The two fautua , Malietoa Tanumafili II and Tupua Tamasese Mea'ole were named as the two heads of state.
Decca opted instead to sign the other group that auditioned that day-Brian Poole and the Tremeloes.
The Anglican Church of Australia became autocephalous, separate from the Church of England, and was headed by its own primate, the Archbishop of Brisbane, Sir Reginald Halse.
The Alabama Crimson Tide, ranked #1 in the AP and UPI polls and crowned as the unofficial national college football champion, defeated the #9 Arkansas Razorbacks in the Sugar Bowl, 10-3, in New Orleans.
Illinois becomes the first United States State to decriminalize homosexual activity.
Diego Martínez Barrio, 78, former President of the Second Spanish Republic Hans von Salmuth, 73, German World War II general later convicted of war crimes at NurembergJanuary 2, 1962 In his annual report to the NAACP, Executive Secretary Roy Wilkins praised United States President John F Kennedy's ""personal role"" in advancing civil rights, but said that he was ""sorely disappointed"" by the President's failure to honor his promise to ban racial discrimination in federally assisted housing.
The 1962 Cape Grand Prix in South Africa was won by Trevor Taylor, who finished 0. seconds ahead of Jim Clark.
Iván Palazzese, Italian motorcycle racer, in Alba Adriatica Died: Joseph Edward Woodall, 65, English recipient of the Victoria CrossJanuary 3, 1962 A spokesman for Pope John XXIII revealed that Cuban leader Fidel Castro and several other officials had received a decree of excommunication from the Roman Catholic Church in 1961 under two sections of canon law, for impeding bishops in their work and for violence against clergymen.
The ad contained favorable quotes, citing the names of seven well-known theater critics.
André Rouvoet, Dutch politician, Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands 2007-10; in Hilversum Died: Hans Lammers, 82, Nazi leader and Chief of the Reich Chancellery, 1933–1945January 5, 1962 The first recording on which The Beatles play, the 45 rpm record My Bonnie, credited to ""Tony Sheridan and the Beat Brothers"" , is released by Polydor in the United Kingdom; ""The Saints"" is on the B-side.
Prison inmate Clarence Gideon sent a letter, written in pencil, to the United States Supreme Court, asking them to reverse his conviction for burglary on the grounds that he had not been given the right to an attorney.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari and, on March 18, 1963, issued the landmark decision of Gideon Wainwright, holding that the Sixth Amendment guarantee, of the right to assistance of counsel, required the appointment of a lawyer for any person unable to afford one.
Massouda Jalal, Afghan politician and women's rights activist in Afghanistan; in GulbaharJanuary 6, 1962 The Los Angeles Mirror-News, which had been started in 1948 as an afternoon tabloid newspaper printed by the owners of the Los Angeles Times, published its final issue.
Kim Weon-Kee, South Korean Olympic wrestler, gold medalist in 1984, in Hampyeong Idrissa Djaló, Guinea-Bissau politician and one time presidential candidate Died: Marziyya Davudova, 60, Azerbaijani actress and People's Artist of the USSRJanuary 7, 1962 The UK was blanketed with snow in an unusual winter storm.
Overnight temperatures of −18 °C were recorded during the morning at Benson, Oxfordshire and Woodford, Greater Manchester in Britain.
A bomb exploded at the Paris apartment building where controversial existentialist author Jean-Paul Sartre lived.
Sartre was not home at the time, and his mother was not injured, but the fire destroyed most of his unpublished manuscripts.
Soviet theoretical physicist Lev Landau, who would win the Nobel Prize later in the year, was seriously injured in an auto accident, leaving him in a coma for two months.
Landau survived, but was never able to return to work, and died on April 3, 1968.
Aleksandr Dugin, Russian ideologist and advocate of reclaiming the former Russian Empire, and author of The Fundamentals of Geopolitics; in MoscowJanuary 8, 1962 In the Harmelen train disaster, two trains collided, killing 91 people in the worst rail crash in Netherlands history.
An express train running from Leeuwarden to Amsterdam and a slower moving commuter train from Rotterdam struck each other at the same switching point after 9:18 am in a heavy fog.
SEAL Team One, based in Coronado, California served the Pacific Fleet and SEAL Team Two served the Atlantic Fleet out of Little Creek, Virginia.
In a closed session at the Presidium, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev delivered what was later referred to as the ""meniscus speech"", using the analogy of a wineglass filled to the point that it could overflow at any time.
In the speech, which was not revealed until 40 years later, Khrushchev told the ministers that the U.S.S.R. was weaker militarily than the United States, and that the only way to compete against American superiority was to maintain the threat that world tensions could spill over.
The Yugoslavian freighter Sabac was cut in two by the British steamer Dorington Court in a collision in the English Channel.
Anatoliy Serdyukov, Russian Minister of Defense from 2007 to 2012; in Krasnodar Krai Died: Maximilian, Duke of Hohenberg, 59, eldest son of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and Countess SophieJanuary 9, 1962 Rashidi Kawawa was appointed as the last Prime Minister of Tanganyika, by President Julius Nyerere, who had formerly had both posts.
The position of Prime Minister would be abolished on December 9, after which Tanganyika and Zanzibar had merged to form Tanzania.
Kawawa would become the first Prime Minister of Tanzania when that post was created in 1972.
Cuba and the Soviet Union signed a trade pact.January 10, 1962 An avalanche on Mount Huascarán, the tallest peak in Peru killed 4,000 people.
Ranrahirca, which had only 50 survivors, would be rebuilt, then destroyed again in an earthquake and an even larger avalanche on May 31, 1970.
Speaker McCormack The United States House of Representatives elected Majority Leader John W McCormack of Massachusetts as the 53rd Speaker of the House, to fill the vacancy created by the death of Sam Rayburn.
Eleven coal miners were killed in an explosion at a mine near Carterville, Illinois.January 11, 1962 Soviet submarine B-37, nine days away from being dispatched to Cuba, was moored at Polyarny, conducting maintenance and pressurizing of outdated gas-steam torpedoes.
At 8:20 am, a fire in the torpedo compartment detonated all twelve torpedoes, instantly destroying the submarine.
Captain Anatoly Begeba, who had been outside, inspecting the top of the sub, survived.
The 78 men inside the sub drowned as it sank to the bottom of the Barents Sea.
Piloting the newest model of long-range bombers, the B-52H Stratofortress, crewmembers broke 11 non-stop distance and course-speed records, for its aircraft class and time, when they successfully completed a more-than-21-hour non-refueled flight—flying approximately 12,500 miles across the globe.
Nelson Mandela secretly left South Africa for the first time, as he was driven across the border to Botswana.
From there, he went to Ethiopia to speak at a conference in Addis Ababa.
Three days later, President Kennedy told reporters at a press conference that American troops were not being used in combat.
A spokesman for the Army of Indonesia, Colonel Soenarjo, said that soldiers had begun landing on West Irian, the semi-independent western side of New Guinea that remained under the administration of the Netherlands.
Richie Richardson, Antiguan cricketer and one time captain of the West Indies cricket team; in Five Islands VillageJanuary 13, 1962 American comedian Ernie Kovacs, 42, was killed in a car accident while driving on Santa Monica Boulevard.
Kovacs and his wife, Edie Adams, were driving home separately from a baby shower in honor of Mrs.
At 2:00 in the morning, his station wagon skidded and crashed into a utility pole.
With the United States having halted its U-2 flights over the Soviet Union, the Republic of China began regular U-2 surveillance flights over the People's Republic of China, with a group of American-trained pilots nicknamed the Black Cat Squadron.
Albania allied itself with the People's Republic of China, as the two nations signed a trade pact.
First Lady Jackie Kennedy brought Charles Collingwood and a CBS News television crew into the White House for an unprecedented look at the American presidential residence.
The tape of the visit was edited into the program ""A Tour of the White House with Mrs.
A Netherlands warship sank an Indonesian torpedo boat after it approached the disputed territory of West Irian, a Netherlands colony claimed by Indonesia.
Jörgen Elofsson, Swedish songwriter, in ÄngelholmJanuary 15, 1962 After the United Kingdom sought to join the European Economic Community, the Meteorological Office first began using Celsius temperature values in its public weather information, following the Fahrenheit values.
In October, the Celsius values were listed first, and by January 1, 1973, when the government entered the EEC and completed its conversion to the metric system, Fahrenheit numbers were only used occasionally.
Portugal abandoned the United Nations General Assembly due to the debate over its East African colony in Angola.
The oldest surviving manuscript in Europe, the papyrus roll contained a commentary on philosophy and religion.
A 13-year-old boy testified before a Chicago juvenile court judge and confessed to setting the Our Lady of the Angels School fire that had killed 92 children and 3 nuns on December 1, 1958 in Chicago.
The boy said that he had asked to be excused from class, then tossed lit matches into a cardboard waste barrel filled with paper.
After an investigation, the court concluded that the evidence did not support the boy's confession, and no charges were ever filed.
Kenneth MacKenna, 62, American actor and film directorJanuary 16, 1962 A military coup in the Dominican Republic, led by General Pedro Rodriguez Echavarria, forced President Joaquín Balaguer to resign and to go into exile.
Earlier in the day in Santo Domingo, soldiers fired into a crowd of people protesting against the new regime, killing 8 people and wounding many more.
Balaguer had been the leader of a council of state with seven civilians, and had pledged to hold elections on February 27, 1963.
The junta consisted of two former state council members, two civilians from the old Trujillo government, and three military officers, but had no presiding leader.
Sutan Sjahrir, who had been the first Prime Minister of Indonesia , was arrested on orders of the President he had served, Sukarno.
He would remain incarcerated for three years, until Sukarno sent him into exile for reasons of health, and would die in 1966.
After a four-day search, wreckage was spotted in the Adirondack High Peaks.
The bomber had clipped the top of Wright Peak after veering 30 miles off course in inclement weather, high winds.
Albert W Kandetski were found after a search, but those of Airman First Class Kenneth R Jensen KWF were never recovered.
A memorial plaque was later erected on a rock near the summit by the 380th Bomb Wing.
The Jackson State Times, an afternoon daily newspaper in Jackson, Mississippi, published its last issue, leaving the city with the two dailies owned by Mississippi Publishers, the Daily News and The Clarion-Ledger.
Ivan Meštrović, 78, Croatian sculptorJanuary 17, 1962 United States government workers were given the right of collective bargaining by President Kennedy, in Executive Order 10988.
Ten former game show contestants, all of whom had testified under oath that they had not been given answers in advance of their appearances, pleaded guilty to perjury.
A furniture warehouse fire in the German city of Nuremberg killed twenty employees, including four who jumped from the fourth story of the building.
Police arrested one of the survivors, a paper press operator who had worked in the basement and was believed to have accidentally caused the blaze by throwing a cigarette.
Frank Sinatra completed the recording of his album All Alone, in Los Angeles.
Jim Carrey, Canadian-American actor and comedian, in Newmarket, Ontario Died: Gerrit Achterberg, 56, Dutch poetJanuary 18, 1962 Two days after seizing power in the Dominican Republic, General Pedro Rodriguez Echavarria was overthrown in a counter-coup by his own officers, who then freed members of the former council of state who had been under house arrest.
The council's first act of business was to accept Balaguer's resignation, with Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly as his successor.
The drawing, to determine the arrangement of the 16 teams of the 1962 World Cup, took place at Santiago in Chile, host of the world soccer football championship.
The four seeded teams, and the three others in each group, were Uruguay, Colombia, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia in Group 1;Italy, Chile, Switzerland and West Germany in Group 2; Brazil, Czechoslovakia, Mexico and Spain in Group 3; and England, Argentina, Bulgaria and Hungary in Group 4.
In the lead-up to the opening of negotiations on Ireland's entry to the European Community, Irish Prime Minister Seán Lemass addressed the members of the other EC governments at their headquarters in Brussels.
Former Nazi German General Karl Wolff, who had been chief of staff to Heinrich Himmler and overseer of the SS Einsatzgruppen, was arrested by West German police at his lakeside vacation home in Kempfenhausen.January 19, 1962 KGB agents identified Colonel Oleg Penkovsky as the man who was secretly meeting British national Janet Chisholm in Moscow.
Chisholm, had first seen the two together on December 30, and followed Penkovsky to his apartment.
Surveillance determined that Colonel Penkovsky, a high clearance official with the Soviet military intelligence agency GRU, had been bringing home classified material relating to ballistic missiles, photographing it, and giving the film to the British intelligence agency MI-6.
John Beals Chandler, 74, former Lord Mayor of Brisbane Onn Jaafar, 66, Malay politician Snub Pollard, 72, American silent film comedianJanuary 20, 1962 The original Lt.
Murder, by Richard Levinson and William Link, was first presented, with the premiere at the Curran Theatre in San Francisco.
Character actor Thomas Mitchell portrayed a disheveled police detective named Lt.
When the play was made into a TV movie in 1968, Peter Falk portrayed the detective, and then in the title role of Columbo, one of the recurring segments of the NBC Mystery Movie.
Columbo had been seen once before, on July 30, 1960, in the presentation ""Enough Rope"", part of The Chevy Mystery Show.
Spencer Love, 65, who went from being a payroll clerk at a textile company, to being the founder of Burlington Industries.January 21, 1962 The Organization of American States began its Eighth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in the course of which the United States agreed to resume aid to Haiti in return for its support of sanctions against Cuba.
Haiti's participation was essential because the United States was a vote short of having the 2/3rds majority of the 21 member nations.
They divorced their respective spouses, Sybil Burton and Eddie Fisher, and married in 1964, divorcing in 1974, remarrying in 1975, and divorcing again in 1976.
The Organisation Armée Secrète , opposed to the independence of Algeria, bombed the French Foreign Ministry, by placing a time bomb inside a truck that was going into the compound.
A mailroom worker was killed, and three people were seriously injured by the shattering of hundreds of windows at the Quai d'Orsay.
Whilst technically still a member, the Cuban government was denied the rights of representation, attendance at meetings and participation in OAS activities.
In addition to being the first black MLB player of the modern era, Robinson had also been a six time All-Star, the 1947 Rookie of the Year, and the 1949 MVP for the National League.
Cleveland Indians pitcher Bob Feller, elected on the same day, was also inducted in his first year of eligibility.
It was the first time since the original five selections that anyone had won 75% of the votes on their first try.
Singer Tony Bennett first recorded what would become his signature song, I Left My Heart in San Francisco.
Ralph Sharon, who accompanied Bennett's songs on the piano, had been shown the song in 1959 by writers George Cory and Douglass Cross, then put it away in a dresser drawer.
Sharon ran across it again when Bennett was invited to perform in San Francisco, and Bennett sang it in December.
The song was released as the B-side of Once Upon a Time, and went on to sell two million copies and to win two Grammy Awards.
American inventor Thomas Townsend Brown received United States Patent 3,018,394 for an ""Electro-kinetic Transducer"", a means of using an electric field as a means of propulsion of aircraft.
Natalia Sedova Trotsky, 79, widow of Leon Trotsky 7January 24, 1962 The East German government instituted conscription into its armed forces, which formerly had been filled by volunteers.
Western sources speculated that the East Germans had waited until the completion of the Berlin Wall before announcing the draft.
Brian Epstein made a verbal contract with the four members of The Beatles, becoming their manager in return for receiving up to 25 percent of their gross earnings.
An attempt by the United States, to launch five satellites into orbit from the same rocket, failed when the final stage of the Thor-Able-Star rocket failed to provide sufficient thrust to break the pull of gravity.
Falling into the Gulf of Mexico ""well south of Cuba"" were the 80 foot rocket and the satellites SR-4, Injun II, Lofti II, Secor and Surcal, worth $3,500,000 altogether.
Stanley Lord, 84, Captain of the SS Californian, at the time of the sinking of RMS Titanic nearly 50 years earlier.January 25, 1962 Governor of Montana Donald G Nutter was killed, along with five other people, in a plane crash.
Nutter had been on his way from Helena to a speaking engagement in Cut Bank when his C-47 plane went down in a mountain canyon near Wolf Creek.
Anandyn Amar, who had served twice as Prime Minister of Mongolia and Chairman of the Presidium of State before becoming a victim of a purge by Joseph Stalin, was posthumously rehabilitated, more than 20 years after his execution by the Soviet Union on July 27, 1941.
January 26, 1962 The American space probe Ranger 3 was launched from Cape Canaveral at 3:30 pm local time with the objective of duplicating the Soviet feat of landing a satellite on the Moon.
Hours later, NASA announced that the Atlas rocket had hurled Ranger 3 into its trajectory too quickly, and that the probe would miss its target by 22,000 miles.
Intersecting the Moon's orbit after 50 hours instead of the planned 66 hours, the spacecraft arrived too soon, got no closer than 22,862 miles from the Moon and went into orbit around the sun.
Seventeen employees at the National Steel Company in Volta Redonda, Brazil, were killed when a ladle of molten steel poured down upon them during the morning shift.
Charles ""Lucky"" Luciano, 64, Sicilian-born American mafioso who had been deported from the United States months earlier.
Exiled in Italy, Luciano had just greeted film producer Martin Gosch, who had arrived at the Capodichino Airport in Naples to discuss plans for a film about Luciano's life.
As the two men walked out of the terminal with policeman Marcello Resta, Luciano, who had ordered the murder of more than 40 rival gangsters during his career, collapsed from a fatal heart attack at 5:25 pm.
A deputy commissioner of the United States Narcotics Bureau told reporters later that day that Luciano had been facing re-arrest for his role in a major drug ring.
The film, Lucky Luciano, was made eleven years later and released in 1974, with Italian actor Gian Maria Volonté portraying Luciano.
Gerald Rudolff Ford, 71, adoptive father of future United States President Gerald R Ford and owner of a paint and varnish manufacturing company in Grand Rapids, Michigan, died of injuries after slipping on an icy sidewalk.
In 1917, the elder Ford had married Ford's mother and then changed the name of her 3-year-old son, Leslie Lynch King, Jr. to his own, with the exception of spelling the middle name as Rudolph.
Eunice Gray, 77, died in a fire at the Waco Hotel in Fort Worth, Texas, which she had operated for 40 years.
The Azerbaijan SSR city of Molotov would become Oktyabrkend, and the city of Perm had reverted to its name after Molotov's ouster in 1957; Voroshilovgrad was renamed Luhansk and Voroshilov in the far east became Ussuriysk.
John H Glenn, Jr. was postponed after the countdown clock stopped 20 minutes before liftoff.
Glenn had been in the capsule since 5:10 am and was prepared to become the first United States astronaut to orbit the Earth, while much of the nation watched live coverage.
After technical difficulties halted the countdown, the skies became overcast with thick cloud cover, and the mission was scrubbed at 9:20 am.
Peter Snell set a new world record for the mile, running the distance in 3 minutes, 54. seconds, at Cook's Gardens, Wanganui.
Chairman Mao made a rare self-criticism three days later, and eventually took revenge on Liu, who disappeared in 1968 and reportedly died in 1969.
January 28, 1962 The last streetcar in Washington, D.C. ran for the final time at 2:00 am, as the transit company retired its 27 car fleet.
The day before, free rides were offered for all children accompanied by a paying adult and thousands took advantage of the offer.
Wasfi al-Tal, who would later be assassinated, succeeded Bahjat al-Talhouni as Prime Minister of Jordan.
Compston, 64, British World War I fighter pilotJanuary 29, 1962 The Automobile Manufacturers Association of the United States announced that all 1963 model American vehicles would be equipped with amber-colored turn signals on the front, rather than being the same color as the headlights, which had been the standard since the signals had first been introduced in 1938.
The change was made after the manufacturers had lobbied for the repeal of bans in 25 states against amber-colored lights.
The Miss Dominican Republic competition was held in Santo Domingo and was won by Sarah Olimpia Frómeta Pou.
Olga Tokarczuk, Polish writer, in Sulechów Died: Fritz Kreisler, 86, Austrian violinistJanuary 30, 1962 Two of the high-wire ""Flying Wallendas"" were killed when their famous 7-person pyramid collapsed during a tightrope walking performance at the Shrine Circus at the State Fair Coliseum in Detroit.
Dieter Schepp, who had lost his footing and caused the group to topple, and Richard Faughnan both died of head injuries after falling 36 feet to the concrete arena floor.
Mario Wallenda was paralyzed as a result of the accident, and Karl Wallenda and Jana Schepp were hospitalized for their injuries.
Fourteen of the 21 member states of the Organization of American States voted to oust Cuba.
Six other nations abstained, and Cuba voted against the resolution, which barely passed by a 2/3rds majority.
In what became known as the ""Tanganyika laughter epidemic"", three students at a girls' boarding school in the Tanzanian village of Kashasha began laughing, and other students reacted.
The mass reaction spread to the villages of Nshamba, Ramanshenye, and Kanyangereka and affected hundreds of people before halting in 1963.
Prince Abdullah of Jordan, to King Hussein and Princess Muna al-Hussein, formerly Antoinette Avril Gardiner of Britain.
He would succeed his father as King Abdullah II in 1999 Mary Kay Letourneau, American child rapist, in Tustin, California January 31, 1962 Telling reporters that ""It's a tradition that the show must go on,"" tightrope walkers Gunther Wallenda and his father, Herman Wallenda walked the high wire at the Shrine Circus in Detroit, 24 hours after the disaster had killed two members of the troupe, and put the three others in the hospital.
Twenty-eight people had been killed by the fourth day of an unusually heavy fog in the San Joaquin and Sacramento valleys in central California, with the deaths of 11 people on their way to a labor camp in Mendota.
Snowfall with accumulation recorded on the Mediterranean island of Malta.
Cosmology, Theology and Interpretation p56 ^ ""Boy Admits Fire Fatal To 95"", The Miami News, January 16, 1962, p1 ^ ""Clears Boy, 13 in School Fire He Confessed"", Chicago Daily Tribune, March 14, 1962, p3 ^ ""Balaguer Resigns, Junta Takes Over, Milwaukee Journal, January 17, 1962, p1 ^ Theodore Friend, Indonesian Destinies p124 ^ ""An Air Force Bomber Crashes into Wright Peak"" adirondack-park.net ^ Collected Jamestown Post-Journal articles relating to January 16, 1962 B-47 Adirondacks crash.
The Real Lucky Luciano p255 ^ James M Cannon, Time and Chance: Gerald Ford's Appointment with History p72 ^ Leonard Sanders, Fort Worth p511 ^ ""Order Molotov Name Removed from Towns"", Youngstown Vindicator, January 27, 1962, p1 ^ ""Clouds Stop Glenn Orbit"" and ""He Was 20 Minutes Away From Destiny"", St.
