The confrontation is often considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war.
In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, and the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter a future invasion.
An agreement was reached during a secret meeting between Khrushchev and Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro in July 1962, and construction of a number of missile launch facilities started later that summer.
Meanwhile, the 1962 United States elections were under way, and the White House denied charges for months that it was ignoring dangerous Soviet missiles 90 mi from Florida.
The missile preparations were confirmed when an Air Force U-2 spy plane produced clear photographic evidence of medium-range R-12 and intermediate-range R-14 ballistic missile facilities.
During this meeting, President Kennedy was originally advised to carry out an air strike on Cuban soil in order to compromise Soviet missile supplies, followed by an invasion of the Cuban mainland.
After careful consideration, President Kennedy chose a less aggressive course of action to avoid a declaration of war.
After consultation with them, Kennedy ordered a naval ""quarantine"" on October 22 to prevent further missiles from reaching Cuba.
By using the term ""quarantine"" rather than ""blockade"" , the United States was able to avoid the implications of a state of war.
The United States announced it would not permit offensive weapons to be delivered to Cuba and demanded that the weapons already in Cuba be dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union.
After several days of tense negotiations, an agreement was reached between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Publicly, the Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a United States public declaration and agreement to not invade Cuba again.
Secretly, the United States agreed that it would dismantle all of the Jupiter MRBMs, which had been deployed in Turkey against the Soviet Union.
There has been debate on whether or not Italy was included in the agreement as well.
While the Soviets dismantled their missiles, some Soviet bombers remained in Cuba, and the United States kept the naval quarantine in place until November 20 of that year.
When all offensive missiles and the Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers had been withdrawn from Cuba, the blockade was formally ended on November 20, 1962.
The negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear, and direct communication line between the two superpowers.
A series of agreements later reduced US–Soviet tensions for several years until both parties eventually resumed expanding their nuclear arsenals.
Jump to navigation Jump to search 1962 confrontation between the United States and Soviet Union over ballistic missiles in Cuba .mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}""Missile Crisis"" redirects here.
The confrontation is often considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war.In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, and the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter a future invasion.
While the Soviets dismantled their missiles, some Soviet bombers remained in Cuba, and the United States kept the naval quarantine in place until November 20 of that year.When all offensive missiles and the Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers had been withdrawn from Cuba, the blockade was formally ended on November 20, 1962.
Human casualties 10 Later revelations 11 In popular culture 12 Media representations 12.
Aftermath of the Cuban Revolution and Berlin Crisis of 1961 With the end of World War II and the start of the Cold War, the United States had grown concerned about the expansion of communism.
A Latin American country openly allying with the Soviet Union was regarded by the United States as unacceptable.
It would, for example, defy the Monroe Doctrine, a United States policy limiting United States involvement in European colonies and European affairs but holding that the Western Hemisphere was in the United States sphere of influence.
The Kennedy administration had been publicly embarrassed by the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961, which had been launched under President John F Kennedy by CIA-trained forces of Cuban exiles.
United States covert operations against Cuba continued in 1961 with the unsuccessful Operation Mongoose.In addition, Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weaknesses was confirmed by the President's response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961, particularly to the building of the Berlin Wall.
A monument in the Little Havana neighborhood of Miami to the men who died at Playa Giron during the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba In January 1962, United States Army General Edward Lansdale described plans to overthrow the Cuban government in a top-secret report , addressed to Kennedy and officials involved with Operation Mongoose.
CIA agents or ""pathfinders"" from the Special Activities Division were to be infiltrated into Cuba to carry out sabotage and organization, including radio broadcasts.
In February 1962, the United States launched an embargo against Cuba, and Lansdale presented a 26-page, top-secret timetable for implementation of the overthrow of the Cuban government, mandating guerrilla operations to begin in August and September.
Missile gap When Kennedy ran for president in 1960, one of his key election issues was an alleged ""missile gap"" with the Soviets leading.
Actually, the United States at that time led the Soviets by a wide margin that would only increase.
By October 1962, they may have had a few dozen, with some intelligence estimates as high as 75.
Khrushchev increased the perception of a missile gap when he loudly boasted to the world that the Soviets were building missiles ""like sausages"" but Soviet missiles' numbers and capabilities were nowhere close to his assertions.
The United States had a considerable advantage in total number of nuclear warheads and in the technology required for their accurate delivery.
The United States also led in missile defensive capabilities, naval and air power; but the Soviets had a 2–1 advantage in conventional ground forces, more pronounced in field guns and tanks, particularly in the European theatre.
Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba Justification In May 1962, Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev was persuaded by the idea of countering the US's growing lead in developing and deploying strategic missiles by placing Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite the misgivings of the Soviet Ambassador in Havana, Alexandr Ivanovich Alexeyev, who argued that Castro would not accept the deployment of the missiles.
Khrushchev faced a strategic situation in which the United States was perceived to have a ""splendid first strike"" capability that put the Soviet Union at a huge disadvantage.
In 1962, the Soviets had only 20 ICBMs capable of delivering nuclear warheads to the United States from inside the Soviet Union.
The poor accuracy and reliability of the missiles raised serious doubts about their effectiveness.
A newer, more reliable generation of ICBMs would become operational only after 1965.
The missiles could hit American allies and most of Alaska from Soviet territory but not the Contiguous United States.
In order to meet the threat it faced in 1962, 1963, and 1964, it had very few options.
A second reason that Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba was because Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin, controlled by the American, British and French within Communist East Germany, into the Soviet orbit.
The East Germans and Soviets considered western control over a portion of Berlin a grave threat to East Germany.
Khrushchev believed that if the United States did nothing over the missile deployments in Cuba, he could muscle the West out of Berlin using said missiles as a deterrent to western countermeasures in Berlin.
If the United States tried to bargain with the Soviets after it became aware of the missiles, Khrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin.
Thirdly, from the perspective of the Soviet Union and of Cuba, it seemed that the United States wanted to increase its presence in Cuba.
With actions including the attempt to expel Cuba from the Organization of American States, placing economic sanctions on the nation, directly invading it in addition to conducting secret operations on containing communism and Cuba, it was assumed that America was trying to overrun Cuba.
As a result, to try and prevent this, the USSR would place missiles in Cuba and neutralise the threat.
This would ultimately serve to secure Cuba against attack and keep the country in the Socialist Bloc.
Another major reason why Khrushchev planned to place missiles on Cuba undetected was to ""level the playing field"" with the evident American nuclear threat.
America had the upper hand as they could launch from Turkey and destroy the USSR before they would have a chance to react.
After the transmission of nuclear missiles, Khrushchev had finally established mutually assured destruction, meaning that if the United States decided to launch a nuclear strike against the USSR, the latter would react by launching a retaliatory nuclear strike against the U.S.Finally, placing nuclear missiles on Cuba was a way for the USSR to show their support for Cuba and support the Cuban people who viewed the United States as a threatening force, as the latter had become their ally after the Cuban Revolution of 1959.
In early 1962, a group of Soviet military and missile construction specialists accompanied an agricultural delegation to Havana.
The Cuban leadership had a strong expectation that the United States would invade Cuba again and enthusiastically approved the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
According to another source, Castro objected to the missiles' deployment as making him look like a Soviet puppet, but he was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be an irritant to the United States and help the interests of the entire socialist camp.
Also, the deployment would include short-range tactical weapons that would provide a ""nuclear umbrella"" for attacks upon the island.
By May, Khrushchev and Castro agreed to place strategic nuclear missiles secretly in Cuba.
Like Castro, Khrushchev felt that a United States invasion of Cuba was imminent and that to lose Cuba would do great harm to the communists, especially in Latin America.
All the planning and preparation for transporting and deploying the missiles were carried out in the utmost secrecy, with only a very few told the exact nature of the mission.
Even the troops detailed for the mission were given misdirection by being told that they were headed for a cold region and being outfitted with ski boots, fleece-lined parkas, and other winter equipment.
The Anadyr River flows into the Bering Sea, and Anadyr is also the capital of Chukotsky District and a bomber base in the far eastern region.
All the measures were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences.Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators"", ""irrigation specialists"", and ""agricultural specialists"" arrived in July.
Chief Marshal of Artillery Sergei Biryuzov, Head of the Soviet Rocket Forces, led a survey team that visited Cuba.
The Soviets continued the Maskirovka program to conceal their actions in Cuba.
They repeatedly denied that the weapons being brought into Cuba were offensive in nature.
On September 7, Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin assured United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson that the Soviet Union was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba.
On September 11, the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union announced that the Soviet Union had no need or intention to introduce offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba.
On October 13, Dobrynin was questioned by former Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles about whether the Soviets planned to put offensive weapons in Cuba.
During that month, its intelligence services gathered information about sightings by ground observers of Soviet-built MiG-21 fighters and Il-28 light bombers.
U-2 spy planes found S-75 Dvina surface-to-air missile sites at eight different locations.
On August 10, he wrote a memo to Kennedy in which he guessed that the Soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into Cuba.With important Congressional elections scheduled for November, the crisis became enmeshed in American politics.
On August 31, Senator Kenneth Keating warned on the Senate floor that the Soviet Union was ""in all probability"" constructing a missile base in Cuba.
He charged the Kennedy administration with covering up a major threat to the US, thereby starting the crisis.
He may have received this initial ""remarkably accurate"" information from his friend, former congresswoman and ambassador Clare Boothe Luce, who in turn received it from Cuban exiles.
A later confirming source for Keating's information possibly was the West German ambassador to Cuba, who had received information from dissidents inside Cuba that Soviet troops had arrived in Cuba in early August and were seen working ""in all probability on or near a missile base"" and who passed this information to Keating on a trip to Washington in early October.
Air Force General Curtis LeMay presented a pre-invasion bombing plan to Kennedy in September, and spy flights and minor military harassment from United States forces at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base were the subject of continual Cuban diplomatic complaints to the United States government.
Map created by American intelligence showing Surface-to-Air Missile activity in Cuba, September 5, 1962 The first consignment of Soviet R-12 missiles arrived on the night of September 8, followed by a second on September 16.
The R-12 was a medium-range ballistic missile, capable of carrying a thermonuclear warhead.
It was a single-stage, road-transportable, surface-launched, storable liquid propellant fuelled missile that could deliver a megaton-class nuclear weapon.
The Cuban populace readily noticed the arrival and deployment of the missiles and hundreds of reports reached Miami.
United States intelligence received countless reports, many of dubious quality or even laughable, most of which could be dismissed as describing defensive missiles.Only five reports bothered the analysts.
They described large trucks passing through towns at night that were carrying very long canvas-covered cylindrical objects that could not make turns through towns without backing up and maneuvering.
Defensive missile transporters, it was believed, could make such turns without undue difficulty.
A U-2 reconnaissance photograph of Cuba, showing Soviet nuclear missiles, their transports and tents for fueling and maintenance.
Aerial confirmation The United States had been sending U-2 surveillance over Cuba since the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.
The first issue that led to a pause in reconnaissance flights took place on August 30, when a U-2 operated by the United States Air Force's Strategic Air Command flew over Sakhalin Island in the Soviet Far East by mistake.
Nine days later, a Taiwanese-operated U-2 was lost over western China to an SA-2 surface-to-air missile.
United States officials were worried that one of the Cuban or Soviet SAMs in Cuba might shoot down a CIA U-2, initiating another international incident.
In a meeting with members of the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance on September 10, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy heavily restricted further U-2 flights over Cuban airspace.
No significant U-2 coverage was achieved over the interior of the island.
United States officials attempted to use a Corona photo-reconnaissance satellite to obtain coverage over reported Soviet military deployments, but imagery acquired over western Cuba by a Corona KH-4 mission on October 1 was heavily covered by clouds and haze and failed to provide any usable intelligence.
At the end of September, Navy reconnaissance aircraft photographed the Soviet ship Kasimov, with large crates on its deck the size and shape of Il-28 jet bomber fuselages.In September 1962, analysts from the Defense Intelligence Agency noticed that Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases, leading DIA to lobby for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island.
Although in the past the flights had been conducted by the CIA, pressure from the Defense Department led to that authority being transferred to the Air Force.
Following the loss of a CIA U-2 over the Soviet Union in May 1960, it was thought that if another U-2 were shot down, an Air Force aircraft arguably being used for a legitimate military purpose would be easier to explain than a CIA flight.
When the reconnaissance missions were reauthorized on October 9, poor weather kept the planes from flying.
One of the first U-2 reconnaissance images of missile bases under construction shown to President Kennedy on the morning of October 16, 1962 President notified On October 15, the CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center reviewed the U-2 photographs and identified objects that they interpreted as medium range ballistic missiles.
This identification was made, in part, on the strength of reporting provided by Oleg Penkovsky, a double agent in the GRU working for the CIA and MI6.
Although he provided no direct reports of the Soviet missile deployments to Cuba, technical and doctrinal details of Soviet missile regiments that had been provided by Penkovsky in the months and years prior to the Crisis helped NPIC analysts correctly identify the missiles on U-2 imagery.That evening, the CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, Bundy chose to wait until the next morning to tell the President.
The next morning, Bundy met with Kennedy and showed him the U-2 photographs and briefed him on the CIA's analysis of the images.
Without informing the members of EXCOMM, President Kennedy tape-recorded all of their proceedings, and Sheldon M Stern, head of the Kennedy library transcribed some of them.On October 16, President Kennedy notified Attorney General Robert Kennedy that he was convinced the Soviets were placing missiles in Cuba and it was a legitimate threat.
This made the threat of nuclear destruction by two world superpowers a reality.
Robert Kennedy responded by contacting the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin.
Khrushchev further assured Kennedy that the Soviet Union had no intention of ""disrupting the relationship of our two countries"" despite the photo evidence presented before President Kennedy.
Responses considered President Kennedy meets in the Oval Office with General Curtis LeMay and the reconnaissance pilots who found the missile sites in Cuba.
The United States had no plan in place because until recently its intelligence had been convinced that the Soviets would never install nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Offer Castro the choice of splitting with the Soviets or being invaded.
This game tree models how both actors would have considered their decisions.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously agreed that a full-scale attack and invasion was the only solution.
They believed that the Soviets would not attempt to stop the United States from conquering Cuba.
They can't, after all their statements, permit us to take out their missiles, kill a lot of Russians, and then do nothing.
Kennedy concluded that attacking Cuba by air would signal the Soviets to presume ""a clear line"" to conquer Berlin.
Kennedy also believed that United States allies would think of the country as ""trigger-happy cowboys"" who lost Berlin because they could not peacefully resolve the Cuban situation.
President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara in an EXCOMM meeting The EXCOMM then discussed the effect on the strategic balance of power, both political and military.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that the missiles would seriously alter the military balance, but McNamara disagreed.
An extra 40, he reasoned, would make little difference to the overall strategic balance.
The EXCOMM agreed that the missiles would affect the political balance.
Kennedy explained after the crisis that ""it would have politically changed the balance of power.
President Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko in the Oval Office On October 18, Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko, who claimed the weapons were for defensive purposes only.
Not wanting to expose what he already knew and to avoid panicking the American public, Kennedy did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile buildup.
Army units in the United States would have had trouble fielding mechanised and logistical assets, and the United States Navy could not supply enough amphibious shipping to transport even a modest armoured contingent from the Army.
OPLAN 312, primarily an Air Force and Navy carrier operation, was designed with enough flexibility to do anything from engaging individual missile sites to providing air support for OPLAN 316's ground forces.
Blockade A United States Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over a Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during the Cuban Crisis.
McNamara supported the naval blockade as a strong but limited military action that left the United States in control.
According to international law, a blockade is an act of war, but the Kennedy administration did not think that the Soviets would be provoked to attack by a mere blockade.
Admiral Anderson, Chief of Naval Operations wrote a position paper that helped Kennedy to differentiate between what they termed a ""quarantine"" of offensive weapons and a blockade of all materials, claiming that a classic blockade was not the original intention.
Latin American participation in the quarantine now involved two Argentine destroyers which were to report to the United States Commander South Atlantic at Trinidad on November 9.
An Argentine submarine and a Marine battalion with lift were available if required.
In addition, two Venezuelan destroyers and one submarine had reported to COMSOLANT, ready for sea by November 2.
Colombia was reported ready to furnish units and had sent military officers to the United States to discuss this assistance.
The Argentine Air Force informally offered three SA-16 aircraft in addition to forces already committed to the ""quarantine"" operation.
This initially was to involve a naval blockade against offensive weapons within the framework of the Organization of American States and the Rio Treaty.
Such a blockade might be expanded to cover all types of goods and air transport.
On October 19, the EXCOMM formed separate working groups to examine the air strike and blockade options, and by the afternoon most support in the EXCOMM shifted to the blockade option.
Reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as the October 21, the paramount concern being that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles.
Consequently, the United States could find itself bombing operational missiles if the blockade did not force Khrushchev to remove the missiles already on the island.
Speech to the nation President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office on October 23, 1962.
At 5:00 pm, he met with Congressional leaders who contentiously opposed a blockade and demanded a stronger response.
In Moscow, United States Ambassador Foy D Kohler briefed Khrushchev on the pending blockade and Kennedy's speech to the nation.
Before the speech, United States delegations met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, French President Charles de Gaulle and Secretary-General of the Organization of American States, José Antonio Mora to brief them on the United States intelligence and their proposed response.
Over the course of the crisis, Kennedy had daily telephone conversations with Macmillan, who was publicly supportive of United States actions.Shortly before his speech, Kennedy called former President Dwight Eisenhower.
The two also anticipated that Khrushchev would respond to the Western world in a manner similar to his response during the Suez Crisis and would possibly wind up trading off Berlin.
During the speech, a directive went out to all United States forces worldwide, placing them on DEFCON 3.
The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was designated flagship for the blockade, with USS Leary as Newport News's destroyer escort.
On October 24, at 11:24 am EDT, a cable, drafted by George Wildman Ball to the United States Ambassador in Turkey and NATO, notified them that they were considering making an offer to withdraw what the United States knew to be nearly-obsolete missiles from Italy and Turkey, in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal from Cuba.
Turkish officials replied that they would ""deeply resent"" any trade involving the United States missile presence in their country.
One day later, on the morning of October 25, American journalist Walter Lippmann proposed the same thing in his syndicated column.
Castro reaffirmed Cuba's right to self-defense and said that all of its weapons were defensive and Cuba would not allow an inspection.
In West Germany, newspapers supported the United States response by contrasting it with the weak American actions in the region during the preceding months.
They also expressed some fear that the Soviets might retaliate in Berlin.
In France on October 23, the crisis made the front page of all the daily newspapers.
The next day, an editorial in Le Monde expressed doubt about the authenticity of the CIA's photographic evidence.
Two days later, after a visit by a high-ranking CIA agent, the newspaper accepted the validity of the photographs.
Also in France, in the October 29 issue of Le Figaro, Raymond Aron wrote in support of the American response.
On October 24, Pope John XXIII sent a message to the Soviet embassy in Rome to be transmitted to the Kremlin in which he voiced his concern for peace.
In this message he stated, ""We beg all governments not to remain deaf to this cry of humanity.
Soviet broadcast and communications The crisis was continuing unabated, and in the evening of October 24, the Soviet TASS news agency broadcast a telegram from Khrushchev to Kennedy in which Khrushchev warned that the United States' ""outright piracy"" would lead to war.
Khrushchev stated, ""if you weigh the present situation with a cool head without giving way to passion, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot afford not to decline the despotic demands of the USA"" and that the Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression"" and their ships will be instructed to ignore it.
After October 23, Soviet communications with the USA increasingly showed indications of having been rushed.
Undoubtedly a product of pressure, it was not uncommon for Khrushchev to repeat himself and send messages lacking simple editing.
With President Kennedy making his aggressive intentions of a possible air-strike followed by an invasion on Cuba known, Khrushchev rapidly sought a diplomatic compromise.
Communications between the two super-powers had entered into a unique and revolutionary period; with the newly developed threat of mutual destruction through the deployment of nuclear weapons, diplomacy now demonstrated how power and coercion could dominate negotiations.
US alert level raised Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations, October 25, 1962.
The United States requested an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council on October 25.
United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin in an emergency meeting of the Security Council, challenging him to admit the existence of the missiles.
The next day at 10:00 pm EDT, the United States raised the readiness level of SAC forces to DEFCON 2.
For the only confirmed time in United States history, B-52 bombers went on continuous airborne alert, and B-47 medium bombers were dispersed to various military and civilian airfields and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes' notice.
They did not increase their alert; they did not increase any flights, or their air defense posture.
We were never further from nuclear war than at the time of Cuba, never further.
A declassified map used by the United States Navy's Atlantic Fleet showing the position of American and Soviet ships at the height of the crisis.
Blockade challenged At 7:15 am EDT on October 25, USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to intercept Bucharest but failed to do so.
Fairly certain that the tanker did not contain any military material, the United States allowed it through the blockade.
Later that day, at 5:43 pm, the commander of the blockade effort ordered the destroyer USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr. to intercept and board the Lebanese freighter Marucla.
That took place the next day, and Marucla was cleared through the blockade after its cargo was checked.At 5:00 pm EDT on October 25, William Clements announced that the missiles in Cuba were still actively being worked on.
That report was later verified by a CIA report that suggested there had been no slowdown at all.
Kennedy claimed that the blockade had succeeded when the USSR turned back fourteen ships presumably carrying offensive weapons.
The first indication of this came from a report from the British GCHQ sent to the White House Situation Room containing intercepted communications from Soviet ships reporting their positions.
On October 24, Kislovodsk, a Soviet cargo ship, reported a position north-east of where it had been 24 hours earlier indicating it had ""discontinued"" its voyage and turned back towards the Baltic.
The next day, reports showed more ships originally bound for Cuba had altered their course.
Raising the stakes The next morning, October 26, Kennedy informed the EXCOMM that he believed only an invasion would remove the missiles from Cuba.
He was persuaded to give the matter time and continue with both military and diplomatic pressure.
He agreed and ordered the low-level flights over the island to be increased from two per day to once every two hours.
He also ordered a crash program to institute a new civil government in Cuba if an invasion went ahead.
The Soviets had shown no indication that they would back down and had made public media and private inter-governmental statements to that effect.
The United States had no reason to believe otherwise and was in the early stages of preparing for an invasion, along with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union if it responded militarily, which the United States assumed it would.
Kennedy had no intention of keeping these plans a secret; with an array of Cuban and Soviet spies forever present, Khrushchev was quickly made aware of this looming danger.
The implicit threat of air strikes on Cuba followed by invasion allowed the United States to exert pressure in future talks.
It was the possibility of military action that played an influential role in accelerating Khrushchev's proposal for a compromise.
Throughout the closing stages of October, Soviet communications to the United States indicated increasing defensiveness.
Khrushchev's increasing tendency to use poorly phrased and ambiguous communications throughout the compromise negotiations conversely increased United States confidence and clarity in messaging.
Leading Soviet figures consistently failed to mention that only the Cuban government could agree to inspections of the territory and continually made arrangements relating to Cuba without the knowledge of Fidel Castro himself.
According to Dean Rusk, Khrushchev ""blinked""; he began to panic from the consequences of his own plan, and this was reflected in the tone of Soviet messages.
This allowed the United States to largely dominate negotiations in late October.
Secret negotiations At 1:00 pm EDT on October 26, John A Scali of ABC News had lunch with Aleksandr Fomin, the cover name of Alexander Feklisov, the KGB station chief in Washington, at Fomin's request.
He asked Scali to use his contacts to talk to his ""high-level friends"" at the State Department to see if the United States would be interested in a diplomatic solution.
He suggested that the language of the deal would contain an assurance from the Soviet Union to remove the weapons under UN supervision and that Castro would publicly announce that he would not accept such weapons again in exchange for a public statement by the United States that it would not invade Cuba.
We are ready for this. — Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 26, 1962 On October 26 at 6:00 pm EDT, the State Department started receiving a message that appeared to be written personally by Khrushchev.
At 6:45 pm EDT, news of Fomin's offer to Scali was finally heard and was interpreted as a ""set up"" for the arrival of Khrushchev's letter.
The letter was then considered official and accurate, although it was later learned that Fomin was almost certainly operating of his own accord without official backing.
Additional study of the letter was ordered and continued into the night.
Crisis continues Direct aggression against Cuba would mean nuclear war.
The Americans speak about such aggression as if they did not know or did not want to accept this fact.
I have no doubt they would lose such a war.— Che Guevara, October 1962 S-75 Dvina with V-750V 1D missile on a launcher.
An installation similar to this one shot down Major Anderson's U-2 over Cuba.
Castro, on the other hand, was convinced that an invasion of Cuba was soon at hand, and on October 26, he sent a telegram to Khrushchev that appeared to call for a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the United States in case of attack.
Castro also ordered all anti-aircraft weapons in Cuba to fire on any United States aircraft; previous orders had been to fire only on groups of two or more.
At 6:00 am EDT on October 27, the CIA delivered a memo reporting that three of the four missile sites at San Cristobal and both sites at Sagua la Grande appeared to be fully operational.
It also noted that the Cuban military continued to organise for action but was under order not to initiate action unless attacked.At 9:00 am EDT on October 27, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev.
He also noted that they had not made the Soviets aware of the blockade line and suggested relaying that information to them via U Thant at the United Nations.
The aircraft in 1962 was painted overall gray and carried USAF military markings and national insignia.
While the meeting progressed, at 11:03 am EDT a new message began to arrive from Khrushchev.
You say that this disturbs you because it is ninety-nine miles by sea from the coast of the United States of America.
Throughout the crisis, Turkey had repeatedly stated that it would be upset if the Jupiter missiles were removed.
Italy's Prime Minister Amintore Fanfani, who was also Foreign Minister ad interim, offered to allow withdrawal of the missiles deployed in Apulia as a bargaining chip.
He gave the message to one of his most trusted friends, Ettore Bernabei, general manager of RAI-TV, to convey to Arthur M Schlesinger Jr.
Unknown to the Soviets, the United States regarded the Jupiter missiles as obsolete and already supplanted by the Polaris nuclear ballistic submarine missiles.
The engine of the Lockheed U-2 shot down over Cuba on display at Museum of the Revolution in Havana.
On the morning of October 27, a U-2F piloted by USAF Major Rudolf Anderson, departed its forward operating location at McCoy AFB, Florida.
At approximately 12:00 pm EDT, the aircraft was struck by an SA-2 surface-to-air missile launched from Cuba.
Stress in negotiations between the Soviets and the United States intensified; only later was it assumed that the decision to fire the missile was made locally by an undetermined Soviet commander, acting on his own authority.
Later that day, at about 3:41 pm EDT, several United States Navy RF-8A Crusader aircraft, on low-level photo-reconnaissance missions, were fired upon.
At 4:00 pm EDT, Kennedy recalled members of EXCOMM to the White House and ordered that a message should immediately be sent to U Thant asking the Soviets to suspend work on the missiles while negotiations were carried out.
During the meeting, General Maxwell Taylor delivered the news that the U-2 had been shot down.
Kennedy had earlier claimed he would order an attack on such sites if fired upon, but he decided to not act unless another attack was made.
We had to send a U-2 over to gain reconnaissance information on whether the Soviet missiles were becoming operational.
We believed that if the U-2 was shot down that—the Cubans didn't have capabilities to shoot it down, the Soviets did—we believed if it was shot down, it would be shot down by a Soviet surface-to-air-missile unit, and that it would represent a decision by the Soviets to escalate the conflict.
And therefore, before we sent the U-2 out, we agreed that if it was shot down we wouldn't meet, we'd simply attack.
And therefore, he issued orders to Pliyev, the Soviet commander in Cuba, to instruct all of his batteries not to shoot down the U-2.
Drafting response This section needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources.
Kennedy suggested to take Khrushchev's offer to trade away the missiles.
Unknown to most members of the EXCOMM, but with the support of his brother the president, Robert Kennedy had been meeting with the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in Washington to discover whether the intentions were genuine.
The EXCOMM was generally against the proposal because it would undermine NATO's authority, and the Turkish government had repeatedly stated it was against any such trade.
As the meeting progressed, a new plan emerged, and Kennedy was slowly persuaded.
The new plan called for him to ignore the latest message and instead to return to Khrushchev's earlier one.
Kennedy was initially hesitant, feeling that Khrushchev would no longer accept the deal because a new one had been offered, but Llewellyn Thompson argued that it was still possible.
White House Special Counsel and Adviser Ted Sorensen and Robert Kennedy left the meeting and returned 45 minutes later, with a draft letter to that effect.
After the EXCOMM meeting, a smaller meeting continued in the Oval Office.
The group argued that the letter should be underscored with an oral message to Dobrynin that stated that if the missiles were not withdrawn, military action would be used to remove them.
Rusk added one proviso that no part of the language of the deal would mention Turkey, but there would be an understanding that the missiles would be removed ""voluntarily"" in the immediate aftermath.
He went on to claim that an invasion was only hours away, and Fomin stated that a response to the United States message was expected from Khrushchev shortly and urged Scali to tell the State Department that no treachery was intended.
Scali said that he did not think anyone would believe him, but he agreed to deliver the message.
The two went their separate ways, and Scali immediately typed out a memo for the EXCOMM.Within the United States establishment, it was well understood that ignoring the second offer and returning to the first put Khrushchev in a terrible position.
Military preparations continued, and all active duty Air Force personnel were recalled to their bases for possible action.
As Robert Kennedy noted, there was little expectation it would be accepted.
At 9:00 pm EDT, the EXCOMM met again to review the actions for the following day.
Plans were drawn up for air strikes on the missile sites as well as other economic targets, notably petroleum storage.
To add to the concern, at 6:00 am, the CIA reported that all missiles in Cuba were ready for action.
List of nuclear close calls § 27 October 1962 Later that same day, what the White House later called ""Black Saturday"", the United States Navy dropped a series of ""signalling"" depth charges on a Soviet submarine at the blockade line, unaware that it was armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo with orders that allowed it to be used if the submarine was damaged by depth charges or surface fire.
As the submarine was too deep to monitor any radio traffic, the captain of the B-59, Valentin Grigorievitch Savitsky, decided that a war might already have started and wanted to launch a nuclear torpedo.
The decision to launch these normally only required agreement from the two commanding officers on board, the Captain and the Political Officer.
However, the commander of the submarine Flotilla, Vasily Arkhipov, was aboard B-59 and so he also had to agree.
On the same day a U-2 spy plane made an accidental, unauthorised ninety-minute overflight of the Soviet Union's far eastern coast.
The Soviets responded by scrambling MiG fighters from Wrangel Island; in turn, the Americans launched F-102 fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles over the Bering Sea.
Crisis ends On Saturday, October 27, after much deliberation between the Soviet Union and Kennedy's cabinet, Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in Turkey and possibly southern Italy, the former on the border of the Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba.
There is some dispute as to whether removing the missiles from Italy was part of the secret agreement.
Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that it was, and when the crisis had ended McNamara gave the order to dismantle the missiles in both Italy and Turkey.At this point, Khrushchev knew things the United States did not.
First, that the shooting down of the U-2 by a Soviet missile violated direct orders from Moscow, and Cuban anti-aircraft fire against other United States reconnaissance aircraft also violated direct orders from Khrushchev to Castro.
Third, the Soviets and Cubans on the island would almost certainly have responded to an invasion by using those nuclear weapons, even though Castro believed that every human in Cuba would likely die as a result.
Khrushchev also knew but may not have considered the fact that he had submarines armed with nuclear weapons that the United States Navy may not have known about.
President Kennedy had been told in early 1961 that a nuclear war would likely kill a third of humanity, with most or all of those deaths concentrated in the US, the USSR, Europe and China; Khrushchev may well have received similar reports from his military.
With this background, when Khrushchev heard Kennedy's threats relayed by Robert Kennedy to Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin, he immediately drafted his acceptance of Kennedy's latest terms from his dacha without involving the Politburo, as he had previously, and had them immediately broadcast over Radio Moscow, which he believed the United States would hear.
At 10:00 am, October 28, Kennedy first learned of Khrushchev's solution to the crisis with the United States removing the 15 Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviets would remove the rockets from Cuba.
Khrushchev had made the offer in a public statement for the world to hear.
Despite almost solid opposition from his senior advisers, Kennedy quickly embraced the Soviet offer.
Kennedy had deployed the Jupiters in March of the year, causing a stream of angry outbursts from Khrushchev.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson was the first to endorse the missile swap but others continued to oppose the offer.
On October 28, Kennedy participated in telephone conversations with Eisenhower and fellow former United States President Harry Truman.
In these calls, Kennedy revealed that he thought the crisis would result in the two superpowers being ""toe to toe"" in Berlin by the end of the following month and expressed concern that the Soviet setback in Cuba would ""make things tougher"" there.
He also informed his predecessors that he had rejected the public Soviet offer to withdraw from Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey.
Removal of Missiles in Cuba November 11, 1962 – NARA – 193868 The United States continued the blockade; in the following days, aerial reconnaissance proved that the Soviets were making progress in removing the missile systems.
The 42 missiles and their support equipment were loaded onto eight Soviet ships.
On November 2, 1962, Kennedy addressed the United States via radio and television broadcasts regarding the dismantlement process of the Soviet R-12 missile bases located in the Caribbean region.
The United States made a final visual check as each of the ships passed the blockade line.
Further diplomatic efforts were required to remove the Soviet Il-28 bombers, and they were loaded on three Soviet ships on December 5 and 6.
Concurrent with the Soviet commitment on the Il-28s, the United States government announced the end of the blockade from 6:45 pm EST on November 20, 1962.
The initial plans were to recycle the missiles for use in other programs, but NASA and the USAF were not interested in retaining the missile hardware.
Because the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from NATO bases in Italy and Turkey was not made public at the time, Khrushchev appeared to have lost the conflict and become weakened.
The perception was that Kennedy had won the contest between the superpowers and that Khrushchev had been humiliated.
Both Kennedy and Khrushchev took every step to avoid full conflict despite pressures from their respective governments.
For the U.S., around 3,500 would have been used in attacking the Soviet Union.
The United States secretly agreed to withdraw the missiles from Italy and Turkey.
The letter invited counter-proposals and further exploration of these and other issues through peaceful negotiations.
Khrushchev invited Norman Cousins, the editor of a major United States periodical and an anti-nuclear weapons activist, to serve as liaison with President Kennedy, and Cousins met with Khrushchev for four hours in December 1962.
Kennedy's response to Khrushchev's proposals was lukewarm but Kennedy expressed to Cousins that he felt constrained in exploring these issues due to pressure from hardliners in the United States national security apparatus.
Further after the crisis, the United States and the Soviet Union created the Moscow–Washington hotline, a direct communications link between Moscow and Washington.
The purpose was to have a way that the leaders of the two Cold War countries could communicate directly to solve such a crisis.
The compromise embarrassed Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal of United States missiles from Italy and Turkey was a secret deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Khrushchev went to Kennedy as he thought that the crisis was getting out of hand, but the Soviets were seen as retreating from circumstances that they had started.
Khrushchev's fall from power two years later was in part because of the Soviet Politburo's embarrassment at both Khrushchev's eventual concessions to the United States and this ineptitude in precipitating the crisis in the first place.
Cuban leadership Cuba perceived the outcome as a betrayal by the Soviets, as decisions on how to resolve the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Castro was especially upset that certain issues of interest to Cuba, such as the status of the United States Naval Base in Guantánamo, were not addressed.
This convinced the American administration of Bucharest's intentions of detaching itself from Moscow.
US leadership The worldwide United States Forces DEFCON 3 status was returned to DEFCON 4 on November 20, 1962.
General Curtis LeMay told the President that the resolution of the crisis was the ""greatest defeat in our history""; his was a minority position.
He had pressed for an immediate invasion of Cuba as soon as the crisis began and still favoured invading Cuba even after the Soviets had withdrawn their missiles.
At least four contingency strikes were armed and launched from Florida against Cuban airfields and suspected missile sites in 1963 and 1964, although all were diverted to the Pinecastle Range Complex after the planes passed Andros island.
Human casualties U-2 pilot Anderson's body was returned to the United States and was buried with full military honours in South Carolina.
He was the first recipient of the newly created Air Force Cross, which was awarded posthumously.
Although Anderson was the only combatant fatality during the crisis, 11 crew members of three reconnaissance Boeing RB-47 Stratojets of the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing were also killed in crashes during the period between September 27 and November 11, 1962.
Seven crew died when a Military Air Transport Service Boeing C-135B Stratolifter delivering ammunition to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base stalled and crashed on approach on October 23.
Later revelations Schlesinger, a historian and adviser to Kennedy, told National Public Radio in an interview on October 16, 2002, that Castro did not want the missiles, but Khrushchev pressured Castro to accept them.
Running out of air, the Soviet submarine was surrounded by American warships and desperately needed to surface.
An argument broke out among three officers aboard B-59, including submarine captain Valentin Savitsky, political officer Ivan Semonovich Maslennikov, and Deputy brigade commander Captain 2nd rank Vasily Arkhipov.
An exhausted Savitsky became furious and ordered that the nuclear torpedo on board be made combat ready.
Fifty years ago, the Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster.
During the standoff, United States President John F Kennedy thought the chance of escalation to war was ""between 1 in 3 and even"", and what we have learned in later decades has done nothing to lengthen those odds.
The United States air strike and invasion that were scheduled for the third week of the confrontation would likely have triggered a nuclear response against American ships and troops, and perhaps even Miami.
Khrushchev determined that because the Americans had not listed the missiles on their list of demands, keeping them in Cuba would be in the Soviet Union's interests.Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with the negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal that was designed to prevent a breakdown in the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
While in Havana, Mikoyan witnessed the mood swings and paranoia of Castro, who was convinced that Moscow had made the agreement with the United States at the expense of Cuba's defence.
He defused the seemingly intractable situation, which risked re-escalating the crisis, on November 22, 1962.
During a tense, four-hour meeting, Mikoyan convinced Castro that despite Moscow's desire to help, it would be in breach of an unpublished Soviet law, which did not actually exist, to transfer the missiles permanently into Cuban hands and provide them with an independent nuclear deterrent.
Castro was forced to give way and, much to the relief of Khrushchev and the rest of the Soviet government, the tactical nuclear weapons were crated and returned by sea to the Soviet Union during December 1962.
In popular culture The American popular media, especially television, made frequent use of the events of the missile crisis in both fictional and documentary forms.
Sheldon Stern finds that a half century later there are still many ""misconceptions, half-truths, and outright lies"" that have shaped media versions of what happened in the White House during those harrowing two weeks.Historian William Cohn argued in a 1976 article that television programs are typically the main source used by the American public to know about and interpret the past.
According to Cold War historian Andrei Kozovoi, the Soviet media proved somewhat disorganised as it was unable to generate a coherent popular history.
Cuba was no longer portrayed as a heroic David against the American Goliath.
One contradiction that pervaded the Soviet media campaign was between the pacifistic rhetoric of the peace movement that emphasises the horrors of nuclear war and the militancy of the need to prepare Soviets for war against American aggression.
Media representations Non fiction Thirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy's memoir of the crisis, posthumously released in 1969; It became the basis for numerous films and documentaries.
Fiction Topaz, 1969 film by Alfred Hitchcock based on the 1967 novel by Leon Uris, set during the run-up to the crisis.
Red Alert 3, a 2008 video game, set in an alternate timeline where Einstein did not exist.
The Kennedys , 2011 production chronicling the lives of the Kennedy family, including a dramatisation of the crisis.
The Courier , tells the ""true story of the British businessman Greville Wynne who helped MI6 penetrate the Soviet nuclear programme during the Cold War.
Sven G Holtsmark, Iver B Neumann, Odd Arne Westad, Springer, 27 iul.16, The Soviet Union in Eastern Europe, 1945–89, 99.
Archived October 8, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Taiwan Air Blog, updated April 11, 2007.
United States Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of the Historian.
Anatoly F Dobrynin's Meeting With Robert F Kennedy, Saturday, 27 October 1962.
ArchivedArchived March 29, 2022, at archive.today from the original on March 29, 2022.
Retrieved March 29, 2022 The 32nd Guards Air Fighter Regiment in Cuba S.Isaev.
Thomas J McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S Painter William B Pickett Ronald E Powaski Yakov M Rabkin Arthur M Schlesinger Jr.
Patrick Bouvier Kennedy Rose Schlossberg Tatiana Schlossberg Jack Schlossberg Joseph P Kennedy Sr.
The Kennedys Thirteen Days RFK Bobby RFK Must Die The Kennedys Ethel Jackie Bobby Kennedy for President Family,family tree Ethel Skakel Kathleen Kennedy Joseph P Kennedy Robert F Kennedy Jr.
David Kennedy Michael Kennedy Kerry Kennedy Chris Kennedy Max Kennedy Doug Kennedy Rory Kennedy Maeve Kennedy McKean Joseph P Kennedy III Kyra Kennedy Max Kennedy Jr.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
