The Administration’s announcement of direct talks between the United States and Iran should be welcomed as good news by those who don’t wish to see yet another bloodbath in the Middle East but Romney can be counted on to condemn the diplomatic breakthrough as insufficiently hawkish.
The news that Obama has chosen dialogue over saber rattling gives Romney the opportunity to vent his criticism at the sole foreign policy debate that falls on the 50th anniversary of the night when President John F Kennedy first made public the existence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Fifty years ago, President Kennedy, after being informed that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had deployed intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba, was able to move beyond his knee-jerk reaction to bomb and invade the island.
Fortunately, over the course of days Kennedy tempered his response by adding statesmanship to his brinkmanship.
As the United States tries to assess the danger of Iran becoming a nuclear power the lessons of JFK’s dealing with the Soviets over the change in the nuclear status quo is more relevant than ever.
The bluster and war mongering of repeating the mantra “all options are on the table” needlessly heightens tensions and makes war more likely if it is not accompanied by face-saving ways out of the crisis.
These kinds of intimidating tactics coming from a nuclear power that can lay waste to Iran, although favored by the neo-cons who brought us the disastrous war in Iraq, if devoid of any links to a pathway out of the confrontation amount to little more than bullying and belligerence.
In the case of Iran, the threat of “the use of force” after years of George W Bush’s calamitous policies in the region do nothing to dissuade the Ayatollahs from continuing their nuclear enrichment program.
Iran remains a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , which has safeguards and allowances for the civilian uses of nuclear power.
The best United States intelligence analyses conclude that Iran is not building an atomic bomb.
Through secret backchannels, Kennedy offered Khrushchev sweeteners in the form of offering to remove the U.S.’s Jupiter missiles from Turkey and pledging not to invade the island in exchange for the Soviets agreeing to take their missiles out of Cuba.
Any public ultimatum against Iran absent of private offers of concessions amounts to nothing more than war mongering.
A wiser policy toward Iran more akin to the one Kennedy applied to Cuba during the missile crisis would be to take the military option “off the table,” quiet down the noise level from actors in the United States and in the region who are screaming for a war, and deal with Iran on terms of mutual respect and a realist recognition of shared interests.
This dual-track policy appears to be where President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton are heading.
Let’s not forget that in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks Iran offered to help the United States track down Al Qaeda and has assisted in stemming the drug traffic out of Afghanistan.
And let’s not further forget that it was the United States Central Intelligence Agency that in August 1953 overthrewthe democratically elected government of Mohammad Mossadegh and installed the Shah Reza Pahlavi.
Promise To Our ChildrenBy Robert Koehler1 hour agoA Life of Revealed Truth Will Set Us Free from NATOBy Tim Duff2 hours ago There has never been an adequate American acknowledgement that the United States was responsible for propping up a dictatorship in Iran under the Shah for 25 years, which set the stage for the 1979 revolution that brought the clerics to power in the first place.
The recent history of American-Iranian relations, which has been a lengthy series of underhanded and failed policies, must be taken into account.
The crisis also put the Atmospheric Test-Ban Treaty on the front burner of his priorities and Kennedy spent considerable political “capital” in prodding the United States Senate to ratify the treaty.
Had Kennedy decided to bomb and invade Cuba it would have been popular with the hardliners around him and with American public opinion.
But it is also highly likely that one of the 98 tactical nuclear bombs on the island would have been detonated over the heads of United States marines.
Yet he understood that Khrushchev would have to brush back the hardliners inside his own government.
Imposing a United States Navy “quarantine” of Soviet ships heading for Cuba and bringing in the United Nations and allies to help find a way out of the crisis was the least pugnacious of the military options and it bought time for negotiations.Robert F Kennedy was sent as his brother’s emissary to privately talk to the Kremlin-connected journalist, Georgi Bolshakov, and to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
The United States offered to dismantle its Jupiter missiles in Turkey and agreed not to try to topple the Castro regime.
In late 1963, Kennedy even sent out feelers to the Cuban government that normalizing United States relations might be a possibility if Castro agreed to certain conditions, such as limiting the Soviet military presence.
Although these efforts were cut short by Kennedy’s assassination they illustrate that he was willing to make substantial concessions and push against the Cold War orthodoxy of the period that took as gospel that the Soviets only respected threats of massive violence.
With the ongoing partisan attacks against President Obama when facing challenges in a more complicated world than existed a half century ago, along with his ill-advised escalation of drone attacks that only increase tensions and create new enemies, the last thing this country needs is to blunder itself into another misguided war.
What’s needed when dealing with Iran and its nuclear program is the cautious pragmatism and willingness to bend and make concessions that characterized President Kennedy’s strategy fifty years ago.
And like the crisis of 1962 the tensions with Iran in 2012 can be lessened with a greater willingness to compromise, the offering of concessions, and a recognition that war will only bring added misery and hardship to the people in that part of the world who have already endured enough.
Romney will no doubt go on the offensive against Obama’s new Iran initiative decrying it as “weak” and not aligned with his neo-con proclivities.
But we musn’t allow their shrill, politicized whining about sensible diplomatic overtures drown out the crucial need for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Unfortunately, neither candidate today could make the kind of speech that President Kennedy delivered in June 1963 without enduring considerable political fallout.
However fixed our likes and dislikes may seem, the tide of time and events will often bring surprising changes in the relations between nations and neighbors.
For in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
And we are all mortal. . . . e shall . . . do our part to build a world of peace where the weak are safe and the strong are just.
