If it available for your country it will shown as book reader and user fully subscribe will benefit by having full access to all books.
Virtually unknown outside of Cuba, Santamaría was a trusted member of Fidel Castro's inner circle and friend of Che Guevara.
Following the Revolution's victory Santamaría founded and ran the cultural and arts institution Casa de las Americas, which attracted cutting-edge artists, exposed Cubans to some of the world's greatest creative minds, and protected queer, black, and feminist artists from state repression.
Santamaría's suicide in 1980 caused confusion and discomfort throughout Cuba; despite her commitment to the Revolution, communist orthodoxy's disapproval of suicide prevented the Cuban leadership from mourning and celebrating her in the Plaza of the Revolution.
In this impressionistic portrait of her friend Haydée Santamaría, Margaret Randall shows how one woman can help change the course of history.
The volume depicts the origins of the conflict, details the middle years, and ends with Fidel Castro's victorious arrival In Havana on January 8, 1959.
Based on a wealth of hitherto unpublished original material, including confidential military reports, letters from various leaders of the insurrection and data gathered from Interviews held In Cuba and abroad, the book Is a descriptive historical analysis of the struggle against military dictator Fulgencio Batista.
The authors challenge the traditional premise that Cuba's Insurrection began in the rural areas and only later expanded into urban areas.
Instead they argue that the insurrectionary struggle was based upon combined urban-rural guerrilla warfare against the regular army.
Basically, The Cuban Insurrection treats two major movements Involved In the struggle—The Directorio Revolucionario and the M-26-7—and examines the growth, ideology, conflicts, and military strategies of their respective rural and urban organizations.
The book Includes a detailed analysis of combat, strikes, uprisings, and expeditions.
Original maps and charts illustrate battles, maneuvers, and guerrilla political structures.
Until now, biographers have treated Castro’s life like prosecutors, scouring his past for evidence to convict a person they don’t like or don’t understand.
Young Castro challenges us to put aside the caricature of a bearded, cigar-munching, anti-American hothead to discover how Castro became the dictator who acted as a thorn in the side of United States presidents for nearly half a century.
In this “gripping and edifying narrative…Hansen brings imposing research and notable erudition” to Castro’s early life, showing Castro getting his toughness from a father who survived Spain’s class system and colonial wars to become one of the most successful independent plantation owners in Cuba.
We see a boy running around that plantation more comfortable playing with the children of his father’s laborers than his own classmates at elite boarding schools in Santiago de Cuba and Havana.
We discover a young man who writes flowery love letters from prison and contemplates the meaning of life, a gregarious soul attentive to the needs of strangers but often indifferent to the needs of his own family.
These pages show a liberal democrat who admires FDR’s New Deal policies and is skeptical of communism, but is also hostile to American imperialism.
They show an audacious militant who stages a reckless attack on a military barracks but is canny about building an army of resisters.
The first American historian in a generation to gain access to the Castro archives in Havana, Jonathan Hansen was able to secure cooperation from Castro’s family and closest confidants.
He gained access to hundreds of never-before-seen letters and interviewed people he was the first to ask for their impressions of the man.
No other book offers this inside look at the strategies of the Soviet leadership.
This important and controversial book draws the missing half of the story from secret Soviet archives revealed exclusively by the authors, including the files of Nikita Khrushchev and his leadership circle.
Contained in these remarkable documents are the details of over forty secret meetings between Robert Kennedy and his Soviet contact, records of Castro's first solicitation of Soviet favor, and the plans, suspicions, and strategies of Khrushchev.
This unique research opportunity has allowed the authors to tell the complete, fascinating, and terrifying story of the most dangerous days of the last half-century.
The revolutionary regime has provided vital support to the rest of the region, offering everything from medical and development assistance to training and advice on guerrilla warfare.
Cuba and Revolutionary Latin America is the first oral history of Cuba's liberation struggle.
Drawing on a vast array of original testimonies, Dirk Kruijt looks at the role of both veterans and the post-Revolution fidelista generation in shaping Cuba and the Americas.
Featuring the testimonies of over sixty Cuban officials and former combatants, Cuba and Revolutionary Latin America offers unique insight into a nation which, in spite of its small size and notional pariah status, remains one of the most influential countries in the Americas.
This insightful book, the most intimate and dispassionate biography of the revolutionary leader to date, shows that neither assessment is true.
Leycester Coltman, British ambassador to Cuba in the early 1990s, came as close to personal friendship with Castro as any foreigner was permitted.
With frequent contact and regular conversations, Coltman was in a unique position to observe the dictator's personality in both public and private situations.
Here he presents a close-up view of the man who for half a century has been loved, admired, feared, and hated, but seldom really understood.
Coltman chronicles the events of the Cuban leader's extraordinary life from the political activism of his university days in Havana to periods of exile, imprisonment, and guerilla warfare alongside Che Guevara, to the uncertainties of his old age.
In this ground-breaking work, Antoni Kapcia focuses instead on a wider cast of characters.
Along with the more obvious, albeit often misunderstood, contributions from Che Guevara and Raúl Castro, Kapcia looks at the many others who, over the decades, have been involved in decision-making and have often made a significant difference.
He interprets their various roles within a wider process of nation-building, demonstrating that Cuba has undergone an unusual, if not unique, process of change.
Essential reading for anyone interested in Cuba's history and its future.
As Latin America experiences more revolutions in Venezuela and Bolivia, and continues to upset America’s plans for neo-liberal imperialism, renowned radical writer and activist Tariq Ali provides a searing analysis of the relevance of Castro’s message for today.
In 1961, at the height of the Cold War, the United States severed diplomatic relations with Cuba, where a momentous revolution had taken power three years earlier.
For more than half a century, the stand-off continued—through the tenure of ten American presidents and the fifty-year rule of Fidel Castro.
His death in 2016, and the retirement of his brother and successor Raúl Castro in 2021, have spurred questions about the country’s future.
Meanwhile, politics in Washington—Barack Obama’s opening to the island, Donald Trump’s reversal of that policy, and the election of Joe Biden—have made the relationship between the two nations a subject of debate once more.
Now, award-winning historian Ada Ferrer delivers an “important” and moving chronicle that demands a new reckoning with both the island’s past and its relationship with the United States.
An American History provides us with a front-row seat as we witness the evolution of the modern nation, with its dramatic record of conquest and colonization, of slavery and freedom, of independence and revolutions made and unmade.
Along the way, Ferrer explores the sometimes surprising, often troubled intimacy between the two countries, documenting not only the influence of the United States on Cuba but also the many ways the island has been a recurring presence in United States affairs.
Filled with rousing stories and characters, and drawing on more than thirty years of research in Cuba, Spain, and the United States—as well as the author’s own extensive travel to the island over the same period—this is a stunning and monumental account like no other.
This updated, second edition contains a new epilogue by the author that covers the last decade, including such newsworthy events as the Elian Gonzalez controversy, the growing immigrant community of Cuban-Americans in Florida, the role of Cuban-Americans in the 2000 presidential election, the withering United States sales embargo and the inevitable transition of power now that Castro is in his mid-70s.
I wanted him to find a solution to all the shortages of clothes; of meat, so it would again be distributed through the ration books.
I kept writing him letters from a sweet and well-behaved child, a brave but sad girl.
As a girl growing up in Cuba, Alina Fernandez found nothing abnormal in the fact that Fidel Castro would occasionally visit her house bearing gifts just for her.
Ann Louise Bardach offers a spellbinding chronicle of the Havana-Washington political showdown, drawing on nearly two decades of reporting and countless interviews with everyone from the Comandante himself, his co-ruler and brother Raúl, and other family members, to ordinary Cubans as well as officials and politicos in Miami, Havana, and Washington.
The result is an unforgettable dual portrait of Fidel and Raúl Castro -arguably the most successful and enduring political brother team in history.
Since 1959, Fidel Castro has been the supreme leader of Cuba, deftly checkmating his foes, both from within and abroad; confronting eleven American presidents; and outfoxing dozens of assassination attempts, vanquished only by collapsing health.
Bardach offers profound and surprising answers to these questions as she meticulously chronicles Castro's protracted farewell and assesses his transformative impact on the world stage and the complex legacy that will long outlive him.
In Miami, where more than one million Cubans have fled, she interviews scores of exiles including Castro's would-be assassins Orlando Bosch and Luis Posada Carriles; in Washington, DC, she reports on the Obama administration's struggle to formulate a post-Castro strategy; in Havanah she permeates the bubble around the fiercely private and officially retired Castro to ascertain the extent of his undisclosed medical condition.
Bardach delivers a compelling meditation on one of the most controversial, combative, and charismatic rulers in history.
Without Fidel includes never-before-published reporting on Castro, his family, and his half-century grip on the largest country in the Caribbean while assessing how his departure will forever transform politics and policy in the Western Hemisphere -and the world.
America's fixation on the tropical socialist republic has only grown over the years, fueled in part by successive waves of Cuban immigration and Castro's larger-than-life persona.
Cubans are now a major ethnic group in Florida, and the exile community is so powerful that every American president has curried favor with it.
What Everyone Needs to Know®, Julia Sweig updates her concise and remarkably accessible portrait of the small island nation.
This edition contains a new foreword that discusses developments since Obama and Raul Castro announced the normalization of US-Cuba relations and restored formal diplomatic ties.
A new final chapter discusses how normalization came to pass and covers Pope Francis' visit to Cuba, where he met with Fidel and Raul Castro.
Expansive in coverage and authoritative in scope, the book looks back over Cuba's history since the Spanish American War before shifting to recent times.
Focusing equally on Cuba's role in world affairs and its own social and political transformations, Sweig divides the book chronologically into the pre-Fidel era, the period between the 1959 revolution and the fall of the Soviet Union, the post-Cold War era, and -finally -the post-Fidel era.
Informative, pithy, and lucidly written, it is the best compact reference on Cuba's internal politics, its often fraught relationship with the United States, and its shifting relationship with the global community.
All sparked movements in the name of liberating their people from their oppressors—capitalists, foreign imperialists, or dictators in their own country.
These revolutionaries rallied the masses in the name of freedom, only to become more tyrannical than those they replaced.
Much has been written about the anatomy of revolution from Edmund Burke to Crane Brinton Crane, Franz Fanon, and contemporary theorists of revolution found in the modern academy.
Yet what is missing is a dissection of the revolutionary minds that destroyed the old for the creation of a more harmful new.
Revolutionary Monsters explores basic questions about the revolutionary personality, and examines how these revolutionaries came to envision themselves as prophets of a new age.
The titles in this series will be valuable resources for journalists, students, diplomats, business people, and anyone else who is interested in the politics of these richly diverse areas.
A confidential story imparted by a cousin draws together disparate threads and weaves a coherent explanation.
The company Facundo Bacardi launched in Cuba in 1862 brought worldwide fame to the island, and in the decades that followed his Bacardi descendants participated in every aspect of Cuban life.
With his intimate account of their struggles and adventures across five generations, Gjelten brings to life the larger story of Cuba's fight for freedom, its tortured relationship with America, the rise of Fidel Castro, and the violent division of the Cuban nation.
The author of this book takes a highly original approach to understanding the past three decades of Cuban history–he offers an analysis and interpretation of the prolific writings and speeches of Fidel Castro and of numerous interviews with him.
After his four-year hitch in the marines was up in 1957, Richard Sanderlin met another Norfolk, Virginia native, Frank Sturgis, Marine Corps veteran, Army Intelligence Officer, and future Watergate burglar.
Richard, and Frank relocated to Miami, Florida where they ran an arms and munition smuggling operation into Cuba, bound for the rebels of Fidel Castro.
During the summer of 1958, Richard Sanderlin traveled to the Sierra Maestra Mountains in Oriente Province Cuba, where he trained the rebels of Fidel, and Raul Castro, in military strategy, tactics, weapon handling, and hand to hand fighting.
After completing the training of Raul Castro’s Second Front, Richard led a guerrilla band into ten combat operations against the Batista army.
This is the story an idealistic young warrior who fought against the tyranny of dictatorship only to be betrayed by a communist conspiracy led by Fidel Castro.
The book traces the roots of the ‘Caribbean Legion’, a transnational network of anti-dictatorial revolutionaries, before detailing how Castro and many of his allies in exile exploited this web during the struggle against Fulgencio Batista.
Contacts in this network provided the Cuban revolutionaries with crucial military, financial, and diplomatic support from the democratic governments of José Figueres in Costa Rica, and Rómulo Betancourt in Venezuela, entangling the Cuban revolutionaries in a larger regional struggle between democratic regimes and military dictatorships.
This transnational involvement shaped the revolutionary regime of 1959 and had far-reaching repercussions for the larger geopolitical dynamics in the region, and for the Cold War as a whole.
But in the late 1990s, as the regime began sending its oldest comrades to the firing squad, he became A Man Who Knew Too Much.
Escaping a death sentence and now living in exile, Fuentes has written a brilliant, satirical, and utterly captivating “autobiography” of the Cuban leader—in Fidel’s own arrogant and seductive language—discussing everything from Castro’s early sexual experiences in Birán to his true feelings about Che Guevara and his philosophy on murder, legacy, and state secrets.
Akin to Gertrude Stein’s The Autobiography of Alice B Toklas, or Edmund Morris’s Dutch, this wickedly entertaining, true-to-life masterpiece is as imaginative and outsized as Castro himself.
The goal of the leaders of the revolutionary movements in all three countries was to create a progressive, independent bourgeois-democratic state but contrary to expectations, the national bourgeoisie did not welcome a national democratic revolution.
Instead, faced with a mass movement, it fought hard to re-assert its own and United States imperialism’s economic and political stranglehold, opposing increased democratic rights, greater social equality, agrarian reform and the redistribution of wealth.
We trace how, in all three countries, the national bourgeoisie joined forces with imperialism and used violent methods to reverse the progressive measures made, and when these attempts failed carried on a campaign of economic sabotage to starve the masses into submission.
In Cuba the revolution was propelled forward by abolishing capitalism and enormous conquests were made.
In Nicaragua and Venezuela, the revolution was stopped half way, leading to disaster and defeat.
As the world enters a decisive revolutionary epoch, reformists, just as they did in Nicaragua and Venezuela, attempt to hold that revolution back.
In the face of all experience, their solution to social crises is one which stubbornly remains within the narrow limits of capitalism.
This book is a contribution to the debate about revolutionary strategy.
It highlights the lessons to be learned from the recent past, argues against the failed reformist approach and draws the conclusion that only through the workers coming to power and expropriating the oligarchy can we begin to overcome the exploitation and oppression of the masses.
It clearly details how in January 1965 Cuba formed an alliance with the Angolan MPLA which evolved into the flagship of its global 'internationalist' mission, spawning the military intervention of November 1975 culminating in Cuba's spurious 'victory' at Cuito Cuanavale and Cuba's fifteen-year occupation of Angola.
Drawing on interviews with leading protagonists, first-hand accounts and archive material from Cuba, Angola and South Africa, this new book dispels the myths of the Cuban intervention, revealing that Havana's decision to intervene was not so much an heroic gesture of solidarity, but rather a last-ditch gamble to avert disaster.
By examining Cuba's role in the Angolan War in a global context, this book demonstrates how the interaction between the many players in Angola shaped and affected Cuba's intervention as it headed towards its controversial conclusion.
The volume foregrounds the experience of Cubans from all walks of life, including slaves, prostitutes, doctors, activists, and historians.
Combining songs, poetry, fiction, journalism, political speeches, and many other types of documents, this revised and updated second edition of The Cuba Reader contains over twenty new selections that explore the changes and continuities in Cuba since Fidel Castro stepped down from power in 2006.
For students, travelers, and all those who want to know more about the island nation just ninety miles south of Florida, The Cuba Reader is an invaluable introduction.
The Cuban Revolution took power from a national elite subordinate to foreign capital, and placed it in the hands of the people; and it subsequently developed alternative structures of popular democracy that have functioned to keep delegates of the people in power.
While Cuba has persisted, the peoples of the Third World, knocked down by the neoliberal project, have found social movement and political life, a renewal that is especially evident in Latin America and the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the same time, the capitalist world-economy increasingly reveals its unsustainability, and the global elite demonstrate its incapacity to respond to a multifaceted and sustained global crisis.
These dynamics establish conditions for popular democratic socialist revolutions in the North.
What neither superpower bargained on was that their puppets would come to life.
Red Heat tells the gripping story of the men responsible for this rude surprise, including, from Cuba, the charismatic Fidel Castro and his mysterious brother Raúl; from Argentina, the ideologue Che Guevara; from the Dominican Republic, the capricious psychopath Rafael Trujillo; and from Haiti, François 'Papa Doc' Duvalier, a buttoned-down doctor with interests in Vodou, embezzlement, and torture.
Alex von Tunzelmann shows her storytelling prowess yet again in a riveting narrative of clashing ideologies, the politics of fear, the machinations of superpowers, and — above all — the brazen daring of the mavericks who took them on.
Based upon the author's firsthand knowledge as a journalist focused on Latin America, this book provides the latest information, historical or present, on such revolutions.
In this unique and stimulating book, Stephen Cushion turns the conventional wisdom on its head, and argues that the Cuban working class played a much more decisive role in the Revolution’s outcome than previously understood.
Cushion contends that the opposite is true, and that significant portions of the Cuban working class launched an underground movement in tandem with the guerillas operating in the mountains.
Developed during five research trips to Cuba under the auspices of the Institute of Cuban History in Havana, this book analyzes a wealth of leaflets, pamphlets, clandestine newspapers, and other agitational material from the 1950s that has never before been systematically examined, along with many interviews with participants themselves.
Cushion uncovers widespread militant activity, from illegal strikes to sabotage to armed conflict with the state, all of which culminated in two revolutionary workers’ congresses and the largest general strike in Cuban history.
He argues that these efforts helped clinch the victory of the revolution, and thus presents a fresh and provocative take on the place of the working class in Cuban history.
