Despite all this, those open-minded individuals who have dared to read Final Judgment—including some very well-known names—have concluded that this book is the one book that most completely outlines the entirety of the conspiracy that took the life of John F Kennedy.
Final Judgment presents what the author, Michael Collins Piper, calls “the other side of the jigsaw puzzle”—the long-ignored, but otherwise freely available details , which present a stark new light on the circumstances surrounding JFK’s assassination.
This book demonstrates the strong likelihood Israel’s intelligence service, the Mossad, collaborated alongside the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate in the JFK assassination because President Kennedy was working to prevent Israel from acquiring nuclear weapons of mass destruction, a fact that remained a dark secret for decades.
Once you’ ve read Final Judgment you will see the evidence of likely Israeli involvement is there.
Although first published in 1994, only one newspaper, a small Washington-based weekly, even mentioned the book.
Despite that, Final Judgment has now sold more than 40,000 copies, achieving he proverbial status of “underground” bestseller.
Yet most Americans never heard of this groundbreaking historical bombshell or of its controversial thesis.
This edition was documented with 1069 footnotes and featured an extended new ""question and answer"" section.
The cover of this volume featured photographs of a number of players in the JFK conspiracy.
Some deletions of subheadings were made to accommodate important factual information added.
This volume is the second printing of the 6th edition and includes a number of textual additions not appearing in the first printing of the 6th edition.
The author continues to hope this will be his ""last word"" on the subject. e This Jan 2007 ebook edition includes internal hyperlink navigation.
However, while reproducing all original text, this ebook makes some some alterations and adaptions for the electronic format that are noted in the Erratum section.
Ebook page numbers are express at the top of various pages as plain numbers.
This ebook also provides internal hyperlink navigation and external links.
All references to the Sixth Edition in the text refer to the soft cover edition, which was a substantially enlarged, updated, revised edition of Final Judgment, first published in January, 1994.
Please visit the author’s web site at mikepiperreport.com for the latest contact information, archived articles, links to radio shows, descriptions of latest books, and other background information.
Please also visit americafirstbooks.com for the latest listings of Michael Collins Piper’s works in ebook form.
This may be the most unusual cover of any book—and there have been many—published about the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The figures shown are Meyer Lansky, the head of the global organized crime syndicate, David Ben-Gurion, the Israeli Prime Minister who resigned his post in 1963, disgusted with President John Kennedy's refusal to support Israel's drive to build a nuclear arsenal, and James J Angleton who—in 1963—was the CIA's director of counterintelligence and head of the CIA's liaison desk for Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad.
Over Angleton's shoulder is the logo of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Israel achieved its nuclear weapons capabilities precisely because of the assassination of President Kennedy.
At the bottom are shown Attorney General Robert Kennedy and President Kennedy and their father, Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy, founder of the Kennedy family's would-be dynasty.
John Kennedy's assassination ended any possibility of another Kennedy reaching the White House.
For ten years Israeli propagandists called Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper a ""liar"" and an ""anti-Semite"" for charging that Israeli intelligence played a role in the JFK assassination conspiracy because of JFK's bitter secret conflict with Israeli Prime Minister David BenGurion over Israel's efforts to build nuclear weapons of mass destruction.
Mordechai Vanunu, recently released after spending 18 years in prison for exposing Israel's covert atomic weapons program—had charged that supporters of Israel's drive for nuclear weapons were involved in the JFK assassination precisely because of JFK's interference with their ambitions.
The Israeli government dismissed Vanunu's allegations, but what he said received attention in newspapers worldwide, with the notable exception of the United States where one and only one newspaper, mentioned Vanunu's charges and that was American Free Press, the Washington-based weekly that published Final Judgment.
Stern was the closest friend of Clay Shaw, the longtime CIA asset charged by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison in the JFK conspiracy.
Final Judgment had already documented Shaw's ties to Israeli intelligence, so the NUMEC-Stern connection is all the more damning and, with other data, explains why Garrison ultimately concluded there was an Israeli connection behind the conspiracy.
Another NUMEC investor was Pittsburgh's CIA-connected ""right wing"" billionaire Richard Scaife, whose protégé, Joe Farah, a vocal supporter of Israel, promoted a JFK conspiracy book evidently designed to distract attention from Final Judgment.
JFK and Israel—No “Special Friendship"" ""Israel need not apologize for the assassination or destruction of those who seek to destroy it.
Washington Jewish Week October 9, 1997 ""The murder of American President John F Kennedy brought to an abrupt end the massive pressure being applied by the United States administration on the government of Israel to discontinue the nuclear program [In Israel and the Bomb, Avner] Cohen demonstrates at length the pressures applied by Kennedy on Ben-Gurion . . . in which Kennedy makes it quite clear to the Israeli prime minister that he will under no circumstances agree to Israel becoming a nuclear state.
Reuven Pedatzer in the Israeli newspaper, Ha'aretz, February 5, 1999, reviewing Israel and the Bomb.
Joseph Kennedy . . . returned to the United States aboard an ocean liner that was also carrying Israel Jacobson, a poor Lubavitcher rabbi, and six of his yeshiva students, who were fleeing the Nazis.
Paul Findley , in The Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, March 1992.
Benjamin Givli, head of Israeli military intelligence, outlining an Israeli terror campaign to be blamed upon Moslem extremists.
PLAYERS ""There has been since almost the earliest days of the Israeli state and the earliest days of the CIA a secret bond, basically by which Israeli intelligence did jobs for the CIA and for the rest of American intelligence.
These are paintings, generally of wilderness landscapes, that, viewed up close, look like simple picturesque scenes—a mountain lake with a snow-covered slope reflected on its surface, a field of wildflowers, a forest of birch trees.
The mirrored rock assumes the shape of an eagle in flight, the flowers form themselves into a rearing stallion, the boles of the birch trees become the profile of an Apache warrior.
Over the years . . . it has become virtually impossible to see what the truth is.
What ultimately faces us is a hydra-headed beast, but it is possible to come to grips at least with its claws.
Upon the first release of his book, Final Judgment, a storm of controversy erupted in the United States with certain ""pressure groups"" trying hard to have the book banned.
Since then, Final Judgment has gone through three more printings—and the controversy hasn't abated.
We here in Australia believe that all theories on the JFK assassination should be heard, no matter whether you agree with them or not.
Trying to get another book banned because you don't agree with it, or it isn't Politically Correct (the greatest censorship drive of the 80s and 90s), is just the kind of thing we fight against.
It's just the same as groups such as the FBI and CIA ""redacting""” lines of text here and there.
So, we here at Probable Cause are proud to review Final Judgment and hope that we never go down the path of the ""American Model""—freedom of speech and the First Amendment and all that—yeah, okay, until you start speaking out and stepping on other people's toes.
Piper's thesis is that Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad, played a key role in the assassination alongside the CIA and organized crime.
Throughout his presidency, JFK was involved in an increasingly bitter behind-the-scenes dispute with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion over Israel's steadfast determination to build a nuclear arsenal.
Well, actually, you'll be surprised how many wellknown ""JFK assassination players"" have links to the Mossad and we were quite impressed with the documented evidence within the book.
Piper is under attack from the ADL in the United States for this book and, really, it's not warranted.
Final Judgment is the most thorough, most honest, most penetrating, most factual, and most analytically complete and systematic of all that I have read so far.
Otherwise its sheer complexity would be nearly impossible to follow and decipher.
At each level, the threads of the puzzle are woven together in such a way that the fog from the labyrinth is slowly but inexorably lifted until eventually it is peeled back completely and the outlines of the conspiracy are laid bare.
While the links at some of the levels may be tenuous, the author refuses to “fake or fudge the data’ or to be “fatally selective’ in what is included or left out—as was so clearly the case in Gerald Posner's Case Closed, or indeed as was the case in the Warren Commission's own flawed report.
Piper is intrepid in following his analysis to every logical conclusion—wherever they lead and whatever the implications may be.
He focuses on the “why and how’ of the conspiracy and unmistakably the threads all lead back to Israel, Israeli super-patriots, the Meyer Lansky led “Jewish branch of the mob,’ and the Mossad and the international “agents of influence’ under its control.
We knew that the truth would have its own context, its own smell, like Peter Dale Scott's Deep Politics and the Death of JFK did.
Piper's book has them all and in the grand tradition of Carl Oglesby's The Yankee & Cowboy War, Michael Collins Piper has struck gold.
He has hit the “mother lode,’ and in the process has pointed the finger at, if not tightened the proverbial noose around, the necks of the cabal of conspirators responsible for pulling the strings of the JFK assassination.
Because of this book, future research will begin to focus more on the “big picture,’ and turn away from constantly grinding, ad nauseam, at inconsistencies in the Warren Commission's Report.
Compared to Posner's Case Closed, Final Judgment is a masterpiece."" —Herbert L Calhoun (Herbert L Calhoun, Ph.D. retired as deputy division chief of the Policy, Plans and Analysis Office of the State Department's Bureau of Political-Military Affairs and formerly served as a senior foreign affairs specialist for the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and as the United States representative to the 1996 and 1998 United Nations Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms and Light Weapons.
A journalist with United Press International and the Pittsburgh Press, Gill also wrote for Life, Fortune, the Saturday Evening Post, Reader's Digest and National Geographic.
Kennedy was attempting to halt the development of nuclear weapons by the Israelis, while simultaneously planning to disband the CIA and disengage our military troops from the Indo-China area.
Donn De Grand Pre (A veteran of World War II and Korea, Grand Pre served as Deputy Chief of the International Division/Office of the Chief of Research and Development at the Pentagon.
In 1967 Grand Pre was named as Director for Ground Weapons Systems in the newly-created office of International Logistics Negotiations, responsible for negotiating sales contracts with heads of foreign nations for military weapons systems.
So I started to read what I would not have purchased at a dollar book sale.
I am now convinced that you have seen and now help others see the largest feature of the JFK assassination that has been missed by all up to this period.
Final Judgment is a 'must' book because it raises and answers so many questions which we need to know about.
Victory is not possible without information, and this book has given us the information we need.
FINAL JUDGMENT—the one book that—if read by enough people—will turn American politics upside down.
Some Dallas Connections,"" the document—apparently the work of a professional journalist—focused on ""the specifics of how the Israelis could have influenced the events in Dallas,"" filling in details never explored in previous editions of Final Judgment.
The data is quite explosive, particularly when contrasted with the mythology regarding ""Big D"" repeated ad infinitum in JFK literature.
However, understanding the real Dallas—not the city of legend and of Hollywood drama—prepares one for the revelations laid forth in Final Judgment.
The document buries the tired old myth that a clique of anti-Semitic White Anglo-Saxon Protestant oil plutocrats ruled Dallas.
Not only did Dallas have an immensely powerful Jewish community, but, more importantly, the city had been a major center of fundraising and arms smuggling on behalf of the Zionist cause, going back to the 1940s.
Even Jonathan Pollard, the American spy for Israel, said he was inspired to pro-Israel activism by stories he heard of gunrunning for the Israeli underground by Jews in Texas.
In fact, the official published history of a major Zionist arms smuggling operation, the Sonneborn Institute, reports its agents smuggled aircraft parts out of Texas to Israel.
This was happening when a then recently discharged Army Air Corps aircraft mechanic, Jack Ruby, was re-settling in Dallas in 1947, the year prior to Israel's birth, when Sonneborn's activities were at a zenith.
Ruby bragged of having run arms to Israel and, in 1963, is now known to have part of an arms smuggling operation overseen by an Israeli intelligence officer.
So the Israeli connection to Texas was a lot more intimate than many today ever realized.
And since JFK was, at that time, at loggerheads with Israel over its nuclear arms program, it is critical to recognize how JFK was lured to Dallas and who was in charge of the arrangements that actually facilitated his assassination.
And while it is well known that the Dallas leg of JFK's Texas trip was sponsored by the Citizens Council , the elite business group that ruled Dallas, the little-noticed evidence shows that two of the three key figures who dominated the CC were Jewish—not ""WASPs,"" as the legend of Dallas would have it.
These were the folks who really ran Dallas, not the conservatives affiliated with the John Birch Society, as the old myth suggests.
In 1963, one of those Jewish power brokers was an outspokenly pro-Israel liquor wholesaler, Julius Schepps, who held the distribution rights in Dallas for the Bronfman family's Seagram's products.
And as we shall see, there is evidence that Jack Ruby was on the payroll of the Bronfman family, whose fingerprints are to be found all over the JFK assassination conspiracy.
The means by which the Dallas elite gained control of JFK's Dallas trip agenda is interesting.
The chairman was Dallas Jewish leader and public relations man, Sam Bloom, the CC's longtime executive director, and—in retrospect—one of the least known but most pivotal figures in world history.
There was an immediate confrontation between Bloom, representing the Dallas elite, and Jerry Bruno, JFK's veteran advance man.
Bruno wanted the president to speak at the Women's Building, but the rulers of Dallas insisted JFK speak at the Trade Mart.
Although Bruno fought long and hard, after much pressure, the Dallas elite prevailed, causing the JFK loyalist to comment that ""this was one of the few fights like this that I had lost.
Had JFK's advance man prevailed—as he usually did—JFK (on his way to the preferred location) would have traveled two blocks farther away from the TSBD—out of the kill zone—at a greater speed.
Although the Secret Service objected to the publication of JFK's motorcade route, Bloom nonetheless made sure a map of the route was repeatedly published in Dallas papers.
Thus, later, when the ""patsy"" was in custody, there was a plausible explanation as to how he knew JFK would pass by his workplace.
That an assassin quite probably fired on JFK from the Dal-Tex Building is most relevant in the context of an Israeli connection.
Co-owned by David Weisblat, a major financial backer of the Israeli lobby's Anti-Defamation League, Dal-Tex housed, on different floors, a number of firms that utilized the telephone number of Morty Freedman, an attorney, garment manufacturer, and activist in Jewish affairs.
Since JFK was working to stop Israel's nuclear arms program—which received smuggled uranium from United States sources—it is notable that one Dal-Tex firm linked to Freedman was the Dallas Uranium & Oil Company.
It is also intriguing that one of Freedman's Dal-Tex business partners was Abe Zapruder, the Jewish dress manufacturer who filmed the assassination and profited immensely.
Today there are some who now believe Zapruder had advance knowledge of the assassination.
Once the accused assassin was in custody, it was—you guessed it—Sam Bloom, who had earlier maneuvered JFK into the kill zone, who pressured Elgin Crull, the city manager, to in turn pressure Dallas Police Chief Jesse Curry into making Oswald accessible to the press and to move him publicly from the Dallas police station to the city jail.
Thus, the situation was in place for Jack Ruby to move in for the kill.
There are several sources, including Dallas FBI agent James Hosty, who stated Bloom and his backers were the forces behind this.
When the police searched Ruby's home, they found a slip of paper with Bloom's name, address and telephone number on it.
This will be painful for those who thought the city an anti-Jewish stronghold, ripe for Nazi revolution.
Instead, Dallas was actually an outpost for the advancement of the interests of Israel and today it very much remains so.
However, in light of the ""Big Picture of Big D""— details Brown ignored in terms of their ultimate context— it's time for real JFK assassination truth seekers to take a new look at Final Judgment.
Advance orders from book dealers—presumably—make this unusual phenomenon possible.
Whatever the case, there's much more to the story behind the story of ""best-sellers"" than meets the eye.
And it's a story that most of the major names in the publishing industry probably would prefer left untold.
Nonetheless, a number of books dealing with the JFK assassination have reached the Times’ list.
Interestingly enough, though, Mark Lane's ground-breaking international best-seller, Rush to Judgment—which did reach the Times list—was never once reviewed by the Times, which tells us that it is the source of ""all the news that's fit to print,” until long after the book had become an international cause celebre.
In more recent years, particularly in the wake of the release of Oliver Stone's Hollywood blockbuster, JFK, several more volumes did reach the Times’ best-seller list.
This despite the fact that nearly 8,000 copies of Final Judgment were sold within two weeks of the book's release in January of 1994—this as a response to a single advertisement in a relatively small national weekly newspaper.
Now, as a result of direct mail promotions, many thousands more copies of Final Judgment are being sold across the country with more than 40,000 copies in circulation.
When the book was temporarily out of print—in the fall of 2003—there was so much demand that second-hand copies were being sold by used book dealers over the Internet for as much—at one point—as $185 a copy.
That Final Judgment has already sold so exceedingly well is quite remarkable, considering the general lack of publicity that the book has received.
Yet, Blakey's book, *Authored by the American Free Press, publisher of the soft cover edition Foreword according to Blakey himself, sold only some 20,000 copies—far less than Final Judgment which received no mass media promotion whatsoever.
So if you've never read anything about the JFK assassination, Final Judgment will be the only book you ever need read on the subject.
If, on the other hand, you have read one or more earlier volumes on the subject, you'll be amazed at the explosive new revelations appearing in Final Judgment.
Dissecting the assassination conspiracy in its entirety, Final Judgment ties together little-known details that have been ignored or misunderstood by other authors—whether by accident or by design.
Once you've read Final Judgment, you'll never look at the JFK assassination the same way again.
And you may never again trust the media to tell you all of the facts about any other important event that shaped the course of history.
Above all, you'll understand how the JFK assassination conspiracy evolved as it did and why—at least until the advent of Final Judgment—the truth had never been told.
It is important to note that since the first release of Final Judgment, only a handful of minor errors have been brought to the author's attention.
The errors, however, had nothing whatsoever to do with the thesis of the book and were based on the research of others.
If anything, hysterical and malicious defamation—especially considering the sources—lends credence, in its own way, to the thesis of the book.
So there is indeed much more to be learned about the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Final Judgment points the direction for those who wish to pursue the matter further.
Final Judgment is—at least for the time being— precisely what its title suggests.
Michael Collins Piper has done the work necessary to assemble this volume.
Now it is up to the readers to make sure that the message imparted within these pages reaches the widest audience possible.
Order extra copies to donate to libraries and to give to opinion makers in your community.
This book, if read by enough people, could play a major part—just as did the assassination of President Kennedy—in reshaping the course of world affairs.
But that can only happen if enough people—who will be mad as Hell when they learn the truth—take action.
Now, prepare for a remarkable journey and learn—at long last—who really killed John F Kennedy... and why.
An Introduction by Robert L Brock A Black American's Perspective on the Assassination of John F Kennedy As an American of African slave descent, as a United States Army veteran of World War II, and as a long-time laborer within the African-American community, I have a special interest in finding out precisely who killed President John F Kennedy and why.
John F Kennedy and his brother, Robert Kennedy, put a great deal on the line when they stepped forward and identified themselves with the cause of justice for Blacks in America.
To be sure, Jack and Bobby were savvy politicians, conscious of the growing and increasingly influential Black voting bloc in America.
Thus, for reasons of their own, they had made a conscious decision to align themselves politically with Americans of African slave descent.
However, at the same time Jack and Bobby also truly believed that it was time that the Black man and Black woman in America deserved an even break.
Through their words and—more significantly—through their actions, the Kennedy brothers were bringing a previously-disenfranchised people under the protection of the Kennedy dynasty.
Had John Kennedy lived and been elected to a second term, the Black voting bloc—for years to come—would have ultimately become part of a Kennedy political powerhouse.
Throughout the 20th century the Black political apparatus in America was dominated at the highest levels—particularly in the all-important financial realm—by Jewish influence.
Organizations such as the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith, one of the foremost elements in the powerful Israeli lobby, aggressively dictated the internal affairs and the public course and discourse of what were ostensibly ""Black""—or, in the parlance of the day, ""Negro""—civil rights organizations.
However, with the advent of the Kennedy presidency, Americans of African slave descent now had an effective and eloquent spokesman in the White House itself.
This essentially had the effect of moving the ADL, for example, out of the loop.
The ADL was no longer the ""middleman"" divvying up the civil rights crumbs for Blacks in America.
John F Kennedy, for all intents and purposes, had emerged as a white ""mainstream"" voice for Black America's political empowerment.
As President of the United States, speaking out on behalf of Black concerns, John F Kennedy short-circuited the long-time domination of the Black community by Jewish financial interests and placed himself in the center of the civil rights debate.
The ADL and other ""civil rights"" organizations funded by the Jewish financial interests were pushed aside and made irrelevant.
A white man of Irish Catholic descent—the grandson of a saloon keeper—became Black America's unlikely spokesman and co-opted the Jewish overseers of the civil rights movement in America.
As a consequence, I do believe—as do many other Americans of African slave descent—that this is one of the reasons that the powers-thatbe within America's plutocratic elite determined that John F Kennedy's presidency had to be brought to premature closure.
What's more, all of this came at a time when independent Black voices such as Malcolm X and Martin Luther King were themselves rising in popularity and influence—much, it seems, to the dismay of the Jewish community.
We now know that although we have heard much in the media about J Edgar Hoover's war on Dr.
King, it was the ADL that was providing the foot soldiers for this war—a fact that the ADL would much prefer be kept under wraps.
A former ADL official has admitted (and as Michael Collins Piper documents in Final Judgment) it was the ADL that was actually doing much of the surveillance of Dr.
They knew how the drug and gambling and prostitution rackets of Meyer Lansky—a major ADL contributor—were eviscerating Black America.
When all is said and done, there's no question in my mind that we will find that those who slew those dreamers were also behind the murder of John F Kennedy and his brother Bobby.
This is why I take great pleasure in penning this brief introduction to Michael Collins Piper's remarkable book.
I believe that Final Judgment provides the answer to the mystery of who really killed John F Kennedy—and why.
I have nothing but contempt for those cowardly white liberals who portray themselves as admirers of JFK's stand on civil rights and say that they want to find the real murderers of President Kennedy but who otherwise ignore or suppress the facts put forth in Final Judgment.
They are profiteers who are trading on the death of President Kennedy but covering up all of the facts that are there before them.
There is no other book ever written that explains the JFK assassination conspiracy so honestly or which makes everything about the JFK assassination conspiracy so crystal clear.
Michael Collins Piper has stepped right up into the footlights of center stage and, like one of those great Broadway impresarios, Piper has presented a spell-binding scenario outlining the entirety of the JFK assassination conspiracy more powerful and more convincing than any before.
Having written a book on such a ""controversial"" topic as the JFK assassination—coupling that subject with a highly ""sensational"" thesis—has proven quite an adventure.
Never having styled myself as an ""expert"" on the JFK assassination, I protest when anyone introduces me as such.
In fact, despite what many have assumed, the subject has never been a particular preoccupation of mine.
No Arab government or financial interest—or even any Arab-American source—had any hand in preparing, publishing or distributing this book.
Only in later 2001—a full year after the publication of the fifth Englishlanguage edition—did a privately owned Arabic-language publishing house issue a translation of the book.
Some critics pointed out that I was an employee of Liberty Lobby, the populist institution that published the national weekly newspaper, The Spotlight.
These critics note that Liberty Lobby questioned United States favoritism toward Israel.
However, for this I make no apologies nor, for that matter, are any apologies due.
So, it was precisely my association with Liberty Lobby that enabled me to gain special insights—particularly vis-a-vis United States policy toward Israel— which assisted tremendously in the preparation of this book.
What's more, as you'll see in Final Judgment, Liberty Lobby became embroiled in a heated libel trial after ex-CIA figure E Howard Hunt brought a lawsuit against Liberty Lobby for publishing an article alleging the CIA intended to frame Hunt for involvement in the JFK assassination.
Handling The Spotlight's successful defense, appropriately enough, was Mark Lane, dean of the Warren Commission critics.
Lane put aside presumed ideological differences with Liberty Lobby and skillfully used the Hunt case to explore the JFK assassination in a legal forum—the first such opportunity since Jim Garrison's ill-fated prosecution of Clay Shaw.
Thus, following the Hunt case from the ""inside""—and later studying Lane's account of the affair in Plausible Denial—gave me a unique vantage point others haven't had.
I thank Mark Lane—and Willis Carto, the founder of Liberty Lobby—for this opportunity.
Willis Carto's encouragement and enthusiasm were most important in making this book possible.
As for Mark Lane, let it be noted that had he not written one word after Rush to Judgment—the book that proved the Warren Commission Report a fraud—we would still be indebted to Mark for that alone.
Although many books from others came later, Mark's singular crusade convinced the world there was much more to the story.
Mark and his one-ofa-kind wife, Trish, are tremendous human beings and valued friends.
The name of my French source, Pierre Neuville, was unveiled for the first time in the fifth edition of Final Judgment, but the Mossad—of course—knew his identity from the beginning.
Although the first draft presented—I think—a compelling indictment of Mossad complicity in the JFK assassination, my French source pointed me in a direction that convinced me—and many readers—that Final Judgment was on the mark.
History owes a debt to the well-known and respected former United States congressman, Paul Findley—a liberal, no ""right-wing extremist""—who introduced me to this French source and vouched for his credibility.
Only recently did I formally identify Findley as the conduit, but, again, it was no mystery to those who make it their business to know these things.
Another former United States Congressman—the late John G Schmitz—told me of his own long-time suspicion of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination and encouraged me to write this book, saying it was a book he would have liked to have written.
Considering this gentleman's connections, his assessment is very telling indeed.
Although they've certainly never endorsed my thesis, several authors upon whose works I relied extensively do confirm the secret war between JFK and Israel and suggest that behind-the-scenes intrigue in the U.S.-Israeli relationship is relevant to the events of November 22, 1963.
Stephen Green, Andrew and Leslie Cockburn, and Seymour Hersh, in their own studies of United States Middle East policy (Taking Sides, Dangerous Liaison, and The Samson Option, respectively), provided the foundation upon which much of my own research was conducted.
In 1998—four years after the first release of Final Judgment—lsraeli historian Avner Cohen, author of Israel and the Bomb, came along and his book has given great credence to my thesis.
Cohen told a mutual acquaintance—I'm sure he'd be shocked to know we even know somebody mutually—that he was horrified to learn (while doing an Internet search for data on his own book) about the existence of Final Judgment and its thesis.
Of course, Cohen rushed to assert his view that rejects the idea of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination, but the genie is out of the bottle and the world now knows that Israel and JFK were not the ""special friends"" some would have us believe.
A little-noticed—but important—book, There's a Fish in the Courthouse, by Gary Wean, enriched my own work considerably.
In fact, Gary's friend, Wade Frazier, has pointed out that I'm one of the few who has even given any credence or publicity to Gary.
A special ""thanks"" to a very real friend, Tom Valentine, host of the popular Radio Free America.
When no others would, Tom gave me the opportunity to discuss this book and has continually given me much encouragement.
Several other radio hosts, including Jack Stockwell and Barbara Jean at ""KTALK"" in Salt Lake City, and ""One Eyed Jack"" Jackson in Springfield, Illinois, Bill Boshears in Cincinnati, Ron Muhammed in San Diego, Victor Thorn and Lisa ""Vicki"" Guliani and Rick Adams at WALE in Providence, Rhode Island have also dared to have me on.
As publisher of New American View, Victor and his right hand, Donna McGrath, kept a watch on the Israeli lobby in Washington.
Vince Ryan, John Tiffany, Travis McCoy and Jim Yarbrough, among others, provided helpful suggestions during the writing of Final Judgment.
Alfred Lilienthal, the brash and wonderful pioneer American critic of America's disastrous Middle East policy, was most supportive.
A warm nod of appreciation to the late H Keith Thompson whose support for my work honored me tremendously.
From the start, Van Loman has been a valued confidante, providing sharp insights and remarkable leads that brought the book full circle.
A tremendous, albeit-belated word of thanks to Bill Grimstad for putting me onto Frank Sturgis’ little-noted Mossad connection, a rather relevant point—and that's putting it lightly—that escaped my own research.
Tom Kerr, Bill W., Reg O., Martin Williams, Tony Blizzard, and others provided editing which improved this book considerably.
Friendly words from the late Ace Hayes, firebrand publisher of the Portland Free Press, and Daniel Brandt of NameBase Newsline proved the point that the JFK assassination is not a matter of ""right"" or ""left,"" as some naive folks still believe.
Herbert Calhoun, the former State Department official whose no-holds-barred endorsement of Final Judgment has absolutely floored my critics who do know that there are a lot of others in high places who agree with Calhoun, but just aren't yet ready to say it publicly.
Thanks also to Gordon's colleagues at The European for publishing a detailed exposition of my controversial research.
The hearty endorsement from no-nonsense Idaho attorney Edgar Steele has certainly helped spread the word.
And I would be remiss in failing to mention Sid and Wwoolf at feralnews.com and Russ at playtowinmoney .com and the folks at afrocubaweb.com who have generously promoted Final Judgment.
Alan Jones' excellent synopsis of Final Judgment in How the World Really Works has really been a boost.
And Carol Adler, the courageous maverick publisher of many fascinating ""controversial"" titles also stands out for her interest in my work.
The same to Professor Ray Goodwin who put his career on the line by telling his students Final Judgment is the ""last word"" on the JFK affair.
Showell, Greg Garnett, Jerry Myers, Donald Malloy, David Lewis, Dan Hinton, James Jakes, Anne Cronin, Julia Foster, Trisha Katson, Ann Brown, Helen Nunley, Marie Zittel, Agi, Mike, Nick, Jim, Judy, Ruby Lee, George, Will, Ricky, DVS, Steve, James the Poet—and Jast but far from least—that special dog, Brute, and all my other four-legged friends too numerous to mention.
My mother—always my worst critic—read the volume and became convinced, her initial doubts notwithstanding.
Com One of the problems with writing a book is that no matter how hard an author researches his subject, he's bound to miss a few significant items the first time around.
Since Final Judgment was first released in 1994, I've repeatedly kicked myself for having passed by more than a few such details that I believe lend credence to the theory that this book puts forth.
Up through and including the fourth edition of Final Judgment, I repeatedly made the point that former New Orleans Jim Garrison who prosecuted trade executive Clay Shaw for conspiracy in the JFK assassination had no inkling of any Mossad connection to the assassination.
After the fourth edition of Final Judgment was released, I made the somewhat unsettling discovery that Garrison apparently did indeed realize that the Mossad was connected to the conspiracy—and the information had been there for me to find it, if I had looked in the right place.
Garrison wanted me to find a publisher for a manuscript he had written on the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
When I read the manuscript I found that it was a fictional work that placed the blame for John Kennedy's death on the Mossad—the Israeli intelligence service.
Considering all the grief to which I had been subjected over the past several years—even including criticism coming from some defenders of the Garrison investigation—I could barely believe what I had read.
Weberman is to be believed, Jim Garrison himself had indeed figured out—somehow, not surprisingly—that there was good reason to believe that the Mossad had been involved in the crime of the century.
But Garrison himself evidently concluded that it was not in his interests to say so—at least not publicly and certainly not in any of his non-fiction writings on the subject.
So Garrison decided instead to put his thesis in a novel, but it was a novel that obviously was never published.
I doubt that Garrison's family will be attempting to put the unpublished manuscript on the market any time soon.
Weberman's revelation is sure to make many defenders of Jim Garrison uncomfortable, but it does provide astounding confirmation that the thesis that has been put forth in Final Judgment does have some genuine support from a figure who has become both a villain and an icon in the lore of the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Garrison's reported theorizing of Mossad involvement does not, of course, prove that the Mossad was involved in the JFK assassination, but it does lend credence to what has been so widely criticized (but without refutation, I might add) in the pages of Final Judgment.
Thus we are left with the fact of what Weberman has alleged about Garrison's apparent suppositions, coupled with the reality that Final Judgment has now come forth documenting the ""how"" and the ""why"" of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
And as much as it may dismay Israel and its powerful lobby in America, represented by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith and other powerful forces, there are a lot of people—in growing numbers—who do believe that Final Judgment presents a scenario that does make sense, one that makes as much sense or more than many of the other standard theories on the subject, the ADL's hysterical efforts to silence me notwithstanding.
So despite the subtitle of my book, in a sense I actually initially missed ""the missing link in the JFK assassination conspiracy""—the fact that Jim Garrison had indeed recognized the Mossad connection.
On August 21, 1997 a front-page article appeared in the Los Angeles Times describing an uproar in Southern California that erupted over my impending lecture at a community college seminar on the JFK assassination.
The seminar was being held under the auspices of the South Orange County Community College District.
Although four speakers were scheduled, it was my expected presence—my presence alone—that created the controversy.
The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith was upset that I contend in this book, Final Judgment, that Israel's intelligence service, the Mossad, played a front-line role in the JFK assassination alongside the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate.
The ADL failed to cite any evidence of my being a ""proponent of Holocaust denial,"" but evidently the ADL considers that the ultimate kiss of death and that such accusations are fair game when trying to silence anyone who runs afoul of its agenda.
That the ADL presumes to label my charge of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination as being ""ridiculous"" is downright laughable.
Inasmuch as the ADL not only functions as a major force in the Israeli lobby in the United States, but is also an intelligence and propaganda arm of the Mossad, it seems unlikely the ADL would ever endorse my thesis.
In any case, as a direct result of intense and highly hysterical clamor by the ADL, the JFK seminar was canceled, although college officials and others said publicly and forthrightly that they were concerned about the implications and consequences of the ADL's heavy-handed pressure campaign to restrict freedom of speech, particularly in an academic forum.
Nonetheless, news reports about the affair appeared in newspapers nationwide, even including a Newsweek commentary by George Will, a strident supporter of Israel.
So, as a consequence, I'm pleased to say, there was a positive side to all of this.
Now—for the first time since Final Judgment was published in 1994— readers of ""mainstream newspapers"" across America have been told that there is a theory floating around out there that Israel's Mossad was involved in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
There is now going to be a lot of debate about this book"" —whether the ADL likes it or not.
Although the Los Angeles Times reporter, Michael Granberry, made some attempt to present my views, I do feel compelled, however, to comment on various aspects of the Los Angeles Times article, inasmuch as the whole story behind the article needs to be told.
The Times quoted one Gerald Posner, the author of Case Closed, as an authority on JFK conspiracies.
This happens to be precisely the propaganda line now promoted by the ADL which has said that if people believe there was a conspiracy behind the JFK assassination, they might also end up believing that there was no Holocaust.
Outspoken Experts Explode the Myths, stated forthrightly: ""If segments of the population are really willing to believe that President Kennedy was killed by the military-industrial complex because he was too soft on Communism .. . then it is not hard to imagine some of these same people falling for the lies of Bradley Smith or the fabrications of Louis Farrakhan and Leonard Jeffries.
In short, if you believe in any JFK assassination conspiracy theory, you might actually believe something else about another matter—such as the Holocaust or the slave trade—that the ADL doesn't want you to believe.
In fact, Posner's book is little more than a rehash of the original Warren Commission Report supplemented with an offensive mish-mash of virulent attacks on not only a number of JFK investigators but also citizens who came forth with credible evidence pointing toward a conspiracy behind the assassination of the president.
The aforementioned Jim Marrs, the author of Crossfire, a popular compendium of JFK conspiracy theories, has been fiercely critical of Posner and he's been pretty public in those criticisms and he has his own opinions about where Posner is coming from.
The Other Side of the Jigsaw Puzzle... book on the JFK assassination, promising Posner that the CIA would open its own JFK assassination files to Posner so that he could write the book.
Posner had to have been set up by the CIA for that book, too,"" says Marrs.
Marrs is upset by the way the mainstream media promoted Posner's book on the 30th anniversary of the JFK assassination.
What is notable is that by far the biggest media push for Posner's book came in the August 30th 1993 issue of United States News & World Report, which gave the book a widely-advertised cover story.
I'll probably upset some people by pointing out that United States News is owned by Mort Zuckerman, one of the most outspoken and powerful figures in the Israeli lobby in America.
In an appendix in this edition of Final Judgment, I have analyzed Posner's book and showed precisely what a pathetic fraud it is.
However, for those interested in a comprehensive critique of Posner, I would heartily recommend Case Open by veteran JFK researcher Harold Weisberg.
Although he's not a reliable source , the Los Angeles Times took great delight in citing his critique of Final Judgment which Posner, the Times said, considers one of the more ""outlandish"" theories presented to date.
Furthermore, the so-called ""think tank"" that employs Berlet has its own axes to grind.
What the Times also failed to mention is that Berlet's ""think tank"" has been funded by at least two known CIA front companies.
There are others who have pointed out that despite his preppy nickname, Berlet's real name is John Foster Berlet.
He was named after former Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, who was apparently associated with Berlet's father.
Dulles' brother, Allen, of course, was not only fired as CIA director by JFK but later went on to serve as a member of the Warren Commission which covered up the truth about the assassination.
So inasmuch as Final Judgment indicts the CIA for collaborating with the Mossad in the JFK assassination we can understand why Berlet (and Posner) are eager to keep Final Judgment under wraps.
Obviously, the ADL directed the Los Angeles Times to both Posner and Berlet, knowing that the two CIA-connected ""authorities"" would come through as they did.
I am certain Bauer never read my book, so for him to accuse me of being a ""crackpot"" is malicious and baseless name-calling of the worst sort.
What's more, although I am not familiar with the ""philosophy"" espoused in the classroom by the good professor it is clearly not a philosophy in line with the American tradition of freedom of speech.
I made repeated efforts to contact Bauer to speak to him directly but he refused to return my calls.
When I finally did reach Bauer, he told me that he had been ""advised"" not to speak with me and promptly hung up.
For years the ADL has maintained a policy of ""refusing to debate"" those it otherwise so feverishly attacks through the press.
The anguished Bauer, evidently was comfortable throwing brickbats from afar and by calling in the ""thought police"" at the ADL, but he didn't have the fortitude to confront me directly.
The Los Angeles Times also reported, incidentally, that college trustee Steve Frogue, the sponsor of the ill-fated college seminar, had claimed some time ago that ""the ADL was behind"" the Kennedy assassination.
What Frogue, in fact, said was that there was evidence that it was possible that Lee Harvey Oswald's strange activities in New Orleans were part of one of the ADL's famous ""fact finding” operations.
The Times reporter misunderstood Frogue's remarks about the ADL's connection to Oswald, but now that misinterpretation has been reported again and again and has taken on a life of its own.
However, in Final Judgment Oswald's ADL connection are examined for the first time.
As a young admirer of JFK, Frogue was preparing to join the Peace Corps, inspired by Kennedy's New Frontier.
The Other Side of the Jigsaw Puzzle... of the president, however, Frogue was so frustrated and disillusioned that he instead joined the Marine Corps.
They had no desire to allow college students and other interested participants to even hear what I had to say.
They considered the thesis of Final Judgment so dangerous that they did all in their immense power to prevent me from being heard.
Thus, Steve Frogue's project was scuttled through a smear campaign against me and against this decent man that he probably never imagined possible.
The Los Angeles Times did correctly report my comment that JFK was involved in a fierce battle with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion over Israel's efforts to build a nuclear arsenal.
I pointed out to the Times that four prominent authors, Seymour Hersh, Stephen Green and Andrew and Leslie Cockburn, wrote extensively about JFK's policy toward Israel and that I relied almost exclusively upon their findings.
I did not say, as the Times further reported, that I disputed the muchreported figure that ""six million Jews"" died at the hands of the Nazis, nor did I ever once allude to claims that the figure is actually much lower.
My views on what did or did not take place during the Holocaust have nothing to do with my book on the JFK assassination.
You can't turn around without reading something about it in the press all of the time.
However,"" I added, ""in recent years, some Jewish historians have claimed that the figure is as high as seven million or even eight million.
This was literary license on the part of the reporter who presumed that these were my views based upon what the ADL had already told him my views happened to be on this irrelevant issue.
Despite all this, of course, my JFK book had nothing to do with the Holocaust, the ADL's false and malicious rantings notwithstanding.
Frankly, I doubt very much that if I happened to be ""pro-choice"" on the issue of abortion that the Catholic Church would have, on that basis, launched a major smear campaign to stop me from speaking on the unrelated subject of the JFK assassination.
When all is said and done, the ADL's hysterical reaction to Final Judgment validates the thesis of this book.
The Los Angeles Times made reference to another proposed speaker at the scuttled seminar, John Judge, and pointed out that he was known for his adherence to ""the conspiracies theories of the late New Orleans Dist.
What is interesting to note is that Judge refused to permit me to speak at a JFK conference that he organized here in Washington in October of 1996.
Ultimately, when Judge's name was linked with mine in press reports, Judge rushed off a letter to the Orange County Register to assure its readers that he and his colleagues would certainly not have anything to do with an extremist like me.
Thus, I find it quite amusing that Judge has now been labeled a ""crackpot"" alongside me.
Likewise with another individual who was scheduled to speak at the seminar in California—one Dave Emory—who contends the Nazis were behind JFK's assassination.
I won't burden the reader with commentary here on that peculiar notion, although in Chapter 15 of Final Judgment 1 do provide some interesting information about Emory's so-called ""Nazi connection"" which proves it was anything but that.
In fact, the thesis presented in Final Judgment, if anything, vindicates Jim Garrison's indictment of Clay Shaw for involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Garrison first pinpointed the role of Clay Shaw in the conspiracy and, in Chapter 15, Shaw's Israeli connections are outlined in sharp detail.
However, I must say that the theory presented in Final Judgment does not hinge on Clay Shaw.
With or without Shaw there is firm evidence in many, many other areas that points in the direction of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination.
However, Shaw's complicity in the conspiracy simply brings things full circle, as you'll see.
To criticize the actions of Israel and its lobby in this country is not ""anti-Semitic"" and common-sense people who have no fanatical religious or political axes to grind realize this.
However, to be perfectly honest, I have to think that Thomas made that remark (in the context of a grudgingly friendly review) simply in hopes of avoiding being called an ""anti-Semite"" himself for suggesting that the reader could learn a great deal about JFK's little-known behind-the-scenes struggle with Israel by reading the book.
Israel, in my view, is just another foreign country and doesn't deserve any special treatment any more than Ireland or Iceland.
However, there is a very strong pro-Israel lobby in America (which includes some of its strongest backers such very Christian men as Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson) and as a consequence, Israel has immense power over United States foreign policy making.
Because of that ""special relationship"" Israel does occupy a unique position that has put Israel right there in the line of fire to be pummeled with criticism.
Israel is not above reproach and because it wishes to exert its influence it must expect to be criticized.
I firmly believe that the Mossad had a hand in the assassination of JFK and that Israel must be held accountable for its actions.
If there was evidence that Arabs had a hand in the JFK assassination, they, too, would have to be held accountable.
At any rate, I do have the right under our good old-fashioned American Constitution to make my views heard.
If someone construes those views to be ""anti-Israel"" or ""anti-Semitic"" that is also their right.
But being opposed to the misdeeds of Israel is not being ""anti-Semitic,"" no matter what the ADL says.
The evidence presented in Final Judgment stands on its own, no matter what the name-callers at the ADL and their assorted shills might say.
Anyone who contends that I believe the JFK assassination was a ""Jewish plot"" is a liar or a fool or both—or illiterate, at the least.
Despite all this, as I've said, the frenzy over the college seminar brought an amazing amount of fully-unexpected publicity to the thesis presented in Final Judgment.
Of some 27 different news accounts of the controversy that came to my attention in the days following the initial Los Angeles Times article, fully 21 of those subsequent accounts (based on the Times’ report and on coverage by the Associated Press) said specifically that the seminar featured a speaker who contended that the Mossad had a hand in the president's murder.
Most of the references, in fact, actually appeared in the opening paragraphs of the articles in question.
Not all of the accounts mentioned Final Judgment by name—although many did—but the thesis herein was definitively referenced and no doubt surprised those who had never heard of the theory before.
In the end, what is so ironic is that if the ADL had just ignored the seminar, the role of Israel's Mossad in the JFK assassination might never have received the widespread national exposure in the daily press that it at long last has.
Ironically, Michael Granberry, the young man who covered the story for the Los Angeles Times—and whose byline appeared in many of the stories across the country—left his post shortly after his story appeared.
To his credit, noted commentator Nat Hentoff, who writes a widely read column on First Amendment issues, weighed in on the controversy.
It turns out that none other than Caroline Kennedy, daughter of the late president, is a member of the center's advisory board.
So evidently Caroline has probably heard about Final Judgment—as have several members of her family and possibly her late brother, as we will see.
In any case, as a direct consequence of its hysterical effort to prevent me from appearing at the seminar in Orange County, the ADL suffered a historic ""double-whammy"" within eight days time, stemming directly from the controversy.
First of all, on October 12, 1997 the Orange County Register, the biggest daily newspaper in one of the most densely populated metropolitan regions in the country, published a lengthy commentary in which I responded to the ADL's attacks and outlined the thesis of the book.
This was the first time since Final Judgment was published in January of 1994 that any ""mainstream"" newspaper gave any substantial publicity of any kind to the allegations made in the book.
Although a flimsy attempt at a ""rebuttal"" by an ADL spokesman, Bruno Medwin, was published in conjunction with my commentary, the ADL's lame response never once attempted to refute any of my specific allegations.
The ADL commentary actually misled readers by suggesting that the ADL believes that ""mainstream"" theories about a possible JFK assassination conspiracy have a right to be heard.
In fact, as noted previously, ADL national director Abe Foxman had said elsewhere that any theory of any kind relating to the assassination is potentially dangerous and has no basis in fact.
Evidently, the ADL is ready to shift its position, depending upon the audience—which, of course, says a lot about the basic dishonesty of the ADL to begin with.
Then, just one week later—on October 20, 1997—the ADL suffered an even more critical blow.
At a meeting of the South Orange County Community College District Board of Trustees, the board's president, Steven Frogue—who had invited me to the JFK seminar in Orange County—was re-elected by a 4-3 vote, much to the ADL's dismay.
Although the ADL clamored for Frogue's head and sent its supporters to lobby for his resignation from the board—or his forced removal—that effort failed.
Then, another board member, Marcia Milchiker—herself a member of the local ADL chapter's board of advisors—introduced a resolution for Frogue's ouster, but her scheme fell flat.
The failed attempt to punish Frogue came following a raucous crowded public meeting in which some forty people from the general public were permitted to speak and most of them—average citizens, teachers, students and others—rose in Frogue's defense, publicly defying the ADL even though ADL operatives were on hand taking photographs of the meeting's participants.
When the ADL's Marcia Milchiker saw that there was such a genuine grassroots outcry against her effort to dislodge Frogue—as opposed to the orchestrated campaign by the ADL—RMilchiker could only respond in a rambling, disjointed and rather pathetic fashion that led to other board members asking that she cut her remarks short.
Describing her ""research"" into the origins of Final Judgment and citing her so-called findings, Milchiker, at one point, referred to me as ""William Collins Piper,"" showing precisely how adequate her research really is.
Rolling into the meeting, Milchiker had been confident that Frogue was on his way out.
Ultimately, Milchiker claimed the theory in Final Judgment was ""scientifically unprovable"" and ""outrageous"" and ""preposterous"" but didn't demonstrate why.
Using a retired minister, Buckner Coe, as its front man, the ADL orchestrated a recall drive against Frogue.
Although the effort failed to gather the required signatures of 35,000 college district voters by March of 1998, an ""anonymous"" source came up with a $10,000 donation and the recall drive was reinvigorated At that juncture, the ADL attempted to forge a ""united front"" against Frogue, roping a variety of special interest groups, including AsianAmerican, Latino, Black and homosexual rights activists into backing the recall.
Although that gimmick likewise failed to generate any further interest, the ADL refused to give up and called on a host of prominent Southern California politicians including two GOP members of Congress— Reps.
One Orange County resident, George Kadar, who formed an ad hoc committee to rally support for Frogue was also subjected to media attacks.
In one instance, a newspaper reporter proclaimed that Kadar was, according to the ADL, also ""anti-immigrant"" only to learn to her embarrassment that Kadar was himself an immigrant who had fled the very communist ""thought police"" of Eastern Europe whose tactics were being mimicked so well—echoed in Orange County by the ADL and its allies.
In the midst of the anti-Frogue petition drive, one ADL member, Harriet Walther, claimed that she was the victim of an ""anti-Semitic"" attack outside the county registrar's office.
For my own part, at the height of the frenzy, I traveled to Orange County to speak at a public meeting of the SOCCCD board of directors in June of 1998.
The Other Side of the Jigsaw Puzzle... armed guards very much in evidence as hundreds of people crowded into the meeting room and into an adjoining room where the overflow audience was able to watch the proceedings live via the magic of video.
Waiting outside, prior to the meeting, an idealistic young reporter for a local Jewish community newspaper made energetic efforts to pin me down as a ""Holocaust denier"" and an ""anti-Semite"" and to challenge the thesis of Final Judgment.
However, Bob Ourlian, a reporter from the Los Angeles Times, was overheard whispering to the young lady, ""Don't try to argue with this guy.
He's very articulate and knows what he's talking about,"" and she quickly changed her approach.
One week prior to this, I had actually sent Ourlian a copy of Final Judgment, so he knew full well the book was thoroughly documented and that I was fully in command of the information that I had presented.
They were involved in Holocaust rescue activities as members of the United States military.
My father spent time in a veteran's hospital for his efforts on behalf of the Jews.
But if you want to know about a real Holocaust, that's happening right now, let's take a look at what's happening to the American Indians on the concentration camps in the United States that are euphemistically called ''reservations.
Despite all this, the federal government is cutting aid to the reservations, yet billions of American tax dollars are going to Israel.
Needless to say, the reporters didn't seem interested in discussing that subject, and frankly, I'm not surprised.
Missing, however, was Marcia Milchiker, my foremost critic on the SOCCCD board.
However, the entire time I was speaking, Irv Rubin, the head of the violent Jewish Defense League , and two equally-repugnant associates were shouting from the audience, resulting in the police finally expelling one of Rubin's cronies, a bizarre troll named Barry Krugel.
At one point, in exasperation, I told the board, quite frankly, ""There's been a lot of talk here about ‘anti-Semitism,’ but if ever there was an argument in favor of anti-Semitism, it's this self-appointed spokesman for the Jewish community right here,” referring to Rubin.
The day afterward, I was invited by Saddleback College journalism professor Lee Williams to address his class on the college campus.
Williams issued the invitation on behalf of the staff of the college newspaper and I met with the staff in the newspaper office on the campus where the students posed thought-provoking questions and exhibited the very type of intellectual curiosity that the ADL was so determined to suppress.
Not only did the students defy the book banners at the ADL by asking me to pose for a picture with them, but later they went even further and, as a group, publicly defied the ADL by coming to the defense of Steve Frogue.
But the ADL-instigated clamor for the destruction of Frogue still continued.
The ADL even managed to contrive a short-lived alliance between Democratic Rep.
Sanchez narrowly defeated in 1996 and then dispatched into oblivion in the 1998 election.
Despite all this firepower, the ADL's recall scheme crashed and burned.
In the end, on November 12, 1998 the ADL hate-mongers suffered an embarrassing defeat.
The ADL's media-backed 16-month-long campaign to oust Frogue came to a crashing halt.
The Orange County registrar of voters ruled that a two-dozen member team of petition circulators had fallen short, having submitted some 13,000 invalid signatures.
The Orange County Register's Kimberly Kindy, who had reported the ADL's campaign against Frogue with particular relish, failed to mention the ADL's role in the scuttled recall in her notably brief report on the demise of the recall drive.
Instead, Miss Kindy focused on the role of Democratic and Republican politicians in the effort, never once indicating the ADL had been the prime mover behind the bungled effort to eviscerate Frogue.
My old nemesis, Professor Roy Bauer was ordered to seek psychiatric counseling because of the inflammatory writings in his scurrilous campus newsletter in which I had been one of his targets.
Bauer sued the SOCCCD board, charging that his First Amendment rights were violated.
Bauer's concern for free speech meant little when he was working to suppress my liberties, but when the tables were turned, he took a second look at the Bill of Rights.
Bauer won his suit and I'm glad he did, because, unlike Bauer, I do believe in the First Amendment, even though he and the ADL do not.
Steve Frogue declined to seek reelection to the SOCCCD board in the year 2000, but we can be certain the ""Final Judgment Affair"" would have come back to haunt him.
However, the fact is the ADL suffered a walloping defeat in Orange County and it happened again in Schaumburg, Illinois, as we will see later.
The ADL will continue to be defeated over this issue as long as I have anything to say about it—and the ADL knows it.
For his own part, the loathsome Irv Rubin of the JDL is now dead— allegedly having committed suicide while in federal custody after having been arrested in late 2001 on charges of plotting to bomb the office of California GOP Congressman Darrel Issa, an Arab-American.
Yet, Rubin was precisely the type of speaker that the ADL and its allies welcomed at the SOCCCD—saying much about what the ADL's agenda really is.
Then, perhaps, you'll understand why Final Judgment really is on the mark.
Had I not amended Final Judgment after its first edition, I would say— even now—that the book could continue to stand on its merits with no further emendation whatsoever.
Now that the book has been substantially expanded, more so than I would have thought possible, I do believe the book will stand the test of time.
Israel's Mossad was indeed a primary player alongside the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Ultimately, Final Judgment will prove to be the first-ever comprehensive record of that conspiracy.
I believe I have taken a new look at a very big jigsaw puzzle that displays a remarkably complex and somewhat murky picture.
On the puzzle you see before you all of the various groups and individuals implicated in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
However, when you turn the puzzle over you find one complete picture—and that's a great big very clear picture of the Israeli flag.
All the other flags on the front of the puzzle are, in intelligence jargon, ""false flags,"" and Final Judgment proves just that.
MICHAEL COLLINS PIPER FINAL JUDGMENT ""A crime is like any other work of art.
The Jewish Presence on the Warren Commission ""The Best and the Brightest""—and Jerry Ford, Too.
The Peking Connection to the JFK Assassination Conspiracy— Israel's Secret Nuclear Alliance With Communist China.
All of the information which, taken together, proves this contention has long been in the public domain.
This book, Final Judgment, brings all of these facts together for the first time in a fascinating and frightening scenario that—although controversial—does make sense.
This was the reaction of more than a few people when apprised of the thesis presented in the pages of this book.
Weberman and Michael Canfield's Coup d'Etat in America that I first stumbled upon a strange reference that ultimately led to my research that is outlined here in the pages of Final Judgment.
It was just one lone detail among millions of words written about the JFK assassination.
Nearly a year went by before I came across the reference again—while re-reading the same book.
I had long ago already concluded that the CIA, in collusion with elements of ""the Mafia"" and the anti-Castro Cuban exiles, was responsible for the president's assassination.
This time it appeared in David Scheim's book, Contract on America, which contends ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" and which also Final Judgment vehemently dismisses any CIA involvement whatsoever.
I had read Scheim's book when it first came out in 1988, but I had not noticed the reference at that time.
What intrigued me, however, was that Scheim's rendition of the quote deleted the reference to the alleged Jewish backers of the Cuban plotters.
At that moment I finally began to see that this unusual detail might, in fact, point toward something much bigger than I had realized.
THE LANSKY CONNECTION It was at this time that a new biography of organized crime figure Meyer Lansky was released.
Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life, the book—prepared in cooperation with Lansky's family—was little more than a puff piece for Lansky.
I realized immediately that the book still somehow seemed to be missing quite a lot.
It was then that I returned to my library and pulled a book off the shelf that I hadn't re-read in perhaps fifteen years.
Re-reading this important book I began to see that Meyer Lansky was not just a Mafia advisor as David Scheim, for example, would have his readers believe.
All of the Mafia figures that had been repeatedly implicated in the JFK assassination were, in fact, Lansky's front men—his subordinates, his underlings.
In short, if ""the Mafia"" had a hand in the killing of JFK, then Lansky had to have been one of the key players.
Yet, as I quickly began to see in reviewing many of the works which allege that ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" Lansky's preeminent role was being ignored or otherwise under-played.
After all, Lansky fled to Israel when the heat was on in the United States.
My research into that question began to turn up some interesting facts.
THE ISRAELI CONNECTION At this juncture, however, I had no reason whatsoever to think that Israel would have had any reason to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
However, it was just about the time that I had begun to take a second look at the Lansky connection—in 1991—that several new works were released which provided never-before revealed information about the covert relationship between the United States and Israel.
Preface Some of JFK's communications with then-Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion were classified for years, until just recently.
Not even top-level intelligence officials with special security clearance were initially allowed access to those explosive documents.
In fact, prior to these more recent revelations, very little about JFK's relations with Israel and the Arab world had ever actually been published anywhere.
So it was that the new revelations about Kennedy's relationship with Israel made me realize that there was an unexplored area of research—never before considered—that needed examination.
ISRAEL, LANSKY & THE CIA By this time, then, the long and close relationship between Israel and JFK's foes at the CIA was something that was now being acknowledged.
At the time of the JFK assassination, however, the depth and breadth of the CIA's relationship with Israel's Mossad, however, was not so commonly known.
With a basic thesis now evolving in my mind, I began re-reading much of the published information about the JFK assassination, his policy toward Israel and the history of organized crime.
And in so doing, I repeatedly found myself stumbling upon new information that continued to verify what was initially in my mind just a theory, but which I now believe to be the truth.
By December of 1992 I realized that I had enough material for a book and I began to write it.
But even as I was already in the process of writing the book, I was startled by the vast amount of material that I was continually uncovering— and virtually all of it was in the pages of mainstream sources freely available to anyone who cared to do the research.
I thus began to realize that I had indeed begun to assemble a remarkable wealth of material that brought my initial thesis full circle.
Final Judgment THE PERMINDEX CONNECTION It is the Permindex connection which is the tie that binds—the final proof that the Mossad was at the center of the assassination conspiracy.
In Permindex we find all of the critical elements tying the Mossad, the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate together in close-knit intrigue linked directly to the murder of President Kennedy.
Those who have referenced it portray Permindex as some sort of remnant of the Third Reich but nothing could be further from the truth.
Just before I began the book I mentioned my theory to a rather well-known former United States congressman.
I've believed for years that the Mossad was involved in the Kennedy assassination, but I never really took the time to look into it.
Then, just after I finished the first draft, I sent a copy of the manuscript to another former member of Congress, Paul Findley, thinking that he might have some interest in the subject.
The ex-Congressman wrote me a surprising letter in which he said, ""I will mention that over the past four years I have had lengthy correspondence with a retired diplomat from a western European nation whose family (including himself) has had disastrous experiences with Israel and the Mossad.
He has been prodding me all that time to do what you have done.""—that is, write a book exploring Israel's secret role in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Congressman Findley then passed the manuscript on to the Frenchman who in turn provided me additional fascinating leads and inside information that helped make the thesis presented in Final Judgment complete.
ONE COMPLETE PICTURE Israel's Mossad was indeed a primary force behind the JFK assassination conspiracy.
The Israeli connection pulls all of the pieces of the puzzle together into one complete picture.
The role of the Mossad in the JFK assassination is indeed the ""missing link"" in the conspiracy.
For the sake of history, it is a story that needs to be told. —MICHAEL COLLINS PIPER A Who's Who of the JFK Assassination Conspiracy and Cover-Up While the following selection of names in this special ""who's who"" is by no means complete, it does provide the reader of Final Judgment with a brief overview of the facts relating to the involvement of the individuals in question with the circumstances surrounding not only the JFK assassination itself, but also the efforts by some to uncover the truth about the assassination—and by others to bury it.
Following each name and description are references to the particular chapters in Final Judgment where details about that individual appear in pertinent part.
The inclusion of any name in particular is by no means intended to suggest that the individual—unless specifically stated—had foreknowledge that the murder of President Kennedy was being planned.
As we note in these pages, there were many people who were brought into the JFK assassination conspiracy and the subsequent cover-up who had no idea of the actual role that they were playing.
The following ""who's who""—if read in this context—provides the reader a quick glance at the key individuals who ultimately prove central to a complete understanding of the entirety of the conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of President Kennedy.
Louis M Bloomfield Based in Montreal, Bloomfield was a long-time intelligence operative and a front man for the powerful Bronfman family interests.
The Bronfmans were not only key international backers of Israel but also long-time figures in the Lansky crime syndicate.
Bloomfield, one of the foremost figures in the Israeli lobby in Canada and one of Israel's leading international operatives, not only served as the chief shareholder in the Permindex Corporation on whose board of directors Clay Shaw served, but also had intimate ties to American intelligence.
Final Judgment 54 Tibor Rosenbaum One of the ""godfathers"" of the state of Israel and the first director for finance and supply for Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad, Rosenbaum was a prime financial angel behind the Permindex corporation and a key figure in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
His Swiss bank, the Banque De Credit International, also served as the chief European money laundry for Meyer Lansky, chief of the global crime syndicate.
John King A close business associate of Tibor Rosenbaum's protégé and sometime front man, Bernard Cornfeld, King showed up in New Orleans in the early stages of Jim Garrison's investigation—before Clay Shaw's name had come up—and sought to persuade Garrison to give up the inquiry.
The Mossad Connection David Ben-Gurion Prime Minister of Israel; resigned his post in disgust with JFK's stance toward Israel in April of 1963; Said JFK's position threatened Israel's very survival.
Yitzhak Shamir A long-time Mossad officer (based largely at the Mossad's chief European office in Paris), Shamir headed the Mossad's assassination squad at the time of the JFK assassination.
A former French intelligence officer has charged that Shamir himself arranged the hiring of JFK's actual assassins through a close ally in French intelligence.
Luis Kutner Although known largely as a ""mob lawyer"" in Chicago, Kutner—who was long and closely associated with Jack Ruby, a sometime client—Kutner also doubled as an international intelligence operative and functioned as an advisor to an ad hoc pro-Israel lobby group in the United States.
Botnick Head of the New Orleans office of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, an intelligence and propaganda arm for Israel's Mossad; a close associate of New Orleans-based CIA operative Guy Banister who helped create Lee Harvey Oswald's pre-assassination profile as a ""pro-Castro"" agitator.
Evidence suggests Banister's manipulation of Oswald may have been carried out under the guise of an ADL ""factfinding” operation.
Arnon Milchan Israel's biggest arms dealer, Milchan was ""executive producer"" of Oliver Stone's Hollywood fantasy about the JFK assassination—a fact which may explain Stone's aversion to exploring the Israeli connection to the affair.
Shaul Eisenberg Israel's wealthiest industrialist and longtime operative for the Mossad was a prime mover behind Israel's efforts to build a nuclear arsenal.
His covert dealings with Red China played a key role in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
The CIA Connection Rudolph Hecht An owner of the CIA-linked Standard Fruit concern, Hecht was a prominent figure in the New Orleans Jewish community and as chairman of the board of directors of the International Trade Mart was Permindex board member Clay Shaw's primary sponsor.
James Jesus Angleton Angleton, the CIA's long-time chief of counterintelligence, was the CIA's primary high-level conspirator in the murder of President Kennedy and the subsequent cover-up.
Angleton, who had been co-opted by and was totally loyal to the Israeli Mossad, played a major role in the effort to frame Lee Harvey Oswald.
Final Judgment is the first JFK assassination study to delve into Angleton's role in the conspiracy.
David Atlee Phillips A long-time high-level CIA official, Phillips was the CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time a strange effort was underway to implicate Lee Harvey Oswald as a Soviet KGB collaborator.
He confessed publicly that the story about Oswald being in Mexico City was not precisely what the CIA had long claimed.
E Howard Hunt Long-time CIA officer and liaison to the anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
Testimony by ex-CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz placed Hunt in Dallas, Texas the day before the president's assassination.
The full truth about Hunt's actual involvement in the affair may never be known, but there is no question that Hunt was deeply involved in the intrigue surrounding the president's murder.
Evidence does indeed indicate that there was a conscious effort to frame Hunt for involvement in the crime.
Under Banister's direction, Lee Harvey Oswald Final Judgment 56 established a public profile for himself as a ""pro-Castro"" agitator in the streets of New Orleans.
David Ferrie An enigmatic CIA contract operative, Ferrie was closely involved with Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans in the summer of 1963, working alongside Oswald out of Guy Banister's office.
The investigation of Ferrie by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison ultimately led to Garrison's discovery of Permindex board member Clay Shaw's ties to Ferrie, Oswald and Banister.
Marita Lorenz A former CIA contract operative, she testified under oath that one day prior to the JFK assassination she arrived in Dallas with her CIA handler Frank Sturgis and an armed caravan of Cuban exiles who were met there by not only Jack Ruby, who later killed Lee Harvey Oswald, but also by CIA official E Howard Hunt.
Frank Sturgis Best remembered as a key CIA player in the war against Castro, Sturgis had worked for the Mossad even prior to his years with the CIA and maintained his Mossad ties well into the 1970s.
Sturgis was not only involved in the training of Cuban exiles near New Orleans (the same operation involving Guy Banister and David Ferrie) but he also led the armed caravan that arrived in Dallas the day before the JFK assassination.
Sturgis later told Miss Lorenz that his team had played a part in the events in Dealey Plaza.
Guillermo & Ignacio Novo Two brothers, veterans of the CIA-backed Cuban exile wars against Fidel Castro, the Novos were part of the armed caravan led by CIA and Mossad asset Frank Sturgis that arrived in Dallas on November 21, 1963.
Many years after Dallas, the Novos were convicted of participating in the murder of a Chilean dissident in collaboration with another Mossad-connected adventurer, Michael Townley, who in 1963 had been working for high-level Mossad figures implicated in the JFK conspiracy.
In a 1978 article in The Spotlight newspaper, Marchetti charged that the CIA was about to frame its long-time operative, E Howard Hunt, with involvement in the JFK assassination.
A libel suit filed by Hunt as a consequence of Marchetti's article resulted in a climactic finding by a jury that the CIA had been involved in the assassination of the president.
Robin Moore A journalist with long-standing close ties to the CIA, Moore co-authored former CIA man Hugh McDonald's book, LBJ and the JFK Conspiracy which promoted James Jesus Angleton's false claim that the KGB was behind the president's murder—another of the disinformation stories that emerged following the assassination.
The Lansky Crime Syndicate Meyer Lansky Chief executive officer and de facto ""treasurer"" of the international crime syndicate; active in gun-running on behalf of the Israeli underground; collaborated closely with American intelligence on a number of fronts; later settled in Israel.
Researchers who have claimed that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" have pointedly refused to acknowledge Lansky's preeminent positioning in the underworld.
Carlos Marcello The head of the Mafia in New Orleans, Marcello owed his status to Meyer Lansky who was his chief sponsor in the crime syndicate.
Marcello could not have orchestrated the JFK assassination—as some suggest—without Lansky's explicit approval.
Seymour Weiss Meyer Lansky's New Orleans bagman and liaison with the Louisiana political establishment served as a director of the CIA-linked Standard Fruit company.
He appears to have been a high-ranking CIA asset in New Orleans at the time of the JFK assassination.
Santo Trafficante, Jr. Although best known as the head of the Mafia in Tampa, Trafficante actually functioned as Meyer Lansky's chief lieutenant in the crime syndicate and as Lansky's liaison with the CIA in the Castro assassination plots.
Sam Giancana Longtime Chicago Mafia leader, Giancana was a player in the CIA-Mafia plots against Castro, working under the direction of the real ""poss"" of the crime syndicate in Chicago, Mossad-connected Hyman Lamer, a partner of national crime chief Meyer Lansky.
Johnny Rosselli A roving ""ambassador"" for the Mossad-connected Chicago Mafia, Rosselli was the primary conduit between the CIA and the mob in the plots against Fidel Castro; may have arranged the murder of Sam Giancana and was later murdered himself.
Mickey Cohen Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman; Jack Ruby's role model and a gun-runner for the Israeli underground, Cohen collaborated closely with Israeli diplomat Menachem Begin prior to the JFK assassination; Cohen arranged for John F Kennedy to meet actress Marilyn Monroe who was assigned the task of finding out JFK's private views and intentions toward Israel.
Jack Ruby A long-time functionary for the Lansky syndicate, Ruby was the Lansky connection man in Dallas and also engaged in CIA-linked gunrunning to the anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
Evidence suggests there is more to Ruby's sudden ""death"" than meets the eye.
Final Judgment 58 Jim Braden A veteran personal courier for Meyer Lansky, Braden was almost assuredly in contact in Dallas with Jack Ruby prior to the JFK assassination.
Al Gruber A henchman of Meyer Lansky's West Coast operative, Mickey Cohen, Gruber and Ruby spoke by telephone just shortly before Ruby killed Lee Harvey Oswald.
It is believed that Gruber gave Ruby the contract on Oswald on behalf of his superiors.
The French Connection Charles DeGaulle Repeatedly targeted for assassination by Israeli-allied forces in French intelligence and in the Secret Army Organization who were angry that DeGaulle had granted independence to Arab Algeria.
The Mossad-sponsored Permindex operation that also had a hand in the murder of JFK, laundered money used in the assassination attempts on DeGaulle.
Georges deLannurien High ranking official in the SDECE, the French intelligence agency; pinpointed by a former French intelligence officer as the individual who (at the behest of Mossad assassinations chief Yitzhak Shamir) contracted the hit team who killed JFK in Dallas.
Michael Mertz A former French SDECE officer and the Paris connection for the Lansky-Trafficante heroin syndicate; alleged to have been one of the actual gunmen in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
Jean Soutre A liaison for the French OAS with the CIA's E Howard Hunt, Soutre maintained contact with Guy Banister's CIAand mob-linked gunrunning headquarters in New Orleans.
There is evidence linking Soutre to James Jesus Angleton's intrigue inside the CIA that affected French intelligence in a dramatic way.
Thomas Eli Davis III A world-traveling mercenary linked to Jack Ruby's arms dealing activities, Davis was taken into custody in North Africa for his subversive activities alongside Israeli agents in supplying weapons to the French OAS just prior to the JFK assassination.
The CIA's infamous international assassin QJ/WIN has long been said to have secured Davis's release from prison.
Geoffrey Bocca A former propagandist for the OAS, Bocca later coauthored former CIA contract agent Hugh McDonald's book, Appointment in Dallas, which pointed the blame for the JFK assassination away from those who were actually responsible—the first of two suspect books put out by McDonald.
Christian David A French Corsican criminal associated with reputed JFK assassin Michael Mertz, David has claimed knowledge of a French hit team involved in the JFK assassination.
David himself was the chief suspect in the murder of a Moroccan dissident, Mehdi Ben-Barka, whose killing was orchestrated by the Israeli Mossad through anti-DeGaulle forces in French intelligence.
Truth Seekers Mark Lane Retained by Lee Harvey Oswald's mother to represent her son's interests before the Warren Commission, Lane's book Rush to Judgment was the first major critique of the Warren Commission Report.
In defending a libel suit filed against The Spotlight newspaper by former CIA operative E Howard Hunt, Lane proved to the satisfaction of a jury that the CIA had indeed been involved in the JFK assassination.
His best-selling book Plausible Denial outlined the circumstances of that libel suit and its ultimate conclusion.
Gary Wean A former detective on the Hollywood beat of the Los Angeles Police Department, Wean discovered how Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, was conspiring against John F Kennedy on behalf of the Israelis.
In a meeting with the former sheriff of Dallas County, Bill Decker, Wean learned a portion of the truth about what really happened in Dallas.
News Twisters Edgar & Edith Stern Close friends of Clay Shaw and financial backers of the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, and owners of the WDSU media empire in New Orleans that not only played a major role in giving vast publicity to Lee Harvey Oswald's profile as a ""pro-Castro agitator"" but also later sought to undermine Jim Garrison's investigation of Clay Shaw.
Johann Rush As a young WDSU cameraman, Rush was on the scene to record Oswald's ""pro-Castro"" activities.
Final Judgment 60 Drew Pearson Accused by his own mother-in-law of being a ""mouthpiece"" for the pro-Israel ADL, Pearson had close ties to not only the Israeli lobby, but also the CIA and to President Lyndon Johnson and his cronies.
It was Pearson who floated an unlikely story that Fidel Castro was behind the JFK assassination and who also played a major influence in shaping Earl Warren's perceptions of the tragedy.
Jack Anderson As protégé of Drew Pearson, Jack Anderson likewise had strange connections that might have biased his own reportage on the JFK affair.
Since 1963 Anderson has promoted a number of conflicting versions about ""who really killed JFK"" ranging from ""the Mafia"" to Fidel Castro or a combination of both.
Jack Newfield A liberal columnist and some-time JFK assassination buff, Newfield has been a likewise long-standing devotee of Israel.
He made a big splash with a highly fantastic story that missing Teamster boss Jimmy Hoffa had ""ordered"" two Mafia figures to arrange the killing of President Kennedy.
Not surprisingly, Newfield's ridiculous story was given wide play in the Establishment media.
Oliver Stone His Hollywood extravaganza, JFK, gave the public a fullblown, full-color, gory-in-every-detail conspiracy theory on the JFK assassination.
Yet, Stone's presentation of the conspiracy was far from complete and failed to reach any firm conclusions.
He deliberately suppressed the ""French connection"" which, in turn, was the long-hidden Israeli connection.
Not only was Stone's chief financial backer Israel's leading arms dealer but the company distributing his film had its origins in the Lansky crime syndicate.
Frank Mankiewicz This former publicist for the Israeli Mossad-linked Anti-Defamation League had a peculiar part in the events that took place prior to the murder of Robert F Kennedy.
Then when Oliver Stone began promoting his film JFK, Mankiewicz popped up as his key public relations man.
Anthony Summers Author of one book hinting that the Kennedy family were responsible for the death—maybe the murder—of actress Marilyn Monroe, Summers wrote another book on the JFK conspiracy.
In neither book did Summers reveal explosive information that could have helped point in the direction of those same forces which played a part in both crimes.
Robert Morrow A former CIA contract operative who played a major role in activities on the periphery of the JFK assassination conspiracy, Morrow's book on his experiences is rife with detail, yet suspect in the eyes of many who had looked into his claims.
Morrow's book absolves the key CIA conspirator, James J Angleton, of involvement in the JFK conspiracy and portrays him as being ""out of the loop"" when, in fact, precisely the opposite was true.
G Robert Blakey An unlikely choice to serve as director of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, Blakey had, just two years previously, served as a character witness for a long-time close associate of crime boss Meyer Lansky.
When pointing the blame in the JFK assassination, Blakey targeted Lansky's protégé, New Orleans Mafia boss, Carlos Marcello, but looked no further.
Blakey, likewise, found no role by the CIA—or any other intelligence agency—in the assassination.
Scheim’s book was published by the American front for an Israeli publishing company.
John Foster ""Chip"" Berlet A hit-and-run ""journalist"" with longstanding covert connections to the CIA and an open collaborator with the AntiDefamation League —a conduit for Israel's Mossad—Berlet played a key role in a major propaganda campaign by the ADL to prevent the facts about the JFK assassination put forth in the pages of Final Judgment from being heard.
James DiEugenio Although a deep admirer of both John F Kennedy and New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison, DiEugenio has tread lightly when inquiring into the ties between Clay Shaw and the Permindex operation with its multiple links to the Israeli Mossad and the crime syndicate.
Peter Dale Scott His years of in-depth research on the JFK assassination have led him directly to the doorstep of the CIA, the Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate, yet he has never been prepared to name names or point in the direction of those very forces, preferring to sidestep the issue.
The blame for the assassination has been placed on numerous power groups, perhaps working independently or together.
Most often named have been the CIA (or rogue elements thereof), organized crime and the anti-Castro Cuban network.
Yet, one power in particular—lIsrael and its spy agency, the Mossad—links all of these forces together.
Israel, however, is the central player whose role has been consistently ignored.
These were the words of one journalist, Terry Catchpole, reflecting on the controversy over Oliver Stone's Hollywood all-star extravaganza JFK and of widespread interest in the JFK assassination in general.
Each and every one of these theories, additionally, has been intertwined with Final Judgment 63 one or more of the others.
And now, the advent of Stone's film, coupled with the subsequent release of several new books on the assassination—most notably Mark Lane's Plausible Denial, which proved CIA complicity in the president's murder—has brought new interest in the controversy.
However, it was not retired circus clowns who killed John F Kennedy, at least so far as we know.
ISRAEL'S CENTRAL ROLE This book contends that Israel's Mossad was a primary player alongside the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate in the JFK assassination conspiracy and that, in fact, the Mossad's role was probably the driving force behind the conspiracy.
The connections are far more sinister and go far deeper than most might imagine.
ISRAEL'S MOTIVE Israel, as we shall see, had a very distinct motive not only to orchestrate Kennedy's removal from office but also to elevate his successor, Lyndon B Johnson into the White House.
As did, of course, many of those other elements in the conspiracy that resulted in Kennedy's murder.
Never once, however—at least in standard assassination research—has the suggestion that Israel had a hand in Kennedy's murder ever been uttered.
Yet, the evidence is there—evidence that has lain dormant or has otherwise been ignored or gone unrecognized for its significance.
Indeed, virtually all of the facts brought together in Final Judgment have been drawn from recognized volumes in the field of JFK assassination research and in other standard sources.
Paul Findley himself has publicly suggested that Israel indeed may have had a hand in the JFK assassination.
They were 64 The Tie That Binds aware that when President Kennedy's father, Joseph Kennedy, was ambassador to Great Britain, he frequently praised Nazi Germany.
The government of Israel, therefore, had every reason to believe that its interests would be better advanced with Johnson as president.
In a recent interview another respected JFK assassination researcher, Peter Dale Scott, perhaps lends further credence to the theory we are about to present.
Scott believes that there were a variety of forces at work behind the JFK assassination.
He specifically fingers ""Lyndon Johnson's backers— particularly those who had a stake in the military-industrial complex"" and ""an intelligence-Mafia connection that included members of the intelligence community who were involved with military-industrial Final Judgment 65 corporate backers of Lyndon Johnson, who in turn were involved with Mafia people.
Final Judgment not only suggests that it was, in fact, Israel's Mossad, but also clearly pinpoints the Mossad connection.
As we demonstrate—and which is not really so very secret—it is Israel's Mossad—above and beyond any other intelligence network—foreign or domestic—that has been unusually close to the CIA in a variety of international ventures.
THE MEDIA'S ROLE What's more, we go one step beyond Scott's conclusions.
Final Judgment points out the highly significant role of the American media in its role in the cover-up.
The cover-up of the JFK assassination conspiracy could never have succeeded without the support of a willing media.
The fact is that Israel and its supporters in the American media have a long and intimate relationship.
Until recent years—and even still today—criticism of Israel and its misdeeds have been verboten in the Establishment media, as noted previously in the comments by Congressman Findley.
This is a phenomenon never before examined in studying the JFK assassination and which explains, in large part, why the real truth about the assassination conspiracy has remained hidden for so long, all of the research notwithstanding.
He also points out that there was, additionally, a change of policy toward Latin America.
However, in these pages, we demonstrate beyond question that the most profound—and, in retrospect, probably most lasting and unusual—reversal in the conduct of American foreign policy was in the arena of U.S.-Israeli relations.
THE THEORIES MESH The purpose of Final Judgment, you see, is not to prove, once and for all, that there was indeed a conspiracy to assassinate President John F Kennedy and to perpetuate a cover-up of that conspiracy.
That has been proven, time and again, in an endless array of books, monographs, magazine articles—even in the pages of several novels.
Instead, Final Judgment takes the commonly accepted theories one step further and binds them all together—all too well—in a frightening scenario that is surely so very close to the truth.
However, as we note throughout these pages, research over the years has—for a variety of reasons—ignored the bitter conflict between the State of Israel and John F Kennedy.
In Final Judgment, we present a theory that, in the free market of ideas, deserves consideration—controversial though it will be.
What all of the commonly alleged conspiracies are tied together by is the one strand that has been consistently ignored—and that, of course, is the Israeli connection.
In Final Judgment we will consider this long-ignored hidden aspect of history.
What Final Judgment proves is not only that Israel had reason to conspire against JFK, but that Israel was in a central position to not only Final Judgment 67 coordinate the assassination scheme but also the subsequent coverup—all of this in close collaboration with its co-conspirators in the CIA and organized crime—most specifically those elements intimately linked to syndicate boss Meyer Lansky.
Israel—as much as the Mafia or the CIA, for example—stood to benefit greatly from the death of America's 35th president—and did, JFK's assassination set the stage for Israel to become a major power.
Research into the Kennedy assassination is most difficult, if only because the literature is so immense, the web so tangled, and the surfeit of theories and potential conspirators so seemingly unending.
With all of this in mind, let us proceed on the basis that there are certain areas of agreement.
This is the basis upon which the research for this volume was undertaken.
Upon this foundation Final Judgment ties together all of the facts and shows how the State of Israel and its spy agency, the Mossad, collaborated with not only the CIA but also key elements in Organized Crime and in the anti-Castro Cuban community in order to orchestrate the assassination of John F Kennedy and the cover-up.
Additional information—particularly in regard to Kennedy's difficult relations with Israel and how U.S.-Israeli relations changed drastically as a result of JFK's murder—has really only recently come into the public forum.
The remarkable scenario presented in Final Judgment logically incorporates all of the commonly-accepted theories into one broadly encompassing theory that not only makes sense but which brings the diverse elements in the conspiracy together full circle.
The theory presented in the pages of Final Judgment has been greeted with the charge of ""anti-Semitism""—a standard attack directed upon any utterance even vaguely critical of Israel and its misdeeds.
However, the author leaves it up to the basic honesty and openmindedness of the readers to determine whether or not the theory presented in this volume makes sense.
Final Judgment explores in detail the little-known behind-thescenes war between John F Kennedy and Israel and documents how United States policy toward Israel and the Arab world underwent a drastic reversal upon JFK's assassination.
We will also focus on the singularly important role of Meyer Lansky's positioning in the joint Mossad-CIA-Organized Crime nexus that came together in the JFK assassination.
As we shall see, Meyer Lansky was, in fact, the real ""overlord"" of the international crime syndicate; many of the ""Mafia bosses"" who allegedly masterminded the JFK assassination were, indeed, Lansky henchmen, front-men, underlings.
The basic facts have virtually all been published in previous works on the JFK assassination and in other studies on the subjects of U.S-Israeli relations, international intelligence intrigue, and organized crime.
It is only now, however, that all of the facts have been finally placed together in a neatly-constructed jigsaw puzzle that presents the whole picture in its rather simple entirety.
A THEORY OF POWER POLITICS AT WORK The conspiracy outlined here was a criminal enterprise involving power politics in its highest—and lowest—forms.
All of this taken together makes the conspiracy outlined here one that is not only logical, but one that ties all of the most prominently mentioned conspirators together in a package that is all too uncomfortably neat.
A READER'S GUIDE In order to outline the conspiracy described in the pages of Final Judgment, it is necessary, from the beginning, to consider that conspiracy in its historical context.
A wide array of players were involved and their integral links with one another and with the diverse forces behind the Final Judgment 71 conspiracy make it prudent, at this juncture, to provide the reader with an overview of the material about to be presented.
THE MOSSAD e Chapter 2 explores the accusation that Israel's Mossad did indeed consider assassinating an American president perceived hostile to Israel—in this instance, George Bush—and ponders the likelihood that the Mossad did, in fact, previously collaborate in the assassination of John F Kennedy. e Chapter 3 reviews the Mossad's historic use of so-called ""false flags"" in its worldwide acts of terrorism and assassination, leaving others (such as the Mafia,"" ""right wing extremists,"" and ""Arab terrorists"") to take the blame.
The point driven home is that the Mossad could have done likewise in the JFK assassination.
This important chapter also demonstrates how Israel, the CIA and the Lansky Syndicate stood to benefit from American involvement in the Vietnam War—a little explored aspect of that unfortunate period.
This chapter documents Cohen's close relationship with Israeli intelligence and connects the murder of actress Marilyn Monroe, with Cohen's pro-Israel activities. e Chapter 14 is a review of the career of Jack Ruby as an errand boy for both the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and his activities connected with the JFK assassination.
Final Judgment 73 Then, what follows are ten uniquely diverse appendices that shed new light on a wide variety of little-known aspects of the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up that have been distorted or misinterpreted or otherwise forgotten.
The primary ""right wing"" figure linked to the assassination was moving in proIsrael circles all along.
Separating the facts from the myths, this appendix shows that there's much more to the story than meets the eye. e Appendix Six takes a look at the strange death of not only former CIA Director William Colby but another highlevel CIA figure who ran afoul of Israel's Mossad.
YOU HEARD IT HERE FIRST... e Appendix Seven is the first-ever exposition of the real link between the JFK assassination and Watergate.
Forget anything you've ever heard before about the ""Dallas-Watergate"" connection.
This is a detailed selection of questions addressed to the author after the initial release of Final Judgment.
The answers shed additional light on many matters discussed in Final Judgment as well as upon some things that were not addressed. e Our afterword and what may well be our ""final word"" reflect on the nature of the continuing cover-up and of how the truth may never really be told.
A special postscript explains the tragic story of how an honest French diplomat may have died as a result of the release of Final Judgment—another of the strange deaths that came in the wake of the assassination in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
What appears in these pages, many readers now believe, is a logically constructed recitation of the facts that lead us to the conclusion that Israel's Mossad did play an instrumental role in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
This is the one and only book which ties all of those theories together in a comprehensive summary which makes ultimate sense.
According to ex-Mossad man Victor Ostrovsky, the Israeli spy agency hatched a plan to kill President George Bush.
If President John F Kennedy was killed by a conspiracy orchestrated—at least in part—by Israel's spy agency, the Mossad, this evidently not be the last time that the Mossad planned the assassination of an American president.
According to former Mossad agent, Victor Ostrovsky, elements of the Mossad were plotting an attempt on the life of President George Bush.
This amazing revelation was published in the February 1992 edition of the Washington Report on Middle East Affairs.
The author of the report was former Congressman Paul Findley , himself a prominent critic of Israel.
Findley reported that Ostrovsky had learned through his sources in the intelligence community that because of President Bush's seeming intransigence toward Israel's demands, the Mossad had begun coordinating plans for the assassination of the American president.
Upon learning of the potential threat to President Bush, exCongressman McCloskey himself flew to Canada where he met with Ostrovsky.
After lengthy discussion during which he became convinced that Ostrovsky was 'real' and telling the truth, McCloskey took the next flight to Washington.
Although Israeli agents learned that the attack was impending, the Mossad headquarters in Tel Aviv ordered its agents to ignore the threat and to not alert the American servicemen to the danger.
It was an attempt to destroy the ship and its entire crew. e During the October 1973 war, Israeli pilots were ordered to shoot down an unarmed United States reconnaissance plane that was overflying Israel's secret nuclear bomb development site at Dimona.
The plane, however, flew too high for Israel's would-be assassins to reach.
Each of these threatening incidents took place during President George Bush's January 1992 trip to the Far East.
The most notable incident, of course, was the President's bizarre public seizure while dining in the company of the Japanese premier.
More than a few people speculated—privately—that the president might indeed have been poisoned.
Interestingly, it was while the president was on his Far Eastern junket that The Washington Post—the daily newspaper of record in the nation's Final Judgment 77 capitol—inexplicably reversed itself and began publishing a lengthy and glowing seven-part series hailing Vice President Dan Quayle.
Obviously this seems to be a confirmation of Victor Ostrovsky's claim that preparations were being made in the United States to make a Dan Quayle presidency palatable.
The Post's unusual flip-flop was made all the more potent when the news arrived that the president had been stricken.
Quayle, evidently, already had the Establishment's support if he had been unexpectedly thrust into the presidency.
Oddly, prior to the Post's turn-about, the Washington daily had been one of Quayle’s most persistent critics.
However, something quite alarming also took place during that eventful week.
A SECURITY BREACH For two days, during President George Bush's visit in Seoul, South Korea, top-secret information regarding the president's personal arrangements was inexplicably made available to the public.
Incredibly enough, this was during a period when terrorist alert status was already high.
Security experts believed that if potential presidential assassins had such action in mind, the security breach would have assisted them tremendously.
According to Robert Snow, a spokesman for the Secret Service, ""It wouldn't be stretching it""'® to suggest that the security lapse could have put Bush in danger.
Blame for the lapse in security was laid at the hands of the United States Information Service , a branch of the State Department.
For their own part, officials at the State Department were unable to provide an explanation of the bizarre security breach.
Also revealed were security control room locations in the hotel where the president was staying as well as the names of the 10 Secret Service agents heading security at the various locations that the president visited while in Korea.
The room assignments of top administration officials accompanying the president, as well as those of the thirteen corporate executives along for the trip were also published.
The tentacles of Israel's Mossad do reach far and wide— even into the depths of the United States State Department.
L Fletcher Prouty, himself an acknowledged authority on covert operations—including assassination planning—says that 78 Off With His Head one of the primary necessary measures in any assassination plot is the process of removing or otherwise breaching the intended victim's blanket of security.
Prouty, who worked in presidential security with the military, knows whereof he speaks.
According to Prouty, ""No one has to direct an assassination—it happens.
The Mossad had captured three Palestinian ""extremists"" and leaked word to the Spanish police that the terrorists were on their way to Madrid.
The plan was to kill Bush, release the ""assassins"" in the midst of the confusion—and kill the Palestinians on the spot.
The crime would be blamed on the Palestinians—another Mossad ""false flag,"" more about which we will learn in Chapter Three.
They point out, based on well-documented historical evidence, that FDR may have been a genuine roadblock in the way of the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine.
It is known that Saudi King Abd al-Aziz Ibn Saud met with FDR on board a United States Navy ship on February 14, 1945 when the American president was returning from the famous Yalta Conference.
His new knowledge did not prevent him, however, from authorizing a United States Zionist leader to state that the President still favored a Jewish state and unrestricted Jewish immigration into Palestine.
As several leading Zionists admitted, if Roosevelt had lived, it is unlikely that Israel would ever have been born.
However, we do know—based on a very reliable source—that FDR's successor, Harry Truman, was in fact the target for assassination because he was perceived hostile to Zionist interests.
According to Margaret Truman, daughter of the late president, the Jewish underground terrorist movement in Palestine known as the Stern Gang once tried to murder her father.
In a biography of her father Miss Truman discussed the attempt on her father's life by Puerto Rican nationalists.
Harry Truman, of course, got the message, though, and rushed to recognize the state of Israel upon its founding in 1948, despite his own reservations and those on the part of his diplomatic advisors.
This clumsy attempt to kill Truman is interesting, to say the very least, and points to a proclivity for political violence on the part of the Israeli leaders in the Stern Gang whom, it should be pointed out, were the very individuals who emerged as the leaders of the Mossad following the establishment of the state of Israel.
Very clearly, there is strong evidence—indeed a pattern—to suggest that Israel would indeed consider the assassination of an American president.
With this in mind, let us move forward and examine the evidence which will lead us toward a final judgment.
Israel's Use of ""False Flags"" in Global Terrorism— Pointing the Finger of Guilt Elsewhere Researchers in the JFK _ assassination controversy have repeatedly pointed out the false leads that continue to appear.
Most believe that Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin, was indeed what he claimed to be—the patsy—and that false clues had been laid by the real conspirators to make it appear as though Oswald was an agent of Fidel Castro or the Soviets or both.
The use of such ""false flags"" by Israel's Mossad to cover up its own role in worldwide assassination conspiracies and other criminal activity has been documented time and again.
The use of ""false flag"" operations by Israel and its Mossad has been documented repeatedly since the Jewish State first came into being.
That Israel has had a long and proven record in planting ""false flags"" is the subject of discussion in this chapter.
Liberty in June of 1967 and the intended attack on an American reconnaissance plane that was overflying Israel's secret nuclear bomb development site.
These incidents are particularly intriguing in light of what we will ponder in this volume.
The attack on the Liberty—it is generally acknowledged by everyone but Israel and its defenders—was a deliberate attempt to destroy the Liberty and its crew and to sink the vessel to the bottom of the Mediterranean.
What is most interesting, however, is the reason behind this bizarre and brutal attack.
LIBERTY—BLAMING THE EGYPTIANS Israel, in fact, hoped to pin the responsibility on a ""false flag""—Egypt— and draw the United States into the impending 1967 war on the side of Israel.
It is only because the Liberty did not sink and instead was rescued that the history books don't tell us today that ""the Arabs"" sunk an American spy ship and sparked another ""Lusitania incident"" that forced America to go to war.
THE NUCLEAR BOMB The second instance to which Congressman Findley referred is of special interest inasmuch as the intended attack on an American air force reconnaissance plane was designed to protect Israel's secret development of nuclear weaponry.
It was Israel's nuclear offensive that led President John F Kennedy into the ""secret war"" with Israel that he conducted with increasing intensity during the three years of his short-lived presidency.
As we shall see in Chapter 5, it was the very issue of Kennedy's intransigent opposition to Israel's nuclear arms development that became a central part of his standoff with Israel and its Mossad.
It was this conflict that played a critical part in setting in final motion the assassination conspiracy that ended John Kennedy's life.
What follows is an overview of some other notable instances in which Israel utilized ‘false flags"" in its international criminal endeavors.
THE LAVON AFFAIR Perhaps the best-known instance in which Israel used a ""false flag"" to cover its own trail was in the infamous Lavon Affair.
It was in 1954 that several Israeli-orchestrated acts of terrorism against British targets in Egypt were carried out.
Blame for the attacks was placed on the Muslim Brotherhood, which opposed the regime of Egyptian President Gamul 82 A Bad Habit Abdul-Nasser.
The actions should cause arrests, demonstrations, and expressions of revenge.
The Israeli origin should be totally covered while attention should be shifted to any other possible factor.
Competing political elements within Israel used the scandal as a bludgeon against their opponents.
But the truth about Israel's use of a ""false flag"" had come to international attention and demonstrated how Israel was indeed willing to needlessly endanger innocent lives as part of its grand political strategy to expand its influence in the Middle East.
BLAMING 'RIGHT-WING EXTREMISTS' A shadowy ""right wing"" group known as ""Direct Action"" was accused of the attack on Goldenberg's Deli in Paris on August 9, 1982.
Rouillan had been operating in the Mediterranean under the cover name of ""Sebas"" and had been repeatedly linked to the Mossad.
All references to Rouillan's Mossad links were deleted from the official reports issued at the time.
However, the Algerian national news service—which has ties to French intelligence—blamed the Mossad for Rouillan's activities.
Angry French intelligence officers were believed to have leaked this information to the Algerians.
Several top French security officials quit in protest over this coverup of Mossad complicity in Rouillan's crimes.
On October 3, 1980 a synagogue on Copernicus Street was bombed in Paris.
Yet, of all of the ""right wing extremists” held for questioning, none was arrested.
In the upper echelons of French intelligence, however, the finger of suspicion was pointed at the Mossad.
Immediately afterward, Paris police received anonymous phone calls accusing Boudia of involvement in narcotics deals and attributing his murder to the Corsican Mafia.
A thorough investigation subsequently established that Mossad special-action agents were responsible for the terrorist killing.
BLAMING THE NEO-NAZIS e In October, 1976 the same Mossad unit kidnapped two West German students named Brigette Schulz and Thomas Reuter from their Paris hotel.
Planted ""clues"" and anonymous phone calls made it appear that a Bavarian ""neo-nazi"" formation had executed the abduction.
In fact, French intelligence established that the two German youths had been secretly flown to Israel, drugged, tortured, coerced into a false ""confession of complicity"" in PLO activities, and then anonymously incarcerated in one of the Israeli government's notorious political prisons.
BLAMING THE SOUTH KOREANS e In February 1977 a German-born, naturalized United States citizen named William Jahnke arrived in Paris for some secretive business meetings.
Paris police were anonymously informed that Jahnke had been involved in a high-level South Korean bribery affair and ""eliminated"" when the deal went sour.
A special team of investigators from SDECE, the leading French intelligence agency, eventually determined that Jahnke had been ""terminated"" by the Mossad, which suspected him of selling secret information to the Libyans.
BLAMING THE LIBYANS One of Israel's most outrageous ""false flag"" operations involved a wild propaganda story aimed at discrediting Libyan leader Muamar Qaddafi—one of Israel's favorite enemies.
In the early months of the administration of President Ronald Reagan, the American media began heavily promoting a story to the effect that a ""Libyan hit squad"" was in the United States for the express purpose of assassinating Reagan.
This inflamed public sentiment against Libya and there were repeated calls for blood.
In fact, it was ultimately discovered that the source of the story was one Manucher Ghorbanifar, a former Iranian SAVAK agent with close ties 84 A Bad Habit to the Mossad.
In fact, he was a Mossad disinformation operative waving a ""false flag"" to mislead America.
BLAMING LIBYA AGAIN Israel's Mossad was almost certainly responsible for the bombing of the La Belle discotheque in West Berlin on April 5, 1986.
However, claims were made that there was ""irrefutable"" evidence that the Libyans were responsible.
However, intelligence insiders believed that Israel's Mossad had concocted the phony ""evidence"" to ""prove"" Libyan responsibility.
West Berlin police director Manfred Ganschow, who took charge of the investigation, cleared the Libyans, saying, ""This is a highly political case.
BLAMING THE SYRIANS On April 18, 1986 one Nezar Hindawi, a 32 year old Jordanian was arrested in London after security guards found that one of the passengers boarding an Israeli plane bound for Jerusalem, Ann Murphy, 22, was carrying a square, flat sheet of plastic explosive in the double bottom of her carry-on bag.
Miss Murphy told security men that the detonator (disguised as a calculator) had been given to her by her finance, Hindawi.
Word was leaked that Hindawi had confessed and claimed that he had been hired by Gen.
The French authorities warned the British Prime Final Judgment 85 Minister that there was more to the case than met the eye—that is, Israeli involvement.
Thousands of Palestinians living in Jordan were rounded up, some of the leaders were tortured, and in the end, masses of refugees were driven from Jordan to Lebanon.
New data, coming to light after the murder of two leading Mossad operatives in Larnaka, Cyprus suggested that the entire operation had been a Mossad covert action, led by one of its key operatives, Sylvia Roxburgh.
She contrived an affair with King Hussein and served as the linchpin for a major Mossad coup designed to destabilize the Arabs.
Years later, even leading Israeli spokesmen, such as former Foreign Minister Abba Eban, admitted that the reports of ""PLO terrorism"" had been contrived by the Mossad.
What's more, one of the suspects in the crime was found carrying a ""hit list"" which actually included the name of the head of the PLO office in London.
Indeed, Oswald's activities were presented as proof that a ""pro-Castro agitator"" had been the ""lone nut"" behind the president's assassination.
If anything—we should note at this juncture—Lee Harvey Oswald's identity as a ""pro-Castro agitator""—the role he played prior to the JFK assassination—was tailor-made for (or, perhaps we should say, tailor-made by) the CIA and its allies in the Mossad.
Thus, both the Mossad and the CIA would find a ""pro-Castro agitator"" an ideal patsy.
In a lengthy essay the Castro government published in the November 4, 1979 edition of Granma—an official newspaper—the Cuban Marxists critiqued Israel and Zionism.
And to complete the picture there is the Zionist counter-revolutionary action against the national liberation movements.
Now their task is to defend oil routes, protect all the interests of United States imperialism and block the advance of the Arab revolution.
The profile would satisfy both the hard-line anti-communists and the Zionists.
It was the Mossad and its allies in the CIA and in the controlled American media who have been doing all the fingering.
Everybody being blamed by the Mossad and its CIA allies were implicated and everybody, as a consequence, had a stake in the cover-up.
JFK AND SECRET DEALS To achieve the presidency in 1960, John F Kennedy was forced to cut secret deals—behind the scenes—with a variety of powerful forces intricately linked to Israel.
In Chapter 4 we shall examine the history of those deals and how they played a part in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
JFK, Meyer Lansky, the Mafia & the Israeli Lobby There was a long history of bitter enmity between John F Kennedy and his powerful father Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy and organized crime boss Meyer Lansky, stemming in part from the senior Kennedy's deals with the underworld.
This, however, did not stop the Kennedy family from cutting deals with the crime syndicate when it came to winning elections.
The Kennedy family's alleged anti-Semitism didn't do anything to improve JFK's relations with Israel and its American lobby either.
Kennedy's intervention in the issue of Algerian independence from France also drew sharp criticism from the Israeli lobby as well.
Yet, when John F Kennedy sought the presidency, he was willing to cut deals with the Israeli lobby—for a price.
By the end of his presidency, however, Kennedy had reneged on his deals, not only with Israel's Godfather, Meyer Lansky, and his henchmen in the Mafia, but also with the Israeli lobby.
John F Kennedy was very much a product of his father's upbringing— much to the dismay, it might be said, of many of even JFK's most devout disciples.
They would, frankly, prefer to forget much of the recorded history of the Kennedy family and present JFK as something just short of being a saint.
That President John F Kennedy was the son of Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy long perceived to be, at the very least, neutral to the ambitions of Nazi Germany—and, at the worst, an anti-Semite and even an admirer of Adolf Hitler—has been a lot for Kennedy's admirers to swallow.
Several accounts of the period suggest that Kennedy himself returned from Britain, where he served as American ambassador, with the intent of launching a major campaign against President Roosevelt's war plans.
However, after a meeting at the White House between the ambassador and the president, Kennedy backed off.
JFK, HITLER AND THE WAR IN EUROPE What is interesting to note is that at the same time Ambassador Kennedy was fighting against American involvement in what became the Second World War, his sons Joe, Jr. and John were also promoting the same agenda.
KENNEDY AND THE 'FASCIST' After the war was underway, JFK's father, Ambassador Kennedy, actively considered involvement in a scheme to cut the war short—in opposition to President Roosevelt.
Kennedy's biographer, Richard Whalen, has written of a secret meeting between Kennedy and a prominent critic of the Roosevelt administration, the controversial publicist, Lawrence Dennis.
Before the war, Dennis had contributed to the Digest, but the author of The Coming American Fascism since had become too controversial for his byline to appear in the nation's largest magazine.
Regis Hotel, saying he would meet someone there who was thinking along similar lines.
Over lunch, Kennedy said he had been seeing Archbishop Spellman almost daily.
He said the Archbishop had Final Judgment 89 returned from Rome with word that Hitler's generals might attempt to overthrow him if they were offered terms less hopeless than unconditional surrender.
He talked of his two sons in the service, and declared that the war could be ended within two weeks if the German generals were given encouragement.
The editor asked whether the former Ambassador would write, or at least sign, an article condemning unconditional surrender.
The impact of such an article, given Kennedy's former standing in the administration, could be enormous.
He was very bitter about the war and particularly bitter at Franklin D Roosevelt.
A BUSINESS VENTURE However, the senior Kennedy's views most definitely did not change as time went by.
In fact, as we shall see, it may have been efforts by Hooker, as a consequence of his meeting with Joe Kennedy, that helped John F Kennedy win his narrow victory in the 1960 presidential election.
Mr Hooker hoped to interest Joe Kennedy in a business venture which Hooker believed might be right up the ambassador's alley.
Hooker wanted to establish an independent television network, and he felt that Kennedy, himself a veteran movie mogul, might be interested in backing the enterprise.
Hooker's memory of that meeting is quite interesting, particularly in the context of the thesis presented in these pages.
To appreciate just precisely where Hooker was coming from, however, it is appropriate to review Hooker's remarkable background.
UNABASHEDLY ANTI-JEWISH Born to wealth and privilege and a descendent of one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence, Hooker had a varied career.
Not only did he act on the Broadway stage, but he also modeled in cigarette advertisements.
Hooker also served for a period as a talent agent with the powerful firm 90 No Love Lost MCA and was, at a time during the 1950's one of the highest-paid talent agents in America.
Hooker also dabbled in television production and was equally successful.
A powerfully-built man, Hooker is fearless and not afraid to make his position known.
In his memoirs, This Time the World, Rockwell credits Hooker as being a major influence on his thinking.
In fact, Rockwell dedicated the book to Hooker, along with several others including Sen.
Hooker wanted the new network to be totally divorced from Jewish money and influence.
In his judgment, the three existing networks were entirely under the control of Jewish interests.
JOE KENNEDY SPEAKS FRANKLY It was in 1956 that Hooker had a private meeting in Palm Beach, Florida with Kennedy.
Hooker was there to solicit Kennedy's financial, political and personal backing for his proposed network.
After Hooker made his presentation to the retired ambassador, Kennedy's response was supportive in spirit, but Old Joe made his final position clear during their four-hour conference.
According to Hooker, ""Joe admitted that when he was ambassador to England that he had been pro-Hitler.
I'm teaching my boys the whole score and they're going to work with the Jews.
I'm going to make Final Judgment 91 Jack the first Irish Catholic President of the United States and if it means working with the Jews, so be it.
Ze Hooker was, of course, disappointed by Kennedy's response and ultimately his ""fourth"" network failed to get off the ground.
However, Hooker at least had the satisfaction of knowing that he and the Kennedy family were on the same wavelength—even if they were willing to compromise those views for political gain.
THE NAZIS 'ENDORSE' NIXON As they parted at the end of their Palm Beach meeting, Hooker asked Kennedy if there was anything he could do to help the Kennedy family.
Have them start publishing articles accusing Jack of being controlled by the Jews, of being a Jewish puppet.
And being a man of his word, Hooker did influence his right-wing contacts as Kennedy had asked.
Hooker encouraged his friend, Nazi leader Rockwell, and other ""right wingers"" to smear John F Kennedy as JFK's father had suggested.
This interesting—and revealing—episode is not likely to be memorialized at the John F Kennedy Library at Harvard or in any friendly biographies of the Kennedy family.
However, there can be little doubt that Israel and its American lobby had a fairly good idea of what was going on behind the scenes.
The giant Arab colossus, long a French colony, was seeking its freedom and in France itself the nation was engaged in a heated debate over the question.
Israel, of course, saw the emergence of another independent Arab republic as a threat to its security and anyone favoring Algerian independence was, thus, advocating a policy deemed threatening to Israel's survival.
Already one of the congressional library's heaviest borrowers, he now spent additional time in conversation with William J Porter, an Arabist and the director of the State Department's Office of North African Affairs.
As we shall see, in the end, it may have been JFK's initiative on the Algerian question that, in fact, played a major part in shaping the entirety of the conspiracy that ended his life in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963.
This gesture by the young senator also angered many French nationalists who wanted to retain French colonial control of Algeria.
Many Final Judgment 93 of these nationalists later banded together in the so-called Secret Army Organization—the Israel-backed OAS—and fought against French President Charles DeGaulle who ultimately granted Algerian independence.
In Chapter 12, Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 we will learn more about the socalled ""French connection"" and how, indeed, it ultimately played a role in the JFK murder, manipulated by Israel's Mossad.
An ancient enmity also stood between Joseph P Kennedy and Meyer Lansky, the foremost Jewish mob boss in America.
The conflict between JFK and Lansky, however, went back to the days of the president's father's own bootlegging activities.
The hijackers were part of the Luciano-Lansky mob, while it was rumored that Joseph P Kennedy was involved in the shipment.
Long-time Lansky henchman Michael Milan lends support for Marrs’ allegation.
According to Milan, ""Ask Meyer Lansky about Joe Kennedy and you'd see one of the few times that Mr L would actually get conniptions.
What they said back during Prohibition was that you can't trust Joe Kennedy to keep his word.
And right before World War II, the sonovabitch turned around and said that we should all get on Hitler's side, that the Jews could go to Hell.
His temples were actually throbbing when Sam Koenig told him what Kennedy had said.
And then Meyer, almost like he was a born Sicilian, swore a blood revenge on the entire family.
The conflict between Lansky and Joseph P Kennedy was but one facet of Kennedy's relationship with organized crime.
It was a relationship of many parts, and, in the end, clearly had a significant role in helping shape the conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of Ambassador Kennedy's son who had, in fact, finally achieved the presidency.
A DOUBLE CROSS Commenting on the theory that organized crime killed JFK (a theory with which Fox concurs), historian Stephen Fox noted that ""Gangsters did not normally harm honest lawmen,"" © such as a president like Kennedy 94 No Love Lost whose administration had begun cracking down on the national crime syndicate.
However, notes Fox, ""For such an extraordinary murder—to kill a president—they must have been extraordinarily provoked.
Lansky himself used to brag that among his clients included, ""judges, senators, respectable businessmen.
However, as the senior Kennedy's son Jack moved upward in the political arena, his father tried to shut out his past relationship with Frank Costello.
According to one of Costello's friends, ""The way talked about , you had the sense that they were close during Prohibition and then something happened.
According to Sam Giancana (nephew of the Windy City mobster) and Chuck Giancana , JFK— and his father—had indeed double crossed organized crime.
According to the Giancanas, Detroit's ""Jewish Mafia,"" the so-called ""Purple Gang"" had put out a contract on Joe Kennedy's life for bringing illegal liquor through their territory without their permission during the Prohibition days.
However, Kennedy Sr. had gone to Chicago to beg for his life and the Chicago Mafia bosses intervened on his behalf, saving his life.
You help me now, Sam, and I'll see to it that Chicago—that you—can sit in the godamned Oval office if you want.
JFK, THE MAFIA AND MEYER LANSKY It was during the 1960 Democratic Presidential primary campaign that the Kennedys once again turned to Giancana for critical Mafia support.
In fact, according to the Giancanas, the Kennedys—father and son—actually met with Sam Giancana to work out a joint agreement of mutual support, before— and after—the election.
It'll be business as usual."" oe Mafia money poured into critical primary states such as West Virginia and by convention time, JFK was virtually assured the presidential nomination.
Although New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello preferred Texas Senator Lyndon Johnson, an agreement was cut, and a Kennedy-Johnson ticket was set in place.
It turns out, too, that JFK himself was busy with other mob figures other than Sam Giancana, although the history books have discreetly ignored JFK's other crime connections, preferring instead to focus on the Italian-American ""Mafia"" figures.
According to FBI documents and wiretaps, JFK himself had ""direct contact""™ with Meyer Lansky himself during the 1960 presidential campaign, presumably for the purpose of shoring up mob support for his presidential campaign—a pact that would ultimately prove to have been a proverbial deal with the devil.
For obvious reasons, as we have seen, there was indeed no love lost between JFK, his father, Ambassador Kennedy, and the American Jewish community.
And unlike Lyndon Johnson, Kennedy did not rush to Israel's defense during the Suez affair.
Many Jews associated American Catholics with right-wing, pro-McCarthy, and anti-Semitic causes.
Angering the Israeli lobby further, Senator Kennedy had once offered an amendment that would have slashed economic assistance to Africa and the Middle East from $175 to $140 million, this despite the fact that pro-Israel senators said that this was harmful to Israel.
Feinberg was president of the Israel Bond Organization and was helping raise private money to finance Israel's secret nuclear development program.
Following a discussion with Kennedy, Feinberg and his associates agreed to come up Final Judgment 97 with $500,000 on Kennedy's behalf.
He had driven to Bartlett's home in northwest Washington and dragged his friend on a walk, where he recounted a much different version of the meeting the night before.
Kennedy, as a presidential candidate, also resented the crudity with which he'd been approached.
PARTIALITY 'DANGEROUS' In a private letter to Jewish American historian Alfred Lilienthal, himself a vocal critic of Israel, Kennedy did, however, reveal his feelings toward the Middle East conflict.
Not only organized crime—but the Israeli lobby —had their claims on John F Kennedy.
In the general election, it was a narrow Kennedy victory over the Republican candidate, Vice President Richard M Nixon.
The role of the Chicago Democratic political machine (under the thumb of Mafia boss Sam Giancana) in stealing Illinois votes on behalf of the Kennedy-Johnson ticket is now well known and a widely accepted part of American political history.
KENNEDY & BEN-GURION—THE FIRST ENCOUNTER Shortly after his inauguration as president, Kennedy arranged to meet with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion.
At this meeting, Kennedy said, ""I know I was elected because of the votes of American Jews.
KENNEDY TURNS THE TABLES It was not much longer afterward that Kennedy's organized crime friends began to realize that Kennedy was not proving to be the loyal ally that they had expected he would be.
Soon after JFK assumed the presidency, an unexpected war on organized crime began.
Robert Kennedy, who had cut his teeth prosecuting mobsters as a counsel for the Senate's ""rackets committee,"" was named attorney general and it was apparent that he was taking his new job seriously.
Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, reflected in later years upon the Organized Crime-Kennedy alliance and what it meant, particularly after Bobby Kennedy launched his campaign against the underworld.
There was no thought that they were going to get the best of it with John Kennedy.
See, there may be different guys running for an office, and none of them may be . . . what's best for a combination.
But nobody in my line of work had an idea that he was going to name Bobby Kennedy attorney general.
Ultimately, as we shall see, JFK's war against his former allies in the underworld, would lead him to the very doorsteps of the real brains behind the national—and international—crime syndicate, Meyer Lansky.
However, he had already double-crossed his immediate underworld collaborators.
JFK MOVES AGAINST THE ISRAELI LOBBY However, Kennedy was also engaged in some legislative sleight-of-hand that could also prove dangerous to Israel's political leverage in American election politics.
In 1962 Kennedy submitted five bills to reform campaign financing to Congress and in 1963 two more such bills.
But none of those bills survived, having been beaten back by the very special interests that Kennedy sought to counter.
As we shall see in Chapter 5, Kennedy, in fact, was at war with Israel.
Not only had Kennedy double-crossed his allies in organized crime, but he had crossed his pro-Israel financiers.
Israel, as we shall see in Chapter 7, was long close to the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
All of these powerful special interests had very special reasons to want to see JFK removed from the presidency and replaced with Lyndon Johnson.
There was clearly no love lost between John F Kennedy and the powerful forces which had helped bring him to the presidency.
A reform-minded President Kennedy also had other long-range plans in the works.
The scion of an independent and essentially self-made man who ""played the game"" to gain power and influence—and to get his son elected president—JFK was indeed very much his father's son.
There have been widespread rumors, for nearly a generation, that JFK was planning to issue interest-free money—so-called ""greenbacks""— independent of the stranglehold of the privately-owned Federal Reserve System.
In fact, interest-free United States Notes were issued during JFK's presidency—some remain in private hands today—but there have been many myths about what some have called ""JFK's Greenbacks"" and in Appendix Five we will examine this controversy in detail.
THE MONEY MONOPOLY There is no question, however, but that JFK—once firmly established in the presidency—fully intended to move against the Federal Reserve money monopoly.
However, there were other more immediate and ultimately dangerous conflicts at work between the forces whose influence JFK sought to dismantle and the hard-driving new Kennedy administration.
DIVERSE ENTITIES Let us move forward and examine the strange and intimate connections between all of these Kennedy foes and the dynamics at work between them.
However, as we shall see, it is the central thread of Israel and its Mossad that ties all of these diverse entities together.
To begin the process of untangling this hidden web of intrigue, we must first review the long-hidden story of Israel's secret war with John F Kennedy.
Yet, only in recent years have we begun to learn of Kennedy's secret war with Israel.
Much of the conflict stemmed from Israel's determination to build a nuclear bomb.
This is a hidden history that helps explain in part the dynamic forces at work resulting in Kennedy's assassination.
By mid-1963 Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion hated Kennedy with a passion.
In fact, he considered JFK a threat to the very survival of the Jewish State.
One of John F Kennedy's first presidential appointments was naming his former campaign aide Myer Feldman as his point man for Jewish and Israeli affairs—an important post, especially considering JFK's tenuous relationship with Israel and its American lobby.
However, the administration was determined to make certain, according to Hersh, that nobody—Feldman in particular—would be able to circumvent any administration policy insofar as the Middle East was concerned.
Kennedy was making it clear that he was very much interested in finding a path to peace in the Middle East and was, in particular, looking for ways to solve the problem of finding a home for the Palestinian refugees who had been displaced by Israel in 1948.
American Perceptions of the Arab-Israeli Dispute, elaborated on Kennedy's attitude toward the Middle East controversy.
Kennedy was especially intrigued with the possibility of opening up relations with Nasser.
According to Kennedy associate, Theodore Sorensen, ""Nasser liked Kennedy's Ambassador, John Badeau, and he liked Kennedy's practice of personal correspondence.
ISRAEL'S LOBBY REACTS Soon after Kennedy assumed office, Israel and its American lobby began to understand the import of Kennedy's positioning in regard to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Israel was not happy—to say the very least—and began putting heat on the White House through the egis of its supporters in Congress, many of whom relied upon support from the Israeli lobby for campaign contributions and political leverage.
According to America's most noted longtime Jewish critic of Israel, Dr.
Five years and one day after Kennedy's Senate speech calling for Algerian independence, Algeria became a sovereign state on July 3, 1962.
In fact, Algeria was very much an Islamic state and it was precisely this which created so much concern for Israel.
DeGAULLE'S MIDDLE EAST TURN-ABOUT However, the debate over Algerian independence had sparked a major crisis within France and the French Secret Army Organization , which fought Algerian freedom, considered John F Kennedy an enemy only second to Charles DeGaulle.
At the same time, JFK was shaping a Middle East policy that put him at loggerheads with Israel.
Yet, cognizant of Israel's political influence in the United States, JFK made overtures to Israel and arranged to meet in Palm Beach, in December of 1962, with Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir.
However, the president tempered that pledge with a hope that Israel recognized that America also had interests in the Middle East.
America's Secret Relations With a Militant Israel: ""The United States, the President said, has a special relationship with Israel in the Middle East really comparable only to that which it has with Britain over a wide range of world affairs.
Kennedy told Meir that United States interests and Israel's interests were not always the same.
AMERICA'S NEEDS IMPORTANT ""Our security problems are, therefore, just as great as Israel's.
Thus it was that John F Kennedy informed Israel, in no uncertain terms, that he intended—first and foremost—to place America's interests—not Israel's interests—at the center of United States Middle East policy.
Israel had been engaged in nuclear development during the past decade but continued to insist that its nuclear programs were strictly peaceful in nature.
America's Secret Relations With a Militant Israel, a treasure trove of little known information relating to U.S.Israeli relations from the period of 1948 through 1967.
Green writes of JFK's discovery that Israel was engaged in nuclear arms development.
When Kennedy was coming into office in the transition period in December 1960 the Eisenhower administration informed Kennedy of Israel's secret nuclear weapons development at a site in the desert known as Dimona.
Israel had advanced several cover stories to explain its activities at Dimona.
A 'HIGHLY DISTRESSING' SITUATION Israel had kept the nuclear weapons program as secret as possible, but United States intelligence had discovered the project.
Kennedy, upon taking office, determined that he would make efforts to derail Israel's nuclear weapons development.
Israel's intended entry into the nuclear arena was, as a consequence, a frightening prospect in JFK's mind, particularly in light of ongoing conflict in the Middle East.
From the very beginning of his presidency, John F Kennedy found himself at severe odds with the government of Israel.
His government had been providing nuclear technology assistance to Israel, but with the assurance from Ben-Gurion that the nuclear development was peaceful in nature.
In Washington, JFK was determined to settle the matter once and for all.
Kennedy had already written to Ben-Gurion expressing his extreme concern about the Dimona project, and suggesting regular inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
THE SECRET WAR Kennedy's friendly overtures to the Arab states were only a public aspect of what ultimately developed into an all-out 'secret war' between Kennedy and Israel.
If indeed it had been, as we shall see, the mystery behind the JFK assassination might have been unraveled long, long ago.
Although Israel and the American CIA had established a longtime close and ongoing working relationship, the CIA was monitoring Israel's nuclear weapons development.
According to Stephen Green, for the purposes of this internal memorandum, Kent defined ""acquisition"" by Israel as either a detonation of a nuclear device with or without the possession of actual nuclear weapons, or an announcement by Israel that it possessed nuclear weapons, even without testing.
In short, Israel would use its immense political power—especially through its lobby in Washington—to force the United States to accede to Israel's nuclear intentions.
According to Green, ""It is perhaps significant that the memorandum was not drafted as a formal national intelligence estimate , which would have involved distribution to several other agencies of the government.
As we shall see in Chapter 8, the ties between Israel and the CIA were quite intimate—perhaps too intimate in too many, many ways.
KENNEDY AND BEN-GURION In the meantime, President Kennedy was well aware that Israel's nuclear project at Dimona would enable Israel to produce at least one bomb per year—and that was enough to start a world war.
Although Israel's nuclear program was ostensibly ""peaceful"" in nature, the fact is that the project was entirely controlled by Israel's Ministry of Defense.
It was for this reason that it was critical for Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion to neutralize JFK's opposition.
There was enough domestic opposition to the program in Israel itself that Kennedy's own steadfast refusal to support Israeli nuclear development could have killed the project altogether.
In the early months of his administration, Kennedy maintained regular contact with Ben-Gurion in an effort to stop the nuclear development.
Ben-Gurion sought to have a private meeting with Kennedy—in the course of an official state visit to Washington—but the president refused to provide a formal invitation.
It was Feinberg, as we have seen in Chapter 4, who had initially smoothed over Kennedy's relations with the American Jewish community during the 1960 presidential campaign and arranged for a massive infusion of Jewish money into JFK's campaign.
According to Hersh, ""The meeting with Kennedy was a major disappointment for the Israeli prime minister, and not only because of the nuclear issue.
According to Feinberg, ""There's no way of describing the relationship between Jack Kennedy and Ben-Gurion because there's no way B.G. was dealing with JFK as an equal, at least as far as B.G. was concerned.
Ben-Gurion's contempt for the younger Kennedy was growing by leaps and bounds—almost pathologically.
The U.S.-Israeli relationship was at an ever-growing and disastrous impasse, although virtually nothing was known about this to the American public at the time.
The Israeli leader refused to agree to a Kennedy proposal that the Palestinians either be permitted to return to their homes in Israel or to be compensated by Israel and resettled in the Arab countries or elsewhere.
KENNEDY'S GESTURE Despite all of this, the American president remained determined to find a solution to the potential crisis presented by Ben-Gurion’s obstinacy.
Kennedy offered to sell Israel Hawk missiles for defensive purposes—as Israel had been demanding—but Kennedy continued to drag his feet on the sale.
Kennedy finally relented and approved the sale, but only after pressure from Israel and its allies in the American Congress.
ISRAEL RELENTLESS Even the arms sales to Israel did not assuage Israel and its lobby.
The ""Israel first"" bloc in the Senate attacked the administration for failing to conclude a defense pact to protect Israel and to call an embargo on all arms shipments to the Middle East.
By this time—behind the scenes—Kennedy had ordered continuing surveillance of the Israelis and their push for the nuclear bomb.
However, to ensure that Israel's access to intelligence regarding the American spy operation against Israel was limited, the surveillance was being conducted directly out of then-CIA Director John McCone's office.
Kennedy was still willing, however, to attempt to settle the matter and requested that Israel permit American inspectors the opportunity to come to Israel's nuclear operation at Dimona to verify that—as Israel claimed—the program was peaceful in nature.
This was the president's last-ditch effort, apparently, to pacify Israel and, at the same time, find out precisely what was going on at Dimona.
The president's inner circle had begun to realize that Israel deemed Kennedy's refusal to knuckle under to Israel's demands as a dire threat to Israel's survival.
According to then-Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, speaking in retrospect, ""I can understand why Israel wanted a nuclear bomb.
JFK would simply not countenance a nuclear Israel and Israel's leaders believed that a nuclear Israel would ensure the continued survival of the Jewish State.
THREATS AGAINST JFK The American president continued to demand that Israel permit American inspection of Israel's nuclear development facilities.
In response, Israel called on its American lobby to apply pressure on Kennedy behind the scenes.
The Israeli Prime Minister hurriedly ordered the construction of what amounted to a phony nuclear plant—one that didn't give evidence of the construction of a nuclear bomb.
False control rooms were set in place and dummy operations were displayed.
Even the Israeli guides who took the Americans through the facility were accompanied by translators who gave the Americans fraudulent translations of the remarks made by the Israeli engineers at the plant.
A standoff between Kennedy and Israel was already in place and it did not bode well for the future.
THE 'LAST AMERICAN PRESIDENT' John Hadden, the former CIA station chief in Tel Aviv at the time believes that John F Kennedy was the last American president to have really tried to stop the advent of the Israeli atomic bomb.
Overall Kennedy administration policy toward the Middle East left Israel and its American lobby most dissatisfied.
Kenan of the pro-Israel American-Israel Public Affairs Committee, a registered lobby for Israel, described 1963 as “the turbulent year"" between John F Kennedy and Israel.
Those ""allies""—at least in Kenan's context—really meant just one country—Kenan's foreign principal, Israel.
Kennedy's ""strong but quiet commitments,"" however, were apparently not enough as relations between Israel and the Arab states were strained.
On August 14, 1963 the government of Algerian premier Ben Bella accused Israel of plotting to topple the new Arab regime.
The Algerian authorities captured 20 Algerians and 10 foreigners who were engaged in a conspiracy to bring down the government.
Israel and its allies in the French Secret Army Organization —now officially disbanded, but effectively still functioning—were determined to reverse the course of history.
This, however, is not the last time in these pages that we will find the fine hand of Israel and the OAS interfering in the life and work of John F Kennedy.
THE LAST PRESS CONFERENCE Kennedy's efforts to conduct a balanced United States Middle East policy were being frustrated at each and every turn.
As a result of Israel's manipulation of Congress, both the House of Representatives and the Senate voted in late 1963 to cut off aid to Egypt, a country central to Kennedy's drive for peace.
His hand of friendship to the Arab world and its leaders, Nasser of Egypt in particular, was being cut off—at the shoulder.
On many fronts, indeed, JFK's Middle East policy was angering the Israelis, including—perhaps especially—JFK's determination to solve the problem of the Palestinian refugees.
JFK'S 'GOOD FAITH' IN DOUBT On November 20, 1963, Kennedy's delegation at the United Nations called for continuing movement toward the implementation of the 1948 UN resolution which called for the right of displaced Palestinian Arabs to return to their homes and for those who chose not to return to their homes to be compensated.
So it was that even as John F Kennedy was preparing to leave Washington for his final journey as president, he was plagued with the problem of Israel and its powerful influence in Washington.
As it turned out, it was during Kennedy's trip to Dallas that one last memorandum was prepared on his behalf relating to the touchy issue of global nuclear arms development.
Although JFK had forcefully opposed French production of nuclear weapons—much as he opposed that of Israel—the American president had, however, begun taking a new look at his stance vis-a-vis the French.
Thus it was that while John F Kennedy was triumphantly touring downtown Dallas, there was being prepared a ""Top Secret, Eyes Only"" memorandum from JFK's advisor, McGeorge Bundy, outlining the new, perhaps more lenient, Kennedy policy toward France, which, as we have seen, had itself played a major role in Israel's nuclear development and, unwittingly in the drive for atomic weaponry.
The memorandum regarding the new policy toward France was also dated November 22, 1963. ee By this time, however, John F Kennedy's fate was sealed.
By spring of 1963, Kennedy and Ben-Gurion were at loggerheads, more seriously than ever before.
All of this exacerbated tensions—fierce tensions—between the American President and the Israeli leader.
Relations between the United States and Israel were unlike they had ever been before.
ISRAEL'S 'EXISTENCE IS IN DANGER' It was then that Ben-Gurion made his position all too clear.
He was convinced that what he perceived to be Kennedy's intransigence was an all-out threat to the continued survival of the Jewish State.
On June 16, 1963 Ben-Gurion abruptly resigned as prime minister and defense minister.
Thus, the ""prophet of fire"" ended his fifteen-year career as grand old man of Israel.
A BITTER IMPASSE However, the primary reason behind Ben-Gurion's departure was the Israeli leader's inability to pressure JFK into accepting Israel's demands.
The battle had been lost, but the war between the two men was still to be won.
In light of Ben-Gurion's explicit comment to John F Kennedy that ""my people have the right to exist . . and this existence is in danger,"" we can certainly make a good presumption.
In Ben-Gurion's eyes, John F Kennedy was clearly a modern-day Haman—an enemy of the Jewish people.
In Jewish folklore, Haman was a descendant of the Amalekites who served as prime minister to King Ahasueros of Persia.
It was Haman who sought to convince the king that all of the Jews of his empire should be exterminated forever.
However, according to legend, a beautiful Jewish temptress named Esther used her feminine wiles on Ahasueros and, in the end, it was Haman who was instead put to death.
The important Jewish holiday of Purim celebrates the deliverance of the Jews from Haman's intended holocaust.
In the Bible—Deut 25:19, I Sam.:8—the ancient Hebrews were urged to ""blot out the memory of the Amalekites"" from whom Haman descended.
In Israel—in 1963—David Ben-Gurion certainly looked upon John F Kennedy as a modern-day Haman, a son of the Amalekites.
Insolent in his riches, he digged himself a pit, and his own greatness laid him a snare.
The Israeli leader could not help but ponder further how he might deliver his people from what he perceived to be certain destruction.
BenGurion had devoted a lifetime creating a Jewish State and guiding it into the world arena.
And, in Ben-Gurion's eyes, John F Kennedy was an enemy of the Jewish people and of his beloved state of Israel.
He really steered the state to independence, steered his people to independence, wrote the Israeli declaration of independence, was prime minister all the way through, with a brief interval, until 1963.
It is the thesis of this volume that Ben-Gurion, in his final days as Prime Minister, ordered the Mossad to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Based upon evidence that we will outline in Final Judgment, we believe that the Mossad carried out Ben-Gurion's order.
On November 22, 1963, the American president whom Ben-Gurion considered a threat to Israel's very survival came to an inglorious end in Dealey Plaza in Dallas.
That Israel and its leaders believed that drastic measures might be needed to influence the course of history and to ensure the survival of Israel cannot be doubted.
The Israeli newspaper reported that Shamir headed the assassination unit from 1955 until 1964—the year after JFK’ s assassination.
According to the Israeli newspaper, Shamir had recruited members for his Mossad hit squad from former members of the Stern Gang, the underground terrorist group that Shamir led during Israel's fight for independence.
The Stern Gang was responsible for the murder, in 1944, of Lord Moyne, Britain's resident Mideast minister, and for the slaying of United Nations mediator Count Folke Bernadotte in 1948.
And now we know of the existence of the Mossad hit squad that played a major role in the conspiracy that brought about the death of John F Kennedy.
In Chapter 16 we shall learn precisely how this Mossadorchestrated conspiracy came about.
THE ENEMIES COME TOGETHER With Israel's intimate ties to not only the American CIA but also the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate—which we will examine in much further detail—the Israeli prime minister and his Mossad operatives had in place a network of allies with whom they could easily collaborate in orchestrating the assassination of John F Kennedy.
That they undoubtedly came together in a joint conspiracy we shall document in this volume.
THE COMING OF THE MESSIAH With John F Kennedy lying in a grave in Arlington National Cemetery, Israel was safe—for the time being at least.
That Lyndon Johnson—a man with a steadfast history of loyalty to Israel and its American lobby—was in line to assume the American presidency was a fact not gone unnoticed.
Lyndon Johnson Rushes to Israel's Rescue; United States Middle East Policy Is Reversed Within weeks of John F Kennedy's assassination, Israel was perhaps the most immediate primary beneficiary of Kennedy's death—although this was not something that the controlled media told the American people.
The most immediate individual beneficiary of JFK's death was, of course, Lyndon Johnson who was a political favorite of Israel and its allies in Meyer Lansky's Organized Crime Syndicate.
It was Johnson who promptly reversed Kennedy's Middle East policy and who, for all intents and purposes, according to one historian, established Israel as America's 51"" state.
This permitted Israel to advance its own geo-political stance in the Middle East; and 4) It enabled Israel's allies in the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate to gain a lock on drug trafficking in Southeast Asia as a proximate result of United States involvement in the region.
Israel was clearly—and beyond doubt—the primary international beneficiary of Lyndon Johnson's presidency which only became possible through the assassination of John F Kennedy.
ISRAEL'S SURVIVAL If protection of its national security interests and its very survival can be considered a motive—and surely it can be—then Israel, perhaps above all, obviously had a major interest—and motivation—in helping orchestrate the assassination of President Kennedy.
Indeed, the very survival of Israel has been a cornerstone of its foreign policy from that nation's earliest beginnings.
This especially, of course, in light of the fact that the man who succeeded Kennedy—Lyndon Johnson—had long and often proven a history of personal affinity for Israel and its international interests.
JOHNSON'S LANSKY CONNECTION Johnson, too, had a long and sordid record of involvement in criminal activities—including murder—that have finally begun to surface.
The record is far too complex to examine here—besides which, popular literature on the subject is quite complete.
Nonetheless, it is certainly worth noting that one major Johnson backer was Meyer Lansky's Louisiana henchman, Carlos Marcello.
According to John W Davis, Lansky's man Marcello funneled at least $50,000 a year in payoffs to then-Texas Senator Lyndon Johnson who, in turn, helped kill in committee all rackets-related legislation that might have been harmful to the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
When Lansky himself was living in Israel, one of his American cronies, Benjamin Sigelbaum, came visiting.
It was this same Mickey Weiner who, as we shall see in Chapter 7, was one of Meyer Lansky's chief couriers between his Miami banking operations and his European money-laundering center at the Banque de Credit International in Geneva, Switzerland.
Mr Baker, who served time in federal prison for his criminal activities during his time as Johnson's protégé , would have been the one person who could have sent Lyndon Johnson to prison if he had revealed all.
But even with Kennedy's death, the stench of corruption surrounding the Lansky-linked Baker still threatened Johnson.
Washington lobbyist Robert N Winter-Berger recalls a visit by thenPresident Johnson to the office of House Speaker John McCormack while Winter-Berger was there.
Unconscious of Winter-Berger's presence, Johnson began shrieking and shouting and condemning his longtime friend and protégé, Bobby Baker.
Speaker McCormack assured the president that Winter-Berger was ""all right"" and that Winter-Berger was close to one of Baker's other associates, Nat Voloshen.
Obviously, Johnson's Lansky connection is far more complex than we might even be able to determine—but the interplay between Johnson and his intimates and those of the Lansky syndicate is indisputable, to say the least.
SUDDEN POLICY CHANGES Needless to say, when Lyndon Johnson became president, the Kennedy war against organized crime came to a sudden halt.
What, of course, however, is most significant about Lyndon Johnson's assumption of the Oval Office were the profound—and immediate—changes in United States policy toward Israel and the Arab world that came rapidly upon LBJ's sudden succession to the presidency.
Hailing Johnson's ""front-rank pro-Israel position""'*’ during his Senate career, the memo was dated November 26, 1963, just one day after John F Kennedy was buried in Arlington National Cemetery.
What is additionally interesting are Kenan's memoirs of his service as one of the Israeli lobby's top men in Washington.
Johnson—who was, in Kenan's words, the ""New Man in the White House""—proved to be a very loyal friend of Israel.
Seymour Hersh points out that one of Johnson's first symbolic acts as president was to dedicate a synagogue in Austin, Texas—less than six weeks after assuming the presidency.
In fact, Hersh notes, Johnson was the first American president in history to dedicate a synagogue.
ISRAEL'S INTERESTS FIRST In Israel, Johnson's presidency was greeted with pleasure.
In other words, Johnson—unlike Kennedy—would be willing to set aside American interests in favor of Israel's.
In Egypt President Nasser realized that the death of John F Kennedy would have a profound impact upon the Arab world.
MOURNING IN PARIS In Paris, DeGaulle—who had granted Algerian independence and who had suffered numerous attempts on his own life in retaliation—was thoroughly stunned by the murder of the American president.
He was one of the very few leaders of whom it may be said that they are statesmen.
SUSPICIONS There was additional fall-out in the Arab world as a consequence of Kennedy's assassination.
According to Curtiss, the fact that Kennedy's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald was promptly murdered by Jack Ruby—in Curtiss' words—“an American Jew with gangster connections,""'” suspicions about Israel's complicity in the crime were widespread.
Nonetheless, as Alfred Lilienthal, the veteran critic of United States Middle East policy, has written, ""There is little question that Kennedy intended to move decisively in his second term.
The quote, indeed, may have been apocryphal—another legend in the Lyndon Johnson legacy.
However, most sources believe that Johnson's comment was probably made to Ephraim Evron, the number two man in Israel's embassy in Washington.
It was Evron who ultimately became a very close friend of Lyndon Johnson.
Thus, it seems likely, that whatever Angleton knew about JFK's assassination, Evron likely knew—and vice versa.
As a consequence, McPherson was especially tuned in to Johnson's relationship with Israel and its lobby in Washington.
Israel knew that it had a loyal devotee of its interests in the White House now that John F Kennedy was out of the way.
A LONG-TIME FAVORITE OF ISRAEL Israel, of course, had been keeping a close watch on Lyndon Johnson for a long time.
When at that time President Eisenhower and Secretary of State Dulles wanted to force us to withdraw from Sinai, they threatened us with economic sanctions.
The Arab States were also watching Johnson closely, particularly after he assumed the presidency.
In fact, as we have seen, it was during his last White House press conference that JFK bemoaned the efforts by Israel and its partisans to sabotage his Middle East peace initiatives, especially in regard to relations with Nasser.
Deacon reports that Walt Rostow, the president's national security advisor believed that United States policy towards Israel would serve as an effective check on Soviet support for Arab countries.
As Senate Majority Leader, Johnson worked closely with the CIA on a regular basis and was considered a ""CIA friend"" in Congress.
Unquestionably, however, Lyndon Johnson did indeed begin a major shift in United States Middle East policy—keeping in line with his joint devotion to not only the CIA's interests, but those of Israel's as well.
THE NUCLEAR BOMB Interestingly enough, Israel's initial primary benefit from the death of JFK was, in fact, the removal from the White House of a president who vehemently opposed Israel's nuclear weapons development.
The new American president—so long a partisan of Israel—allowed the nuclear development to continue.
HUBERT HUMPHREY & THE LANSKY SYNDICATE Johnson was also cementing his long-standing ties to Meyer Lansky's Organized Crime Syndicate.
In 1964—seeking his first full term in the White House—Johnson selected Minnesota Senator Hubert H Humphrey as his vice-presidential running mate.
Thus, in the 1964 presidential election—which was Johnson's to lose— Lansky and his partners in Israel were assured a dream ticket come November.
Lansky and Israel made sure there wouldn't be any problems with any independent upstart second-generation multi-millionaire Irishmen like John F Kennedy who was not only the son of a notorious anti-Semite but a bullheaded proponent of America's interests to boot.
Thus, having become ensconced in the presidency, Lyndon Johnson was in a position to do many favors for Israel.
THE FOREIGN AID PORK BARREL Perhaps his most drastic efforts in service to Israel involved massive increases in United States taxpayer-financed foreign aid giveaways.
Although John F Kennedy himself had been generous to Israel in that regard, Johnson made Kennedy look like a piker.
United States government assistance to Israel in FY 1964, the last budget year of the Kennedy administration, stood at $40 million.
This was substantially reduced from the levels of assistance in previous years.
In [LBJ's} FY 1965, however, 20 percent of United States aid was military in nature, and in FY 1966, fully 71 percent of all official assistance to Israel came in the form of credits for purchase of military equipment.
In FY 1963, the Kennedy administration agreed to sell five batteries of Hawk missiles valued at $21. million.
All told, however, the death of John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson's assumption of the Oval Office marked a major change in overall United States policy.
America's Secret Relations With A Militant Israel: ""In the years 1948-1963, America was perceived by all of the governments in the Middle East as a major power that acted upon the basis of its own, clearly defined national self-interest.
Moreover, United States Middle East policy was just that—Middle East policy; it was not an Israeli policy in which Arab countries were subordinate actors.
Truman's policies on arms exports to the middle East, Eisenhower's stands on regional water development and on territorial integrity during the Suez Crisis, and Kennedy's candor with Mrs.
And United States diplomatic support for Israel in the UN and elsewhere was no less generous.
America had a public policy on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons, but suddenly had a covert policy of abetting Israel's nuclear weapons program.
We had a public policy on arms balance in the region, but secretly agreed, by the end of 1967, to become Israel's major arms supplier.
Clearly, Israel's allies in the CIA now had a free hand to conduct their own private war in Vietnam—one CIA benefit resulting from Kennedy's removal from the presidency.
Johnson's reversal of JFK's decision to begin withdrawing United States forces from Southeast Asia was, in its own sense, a CIA coup.
Likewise with Johnson's many friends in the defense industry both at home in Texas and elsewhere.
The defense contractors reaped untold billions in profits from Johnson's dirty little war in Southeast Asia—a war that probably spelled the end of Johnson's popular chances for a second term.
VIETNAM—ISRAEL'S DIRTY LITTLE SECRET However, what has been unfortunately ignored is that Israel, too, had much to gain from United States involvement in Vietnam.
As Stephen Green points out, a direct and proximate result of United States military adventurism in Southeast Asia was Israel's ability to advance its own military muscle and political influence in the Middle East.
After all, Israel could now argue, with the United States bogged down in Southeast Asia, Uncle Sam needed its close, reliable, democratic ally in the Middle East looking out for America's interests in the region.
The United States would have to take the initial steps toward becoming what three previous Presidents had said we never would be—Israel's major arms supplier.
We would also at least temporarily forfeit our role as primary mediator of the multifaceted Arab-Israeli dispute.
Israel—above all—stood to benefit immensely from United States involvement in Vietnam, something which would not have occurred had JFK lived.
There is yet an additional irony in the relationship of the United States and Israel vis-a-vis the Vietnam conflict that is very much worth noting, After the war in Vietnam was underway, dragging Lyndon Johnson deeper and deeper into the muck of public discontent, Israel was beginning to encounter its own difficulties as it flexed its muscle in the Middle East.
Although America's entry in Southeast Asia had given Israel a free hand in its own sphere of geographic influence, the tiny Jewish state found that it now needed the United States—perhaps more so than ever.
Israel's aggression against its Arab neighbors had rallied the Arab world against Israel.
With the United States in too deep in Southeast Asia, Israel and its American lobby perceived United States energy to be focused in the wrong direction.
Thus it was that many of the very voices urging United States withdrawal from the arena of Vietnam were those who were most stridently demanding that the United States re-insert itself into the Middle East cauldron.
It was on the eve of the 1967 War—a war that could have been the end for Israel—that the Washington Star pointed out the strange paradox.
The nation, so this line of reasoning goes, cannot afford involvement in both areas.
And the Middle East is the logical place for the United States to intervene,"" '’according to the Star's assessment of the attitude of the pro-Israel advocates of withdrawal from Vietnam who were urging United States intervention in the Middle East.
LANSKY, THE CIA & VIETNAM It should be noted, too, that Israel's friends in the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate also stood to benefit from the Vietnam conflict.
In Chapter 12 we shall examine in detail the little-known collaboration between the Lansky syndicate, its Mossad-linked banking money launderers, and the CIA in the drug pipeline out of Southeast Asia.
The Lansky crime empire began operating major global drug trafficking, largely under CIA cover, throughout Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War, during which time the drug problem began escalating to a major degree in the United States and elsewhere.
Now, many years later, the CIA's role in the global drug market is only now just coming to the surface.
The Iran-contra scandal, for example, shed some light on this little known aspect of the underbelly of world affairs.
Thus, the joint Israel-Lansky-CIA combine shared a major benefit from American involvement in Vietnam.
A PASSIONATE ATTACHMENT Israel and its covert allies did indeed have a messiah in Lyndon Baines Johnson.
Third, by refusing to follow the advice of his aides that America make its delivery of nuclear-capable F-4 Phantoms conditional on Israel's signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Johnson gave the Israelis the impression that America had no fundamental objection to Israel's nuclear program.
The Man in the Middle Meyer Lansky, the CIA, the FBI & the Israeli Mossad If it had not been for international crime boss Meyer Lansky there might not be a state of Israel today.
Israel was established as a state, in major part, through the political, financial and moral support of Meyer Lansky and his associates and henchmen in Organized Crime.
In fact, Lansky's chief European money laundering bank was an operation run under the auspices of a high-ranking, longtime officer of Israel's Mossad.
Lansky's intimate ties with not only American intelligence made the Jewish mobster the ""untouchable"" leader of the global organized crime syndicate.
During John F Kennedy's short-lived presidency, he was not only at odds with Israel and its powerful lobby in America.
Kennedy, as we saw in Chapter 4, had also double-crossed his secret allies in the criminal underworld who had helped him achieve the presidency.
The president's brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, was waging a relentless war against organized crime.
In the years prior to Kennedy's ascendency to the presidency, a littleknown, but immensely powerful underworld figure by the name of Meyer Lansky had schemed and shot his way to the top of the crime syndicate.
That syndicate was not just national—it was international—and the uncrowned king of crime was Meyer Lansky—the so-called ""chairman of the board"" of that incredible criminal empire which spanned the globe.
It was Meyer Lansky, early in his criminal career, who had emerged as one of the leading sponsors of the state of Israel and whose most intimate associates were among the chief financial patrons of the influential Israeli lobby in America.
What's more, as we shall see, Lansky had also forged close ties with Israel's allies in the American CIA—an agency that, in itself, had entered into a bitter war with John F Kennedy.
Thus, when JFK came to blows with not only Israel and its allies in the Lansky Organized Crime empire, but also with the CIA, the American president had unwittingly forged a deadly alliance among his fiercest foes.
To begin our investigation of the shadowy crevices of the underworld where Israel's Mossad, Organized Crime and the CIA came together in the Kennedy murder, it is most appropriate to begin with Lansky.
It is Lansky and his crime syndicate which tie all of these diverse strands together, pointing the finger toward the until-now undisclosed role of Israel in the JFK assassination.
Meyer Lansky, in fact, is a pivotal player in the international conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of John F Kennedy—all of the literature propagating the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" notwithstanding.
The most concise summary of the origins and rise to power of Meyer Lansky appeared in a lengthy profile of Lansky that appeared on the front page of The Wall Street Journal in 1969.
By the time he was 27, young Maier had five arrests on his record, on charges ranging from disorderly conduct to suspicion of murder, but he was never convicted.
A MEMBER OF THE BOARD ""Their specialty was protecting liquor in transit from hijackers to East Coast gangs.
They were good at it, and when an alliance called the Eastern Syndicate was formed to coordinate rum-running Lansky and Siegel were named to the board.
Final decisions rested with individual gang leaders, with one acting as federation chairman.
Apparently, the Navy decided East Coast piers could be protected from sabotage only with the aid of the Mafia.
Luciano's attorney and Meyer Lansky were recruited to persuade Luciano to give the arrangement his blessing.
After the war, Lucky was paroled and sent home to Italy on promise he would never again enter the United States CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD ""With Luciano gone, a triumvirate of Lansky, Joe Adonis and Frank Costello took over leadership of the syndicate.
By the late 1950's, Costello had been ousted from power by his colleagues and Adonis had been deported.
Roosevelt himself sent Lansky as a personal emissary to Cuba to meet with Cuban strongman Fulgencio Batista.
FDR believed that Batista's authoritarian rule was stirring popular discontent which could be exploited by a growing communist movement in Cuba.
Through Lansky FDR hoped to influence Batista to institute reforms that would quell the communist threat.
It was during this period that Lansky had begun establishing his lucrative gambling empire in the tropical paradise and a long and profitable personal and business relationship with Batista and other Cuban leaders who made millions in kickbacks from Lansky's casino operations.
Although Batista was in and out of office several times during the next two decades, the Cuban strongman remained the de facto leader of the island through successive puppet regimes until the advent of Fidel Castro on New Years Day, 1960.
However, Lansky also had extensive contacts much farther away from American shores.
Lansky—as we shall see here—was a key force in establishing the State of Israel.
ALLIANCE & RIVALRY To understand Lansky's preeminent leadership position in organized crime, however, we must first look at the strange and complex alliance—and rivalry—between the Italian and Jewish elements in the organized crime world.
The Wall Street Journal's account of Lansky's rise to power hints at these contradictions, but doesn't explore them in the fashion needed.
Two interesting things left out of the Journal summary of Lansky's career should be mentioned.
It is generally known that Lansky launched his criminal career working in conjunction with the famed Mafia figure Charles ""Lucky"" Luciano.
Their alliance is noted in the Journal account and a recent Hollywood extravaganza entitled Mobsters highlighted the youthful exploits of Lansky, Luciano, Benjamin Siegel and Frank Costello.
LUCIANO GETS FRAMED However, it may have been Lansky, through his political contacts, who arranged the criminal indictment and subsequent imprisonment of Luciano.
It was Luciano's imprisonment—and ultimate deportation—that smoothed Lansky's further advancement in organized crime.
In his own memoirs Luciano provides a detailed account of how he was, in fact, framed on the white slavery and prostitution charges that resulted in his imprisonment.
Luciano does not blame Lansky, by any means, although, as we shall see, he may have had his suspicions.
Luciano doesn't ask the reader to believe that he wasn't engaged in extensive criminal activity.
He does present a very cogent case, however, that he was not guilty of the crimes for which he was convicted.
Indeed, Luciano was never brought to trial for any of the crimes in which he was engaged with Lansky.
In any case, it is quite possible that Lansky, in fact, did have some role in framing Luciano on the prostitution charges.
Tom Dewey's war against Lucky Luciano, the Mafia chieftain's imprisonment, and his subsequent deportation smoothed the way for Lansky's rise to the top.
According to Luciano, ""I worked it all out with Lansky, and that's the point where Meyer became the real treasurer of the outfit.
LANSKY, DEWEY & THE CIA Both Dewey and Lansky did, of course, stand to benefit from Luciano's imprisonment.
In fact, at that time, Lansky reportedly donated fully $250,000 (in 1938 dollars) to Dewey's campaign.
Then, in 1942 when Dewey once again—this time, successfully—sought the governorship, Lansky provided additional financial support and political muscle.
In return for his freedom, Luciano agreed to go into exile to his homeland of Italy.
Dewey later became a major stockholder in the Mary Carter Paint Company in the late 1950's.
According to former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow, ""Carter Paint was originally an active corporation set up by Thomas Dewey [and CIA director] Allen Dulles to use as a CIA front.
In 1958, Dewey and some friends had bought controlling interest in the Crosby Miller Corporation, with two million dollars in CIA money—authorized by Allen Dulles.
Then, in 1959, the Crosby Miller Corporation was merged with the CIA-owned paint company.
As an example of one of its early activities, it provided laundered CIA money for the Bay of Pigs army.
Perhaps not surprisingly, Dewey's admiring biographer, Richard Norton Smith, writing in Thomas E Dewey and His Times, never mentions Dewey's Mary Carter Paint Company—or Lansky's support for Dewey's political endeavors.
All of this illustrates the depth of Lansky's political influence and his wide range of connections.
Whatever the truth, the attempt on Costello forced the ""prime minister"" into early retirement and gave Lansky further influence in organized crime.
In 1961, well after his influence in the international crime syndicate had begun to dwindle, Luciano reflected upon his relationship with Lansky.
According to Luciano, his Mafia associate Vito Genovese was his own Cassius.
However, upon further thought he added, ""Come to think of it, I even had two Cassiuses in my life, the other one bein' a guy by the name of Meyer Lansky.
However, Luciano—in exile in Italy—got word from home that there were ""orders"" that he not participate in any such venture.
It was then that Luciano saw the whole picture—the whole truth about what ""the Mafia"" had really become.
Because he was pullin’ the wires and everybody was dancin’ to his tune on the other end, like a bunch of puppets.
He was so hungry for power behind the scenes he'd kiss anybody's ass and do anythin’ he had to do so that in the end, he—Meyer Lansky, my old partner and a Jew—would wind up the real boss of bosses of all the Italians and the Jews—and without a single fuckin’ vote on the council.
If, as some claim, ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" it couldn't have been done without the foreknowledge—and guiding hand—of Meyer Lansky.
And as we shall see in this chapter—and further throughout the pages of this work—Lansky's connections with Israel and its Mossad (as well as Israel's allies in the CIA), demonstrates that Israeli loyalist Meyer Lansky is an integral player who bound together the diverse elements which came together in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Yet, contrary to what Lacey contends, Lansky's name seldom appears in any significant fashion in most standard accounts which contend that organized crime played a role in the assassination.
The fact is that Lansky's name has been continuously and conveniently buried behind a host of Italian Organized Crime figures.
In Chapter 10 and Chapter 11 we review, extensively, Lansky's connections with the more famous—perhaps infamous—lItalian-surnamed underworld figures linked to the Kennedy assassination.
As we shall see, in fact, those individuals in question were, practically to a man, Lansky's underlings.
However, Lansky's name is_ hardly mentioned at all in standard accounts which suggest that organized crime— particularly ""the Mafia""—played a part in the president's murder.
According to Luciano, it was Lansky himself who suggested that the newly-assembled national crime syndicate dub itself ""the Union Siciliano""—a sobriquet which gave the criminal underworld a decidedly ""Sicilian"" imagery.
Because of political constraints and fear of being accused of ""antiSemitism,"" many have been afraid to point out the important role of Jewish criminals in the world of crime.
One Jewish gangster, Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, discussed the Italian-Jewish conflict in organized crime in his memoirs.
Americans had long been aware of legendary mobsters such as Al Capone and Lucky Luciano, but general awareness that a national crime syndicate did indeed exist was not commonplace.
Following a police raid of the Appalachian conference—attended exclusively by top Italian-surnamed Mafia figures from around the country— public attention began focusing on ""the Mafia""—thanks to the media.
MAFIA IN TURMOIL/LANSKY ON TOP The official story has always been that a local policeman just happened to stumble upon the Mafia conclave at the home of Mafia figure Joseph Barbara.
However, according to Hank Messick, the police had been tipped off by a Lansky associate that the meeting was about to take place.
It focused not only on the men who attended the session but on the entire Mafia.
What's more, it continued for well over a year as state and federal officials tried to find some charge to stick against the delegates they had captured or identified.
It was Finger who later went on to become chief of the ""civil rights division"" of the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith, the primary intelligence and propaganda arm of Israel's Mossad in the United States.
Michael Milan, a low-level Jewish organized crime figure who grew up in Lansky's sphere of influence claims to have, in fact, been ritually inducted into the Mafia—by Lansky himself.
THE HOOVER-LANSKY CONNECTION Lansky's role in the Office of Strategic Services -Naval Intelligence operations during World War II and his work on behalf of Franklin Delano Roosevelt in handling Batista may account for the fact that Lansky seldom faced harassment from the federal authorities.
No final answer is possible, but he has been strangely immune to prosecution on the Federal level.
Twice the IRS Intelligence Division has recommended prosecution, and twice the Justice Department has declined.
Lansky remains the only top man in the national crime syndicate to escape untouched.
Mr L was never rousted, was rarely served with federal subpoenas, and was generally left alone to conduct his business.
Mr L., on the other hand, didn't go around shooting anybody like people in some of the other Families, and making life embarrassing for the cops and the feds.
It was the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith that was largely responsible for the establishment of the J Edgar Hoover Foundation in 1947.
Upon retirement from the bureau he signed on as Executive Vice President of Schenley Industries, a major liquor firm run by ex-bootlegger and Lansky associate Lewis R Rosenstie1.
These same liquor interests—obviously, as we have seen—had longtime contacts with Lansky from his earliest years in the bootlegging and rum-running rackets.
The organization's initial impetus came not so much out of a desire to defend members of the Jewish faith, but, more so, in particular, Jewish mobsters.
By 1908 Bingham was under fire and being accused of being ""antiSemitic"" for pointing out the role of certain Jewish gangsters in organized crime.
One of the immediate beneficiaries of Bingham's departure was mobster Arnold Rothstein, Lansky's mentor and the undisputed Jewish underworld leader prior to the younger Lansky's rise to power.
The source of the attacks on Bingham was a public relations committee formed by a corporate attorney by the name of Sigmund Livingston.
LOOKING THE OTHER WAY Critical J Edgar Hoover biographer Curt Gentry notes that Hoover's FBI was never strongly concerned with Lansky's activities.
According to Gentry, ""The Dallas and Miami field offices had blind spots.
William Sullivan had his own suspect, someone close to both the director and [Hoover's close friend and second in command, Clyde] Tolson, who was reputedly living far above his means.
This same Sullivan happened to be the number three man at the FBI behind Hoover and Tolson.
As head of the Bureau's highly secretive Division Five, Sullivan was in charge of domestic counterintelligence.
Also in charge of the FBI's participation in the Warren Commission investigation, Sullivan was not only a close friend of James Angleton, head of the Mossad desk at the CIA, but also—incredibly enough—a CIA conduit within the FBI itself.
As head of the FBI's Domestic Intelligence, Sullivan was in charge of the infamous COINTELPRO operations against, among others, Dr.
A DEAD WITNESS Clearly a man with much inside knowledge, Sullivan was shot to death in a strange hunting accident on November 9, 1977 just prior to the time that he was to be called to testify before the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
Winchell, in turn, would pass the information on fixed races to Hoover.
Hoover would arrange his real bets through his associates while making minimal bets on his own ticket at the horse races.
He knew where the money went and how it made its way to the top bosses.
In a typical month in 1963, the skim from one casino amounted to $123,500, of which Lansky kept $71,000, then transmitted the rest to the New Jersey mobster Gerald Catena.
Each recipient would have a small percentage of his share deducted for casino employees who kept mum about the operation.
THE ANGLETON CONNECTION However, in 1993 author Anthony Summers provided what may be a critical missing piece of the puzzle.
Although such rumors about Hoover had been commonplace for years, no well-known author had affixed his own name to the charge.
Summers reports that former OSS man and later longtime CIA counterintelligence chief James Jesus Angleton also had control of the Hoover photos, as did former OSS chief William Donovan.
The question, though, is whether Angleton, Donovan and company gave the photos to Lansky—or vice-versa--either option being possible in light of Lansky's own longtime association with American intelligence.
Angleton, as we shall see in Chapter 8 and Chapter 12, had been directly involved with the Lansky crime syndicate through the CIA's dealings with Lansky's drug-smuggling allies in the Corsican and Sicilian Mafias.
THE GODFATHER Clearly, Meyer Lansky was very much a ""godfather"" in organized crime, far more influential than even the most powerful Mafia boss in any city in America.
All of this, then, accounts for Lansky's preeminent role in the underworld.
It is for this reason, then, that when we refer to the ""Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate"" we are referring to not only the ""Mafia"" but also to the powerful Jewish interests that are inter-connected here.
It was the Lansky Syndicate that played a pivotal role in the establishment of Israel.
GUN-RUNNING FOR ISRAEL According to Hank Messick, ""Certainly Jewish gangsters have long and openly supported Jewish causes and the State of Israel.
Lansky permitted the Haganah fund-raiser, Joseph Baum, to hold a $10,000 benefit at (Lansky's gambling house), the Colonial Inn.
On other occasions, arms intended for the Arabs were, instead, hijacked by Lansky's henchman and shipped to Israel.
Lansky also wasn't above putting the squeeze on rackets buddies—Jewish and non-Jewish alike—to buy Israel bonds.
Kahane, who was ultimately assassinated, actually served, at one point, in the Israeli parliament.
OPERATION UNDERWORLD It was Lansky's connection with the OSS-Naval Intelligence enterprise known as ""Operation Underworld"" that brought him into a strange global network that ultimately paved the way for the establishment of the state of Israel.
In Chapter 17 we will examine the ADL's role more fully, particularly in regard to its manipulation of the media.
Stephenson's top aide was Louis Bloomfield, later an attorney for the Lansky-linked Bronfman bootlegging family and himself a key player in the conspiracy to assassinate John F Kennedy.
There is little question but that Stephenson and Bloomfield were in close contact with Lansky and his henchmen during this period.
It was this institute that provided the Jewish Haganah, and later the Irgun, in Palestine with arms and money.
The Institute's coordinator for arms smuggling to the Jewish underground was Louis Bloomfield.
Working with Bloomfield were liquor baron Samuel Bronfman, one Hank Greenspun and Lansky himself.
Angleton worked closely with Jewish underground activities both in London and in Italy and was instrumental in orchestrating United States intelligence collaboration with the Corsican Mafia and the Sicilian Mafia in intelligence operations during these same years and thereafter.
Clearly, during the period of the establishment of Israel, Meyer Lansky was directly and intimately involved with all of the major players.
The Russian-born Jewish immigrant had come a long way from the slums of Brooklyn to a singular and pre-eminent role in global power politics.
A BASE OF OPERATIONS The real key to the Lansky connection with Israel is money.
The newly-established State of Israel not only needed money to exist, but the organization of a new government was an ideal opportunity for Lansky and his confederates to establish their own worldwide financial—and criminal— network.
The emotional memories of the experiences of the Jewish people during World War HI— indeed throughout history—were the foundations upon which Israel had been established.
MONEY LAUNDERING Lansky's status as organized crime's chief financier and grand wizard of money laundering put Lansky in a particularly central position.
RABBI TIBOR ROSENBAUM Lansky's primary link with Israeli intelligence and financial operations came through the entity of the Banque de Credit International in Geneva Switzerland.
This bank emerged as Lansky's primary European moneylaundering operation.
Rosenbaum also was a co-founder of the World Zionist Congress and a director of the Jewish Agency in Geneva, Switzerland.
Rosenbaum was, very clearly, a key figure in Israel's international intrigue and a critical player in the world of organized crime syndicate boss Meyer Lansky.
Rosenbaum, among other things, also served on the board of the SwissIsrael Trade Bank, established by Pinchas Sapir, Israel's Finance Minister and a Mossad officer.
THE BANQUE DE CREDIT INTERNATIONAL BCI—Meyer Lansky's European money laundering bank—was very much an Israeli government/Mossad operation, critical to the survival of the Jewish State.
Indeed, one of the board members of BCI was Zwi Recheter, director of the Bank Hapoalim, one of Israel's largest banks and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Israel's Histadrut, the national labor confederation.
BCI was to become Meyer Lansky's primary overseas money laundering bank—sharing those money laundering services that the bank provided to Israel's Mossad.
In fact, during its heyday, BCI included among its board of directors two longtime Lansky associates, Edward Levinson and John Pullman.
As we noted in Chapter 6, Levinson was one of the operators of the Fremont Casino in Las Vegas, a front man for Lansky's close friend, Joseph ""Doc"" Stacher, and a frequent business partner of Bobby Baker, reputed ""pagman"" for Lyndon Johnson.
John Pullman, about whom we shall learn more later in this chapter and in Chapter 12 and Chapter 15, was Lansky's key international money handler.
The extent of Lansky's Israeli connection—through Rosenbaum's BCI— first became part of the public record in 1970 during the criminal trial of Alvin Malnik, one of Lansky's lieutenants.
Rosenbaum's bank received its Lansky Crime Syndicate cash flow mainly through the Lansky-dominated Bank of World Commerce in Nassau, Bahamas.
The middleman was a Swiss national, Sylvain Ferdmann, a courier for Lansky.
Ferdmann was an official of Rosenbaum's bank, an associate of the Bank of World Commerce (controlled by Lansky's longtime crony, John Pullman) and a legman for Investors Overseas Services , the fiefdom of financier Bernard Cornfeld.
Cornfeld, in fact, was sponsored by Rosenbaum, and had emerged as a major money launderer for Lansky's global drug trafficking.
A superb clandestine operator, Rosenbaum is said to have been instrumental in providing weapons to the Haganah and Stern Gang.
Banque de Credit International or BCI], “Rosenbaum's Baby,"" became gambling czar Meyer Lansky's Number One conduit abroad.
While Rosenbaum's bank facilitated the flight-capital schemes worked by IOS, it also served as a source of secret funds for the Mossad, Israel's intelligence service, and as one of the country's primary weapons brokers.
The raison d'etre of the Israel Corporation was to raise money among the world's Jews, money to be invested in a variety of public and semi-public Israeli enterprises.
By finding money abroad to fund development projects in ""the homeland,"" Rosenbaum and Rothschild freed Israeli tax monies to be spent on the country's critical military needs.
Accordingly, became the ""Mr Fixit"" of Israeli finance, cementing friendships with the country's most important military and political leaders.
It was Rosenbaum's BCI that held the bulk of funds for the Israel Corporation, a $200 million investment trust.
The founders of the Israel Corporation included a host of longtime figures who moved in Lansky's sphere of influence.
Rothberg, in fact, was one of the initial investors in Lansky's first Las Vegas casino, established by Benjamin Siegel, the Flamingo Hotel.
Rothberg was one of the leading lights in the American Jewish community and the United States director of the Israeli Bonds drive.
Klutznick, who had been associated with the Lansky-linked Sonneborn Institute gunrunning operations coordinated by Louis M Bloomfield , had become chairman of the board of the American Bank and Trust Company.
American Bank and Trust was a subsidiary of the Swiss-Israel Trade Bank, a Mossad financial operation of which Rosenbaum and his long-time associate, Shaul Eisenberg, had been directors.
It was Feinberg, whom we first met in Chapter 4, who was instrumental in arranging highly critical American Jewish financial support for the 1960 presidential campaign of then-Senator John F Kennedy.
The company was looted in 1975-76 by financier David Gravier who subsequently was supposed to have died in an airplane crash in Mexico.
Tibor Rosenbaum's BCI also, incidentally, had a similarly unhappy ending.
The bank collapsed in 1974 resulting in a scandal that shook Israel to its core.
The Myths and the Reality, aathor Gerald Krefetz details the collapse of the Lansky-Mossad banking operation.
THE ADL BANKS The Bank of Miami Beach and the City National Bank of Miami were Lansky's chief money laundering banks in the United States and both included several Lansky associates, most notably one Max Orovitz, as directors.
In 1963, in fact Lansky began planning the installation of his gambling casinos in the Bahamas in Orovitz' office.
Finally, when Lansky himself ultimately settled in Israel, he initially took up residence in the Dan Hotel in Tel Aviv, owned by Lansky's Miami banker friend, Orovitz.
Lansky's Miami banks were central to Lansky's gambling operations in the Caribbean.
According to former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow, the Bank of Miami Beach ""was originally set up to service Cuban casinos operated by organized crime and continued to perform laundering services through the 1960s—and was still considered mob-connected.
For example, Leonard Abess was chairman and founder of City National Bank of Miami.
His bank managed ADL Foundation funds and Abess himself served as ADL national vice chairman.
In Chapter 15, however, we shall see the Lansky-Rosenbaum connection once again, and in further detail.
Their linkage is critical to recognizing the important role that Israel played in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
THE GODFATHER GOES HOME It was in 1970, finally, that Meyer Lansky pulled up stakes and settled in Israel.
Under Israel's unique ""Law of Return"" any Jew from anywhere in the world could claim Israeli citizenship.
Israel was an ideal location for Lansky to relocate his operations and he set about plans for setting up the Jewish State as the new, formal headquarters for his global crime syndicate.
So had a wide-ranging assortment of other American Jewish mobsters, including Lansky's good friend Phil ""The Stick"" Kovolick.
The Mossad-dominated government of Israel seemed to welcome these criminals as new countryman.
Israel, according to Newsweek, ""appeared to be motivated by self-interest.
Each year, Lansky and his underworld associates pour vast sums into Israeli bonds and Israeli philanthropies.
Word leaked out that a wealthy ""Miami philanthropist” had taken up residence in the Jewish State.
However, circumstances beyond Lansky's control made matters difficult for the grand wizard of the underworld.
During his stay in Israel, two American grand juries (in March of 1971 and in June of 1972) handed down indictments against Lansky and several of his associates.
The first indictment charged—correctly, of course—that Lansky had been skimming millions from the Flamingo Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas.
It didn't help matters that fearless crime reporter Hank Messick's biography of Lansky appeared during that same period and portions of it appeared in the Israeli press.
In a friendly series of interviews with Ma‘ariv, an Israeli daily, Lansky said, ""I don't care what they wrote and write about me in America.
However, the ""boss of all bosses"" appealed his expulsion all the way to the Israeli Supreme Court.
The emotional issue of a Jew who had made ""aliyah"" and settled in Israel under the Law of Return—and who was then being expelled to face possible punishment in a criminal court in another country—played heavily in Lansky's favor.
However, despite Lansky's best efforts—including an offer of $10,000,000 if he was permitted to remain—he was forced to return to the United States.
LANSKY IN DECLINE By this time, Lansky was in ill health and even underwent open-heart surgery.
First of all, a jury in his home base of Miami acquitted him on the income tax evasion charges.
Then, in mobcontrolled Nevada, the criminal charges against Lansky were thrown out of court on the basis that Lansky was in ill health.
And in Washington, United States Solicitor General Robert Bork decided that going after Lansky—the ruling boss of international organized crime—was not in the nation's best interests.
Bork decided that the Justice Department just didn't have a case against Lansky.
Lansky's remaining years were quiet ones spent with his wife and dog and an assortment of other aging racketeers.
He still maintained some oversight over his business operations but increasing health problems continued to plague him.
The mastermind behind the global crime syndicate finally died on January 15, 1983.
Gangsterism was being made fashionable—even as the glory days of John F Kennedy and Camelot were being trashed by that same media.
Lansky's days with Benjamin Siegel were glamorized in films such as The Gangster Chronicles, The Neon Empire, and in Mobsters, where a host of teen idols played Lansky, Siegel, Costello and Luciano in their early years.
He would have us believe that Lansky was, more than anything, a devoted family man, and not the ruthless thug that he truly was.
Even as Lacey's Lansky biography was hitting the bookstores, yet another Hollywood production brought Lansky to the screen.
This film, Bugsy, starring heart-throb Warren Beatty as Benjamin Siegel, cast the highly-regarded actor Ben Kingsley (who had even played Mahatma Gandhi) as a wise and all-knowing Meyer Lansky.
However, the Hollywood versions of the life and times of Meyer Lansky were far from the truth, no matter how colorful a story they told about the evil genius they portrayed.
Lansky's central role As a virtual middleman between the high-level forces that conspired in the assassination of John F Kennedy has been cleverly buried by a willing media.
Instead, Lansky was a cynical, cold-blooded killer who had ordered the death of his closest friend—Benjamin Siegel—and who certainly had no qualms about helping orchestrate the murder of an American president who threatened not only his own survival, but that of his beloved State of Israel.
The CIA and Israel had forged a close-working strategic alliance in the previous decade.
Their joint enterprises around the globe tied the CIA and Israel together inextricably.
Israel's interests—and the CIA's interests—were often one and the same, perhaps too often.
What's more, Israel's chief contact at the CIA in Washington, James Jesus Angleton, ultimately played a pivotal role in the JFK assassination conspiracy cover-up.
Angleton, too, had close links with the same forces in the Lansky Syndicate.
At the Central Intelligence Agency headquarters at Langley, Virginia there was one man who knew perhaps better than any other American, Israel's intentions and attitudes toward President John F Kennedy.
Angleton was so close to the Israelis during his tenure at the CIA that, following his death in 1987, a monument was unveiled in Israel by its government in his honor.
This is one of the few known public monuments to any American CIA official anywhere in the entire world but actually one of several memorials to Angleton in Israel.
By 1954 Angleton assumed the highly sensitive post of chief of CIA counterintelligence.
What's more, Angleton's influence within the CIA itself was of a greater magnitude than what otherwise might be expected.
POWERFUL PATRONS According to Angleton's biographer, Tom Mangold, CIA Director Allen Dulles and his deputy, Richard Helms, who later went on to become CIA director under Lyndon Johnson, were Angleton's mentors.
And it would be Helms, along with Angleton, who would later be implicated in a strange series of events—examined in Chapter 16 in detail—that would ultimately and apparently unwittingly blow the lid off the CIA's involvement in the JFK assassination.
A POWER UNTO HIMSELF According to the CIA spymaster's biographer, ""Angleton's longstanding friendships with Dulles and Helms were to become the most important factor in giving him freedom of movement within the CIA. was extended such trust by his superiors that there was often a significant failure of executive control over his activities.
The result was that his subsequent actions were performed without bureaucratic interference.
The simple fact was that if Angleton wanted something done, it was done.
Angleton argued that he would have to be trusted, without outside accountability, because it would have been difficult to allow mere clerks to go through his accounts—if only because sources would have to be revealed.
In short, according to Peter Dale Scott, Angleton ""managed a ‘second CIA' within the CIA""”” and one, as we shall see, that was collaborating all too comfortably close with Israel's Mossad.
INTERNATIONAL INTELLIGENCE BOSS However, Angleton's influence went even further.
Angleton, in fact, was the CIA liaison for all Allied foreign intelligence agencies""”°*—in particular, and most especially, the Mossad.
While he was liaising with everyone, he was getting them to do favors for either the C[A—things the CIA didn't want to carry out directly; like they've never killed anyone, right?—or for his own agenda.
You know, 'My Israeli sources tell me such and such,’ and no one was going to contradict him, since no one else was allowed to talk to Israeli intelligence.
For him nothing else really mattered, but he would use anyone and anything to combat it.
In fact, he was the CIA's longtime, self-appointed man at the agency's Israel desk.
If there was anyone in the CIA who knew of Ben-Gurion's distaste for JFK, it was Angleton.
As a devoted friend of Israel—and chief liaison with the Mossad—Angleton had to be fully aware of the raging conflict between the Israeli prime minister and the American president who refused to bow to Israel's demands.
All of this not to mention Kennedy's own conflicts with the CIA which we will review in Chapter 9.
KENNEDY A THREAT Clearly, John F Kennedy was not only a threat to Israel and the CIA and their allies in the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, but also to James Jesus Angleton himself.
Kennedy's war with the CIA could spell an end to Angleton's career and the world-wide intelligence empire that the strange and calculating counterintelligence boss had assembled.
The ties between Angleton's CIA and the Mossad were such, according to historian Steven Stewart, that they ""had the effect of ensuring that virtually every CIA man in the Middle East was also working at second hand for the Israelis . . . as the CIA's policy changed almost overnight, in an extraordinary volteface, from being largely pro-Arab to becoming almost totally pro-Israeli""*°°—a close relationship indeed.
And it was Angleton who was, as we have seen, the prime mover behind the CJA-Israeli Mossad's close working relationship—in fact, from its very beginnings.
The late Wilbur Crane Eveland, a former advisor to the CIA and former member of the policy-planning staffs of the White House and Pentagon, had written extensively on the U.S.-Israeli relationship.
In his book, Ropes of Sand, Eveland reviewed the beginnings of what Andrew and Leslie Cockburn call the ""dangerous liaison""—America's covert relationship with Israel.
According to Wolf Blitzer, longtime Washington correspondent for the Jerusalem Post, the CIA-Mossad relationship began on a basis of mutual distrust.
Blitzer notes that after Iranian militants seized the United States Embassy in Tehran , the militants seized CIA documents which they later released.
ASSASSINATION PLOTS The CIA and the Mossad had many joint ventures over the years, all conducted under Angleton's watchful eye.
In fact, after President Eisenhower commented that he hoped that ""the Nasser problem could be eliminated""””""— —CIA Director Allen Dulles and Angleton launched a plan to kill Nasser.
However, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles intervened and called off the CIA dogs.
The CIA was also engaging in covert actions against Israel's enemies in Syria.
One CIA conspiracy in 1958 to overthrow the nationalist government of Syria—which anti-communist fanatics such as Angleton considered to be ""leftist""—fell apart when the CIA's paid henchmen, Syrian nationals (who evidently were patriots), turned themselves in and exposed the CIA's plot to the Syrian government.
It is interesting to note, however, at this juncture, that as part of the plot against Castro the CIA established its nowinfamous ZR/Rifle Team, incorporating a wide array of foreign assassins and mercenaries—skilled and dangerous men who were trained in murder.
This, in the long run, as we shall see in Chapter 16, gave Angleton and his Israeli allies access to the ""talent"" necessary to achieve a successful operation in Dealey Plaza in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963.
The CIA had been realistic enough to realize that the Eisenhower appeasement policy towards the Arab world would ultimately be disastrous for every American interest, military or economic.
In short, what this meant was that the CIA had no office or station chief in Tel Aviv, but that certain officers in the United States Embassy there co-operated with the Mossad.
In theory this entailed an exchange of intelligence between the two sides and in practice this worked rather better than one could have expected normally.
It was he who first saw the need for a new policy in the Middle East and safeguards against increasing Russian influence.
A REVERSAL OF POLICY ""He and Evron worked well together and, as a result, the CIA helped Israel with technical assistance in the nuclear field.
ANGLETON AND ISRAEL'S NUCLEAR BOMB There is, in fact, evidence that Angleton was covertly assisting Israel's nuclear bomb program which, of course, was the primary source of conflict between JFK and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion.
We do know that one of Angleton's ""closest colleagues"" from his days in the OSS in Italy was a former leader of the Jewish underground, Meir Deshalit, the older brother of Amos Deshalit, a physicist who was one of the leaders in Israel's drive to build a nuclear bomb.
John Hadden, who was the CIA station chief in Tel Aviv before his retirement in 1960, is evidently the CIA officer who first reported (perhaps incorrectly) that an Apollo, Pennsylvania company, the Nuclear Materials & Equipment Corporation , was illegally providing bomb-grade uranium for Israel's nuclear weapons development.
One individual in particular, the assistant to the deputy director for covert operations, was constantly attacking Hadden, belittling his claims.
Shackley, as we'll see in Chapter 11, was a key CIA player in CIA-Lansky Syndicate plots against Fidel Castro.
And it was also Shackley, as we shall see in Chapter 12, who was a key CIA player in Southeast Asia during the joint CIA-Lansky drug-trafficking operations in the region.
Later, following his retirement from the CIA, Shackley entered into lucrative international arms dealing ventures with Shaul Eisenberg, a key Mossad operative and a major figure in Israel's nuclear development program.
And later in these pages we will learn much more about the connections of both Shackley and his future business partner Eisenberg.
Here, however, we see Shackley engaged in covering up Israeli operations in the nuclear development arena—along with Angleton.
According to Hadden, Angleton ""had no interest in stopping” the NUMEC operation, and did not.
However, as we will see in Appendix Nine there is much more to the NUMEC story than meets the eye.
However, according to historian Stephen Green, ""It is perhaps significant that the memorandum was not drafted as a formal national intelligence estimate, which would have involved distribution to several other agencies of the government.
The CIA-Mossad joint operations relating to Israel's nuclear development continued for a generation.
Many years later, the CIA and Israel jointly arranged the kidnapping of Mordechai Vanunu, a nuclear technician who blew the whistle on Israel's nuclear weapons development.
A woman used to lure Vanunu in the kidnapping conspiracy was a CIA covert action operative who also did occasional work for the Mossad.
ANGLETON'S POWER INCREASES With the advent of the Lyndon Johnson administration and the amazing reversal of United States policy toward Israel, outlined in detail in Chapter 6, and with the close relationship between Angleton's Mossad liaison, Evron, and Lyndon Johnson, Angleton's influence in Middle East policy-making became even greater.
However, much new additional information has come to light which ties Angleton even further into the international web of conspiracy that resulted in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
ANGLETON, LANSKY & THE OSS Angleton, in fact, had intimate ties to Meyer Lansky-linked organized crime operations in Europe stemming back from his service in the OSS in England and in Italy.
And it was during this same period that Meyer Lansky himself was engaged in joint covert operations with the OSS, as noted in Chapter 7.
It is also very likely that during this time Angleton came in contact with a young American officer detailed to the OSS—one Clay Shaw.
THE JEWISH UNDERGROUND At the tender age of 27, Angleton—then stationed in Rome—was the youngest counterintelligence branch chief in the entire OSS and the only non-Briton in Italy cleared to share intelligence secrets of the top-secret Ultra program which was cracking Nazi codes.
Italy, indeed, became a central point of contact for Angleton and his international intelligence connections, and particularly for his work on behalf of the state of Israel.
In Chapter 7 we met Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum of the Banque De Credit International.
It was Rosenbaum, who went on to serve as Director General for Finance and Supply for the Mossad, who was one of the prime movers in the refugeeturned-intelligence network with which Angleton worked so closely.
It was also during this same period that the terrorist Menachem Begin was coordinating Israel's Irgun operations in Europe.
In Chapter 13, we shall find, Begin was also operating in the United States in conjunction with a key figure in the Lansky Crime Syndicate in joint efforts on behalf of Israel—and against John F Kennedy.
THE CORSICAN MAFIA CONNECTION Angleton's connections with the Lansky operations, however, go even deeper.
For details on the activities of Angleton and his Lansky-linked organized crime associates we turn to the work of Robert I Friedman.
In the 1960’s Churba and Kahane functioned as CIA assets in churning up Jewish support—and otherwise—for the war in Vietnam, a venture, we have seen, which proved fruitful for not only the CIA, but its allies in Israel and their allies in the Lansky Syndicate.
It was under the CIA's direction that Lovestone and Brown—using Corsican and Italian mafiosos—set up right-wing death squads in Marseilles and other European cities after the Second World War to break the burgeoning leftwing labor movement.
Thanks to Brown, by 1953 his key contact in the Marseilles underworld, Pierre Ferri-Pisain, had control of the city's port, where he built an international heroin trafficking empire.
Prior to the Allied invasion of Sicily in the Second World War, the OSS established contacts with the Sicilian Mafia through the same Lucky Luciano who allowed to smuggle weapons from Hoboken to the Irgun in Palestine.
In partnership with Italy's Mafia syndicates, the Corsicans smuggled raw opium from Turkey and refined it into no. heroin for export.
In Chapter 12 , Chapter 15 and Chapter 16, we will also examine the role of French Corsican gangsters and French intelligence operatives in the JFK assassination—linking Angleton further to the events in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
Here, now, we see that it was Israeli Mossad ally James J Angleton who was, in fact, the prime mover behind the CIA operations utilizing the Corsican and Sicilian organized crime elements in Angleton's ""anticommunist"" ventures.
That all of this was run through the Angleton's Israeli desk at the CIA is quite interesting, to say the least.
This, of course, ties Angleton and the CIA and their collaborators in the Mossad even further into the Lansky network—and into the nexus revolving around the conspiracy that led to the murder of John F Kennedy.
ANGLETON, THE CIA & THE FRENCH CONNECTION However, Angleton's French intrigue went beyond his connections with the Corsican crime syndicate.
He and the CIA were also dabbling in internal French politics, interfering with the political aims of French leader Charles DeGaulle and his political alliance.
However, there were only three major political parties in France—Socialist, Communist and Gaullist—and by a simple process of elimination the CIA wound up allying itself with the Socialists.
That Angleton and the CIA would be actively working against DeGaulle is intriguing, particularly in light of further evidence we shall examine in Chapter 12, Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 which ties the CIA and its allies in Israel to joint operations against DeGaulle.
It was from this same sphere of intrigue, as we shall see, that the JFK assassination evolved.
MANIPULATING THE WARREN COMMISSION After John F Kennedy was killed, it was Angleton who emerged as the CIA's ""overseer"" of the Warren Commission investigation into the assassination of Kennedy.
In fact, as we shall see, Angleton maneuvered himself into this position.
The testimony by Scelso also brought forth some interesting revelations about Angleton's organized crime connections.
Scelso went on to explain that the Justice Department had once asked the CIA to determine the true names of people holding numbered bank accounts in Panama because the mob was hiding Las Vegas ""skim"" money there.
The real reason is that Angleton himself has ties to the Mafia and he would not want to double-cross them.
Indeed, Angleton, Israel's point man at the CIA, was well-placed to help cover up the real truth about Israel's role—along with that of the CIA and the Lansky syndicate—and ultimately he did.
PLACING BLAME It was Angleton who emerged in the period of the Warren Commission investigation as the leading CIA critic of Russian Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko.
Nosenko, who defected to the United States in 1964, claimed to have been the KGB's case officer who handled Lee Harvey Oswald during his sojourn in Russia Nosenko's most provocative claim was that, contrary to some suspicions—and allegations—the Soviet KGB had absolutely nothing to do with the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Thus, those such as Israel's man at the CIA, Angleton, who wanted to hang the blame on the KGB for the president's murder, had what appeared to be a bona fide Soviet defector on their hands whose claims ran contrary to the propaganda line they sought to promote.
Angleton was Nosenko's loudest and most vociferous accuser, determined to prove Nosenko a liar.
Angleton subjected Nosenko to 1,277 days of torture, questioning and deprivation, but Nosenko stuck to his story.
Angleton was clearly determined to disprove the one man who was clearly well-informed enough about the Soviet KGB to dispute the claim that the Soviets were behind the JFK assassination.
Eliminating the Soviets as a suspect would, of course, shift suspicion elsewhere.
In Chapter 16 we shall see how Angleton did indeed play a key role in the JFK assassination cover-up.
Revelation of either a CIA role or an Israeli role in the murder of JFK would have inevitably destroyed not only America's relationship with Israel, but it would have brought the international house of joint CIA-MossadLansky Crime Syndicate conspiracies tumbling down.
And James Jesus Angleton, as the CIA's intimate liaison with Israel, would have been destroyed in the process.
Angleton was fired by the new CIA director, William Colby, on December 20, 1974.
And, as we shall see in Appendix Six, Angleton's firing not only had precisely to do with his unusually close affiliation with Israel, but ultimately may have played a part in the strange demise—years later—of William Colby.
FANTASY IN BOOK FORM In his remaining years, Angleton habitually met with Washington reporters, feeding them tidbits, stroking them with information, convincing them all that they were getting ""the inside story""—particularly in regard to the matter of the JFK assassination.
As pointed out, however, by assassination researcher, Carl Oglesby, it was Angleton who was ""Epstein's chief source for the narrative unfolded""””* in Legend.
Epstein's book presented the thesis that Oswald had been recruited by the Soviet KGB during his Marine service.
Later KGB asset Oswald killed JFK, but not necessarily on the Kremlin's orders.
And interestingly enough, it was the controlled media which had otherwise scoffed at JFK conspiracy allegations that responded so favorably to this ""new"" conspiracy story.
The normally chaste Wilfred Sheed swallowed the whole Angleton kaboodle and chimed in on his own that “Cuba itself seems the most likely conspirator’ with Oswald.
FOOLED BY A FALSE FLAG Interestingly, many American conservatives (who were certainly no admirers of the Kennedy administration) fell for the Angleton-sponsored fantasy that the KGB was behind the JFK assassination.
Since the publication of the second edition of Final Judgment, a former publicist for the American Security Council.
William J Gill, acknowledged to this author his own sincere belief that there had been a communist role in the JFK assassination.
He acknowledged that, for political reasons, he had indeed been a part of the effort to pin the assassination on the Soviets.
In other words, that he now believed that the Israeli Mossad was indeed the prime mover behind the JFK assassination.
One prominent ""right wing"" journalist of the time, Revilo P Oliver— then a key figure in the John Birch Society—was actually called before the Warren Commission to elaborate on his controversial and widely-publicized theory that the Soviets had JFK executed because he was not doing enough to advance international communism.
However, shortly before his death in 1994 Oliver told associates that had he not been so ill, he would have relished the opportunity to write a favorable review of Final Judgment which had just been released earlier in the year.
Oliver himself evidently realized that he, too, had been taken in by the Angleton-inspired myth.
Needless to say, however, the myth the Soviets were somehow involved in the JFK assassination was an ideal cover story and one that James J Angleton was very much the prime mover behind.
Angleton, however, insisted that the reference had nothing to do with the JFK assassination.
Angleton died a broken man on May 11, 1987—driven out of the CIA to which he had devoted his lifetime.
Since the first release of Final Judgment—which was the first JFK assassination book to seriously focus on James Angleton (based upon leads provided by Mark Lane's Plausible Denial)—JFK researcher Lisa Pease has written two excellent articles examining Angleton's critical role in the JFK affair.
They appear in the book The Assassinations edited by Miss Pease and James DiEugenio.
Unfortunately, although Miss Pease referenced Final Judgment, in passing in earlier renditions of her essays (when they were first published on the Internet), she has since deleted those references, perhaps out of fear of being associated with yours truly.
In any case, Miss Pease also rushes to assure her readers that she has found no evidence to support the theory that Angleton was ""controlled"" by the Mossad, despite her suggestion that other un-named writers have asserted as much.
In fact, as readers of Final Judgment know well, no such assertion is made in this book.
JFK's War With Israel's Allies at the CIA JFK's battle with the CIA over the Bay of Pigs debacle was just the beginning.
By November of 1963, JFK was not only fighting the CIA's Israeli allies over the nuclear bomb, but he was also resisting efforts by the CIA to involve the United States more deeply in Southeast Asia.
In fact, JFK planned to dismantle the CIA entirely—a move that would threaten Israel's power base in official Washington.
At the same time, the CIA and the Mossad were also engaged in efforts to undermine French President Charles DeGaulle.
In the end, the intrigue against DeGaulle would prove to play a little-known but critical part in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
In 1972 the Washington Observer newsletter published perhaps what was one of the first hints—in print—that the Kennedy family itself suspected that the CIA had a hand in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
According to the Observer, ""Back in 1963, shortly after President Kennedy's assassination, Robert F Kennedy while he was still Attorney General, conducted his own private investigation, which ran parallel with the official inquiry into the assassination conducted by the Warren Commission.
Kennedy's investigation featured trips to this country by an Inspector Hamilton, former Chief Inspector of Scotland Yard.
The bittnerness that developed between JFK and the CIA over the failed attempt to invade Castro's Cuba was a serious point of conflict between the president and the intelligence agency.
The Bay of Pigs and its aftermath was a sore spot between Kennedy and the CIA, but not the last.
The family biographers of Chicago Mafia boss, Sam Giancana, who participated in the infamous CIA-Organized Crime plots against Fidel Castro report that Giancana was very much aware that the CIA was unhappy with the Kennedys.
Most relevant, therefore, is not what Kennedy was or was not about to do vis-a-vis the CIA, but what the leaders of the Agency believed he might do.
These documents, in theory, eliminated the ability of the CIA to wage war.
L Fletcher Prouty, who served as liaison between the Defense Department and the CIA during the relevant period.
According to Prouty, ""Nothing I had ever been involved in my entire career had created such an uproar.
NSAM 55 stripped the CIA of its cherished covert operations role, except for small actions.
The burgeoning issue of United States involvement in Southeast Asia had positioned the president at odds with the CIA even further.
By late 1963 JFK's conflict with the CIA was in full force and although it was not the subject of heated public discussion, the word was leaking out through official and un-official channels that there was something afoot at the highest levels.
KENNEDY'S TRUSTED CONDUIT But what is so astounding about the column is that Krock quoted a high-level administration source as having suggested that if there were ever a coup d'etat in the United States, one might expect that it would be the CIA which was responsible—this just weeks before JFK was murdered.
Krock was a longtime close friend and confidant of the Kennedy family and had even ghost-written several published works on behalf of the president's father, Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy.
The columnist was a key Kennedy link in press circles and would have been the first and foremost choice of President Kennedy if JFK had wished to utilize the press to bring his conflict with the CIA into the public arena.
The columnist stated that President Kennedy sent Henry Cabot Lodge, his Ambassador to Vietnam, with orders to the CIA on two separate occasions and in both cases the CIA ignored those orders, saying that it was different from what the agency thought should be done.
And published simultaneously are details of the agency's operations in Vietnam that can come only from the same critical official sources.
And the longer the President tolerates it—the period already is considerable—the greater the real war against the Vietcong and the impression of a very indecisive Administration in Washington.
Nor to this department, which sought and failed to get even the outlines of the agency's case in rebuttal.
And when he makes this judgment, hopefully he also will make it public, as well as the appraisal of fault on which it is based.
Fletcher Prouty points out, upon their return they ""reported to the President that it looked to them, after their visit to Saigon, as though things could be put under control and that we would be able to withdraw all personnel by the end of 1965.
However, as we have seen in Chapter 6, the war in Vietnam proved a boon to the CIA's allies in Israel, allowing the Middle East state to flex its muscles in the region.
And in Chapter 12 we shall see that a joint C[A-Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate venture in the international drug racket out of Southeast Asia proved so very profitable, conducted under military cover in the midst of United States involvement in Vietnam.
Suspicion of the CIA's complicity was commonplace over the years, but Lane's book proved the matter once and for all.
And, significantly, his book was a written summation of a libel trial in Miami some years previously in which the jury had concluded that the CIA had indeed been involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up.
It was in 1978, that a Washington-based weekly newspaper, The Spotlight, published an article by former high-ranking CIA official Victor Marchetti which alleged the CIA intended to frame longtime CIA operative E Howard Hunt for involvement in the Kennedy assassination.
Hunt, of course, was the CIA's chief political liaison with the antiCastro Cuban community during the period leading up to the JFK assassination and who had, subsequently, over the years, been mentioned as a suspect in the assassination conspiracy.
Hunt's Cuban point man in the RDF, Antonio de Varona, in fact, personally received funding for the RDF from Meyer Lansky himself.) a Marchetti's article suggested that there was then so much growing suspicion that the CIA had been involved in the JFK assassination that the CIA had decided that it would sacrifice Hunt and say that Hunt was a ""renegade"" operative involved in the president's assassination.
However, according to Marchetti, the CIA intended to say that Hunt and his co-conspirators had been operating independently—that the CIA as an institution had not been part of the conspiracy.
Although the editors of The Spotlight felt Marchetti's article served, if anything, as an advance warning to Hunt about what his former employers had in mind, the ex-CIA man decided to sue, even though he ultimately admitted under oath that he believed The Spotlight's story seemed plausible.
When the case finally went to trial in federal court in Miami, the newspaper suffered a devastating loss.
The jury found in favor of Hunt and ordered The Spotlight to pay $650,000 in damages.
Fortunately—for The Spotlight—an error in the trial judge's instructions to the jury gave the populist weekly grounds for an appeal.
When the case was successfully appealed and ordered for retrial, Mark Lane—an attorney—stepped in for the defense.
Accompanying Miss Lorenz on what she described as a secret mission were several CIA operatives, led by Miss Lorenz’ CIA ""handler,"" Frank Sturgis, armed with telescopic rifles.
According to Miss Lorenz she had not been apprised of the purpose of the mission.
Upon arrival in Dallas, according to Miss Lorenz, they met with not only E Howard Hunt, who was functioning as the CIA operatives’ paymaster, but also nightclub operator Jack Ruby who later executed the president's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald.
When Hunt himself took the stand, attorney Lane, while questioning Hunt, pointed out numerous inconsistencies in Hunt's testimony.
Hunt himself had told several stories, over the years, about where he had been on the day the president was assassinated.
It was Miss Lorenz’ testimony, however, that convinced the jury that the CIA had been involved in the Kennedy assassination.
He was asking us to believe John Kennedy had been killed by our own government.
THE NOVO BROTHERS But there are other interesting connections, in the meantime, that should be explored.
Lane has described how Miss Lorenz had gone even further in her testimony, naming other CIA operatives who had been in the two-car caravan organized by Frank Sturgis in which Lorenz traveled from Miami to Dallas.
However, "" according to Lane, ""Mr Hunt's lawyer asked her that question and she answered it, to my surprise.
According to Lane, ""The Novo brothers—Guillermo and Ignacio—are very interesting characters.
I can assure you,"" said Lane, ""that the first time I heard their name connected with the Kennedy assassination was when Miss Lorenz gave their names to Hunt's lawyer.
She said—referring to Hunt, the CIA and his lawyers— If they are so dumb as to ask me that question, then it is not my fault if I give them the answer.
THE HUNT-BUCKLEY CONNECTION ""These Novo brothers that Miss Lorenz named have been involved in a series of intelligence related crimes.
They were involved in the murder in Washington, D.C. in 1976 of former Chilean government official Orlando Letelier and Ronnie Moffit, a woman who was with him.
A man named Michael Townley who was connected with the Chilean secret police was involved in planning the Letelier murder with the Novo brothers.
Now a federal judge on the United States District Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, Buckley is the brother of former CIA operative and conservative fortnightly National Review founder William F Buckley, Jr.
According to Lane, ""The testimony by Townley made reference to a William Sampol who worked in James Buckley's office.
According to Lane, ""It was William F Buckley, Jr. who took that story from Bush and ran with it.
These are the brothers that Marita Lorenz testified were in the two-car caravan of killers traveling from Miami to Dallas for the purpose of assassinating President Kennedy."" aa MULTIPLE MOSSAD CONNECTIONS Evidence now available from former Mossad operative Victor Ostrovsky suggests that Israel's Mossad, in fact, was indirectly connected with the Letelier assassination for which the Novo brothers (implicated in the JFK assassination) were later convicted.
And while the Mossad had no direct involvement in the hit ordered by Chilean DINA Chief Manuel Contreras Sepulveda, it had played a significant indirect role in the execution through a secret deal with Contreras to buy a French-made Exocet surface-to-surface naval missile from Chile.
It is interesting to note, nonetheless, that Michael Townley himself had very interesting further connections with Israel.
TIBOR ROSENBAUM'S PROTEGE During the criminal trial in 1970 of one of Lansky's Florida lieutenants, Alvin Malnik, it was publicly revealed that one of the key money laundering channels for the illegal proceeds of Lansky's narcotics, vice and gambling rackets was BCI, the brainchild of the Israeli Mossad's former Director-General for Finance and Supply, Tibor Rosenbaum Rosenbaum's BCI received its Lansky Crime Syndicate cash flow mainly through the Lansky-controlled Bank of World Commerce in Nassau, Bahamas.
The middleman was a young Swiss, Sylvain Ferdmann, a courier for Lansky.
Townley's employer, Cornfeld, in fact, was initially sponsored by Rosenbaum who had emerged as a major money launderer for Lansky's global drug trafficking.
It is thus interesting, to say the least, that Michael Townley, with his Israeli Mossad connections during not only the period of the JFK assassination but also during his participation in the Letelier murder, should be associated with the Novo brothers who have been implicated in both crimes themselves.
As we've noted already, E Howard Hunt and Buckley's brother, publisher William F Buckley, Jr. were longtime friends stemming from their CIA days.
Hunt's own longtime intrigue with the Cuban American community in anti-Castro activities as the CIA's chief liaison with the Cubans, of course, has long been widely noted.
THE BUCKLEY-ISRAEL CONNECTION However, what is not so widely known is that the Buckley family— including brothers James and William—had substantive links to Israel through their various family oil enterprises.
In 1971 the Washington Observer newsletter shed some interesting light on the Buckley family oil concessions in Israel, established by Buckley's father.
Simultaneously, Israel-Mediterranean Petroleum, Inc. was incorporated under the laws of Panama.
The principal offices of the firm were in Jerusalem at the same address where Pan-Israel Oil Co. was located.
All of the voting stock for the two companies was held in the voting trust.
Pan-Israel and Israel-Mediterranean jointly owned eight petroleum licenses, all located in Israel.
President of PIP, Ltd. was John W Buckley who, with his brother James L Buckley, served on the board of directors.
These companies, together conducted global operations with oil properties in Australia, South America, Canada, Libya, Spanish Sahara, the Philippines and Israel.
More so, perhaps, because the Novo brothers’ associate in the Letelier assassination—at least—was himself intimately tied to the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and an Israeli Mossad-sponsored money laundering operation.
Incredibly enough, however, there is yet another bizarre Buckley family link to a key player in the strange world of JFK's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, and the JFK assassination conspiracy.
THE BUCKLEY-DeMOHRENSCHILDT CONNECTION This link came in the person of the colorful Russian nobleman, George DeMohrenschildt, who befriended Oswald upon the young American's return from exile in the Soviet Union.
DeMohrenschildt, who is reputed to have worked for various international intelligence agencies, had a long-standing relationship with the CIA, dating back to the days of the CIA's predecessor, the Office of Strategic Services , in which, incidentally, E Howard Hunt himself had served.
It was in this guise that he came into contact with the Buckley family.
As early as 1945 DeMohrenschildt worked directly under Warren Smith, then the president of the Pantepec Oil Co., the Buckley family's Mexican oil company, established in 1914.
DeMohrenschildt and Smith eventually formed the Cuban-Venezuelan Oil Trust Co.
The Buckley Family's Pantepec, interestingly enough, had, by that time, already shifted its focus to Venezuela.
Hunt and DeMohrenschildt also both popped up in Cuba in 1956 in the stormy period before Fidel Castro pushed the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate off the island.
While DeMohrenschildt said later that he was there on oil business, Hunt was attending a meeting of CIA station chiefs from the Caribbean and Central American regions.
In 1960 both Hunt and DeMohrenschildt also appeared in Guatemala when troops were being trained there for what was ultimately to be the Bay of Pigs debacle, initially intended for the purpose of toppling Castro.
DeMohrenschildt said that he and his wife were on a walking tour of Central America.
Hunt, however, was serving as the CIA's liaison with anti-Castro Cuban groups.
The role of DeMohrenschildt in the JFK assassination conspiracy will probably never be known.
In the end, the globe-hopping nobleman died on the morning of March 29, 1977 just shortly before he was scheduled to meet with an investigator of the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
DeMohrenschildt's wife believed her husband’s suicide had somehow been induced.
Whatever the case, there is yet another bizarre coincidence, DeMohrenschildt had just met—before his death—with author Edward Jay Epstein.
In Chapter 8, as we saw, it was Epstein who was the primary literary promoter of the theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was under Soviet influence when he assassinated John F Kennedy.
The primary source for Epstein's theory was Israel's CIA ally, James Jesus Angleton.
Although the Church Senate Committee hearings on clandestine CIA activities later concluded that there had been no CIA involvement with the OAS,*”’ there is very strong evidence to the contrary.
Although Challe insisted that he ""had no contact personally with any foreign countries' and that in fact he had deliberately avoided all such contacts so as not to incur any possible charge of having been brought in on foreign bayonets.
According to historian Alexander Harrison, ""In early December 1961, a 'Colonel Brown’ of the CIA station in France requested a meeting with Salan.
He was E Howard Hunt, the agency's political handler for the anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
In Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 we will examine Hunt's OAS connections further, particularly as they relate to the key players involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
After Challe was released from prison in 1967, having been convicted of his involvement in attempting to topple DeGaulle, Challe was hired by Zim, the Israeli shipping concern, **’ part of the international corporate empire of one of the Mossad's most valued assets, billionaire Shaul Eisenberg, whose enterprises were an integral part of the economy of the state of Israel itself.
We first met Eisenberg in Chapter 7 where we learned of his partnership, along with Mossad officer Tibor Rosenbaum, in the SwissIsrael Trade Bank.
But we will learn much more about Eisenberg and his ventures on behalf of Israel's drive for a nuclear arsenal later in these pages.
More importantly, however, we will see how Eisenberg's activities tie directly into the JFK assassination—a story that has never been told before.
That Israel and its allies in the CIA would be conspiring against Charles DeGaulle during the same period when they were likewise conspiring against John F Kennedy, as we shall see, is quite significant indeed.
THREE POWERFUL FORCES All of these connections illustrate the cycle which continually links key players in the international intrigue between not only the CIA and the Israeli Mossad, but also the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate—three powerful forces all of which desired the removal of John F Kennedy from the White House.
The fact is that Marcello's most formidable chief accuser, G Robert Blakey, staff director of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, had been on the payroll of a key figure in the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
His key placement in New Orleans—scene of much of the preassassination planning—makes him the perfect fall guy.
It was Lee Harvard Oswald's pathetic cry, ""I'm just a patsy,"" that has become immortalized.
Ironically, though, one of the most widely alleged JFK assassination masterminds—New Orleans’ widely-publicized supposed ""crime boss""—might himself be able to make that same claim.
We are speaking, of course, of the colorful Carlos Marcello—nicknamed ""Little Man""—a sobriquet he happened to share with Meyer Lansky.
Carlos Marcello and the Assassination of John F Kennedy, names Marcello as the likely mastermind of the JFK murder.
But, as we've said, his conclusions are not based on the totality of all the evidence available to those who are interested in the big picture.
The Mafia Murder of President John F Kennedy, likewise blames ""the Mafia"" for the JFK assassination and also points the finger at Carlos Marcello in particular.
For whatever reason, however, Scheim is devoted to underplaying (even ignoring) the critical role of Meyer Lansky in the underworld.
In Scheim's view, Lansky was little more than a bit player—this in direct contradiction to even standard histories of organized crime which, by virtue of reality, are forced to recognize Lansky's particular influence.
That Scheim even suggests this indicates that he is determined to ignore the entire picture.
He was not, contrary to Scheim's bizarre concoction, a Mafia handler of Meyer Lansky.
CLAY SHAW AND THE CIA Scheim's own determination to ignore the role of the intelligence community in the JFK assassination conspiracy—particularly that of the CIA—is also interesting.
In his book Scheim goes to great lengths to portray New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison as a tool of the Mafia and an associate of Carlos Marcello.
He also comes down hard on Garrison's investigation of international businessman Clay Shaw.
According to Scheim, ""Equally bizarre was Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw, who became his prime culprit.
There is simply no rational excuse for Scheim’'s deliberate deletion of this critical fact.
Be that as it may, in Chapter 15 we shall examine Shaw's central positioning in the conspiracy that involved not only the CIA and the Mafia and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, but also Israel's Mossad.
Obviously, in order to perpetuate the myth that ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" Scheim is forced to avoid the facts that damage his thesis.
Organized Crime Assassinated JFK by G Robert Blakey and Richard N Billings.
Scheim's book, all in all, fails miserably in its attempt to lay the blame anywhere for that matter.
That Scheim and Davis relied upon the Blakey/Billings work is unfortunate, particularly since this book comes from what can only be charitably described as suspect sources.
Blakey, of course, was director of the House Assassinations Committee which concluded that there had probably been a conspiracy behind the president's assassination and that, more than likely, elements of the ""Mafia"" may have been been involved.
SABOTAGING GARRISON Richard Billings, who served alongside Blakey in the House Committee investigation, was no stranger to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
In fact, Billings had been the Life magazine editor who led a team from his magazine to New Orleans ostensibly to collaborate with then District Attorney Jim Garrison in his investigation into the JFK murder.
Life ran several major articles which linked Garrison to organized crime—to the Mafia—to Carlos Marcello, specifically, thereby discrediting Garrison to many who believed the tales.
As a consequence when Blakey and Billings teamed up to write the book based on their experiences with the House Assassinations Committee, they reserved harsh criticism for Garrison and suggested that he was pointing the finger, wrongly, at the intelligence community and, in effect covering up for Marcello's involvement in the crime.
ORGANIZED CRIME 'EXPERT' So it was that Blakey and Billings' work put much emphasis on Marcello as having been one of the prime movers in the conspiracy.
Yet, Blakey's allegations about the role of ""the Mafia"" can only be described as suspect, to say the very least.
Thus it is that Blakey's conclusions about the role of ""the Mafia"" (and specifically Carlos Marcello) in the JFK assassination conspiracy have received widespread recognition and credibility.
BLAKEY'S LANSKY CONNECTION After Penthouse magazine had published an article alleging that the La Costa Country Club in Carlsbad, California was linked to the underworld, several of La Costa's founders filed a lawsuit against Penthouse.
One of the plaintiffs in the La Costa case was Morris ""Moe"" Dalitz, a former Detroit and Cleveland bootlegger-turned-Las Vegas casino boss, who had longstanding and close personal and business ties with Meyer Lansky.
This was certainly an unusual position for a self-promoted ""crime fighter"" such as Blakey.
The longtime crime fighter, in fact, provided an affidavit on Dalitz's behalf against Penthouse.
At that time, in fact, one of the key leaders of the Purple Gang was none other than Moe Dalitz, an up-and-coming mob figure.
DALITZ, SIEGEL AND LANSKY According to FBI organized crime expert William Roemer, ""Moe Dalitz started his criminal career way back in the Prohibition Era.
In fact, according to Roemer, it was Dalitz who was the prime mover behind the Syndicate's move against Benjamin ""Bugsy"" Siegel, Lansky's boyhood friend and fellow racketeer who was shot dead in 1947.
Dalitz, reports Roemer, ""was the main contributor to the growing opinion that everything was not on the up and up.
However, it would be nearly thirty years later that Robert Blakey, the chief proponent of the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" would end up on Morris Dalitz's team, proclaiming Dalitz innocent of any mob connections and directing attention away from any direct Lansky connections to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Unfortunately for Blakey, Dalitz and La Costa, Penthouse prevailed and beat back their libel suit and, in effect, repudiated Blakey's character reference on behalf of Dalitz and his associates.
So it was that the chief proponent of the theory that ""the Mafia Killed JFK"" had lined up in defense of one of Meyer Lansky's closest associates— Moe Dalitz, a legendary figure in the underworld himself.
Some seven months after Blakey and the House Assassinations Committee issued their report that ""The Mafia Killed JFK""—a report that carefully and studiously ignored Lansky's high-level influence over ""the Mafia""—the Wall Street Journal reported in September of 1979 that Dalitz had long been identified by federal authorities as an ongoing senior advisor to organized crime.
ISRAEL HONORS DALITZ Dalitz' public image, however, did not suffer as a consequence of the Penthouse victory in the libel suit or as a result of the report in the Wall Street Journal.
Evidently the ADL did not see any problem with giving its highest honor to one of the top leaders of organized crime.
Dalitz's service to the cause of Israel was apparently deemed more significant than his activities in the underworld.
In fact, Dalitz himself was the key mid-West contact for the Sonneborn Institute—the Israeli arms smuggling entity—that we first encountered in Chapter 7 where we examined the long-standing ties of the Lansky Syndicate to Israel.
So we can certainly understand why the ADL would be so eager to award Dalitz for his services.
For his own part, Dalitz's defender, Robert Blakey, clearly prefers to look at the Italian elements of the underworld, but no further.
As we saw in Chapter 7 the differences between ""the Mafia"" and organized crime as a whole are far more profound that Blakey would allow us to imagine.
BLAKEY AND THE CIA Blakey, likewise, has refused to acknowledge the role of American intelligence, specifically the CIA, in the JFK assassination.
LOUISIANA FRONT MAN The fact remains that whatever role Carlos Marcello or any of his underlings played in either the JFK assassination or the cover-up, Marcello was nothing more than a front-man for the ""boss of all bosses""—Israel's longtime patron, Meyer Lansky himself.
Lansky was, in fact, much, much bigger—in terms of power and influence—than Carlos Marcello would ever be, Marcello's fame and reputation notwithstanding.
Interestingly, Davis himself makes clear that Marcello was, in fact, a protégé of Lansky.
For the full story of the Lansky-Marcello relationship we are indebted to Hank Messick, the fearless investigative reporter who specialized in Organized Crime coverage.
In his biography of Meyer Lansky, Messick described how Lansky picked Marcello out of relative obscurity and set up Louisiana's supposed ""Mafia boss"" in business.
Lansky-Costello associate ""Dandy Phil"" Kastel was sent in to take charge of the project.
However, it was Lansky himself who went to New Orleans to cut the final deal with Long.
The two met at the Roosevelt Hotel which was owned by a mutual crony, Seymour Weiss.
It was during that brokered convention that Lansky bribes, along with Long's support, enabled FDR to win his party's nomination.
However, out of the first $800,000 made by Lansky and his cronies in New Orleans, widows and orphans got exactly $600.
Born in Tunis, he had come to New Orleans in 1910 and made a living in a variety of ways, none of them successful.
In years to come he was touted as the Mafia boss of Louisiana—despite his birth in Tunis—and resisted all efforts to deport or jail him.
Even Marcello's famous Beverly Club was not, in reality, Marcello's personal fiefdom.
All of this, of course, taken together, sheds a more accurate light on the truth about the Lansky connection and Carlos Marcello.
According to Sam and Chuck Giancana, in their biography of Chicago Mafia boss, Sam Giancana, ""Marcello was a co-conspirator with the CIA in gunrunning operations and a fervent supporter of the anti-Castro exiles.
The Senate Committee on Government Operations report to the 88th Congress on ""Organized Crime and Illicit Traffic in Narcotics"" had pinpointed New Orleans—at that time—as having been the key distribution point for drugs coming into the United States.
Most observers believe that one of Marcello's ""legitimate"" businesses, a shrimp-boat operation, was, in fact, part of the drug-smuggling—and gunrunning—network.
Needless to say, Marcello's central positioning in New Orleans made it such that it was inevitable that the Mafia chieftain would have an inside track to gaining first-hand knowledge about developments—at least in New Orleans—in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Ferrie's still-undetermined part in the JFK assassination conspiracy, and his apparent association with alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, is but another piece of the whole puzzle.
It was Ferrie's associate, Guy Banister, whose New Orleans private detective agency employed several other Marcello cronies.
Banister, who had been with the Office of Naval Intelligence, and was later special-agent-in-charge of the Chicago office of the FBI, had re-located to New Orleans.
Banister, clearly, was the intermediary between the CIA and the LanskyMarcello operation in New Orleans.
Without question, New Orleans and the Marcello fiefdom were an integral part of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
But to suggest that Marcello was the driving force behind the JFK assassination conspiracy is to ignore the whole picture.
LANSKY & THE LONG ASSASSINATION AS a passing historical note, it is probably appropriate to refer to the demise of Huey Long and the role that Lansky and his associates played in that important political event.
By 1935, Long had been elected to the Senate and had risen to national prominence.
In fact, Long was generally considered a major threat to Franklin Delano Roosevelt's 1936 re-election chances.
Long had made it clear that if he didn't run as a Democrat—or as a third party candidate—in 1936, he certainly intended to play a major part in that election, and not on FDR's side.
Thus, a Justice Department investigation of Long and his finances was unleashed.
Such an inquiry was dredging up Long's tangled financial arrangements and threatened to break the back of the very profitable machine that Long had assembled.
There were more than a few Louisiana political figures and Long associates who were frightened of their impending demise alongside Long at the hands of federal prosecutors.
As Messick notes—and this is ironic—it was in a Dallas, Texas hotel room that the federal authorities made the decision to indict Long.
The colorful Louisiana Senator was shot that same day by a ""lone assassin"" who was himself promptly shot to pieces by Long's bodyguards.
To this day there are myriad conspiracy theories relating to Long's murder.
Some say that the alleged assassin never fired a shot—instead, that he swung a punch at Long and that the ""murder weapon"" was planted on the scene afterward by the bodyguards who wanted to cover up the fact that it was one of them who accidentally shot Long when firing at his assailant.
There are those, however, who say that Long was, in fact, deliberately shot by one of his bodyguards.
Whatever the case, Long died in the hospital some hours after the shooting.
What we do know is that Long's death removed from the scene a major threat not only to the Roosevelt administration, but to the Long machine which relied so heavily on the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
The evidence now indicates that Long's death could have been prevented.
That Lansky's lieutenant, Carlos Marcello had his own reasons for wanting John F Kennedy out of the way cannot be doubted.
The Justice Department under Robert F Kennedy had targeted Marcello repeatedly.
John Davis's interesting biography of Marcello provides a detailed analysis of the Kennedy campaign against Marcello.
In fact, there is no evidence anywhere whatsoever that Marcello took any further affirmative action to have his order—if indeed one can call it an order—fulfilled.
STALKING LANSKY THROUGH MARCELLO It's worth noting, in this regard, that Robert Kennedy's systematic prosecution and harassment of Marcello would have only been a logical first step in the Justice Department's ultimate prosecution of Meyer Lansky.
In this case, of course, it would have been the so-called ""chairman of the board,"" Meyer Lansky.
The end of the Kennedy war on organized crime was a major consequence—a major victory—for the organized crime fiefdom of Meyer Lansky.
Meyer Lansky was Carlos Marcello's immediate superior in the world of organized crime and not vice versa.
There is simply no way of getting around Lansky's critical positioning in the center of the vast conspiracy.
Any major operation such as the assassination of a president—even if proposed by Marcello single-handedly—would have first had to have been cleared by Marcello through his boss, Meyer Lansky.
Thus, it would have been Lansky himself who most certainly had to have given the go-ahead, even if the Kennedy assassination plot originated with Marcello alone.
The evidence, of course, suggests, however, that Marcello and his associates in New Orleans were simply pawns in a more far-reaching conspiracy that originated elsewhere.
Their proximity to Oswald and the New Orleans end of the conspiracy, however, makes them an easy target for those who seek to find a ""Mafia"" conspiracy behind the murder.
WEASEL WORDS As noted previously, those very sources who point to Marcello as the mastermind of the JFK murder choose to ignore Marcello's secondary positioning to Meyer Lansky in the syndicate chain of command.
Lanskylinked Robert Blakey's House Assassinations Committee gingerly skirted around the issue, however.
However, one could also conclude from the committee's presumption that if indeed Organized Crime did play some significant role in the assassination conspiracy, that it was not a conspiracy that originated with ""the Mafia,"" for example.
Unwittingly, then, the House Committee has provided us even further basis for the conclusions drawn here.
LANSKY NOT MENTIONED The House Committee report had nothing to say about the LanskyMarcello connection.
What is also particularly interesting is that Robert Lacey's Lansky biography, Little Man, never once mentions Lansky's sponsorship of Marcello, nor does Marcello's name appear once in the book.
The New Orleans connection is barely mentioned at all, and only in passing.
This is indeed a possibility and would fit firmly into the long-standing Israeli Mossad policy of using ""false flags"" in its criminal endeavors.
Clearly, there's a lot more to the relationship between Meyer Lansky and key ""suspects"" in the JFK assassination than meets the eye.
All of which, again, points toward Lansky's central role in the international conspiracy which we document.
Meyer Lansky, the Mafia, the CIA and the Mossad and the Castro Assassination Plots Three top ""Mafia"" figures—Sam Giancana and Johnny Rosselli of Chicago and Santo Trafficante, Jr. o f Tampa— were key figures in the CIA-Mob plots against Fidel Castro and often linked to the JFK assassination.
Although the three Italian-American gangsters were major mob players, evidence shows they also were—like Carlos Marcello— subordinates of Meyer Lansky.
Amazing new evidence demonstrates Giancana (and Rosselli) were actively collaborating with the Mossad, essentially mere ‘front men"" for Meyer Lansky's little-known Chicago partner-in-crime, Mossad-connected Hyman Larner, the real 'boss""' of the mob in the Windy City.
Carlos Marcello is not the only major ""Mafia"" figure whose connections with Organized Crime syndicate boss Meyer Lansky have been ignored by Lansky's friendly biographer Robert Lacey.
Both Marcello and Rosselli have particular prominence in the annals of criminal folklore, especially in relation to the Kennedy assassination.
He was Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana's primary representative there; e Rosselli was a major figure in Organized Crime in Havana, representing the interests of the Chicago Mafia, where Lansky also dominated gambling operations.
By all standard accounts, Rosselli was very much a key figure in the modern ""Mafia"" as we know it.
In short, while Marcello's activities were based almost entirely in his Gulf Coast fiefdom , Rosselli operated as almost a roving ambassador for the Italian wing of Organized Crime (popularly called ""the Mafia.""), primarily the Chicago branch.
Lacey's biography (which is otherwise quite detailed) would suggest—by virtue of ignoring both Marcello and Rosselli— that Lansky had no connections with them at all, or that any connections he did have were so insignificant that they weren't even worth mentioning.
Rosselli's name—like that of Marcello—has also been prominently linked to the Kennedy murder.
One can only wonder why Lansky's biographer failed to bring in these clearly important connections.
Even Tiger (described in the index as """" is mentioned—not once, but twice.
Rosselli was also particularly close to Lansky's Florida and Havana lieutenant, Santo Trafficante, Jr, who is also practically a ""non-person"" in Lacey's account of Lansky's ventures.
Like Rosselli, Trafficante was also a major figure in the annals of crime and much more so than even Rosselli, was an intimate working partner of Lansky.
In fact, as we shall see in much more detail in Chapter 12, Trafficante— although a ""Mafia"" leader—was Lansky's immediate underling in the gambling and narcotics rackets.
In Lacey's biography of Lansky, Trafficante is also given short shrift.
In fact, he is hardly mentioned at all, except in minor passing—just eight times.
In fact there are fewer references to Trafficante than there are to yet another Lansky dog, Bruzzer, who rates 13 references, including a detailed review of the dog's sad final days.
In Kennedy assassination folklore this is also particularly relevant, inasmuch as we have been told repeatedly that Trafficante once told one Jose Aleman, Jr., a wealthy Cuban exile, that JFK was scheduled to be hit.
THE LANSKY-CIA ALLIANCE All of this is interesting about Rosselli and Trafficante, particularly in the context of their central involvement in CIA-Organized Crime assassination plots aimed at Fidel Castro who had seized control of Lansky's gambling operations in Havana.
Indeed, as we shall see in Chapter 12, Lansky's CIA linkage goes far beyond Cuba and the Caribbean.
Prior to the advent of Castro, Cuba had been a primary gambling money-making base of operations for the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and its Mafia lieutenants.
In 1944, when the United States feared trouble from the Cuban left, Lansky reportedly persuaded Batista to step down for a while.
When he came back in 1952, it was after the current President, Carlos Prio Socarras, was persuaded to resign, a departure reportedly eased by a bribe of a quarter of a million dollars and a major stake in the casino business.
When the Batista regime began to crumble before a revolution of popular outrage, the mob hedged its political bets by courting Fidel Castro.
On the one hand, some of its members had been active in the revolution, ferrying guns to Castro's guerrillas.
It was at this point, then, that the mob did a turn-around and began working against Castro.
Although many syndicate figures still hoped that they could resume operations in Cuba after Castro was removed from office, Lansky was more realistic and practical.
He began looking to the Bahamas as his next Caribbean gambling base of operations.
It was during this period the CIA was preparing to move against Castro.
The fact is that many of the anti-Castro Cubans who had settled in Miami and elsewhere following Castro's rise to power were Cuban Jews.
THE CUBAN 'JEWISH CONNECTION' American CIA-financed anti-Castro propagandist Paul D Bethel, writing in the December 15, 1965 issue of the Latin America Report (subtitled the ""Free Cuba News"") gives us some interesting facts about the status of Jews in Cuba before and after the advent of Castro.
Bethel noted that of a total of 11,000 Jews in Cuba at the time of Castro's takeover, only 1,900 remained at that time.
The rest had already joined the anti-Castro Cuban colonies which had largely migrated to the Miami and New Orleans areas.
LANSKY AND THE ASSASSINATION PLOTS Although Anthony Summers’ previously-cited book on the JFK conspiracy, aptly titled Conspiracy, devotes very little attention to Meyer Lansky's pivotal role in Organized Crime, he does make reference to a CIA anti-Castro operation funded by Lansky.
CIA operative E Howard Hunt put together the Revolutionary Democratic Front, a coalition of anti-Castro Cubans, headed by Manuel Antonio de Varona, a former president of the Cuban Senate.
In fact, as Summers tells us, de Varona met with Lansky for financial support and also received funds through the Washington, D.C. firm of Edward K Moss and Associates, which represented the interests of Lansky operatives Dino and Eddie Cellini.
Now although the famous CIA-Mafia assassination plots against Castro have been reported time and again, the key organized crime players in the tale are always the aforementioned Santo Trafficante, Jr., Johnny Rosselli and Sam Giancana of Chicago.
Rosselli's biographers note that it was CIA contract agent Robert Maheu, a longtime acquaintance of Rosselli, who initiated the CIA's dealings with organized crime in the anti-Castro plots.
One was Rosselli's Chicago boss, Sam Giancana, and the other was Santo Trafficante, Meyer Lansky's colleague in the Havana casinos.
In fact, as we shall see in Chapter 12 when we examine the LanskyTrafficante relationship further, Trafficante was Lansky's subordinate.
All of Trafficante's anti-Castro operations in league with the CIA were being conducted with Lansky's approval and under Lansky's watchful eye.
Skilled assassins, recruited from around the globe (and often from the ranks of professional mercenaries and from within organized crime) were on retainer for use in the CIA's own private ""hit team"" or terrorist army, as the case may be.
One of the prime in-house supervisors of the ZR/Rifle Team project was the CIA's counterintelligence chief, Israel's loyal ally, James J Angleton.
ROSSELLI & THE JFK ASSASSINATION That Rosselli, for example, was entwined in some aspect of the JFK assassination conspiracy seems certain.
Evidence suggests that Rosselli was definitely engaged in activities during the summer and fall of 1963 that tied him directly to several of the key figures in the assassination conspiracy.
Rosselli's biographers themselves have suggested that Rosselli was indeed involved in the assassination itself.
It was in the same controversial building that the Cuban Revolutionary Council had an office.
The full story of Sam Giancana's role in much of these matters—the JFK assassination in particular—never became known until his own nephew and brother went public in 1992 with their book Double Cross.
However, we now know that there was indeed a major Mossad influence at work in the affairs of Sam Giancana.
An eye-opening new book, Double Deal, bares new facts about the secret history of the famed Chicago ""Mafia,"" revealing certain significant never-before-told details that further confirm the likelihood of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination.
Despite his famous ""Mafia"" name, Corbitt's co-author, Giancana, was never involved in the family business and earlier wrote the account of the life and crimes of his late uncle, who had been murdered in 1975.
Despite the media-ballyhooed ""revolving door"" of Italian-American Mafia bosses such as Giancana and others who were alternately jailed or ""whacked,"" it was Lamer who was continually in charge.
Beyond that, the authors reveal that much of Lamer's criminal activity was conducted not only in concert with the CIA, but also, in particular, with the Mossad.
Lamer was not just a major figure in Chicago crime, but on the international scene as well.
He was also a longtime associate of Jewish crime chief Meyer Lansky but, effectively, Lansky's successor when Lansky died in 1983.
According to Corbitt, he learned early on, during his mob days, of Larner's existence, although Larner's presence so high up in the mob was something neither government investigators nor a media (which was otherwise fascinated by the mob) wanted to focus on.
But when Hy Larner's name was mentioned in the papers, he was described only as an ‘associate’ or ‘protégé’ or some gangster and nothing more than that.
It was the partnership with the Mossad—running guns to Israel—-that gave the Chicago mob its 'get out of jail free' card as far as Israeli sympathizers high up in the Justice Department were concerned.
Everything was coming in and out of Panama, which meant that everything was being handled by Hy Lamer.
Lamer was without a doubt Sam Giancana's most trusted financial advisor.
He had everybody who was anybody in Panama—from bankers to generals—eating out of his hand.
In addition, Corbitt and Giancana reveal, Lamer was also deeply enmeshed with two of Lansky's chief high-level lieutenants, Carlos Marcello in New Orleans and Santo Trafficante in Tampa.
The two southern Mafia leaders were engaged with Lamer in lucrative guns and drugs smuggling operations in the Caribbean, not to mention gambling as well.
But Hy Lamer and Meyer Lansky weren't just Zionists, they were also mobsters who believed the end justifies the means.
Corbitt also reveals the amazing story of how Giancana (with Larner's help) finally got the United States Justice Department off his back.
It turns out that as much as President Lyndon Johnson and his Zionist advisors wanted to wage war against Egypt and the other Arab states on behalf of Israel, United States entanglement in Vietnam made it impossible for Johnson to act.
However, Giancana not only put up a substantial amount of money to help arm Israel for its 1967 war against the Arab countries, but, in addition, Lamer and Giancana arranged shipments of stolen weapons to Israel from one of their outposts in Panama, an operation conducted in league with the Mossad's Panamanian-based operative, Michael Harari.
In return for this service on behalf of Israel, President Johnson ordered the Justice Department to drop its campaign against Giancana.
In the end, though, the arrangement between Giancana and Lamer came to an end.
GIANCANA AND ROSSELLI EXECUTED Giancana was murdered execution style in his own home in Chicago on June 19, 1975.
As it just so happens, Giancana was killed the very day that congressional investigators were on their way to Chicago to interview the Mafia leader about reported CIA-organized crime plots against Castro.
Sam and Chuck Giancana frankly assert in their own book that it may have been Johnny Rosselli who helped arrange Giancana's murder.
According to the Giancanas they believe that the CIA contracted out the Giancana murder and that the CIA had arranged it through Trafficante.
The Giancanas believe that Trafficante, in turn, saw to it that Rosselli arranged the Chicago hit on Sam Giancana.
On August 7, the flamboyant mobster's butchered corpse bobbed up in a drum from the bottom of the ocean.
Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker note that there have been suspicions that it was indeed Trafficante, again, who may have even arranged the hit on Rosselli.
However, they point out that there are many in the Mafia who do not believe this necessarily to be the case.
In the judgment of Rosselli's biographers, ""The CIA certainly had the contacts in Cuban Miami to pull off Rosselli's execution, and as it had demonstrated by enlisting him in the first place, it had the will.
Even the evidence pointing to Trafficante did not rule out collaboration by the spy agency.
In Chapter 12 we shall see, indeed, that Trafficante, as Lansky's primary lieutenant in the Southeast Asian drug smuggling racket, developed even closer and more intimate ties to the CIA following the JFK assassination.
Trafficante himself died of kidney failure in 1987—just four years after Lansky.
So, once again, the Mossad connection is very much there, although there are few ""JFK assassination experts"" who are willing to admit it.
The Lansky-CIA-Southeast Asian Drug Pipeline and the Mossad Connection Tampa, Florida Mafia boss Santo Trafficante, Jr. has frequently been mentioned as a possible mastermind behind the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The media has also portrayed Trafficante as the prime mover behind the international heroin racket operating out of Southeast Asia.
However, the truth is that it was Meyer Lansky who was the primary architect of the global drug operations.
The Lansky heroin pipeline was conducted through the CIA-backed French Corsican Mafia in Marseille and used the CIA's covert activities in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War as a cover for its operations.
In fact, all the evidence suggests that the drug smuggling was a joint CIA-Organized Crime venture.
What's more, Lansky's chief drug money laundering bank in Switzerland was a Mossad operation.
Thus, the Lansky Crime Syndicate/Mafia connections with Israel's allies in the CIA are even deeper and more intimate than we have been led to believe.
Scott is correct, for any careful, in-depth examination of the global drug racket shows conclusively that Israel's allies in the Lansky crime syndicate and the CIA are very much a part of the international drug racket.
First published in 1972—despite the strongest efforts of the CIA to block its publication—McCoy's classic work, The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia, has withstood the test of time.
The new edition is an equally remarkable work which not only includes additional findings uncovered in the subsequent 20 years since its initial publication, but also a valuable preface in which McCoy outlines the CIA operations against his research and the publication of the book.
In 1933 Lansky moved into the Miami Beach area and took over most of the illegal off-track betting and a variety of hotels and casinos.
One of Lansky's earliest associates in Florida was Santo Trafficante, Sr., a Sicilian-born Tampa gangster.
Trafficante had earned his reputation as an effective organizer in the Tampa gambling rackets and was already a figure of some stature when Lansky first arrived in Florida.
TRAFFICANTE THE FRONT MAN ""By the early 1950s Trafficante had himself become such an important figure that he delegated his Havana concessions to Santo Trafficante, Jr., the most talented of his six sons.
The younger Santo's official position in Havana was that of manager of the Sans Souci Casino, but he was far more important than his title indicates.
LANSKY MOVES TO THE TOP Lansky biographer Hank Messick makes it very clear that it was Trafficante Jr. who played a key role in ensuring Lansky's dominance over syndicate gambling in Cuba.
Anastasia's removal from the scene was vital to Lansky's ultimate dominance.
Messick notes that Trafficante got caught in the middle between Albert Anastasia and Lansky over the Havana gambling.
Not only did Trafficante opt to abandon his fellow Italian Mafia figure, but Trafficante also swore a blood oath Mafia-style, assuring Lansky of his support.
Following a police raid of the Appalachian conference—attended exclusively by top Mafia figures from around the country, Trafficante included—public attention began focusing on ""the Mafia""—thanks to the media.
The official story has always been that a local policeman just happened to stumble upon the conclave at the home of Mafia figure Joseph Barbara.
The officer called in reinforcements and a major ""bust"" took place, following a heated chase of the Mafia figures through the briars and brambles of the rural countryside.
Not only were Mafia leaders immobilized by the continuing publicity, but also they were demoralized.
Despite all this, as Messick notes, Trafficante himself stood to benefit.
Clearly, a close working relationship between Lansky and Trafficante had been cemented.
It continued for many years, up to and including—and beyond—the critical year of 1963.
It was in 1970, however, that Lansky, preparing to take refuge in Israel, turned over most of his responsibilities to his subordinate, Santo Trafficante, Jr.
In 1968—just two years earlier—Trafficante had journeyed to Saigon, Hong Kong and Singapore.
It was there in the exotic East that he was solidifying the longtime relationship between Lansky and the CIA in the international drug racket.
Here we turn once again to Professor Alfred McCoy for an elucidation of Lansky's ties with the CIA in the Southeast Asian drug racket and the covert part it played in the CIA's involvement in the Vietnam conflict.
After crossing the Atlantic in a luxury liner, Lansky visited Luciano in Rome, where they discussed the narcotics trade.
He then traveled to Zurich and contacted prominent Swiss bankers through John Pullman, an old friend from the rum running days.
This bank, as we have seen, was the brainchild of longtime Israeli Mossad officer Tibor Rosenbaum.
In Chapter 15 we shall examine the Lansky-Rosenbaum-BCI link to the JFK assassination in detail.
After lengthy discussions, Lansky and the Corsicans are reported to have arrived at some sort of agreement concerning the international heroin traffic.
All of this took place at the same time Israel's friend in the American OSS , James Angleton was engaged in the region, assisting the emigration of European Jews to Palestine.
The communists had amassed much political clout in the region and the CIA utilized the Corsican Mafia to shatter the communists’ strength.
While the CIA was instrumental in restoring the Corsican underworld's political influence, it was not until the 1950 dock strike that the Guerinis gained enough power to take control of the Marseille waterfront.
Since the Hmong's main cash crop was opium, the CIA adopted a complicitous posture toward the traffic, allowing the Hmong commander, General Vang Po, to use the CIA's Air America to collect opium from his scattered highland villages.
In their first years of operation, these laboratories exported high-grade no. heroin to United States troops fighting in Vietnam.
Operation Mongoose, it turns out, was under the direction of General Edward Lansdale whom, assassination researcher Bernard Fensterwald notes later ""reportedly cultivated a close relationship with the Corsican Mafia during his controversial service in Vietnam."" a Interestingly enough, it was Shackley and Clines—upon ""retiring"" from the CIA who set up an arms dealing agency—the Egyptian Transport Service Company.
The role of Lansky in all of these activities, however, has been carefully ignored, even by writers—Alfred McCoy, the notable exception— who have exposed the CIA's role in the global drug racket.
The Making of an Unfriendly World, journalist Jonathan Kwitny takes several pages to outline the ClIA-backed drug trafficking networks operating out of Southeast Asia and using the CIAallied Corsican crime families as a central distribution source.
Kwitny points out the role of Charles ""Lucky"" Luciano in establishing the initial networks which also utilized the Sicilian crime families in the Mediterranean.
Nor does Kwitny make reference to Santo Trafficante, Jr., Lansky's chief lieutenant and primary heir in the global drug racket.
According to Kwitny, the principal architect of the crime was, by his estimation, more than likely New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello—who, as we have seen, was one of Lansky's local front men.
It is also worth mentioning as well that Lansky's friendly biographer, Robert Lacey, writing in his 1991 biography of Lansky goes to great lengths to suggest that Lansky had no part in the international drug racket.
This, as we have seen, is par for the course as far as Lacey's attitude toward Lansky is concerned.
However, Rachel Ehrenfeld, one of the world's leading experts on the drug combine and its connections with global terrorism, writes in her book Evil Money that ""there exists reliable evidence to the contrary.
Considering the CIA's alliance with Lansky's allies in the Corsican Mafia, it is interesting to consider here that there are those who believe that the Corsican Mafia or other French elements may have played a role in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
There is evidence, indeed, that at least one French mercenary did show up in Dallas the day JFK was slain.
Writing in Reasonable Doubt, Henry Hurt explores one aspect of the so-called ""French connection"" in some detail.
He describes the possible role of a French OAS terrorist in the assassination.
As we saw in Chapter 6 and in Chapter 9, the OAS was comprised of CIA-backed French forces who opposed granting independence to the French colony in Arab Algeria.
This led them into direct confrontation with French President Charles DeGaulle who granted Algerian independence.
A few hours later, John F Kennedy was in Dallas, where, at 12:30m. he was assassinated.
French intelligence wanted to ascertain whether he was expelled to Canada or Mexico.
Roux happened to be in Fort Worth on November 22, having entered the country on November 19 and leaving at Laredo, Texas on December 6.
When questioned later, Souetre said that Mertz was an old enemy who often used his name and may have been trying to implicate him in misdeeds.
THE HUNT CONNECTION Interestingly enough, it was CIA man E Howard Hunt (whom we first met in Chapter 9) who was one of the CIA's point men in the dealings with Souetre and OAS intelligence *'' That the two may have been in Dallas— perhaps even together—during the time of the JFK assassination is intriguing, to say the very least and yet another of the details that, taken together, demonstrate continuing intimate connections between persons and institutions that have been repeatedly linked to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
In Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 we shall see that Israeli Mossad/ Lansky-linked elements in New Orleans and elsewhere funneled money to the OAS for a 1962 assassination attempt against Charles DeGaulle and that, indeed, these same elements are tied directly to the JFK assassination.
Both are practitioners of what one retired CIA operative has called the ‘clandestine arts'—the basic skill of operating outside the normal channels of civil society.
Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana's family biographers have written of Giancana's own elaboration on this relationship.
ISRAEL, THE CIA AND THE DRUG COMBINE All the evidence we have covered here suggests that the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate were indeed partners in many areas of mutual concern—not only in Cuba and in the Southeast Asian drug racket—but also in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
And as we saw in Chapter 6, Lansky’s allies in Israel stood much to benefit from American involvement in Southeast Asia.
While Israel was using America's engagement in and preoccupation with the Vietnam conflict as a means whereby Israel could flex its muscle in the Middle East, the Lansky narcotics network was using its partnership with the CIA during the Vietnam War as a cover for its drug-smuggling.
And as we have seen in Chapter 8, the CIA and Israel itself had long and close ties equally as incestuous of those of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and Israel.
That Israel had its own difficulties with John F Kennedy we have already seen.
Clearly, this alliance of forces against JFK was such that there was really no way John F Kennedy could have ever completed his first term in the White House.
Mickey Cohen and the JFK Assassination Conspiracy The role of Meyer Lansky's West Coast Henchman — longtime Israeli loyalist Mickey Cohen—in the JFK assassination conspiracy is one of history's little-known stories.
Cohen — who was one of Jack Ruby's idols — apparently had a direct hand in the initial stages of Israeli machinations against John F Kennedy.
Evidence suggests also that the death of film actress Marilyn Monroe was linked, in fact, to the Israeli connection in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
When Mickey Cohen's name has appeared in numerous books and monographs relating to the JFK murder, it has only been in passing.
Cohen, it would appear on the surface, deserves mention if only because of his involvement in Organized Crime which figures so prominently in JFK conspiracy theories.
However, Cohen's intimate involvement with Israel and its international intrigue, and Cohen's dedication to advancing Israel's interests—even at the expense of his own criminal money-making activities—needs to be examined further.
The evidence we shall examine here suggests that even the death of film actress Marilyn Monroe is indeed linked to the John F Kennedy assassination in a way never imagined.
Cohen, as we shall see, was using Miss Monroe—one of John F Kennedy's illicit liaisons—as a conduit to learn Kennedy's intentions toward Israel.
There is a lot more to the story of Marilyn Monroe's affair with JFK than the tabloids have told us.
COHEN'S MEMOIRS The primary source on Mickey Cohen is the Los Angeles mobster's own colorful memoirs.
In My Own Words—is one of the more fascinating first-hand accounts of life in Organized Crime.
Virtually all of the popular accounts of life in the mob come from former ""Mafia"" members or associates.
Cohen— with the exception of Michael Milan, whom we first met in Chapter 7—is perhaps the only other non-Italian, non-Mafia Organized Crime leader to put his experiences in writing.
Cohen, as Hollywood's rackets boss, was a central player in that unique underworld that links the entertainment industry to Organized Crime.
Cohen's ""ghost-writer,""—the man who put Cohen's sometimes inelegant ramblings together and edited them for publication—was John Peer Nugent.
THE CIA CONNECTION A former correspondent for Newsweek, Nugent was—on one occasion— taken into custody while in Africa on suspicion of being a CIA agent.
He was released through the personal intervention of then-Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
However, according to organized crime authority Art Kunkin, Nugent did have CIA connections.
Weberman, co-author of Coup d'Etat in America, where he—Nugent—sought to refute CIA complicity in the JFK assassination.
In this context, one can't help but wonder if Cohen's memoirs weren't a laundered version, CIA-style.
Both what does appear in Cohen's reminiscences—and what doesn't appear—are equally intriguing.
Cohen's memoirs are a gold-mine of often fascinating information, particularly in regard to the Hollywood mobster's early links to Israel and its birth struggle.
SUCCESSOR TO SIEGEL Cohen was the West Coast successor to Meyer Lansky'’s ill-fated boyhood crony, Benjamin Siegel, Organized Crime's top man on the West Coast until his bloody assassination on June 20, 1947.
Remembered best as ""the man who invented Las Vegas,"" the handsome Siegel was shot dead in the Beverly Hills home of his second wife, mob playgirl Virginia Hill.
Lansky and Siegel were longtime friends and early partners in Brooklyn at the beginning of their initial reach into the upper echelons of Organized Crime.
Believed by Organized Crime's ruling commission of looting funds earmarked for the casino network he was establishing in Las Vegas on behalf of the syndicate, Siegel was slain in retribution for his betrayal.
LANSKY ORDERS THE HIT Yet, Lansky himself apparently agreed to the decision that Siegel had to be executed.
HOOVER SENDS HIS SYMPATHIES In Chapter 7 we explored the FBI Director J Edgar Hoover's seeming inability to acknowledge the existence of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate as well as Hoover's connections to Israel's American-based intelligence and propaganda agency, the Lansky Syndicate-financed AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith.
Michael Milan (whom we first met in Chapter 7 as a mutual associate of both Hoover and Lansky) says that when the hit was ordered on Ben Siegel, ""Even himself had to concur and told everybody to stand away.
LANSKY 'S 'EYES AND EARS' According to Lansky's biographer, Hank Messick, it was Cohen who was Lansky’'s real ""eyes and ears"" in Southern California—not his good friend Siegel.
One of Cohen's primary responsibilities was keeping an eye on the free-wheeling and reckless Siegel on Lansky's behalf.
When Siegel was removed from the scene it was Cohen who stepped in and took charge of Lansky's West Coast affairs—quite a fortuitous set of circumstances for the simian thug who could —by no means—ever have competed with Siegel in a beauty contest.
COHEN & ISRAEL Aside, however, from his direct ties to Lansky, and his own intra-mob machinations, Mickey Cohen was in the State of Israel's camp from the very beginning of its existence—even before.
By his own admission, Cohen was engaged in arms smuggling and fund-raising for Israel even before Israel had become a state.
Speaking of his crony, Mike Howard, Cohen recounted the day that Howard introduced him to an Israeli operative.
And the guy tells me this story about the Haganah, which was organized by the David Ben-Gurion guy.
And he tells me especially about the Irgun and the type of war they're fighting against the British, and the type of guys they are and all this.
Hecht appeared at Cohen's headquarters accompanied by a representative of the bloody terrorist Irgun gang.
MENACHEM BEGIN COMES TO TOWN In his own memoirs Jimmy Fratianno, a top West Coast Mafia figure-turned-government informant, gives us a hint as to who Cohen's Irgun friend may have been.
This guy's wearing a black armband and he tells us he's wanted back there for bombing a hotel that killed almost a hundred people.
Afterwards these other guys from the Haganah, another underground outfit, start arguing with Begin about who's going to handle the money.
He was so devoted to Israel, indeed, that he allowed his criminal activities to go by the wayside.
And plenty of armament and equipment was collected that you couldn't possibly get.
He couldn't openly allow it to be known that he was okaying stuff to be shipped back there or that stuff was being stolen from the ships that were coming back from the Second World War.
To me, he was the greatest man in the world, Harry Truman, because of what he done for Israel and because he made it available for us to do.
Some of the stuff and equipment like machine guns that we got back to Israel had never got a chance to be used in the Second World War.
Gary Wean—whose business it was to keep an eye on Cohen's activities—later put his fascinating experiences down in an informal memoir entitled There's a Fish in the Courthouse.
Wean's contributions to Kennedy assassination research, however, have not received the widespread recognition they deserve.
What's more, as a Criminal Intelligence Investigator for the Los Angeles District Attorney's Bureau of Investigation, Wean was privy to much ""inside"" information about Cohen and his activities in Hollywood.
Later, Wean was chief investigator for the Ventura County Public Defenders Office until 1970.
In his memoirs, Wean says he saw Ruby twice in Hollywood in 1946 and in 1947.
The first time Ruby was riding with Cohen in Cohen's big black limousine, although, on that occasion, they were not introduced.
According to Wean, he and his partner went to a club known as Harry's Place.
Ruby was there, and Wean introduced himself and informed Ruby he was a police officer.
Since the war's over the West Coast is dead, so is Chicago, We're moving ‘everything’ to New Orleans and Miami.
We feel that it's flowing in from other Cosa Nostra organizations in other parts of the country for investment by the local mobs.
It wasn't until 1963, however, that the relationship came full circle, as we shall see in Chapter 14.
COHEN, MARILYN MONROE AND JFK By 1960, Cohen was an established power in the West Coast syndicate operations of Meyer Lansky.
And Cohen was also a key figure in Hollywood, nurturing his relationships with the film colony there—for his own insidious purposes.
Cohen was also manipulating beautiful screen star Marilyn Monroe for yet another purpose—one which had international implications.
Now as the legend goes, it was ostensibly the Frank Sinatra connection that led to the introduction of Marilyn Monroe to John F Kennedy.
Wean reveals that Cohen's close friend, entertainer Joey Bishop—who also happened to be a member of Sinatra's famous clique known as ""the rat pack""—was the one who actually set up the circumstances that led to the initial liaison between JFK and Miss Monroe during the 1960 presidential campaign.
Begin was spending more time hanging around Cohen in Hollywood than in Israel.
Begin desperately wanted to know what Kennedy's plan was for Israel if he became president.
Wean learned this from a young lady named Mary Mercandante who was jealous of Piscitelli's relationship with Miss Monroe.
However, according to Wean, Piscitelli told Miss Mercandante that Marilyn would get upset when he began pressing her, saying she didn't know anything about politics.
She appears to be yet another of the many victims of what ultimately evolved into the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up.
Now although there has long been widespread suspicion that Marilyn Monroe was herself perhaps murdered, the tabloids would have us believe that she was murdered by the Kennedy family to keep silent about her affair with the President and—allegedly also—his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
The evidence we have seen here, however, suggests that if Miss Monroe was murdered it indeed was to keep her silent—but for an entirely different reason.
What is interesting is that in his memoirs—which are filled with Cohen's incessant name-dropping and accounts of his friendships with a bevy of Hollywood figures—Cohen never once mentions Marilyn Monroe.
There were evidently certain things that Cohen and his co-author did not see fit to mention.
It is more than interesting to note, at least in passing, that Meyer Lansky himself had ""inside"" knowledge on the extra-marital affairs of Attorney General Robert Kennedy at the very least.
According to J Edgar Hoover biographer Curt Gentry, Lansky was overheard on a federal wiretap on August 1, 1962 telling his wife, Teddy, that Robert Kennedy was carrying on an affair with a woman in El Paso, Texas.
In any event, Mickey Cohen's strange activities were of continuing particular interest to Gary Wean.
He spent a lot of time with a weird-looking little guy at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel lunch counter and drug store area.
MELVIN BELLI According to Wean, after this coffee shop conference, Cohen and Begin departed.
There, Wean says, Cohen and Begin met with high-priced lawyer Melvin Belli, Cohen's longtime friend and attorney.
Cohen was sharing his girlfriend, stripper Candy Barr, with not only Ruby , but also with Begin, Israel's man in Hollywood.
However, Mickey Cohen had a lot more on his mind than his criminal activities and his sexual pursuits.
Cohen was interested in the survival of Israel, the nation he had helped establish.
COHEN'S MISSION Cohen's peculiar interest in JFK's Middle East policy, coupled with his unfortunate manipulation of Marilyn Monroe, along with his longtime devotion to the Zionist cause, places him squarely in the midst of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate's central part in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
The simian-like Los Angeles thug was very much privy to the circumstances of what really took place in the JFK assassination.
What Cohen may have known, however, was lost forever when the Lansky henchman died suddenly of a heart attack.
In Chapter 14 we shall examine Cohen's connection with Jack Ruby in more detail.
It was from a writer named Ed Tivnan who said he was looking into Begin's alleged association with American gangsters.
Tivnan was not interested in Wean's account of Begin's very real association with the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
When author Anthony Summers was preparing his book Goddess, a life of Marilyn Monroe, he contacted Wean for information and Wean provided Summers with all of the details we've reviewed in these pages.
However, when Summers’ biography of Miss Monroe finally hit the bookstores, the author had nothing to say about Cohen and the Israeli connection.
Instead, the book suggested that Miss Monroe's death was a proximate result of her affair with the Kennedy brothers.
Indeed, the book led the reader to believe that it was the Kennedys who were, one way or the other, responsible—directly or indirectly—for the young woman's tragic death.
This same Anthony Summers is the Anthony Summers who wrote an exhaustive study of the JFK assassination entitled Conspiracy.
However, when Summers released an up-dated edition of his book in 1992, he never reported the information that Wean provided him about the Israeli connection.
It is likely, in all fairness to Summers, that he probably did not understand the significance of what he had learned.
However, it is very clear, considering everything that we have already examined in these pages—and what we are about to examine—that Wean's discovery was a key to understanding what really happened on November 22, 1963.
Some have even pointed out that one of Ruby's first telephone calls he made immediately after the JFK assassination (just shortly after Lee Harvey Oswald had been arrested) was to Al Gruber, a Mickey Cohen associate in Hollywood.
Gruber, it also turns out—perhaps not surprisingly—was associated with Lansky's Mexico City syndicate drug-smuggling connection, ""Happy"" Meltzer, with whom, as we shall see in Chapter 14, Ruby had his own connections.
As it stands, ironically enough, Mickey Cohen was already incarcerated in federal prison by the time of the JFK assassination.
Lansky's West Coast lieutenant was one of many ""big names"" snared in the Kennedy war against the Lansky crime syndicate.
There was clearly no love lost between Mickey Cohen and the Kennedy brothers.
It seems likely—and Gary Wean believes, as he told this author—that Cohen's henchman Gruber was the intermediary for the Lansky syndicate in the delicate matter of how to silence the patsy—Oswald—who had somehow escaped being killed and was then in the custody of the Dallas police.
Mickey Cohen and Menachem Begin very clearly were involved in the initial stages of what ultimately evolved into the JFK assassination conspiracy precisely because of Kennedy's difficult foreign policy struggle with Israel which sparked the plot against the American president.
In the next chapter we will examine Jack Ruby's role further and consider his connections with the Lansky syndicate—and with Israel.
Jack Ruby Was More ""Mossad"" Than ""Mafia"" Jack Ruby's connections to the criminal underworld are well-documented.
However, what is almost always ignored is Ruby's integral link to the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate—not ""the Mafia.
And while there are occasional references to Ruby's CIA connections, his equally profound ties to Israeli intelligence are strictly ignored.
A complete examination of the real Jack Ruby—not the Ruby of legend—points further toward the likelihood of Mossad involvement in the assassination of President Kennedy.
Ironically, not only did Ruby silence Oswald and help perpetuate the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up, but he also added fuel to the fire of speculation as a consequence.
Had Lee Harvey Oswald died of a heart attack in the Dallas jail, rather than at the hands of a mob-linked thug named Jack Ruby, suspicion of a conspiracy might not have evolved so quickly.
Yet, when Jack Ruby stepped into the public limelight and eliminated Oswald, attention was focused on the strange background of the Chicagoborn underworld figure who had killed the alleged assassin.
Interestingly enough, McWillie's bosses at that time were Meyer and Jake Lansky.
Ruby mysteriously spoke of meeting two brothers who'd owned the Tropicana Casino which McWillie managed.
Ruby said he was unsure of their last name but thought it had been Fox.
It has long been known that Meyer and Jake Lansky were in fact the two key Tropicana owners.
Meyer and Jake Lansky were known as the most prominent Syndicate men expelled by the Castro government and were in fact then living in Miami.
Ruby said he thought one of the 'Fox brothers’ first names may have been Martin.
Ruby further testified that Fox and McWillie had also subsequently dropped by his nightclub, where they posed for photographs with him.
Ruby biographer Seth Kantor notes that there were brothers named Martin and Pedro Fox who were Cuban nationals and involved in the Tropicana.
He was telling them the truth, and begged to be taken out of Texas so he could tell them more.
RUBY AND THE LANSKY DRUG RACKET Peter Dale Scott has scored G Robert Blakey and his House Assassinations Committee for its dismal failure to explore and to expose Ruby's Lansky connections which are very strong indeed.
Scott, who has studied Jack Ruby's criminal antecedents, has outlined Ruby's critical positioning in the Lansky syndicate.
RUBY WAS NOT 'MAFIA' According to Scott, the House Committee investigation of Ruby and his underworld associates chose to focus on what Scott describes as an ""ethnic model of organized crime as 'La Cosa Nostra'""**°—that is, focusing on the so-called ""Mafia,"" the popularized media sobriquet for Italian elements in the organized crime underworld, rather than upon the more substantially predominant Jewish elements personified by Meyer Lansky and those in his sphere of influence.
For this active misrepresentation has deformed the two official investigations into the Kennedy assassination itself, not in marginal ways, but so as to conceal central truths about the assassination, truths that were embarrassing to those conducting the investigation.
Processes, one must add, which mutually affect the truth, but concealed, seats of political power in this country.
The deeper political processes of which Peter Dale Scott has noted ""have not yet been discerned"" are now, however, in the pages of Final Judgment, being bared for the first time.
RUBY'S ISRAELI CONNECTIONS Now although Jack Ruby was long known to be proud of his Jewish heritage, what is littlke known is that Ruby himself had an intimate connection with an individual with deep ties to the world of intelligence and to the pro-Israel lobby in the United States.
Luis Kutner of Chicago, who had represented Ruby when Ruby was called before the staff of the Kefauver Senate Rackets Committee in 1950 to discuss underworld activities in his former home base of Chicago.
According to Kutner, Ruby's offer was contingent upon the condition that the Kefauver Committee stay away from investigating organized crime in Dallas where Ruby was by then ensconced.
According to Scott, ""Kutner, by his own account, had known Ruby since 1936, when he had used Ruby to 'run errands' in his unsuccessful 1936 congressional campaign.
Serving as ""honorary chairman"" of this pro-Israel lobbying group was General Julius Klein, an American military figure who not only played a major role in supplying weapons to the Israeli Haganah underground prior to the establishment of Israel, but also assisted in the founding and training of the Israeli Mossad.
Clearly, Jack Ruby's friend and lawyer, Kutner, was a man with important ties to Israel and its global power networks.
Weberman raised the question as to whether this suggested Ruby might have been involved in an arms deal between Israel and South Africa, but noted that the FBI had then decided the number was JE-8-7475 rather than TE-8-7475.
There is, in fact, evidence of other Ruby connections to Israel at the time of the JFK assassination itself.
It is well known that while Ruby was milling about the Dallas Police Department after the assassination that Ruby claimed to be translating for Israeli ""reporters"" who were on the scene.
This is interesting, obviously, in that it seems unlikely that Israeli correspondents in the United States would have English capabilities so lacking they required the services of a Dallas strip club operator.
The answer that the master of ceremonies, researcher Walt Brown, gave was revealing in its own fashion.
However, Pepper's circumspect reference to the Mossad was a lightning bolt of recall to anyone who had already read Final Judgment.
Pepper's assertion involving the Mossad link to the arms smuggling operation involving Ruby is based on statements made to one of Pepper's investigators by former Colonel John Downie of the 902nd Military Intelligence Group, a unit based inside the Department of Defense.
According to Downie, the mysterious figure ""Raul""—whom King's accused assassin, James Earl Ray, claimed had helped frame him for King's murder—was part of a U.S.-based international arms smuggling operation that Pepper had already determined—through other sources— involved Jack Ruby.
The proceeds from the arms deals were reportedly split equally with the United States 902nd Military Intelligence Group using its cut for financing covert, off-budget, operations.
It appears the previously published Final Judgment had almost certainly already pinpointed the identity of the individual described by Pepper's source.
In the photo section of Final Judgment, it is pointed out that the famous ""umbrella man"" who was photographed in Dealey Plaza in Dallas on Nov., 1963 bore a remarkable resemblance to no less than the nowinfamous longtime Mossad figure, Michael Harari.
In 1963, Harari was in the field as a top Mossad's assassinations specialist and would have assuredly been in Dallas if the Mossad was a prime player in the JFK conspiracy.
RUBY AND THE BRONFMAN FAMILY Jack Ruby's covert activities were clearly well-established.
But independent researcher Brian Downing Quig came up with a Ruby connection that had never before been revealed.
Exploring the corrupt world of Arizona mob bagman and political boss Kemper Marley, linked to the infamous 1976 murder of investigative reporter Don Bolles, Quig learned from Marley's longtime publicist Al Lizanetz that not only had the Lanskylinked Bronfman bootlegging family been Marley's sponsors, but also that Jack Ruby himself was also on the Bronfman family's payroll.
Former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow reports that Ruby's pro-Castro gun-running was done in conjunction with former Cuban president Carlos Prio Socarras.
One of his partners would be Jack Ruby of Dallas, Texas, then known as Jack Rubinstein.
There are others who confirm that Ruby was in the gunrunning business in Florida during the late 1950's.
Kohly himself subsequently turned to Meyer Lansky for support and offered to return his casino rights if he, Kohly, were able to assume power in Cuba after Castro was removed.
Nonetheless, there is clearly more to the story of Jack Ruby that needs to be explored.
RUBY, OSWALD AND THE CIA The late John Henshaw, a crack investigative reporter operating out of Washington, D.C., did some of his own digging into Ruby's background.
According to Henshaw, Dallas police officials were actually in the process of investigating Ruby and Oswald in the assassination attempt on retired General Edwin Walker several months before the JFK murder.
A bullet was fired through Walker's window, although the general, a dedicated anti-communist and Castro critic, was unharmed.
This is yet another of the many unanswered questions surrounding the JFK mystery.
At any rate, according to Henshaw's account, a secret police investigation of the shooting linked Oswald and Ruby to the incident.
Then, according to Henshaw, a high-ranking FBI official was asked by a top official in the Justice Department to intervene and stop the impending arrest of the two Dallas operatives.
Henshaw said that it was the CIA itself that had asked the FBI to intervene.
According to Henshaw, the CIA was using Ruby to recruit Dallas men into the anti-Castro movement.
However, the FBI official refused to intervene, saying it would be obstructing justice.
The FBI official did say, though, that he would make the request only if he were formally directed to do so in a written communication signed by the Justice Department official.
Shortly thereafter, according to Henshaw's account, the FBI official then received a signed directive.
He contacted Dallas police and urged them not to arrest Oswald and Ruby.
Thereupon the Justice Department sent the communication to Dallas Police Chief Curry asking that Oswald and Ruby be left strictly alone.
The film covers Ruby's progress through the FBI and police screens guarding the entrance of the Dallas Police headquarters.
There is evidence of other possible contact between Ruby and Oswald— even in New Orleans.
This author received access to a private letter written on February 20, 1967 during the controversy over New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison's inquiry into the assassination.
The author of the letter described the fears of his aunt, a New Orleans woman, who was a neighbor of Lee Harvey Oswald's during his sojourn in the Crescent City.
She observed Oswald having visitors three times two ""Cuban looking"" men visited him twice and a man and woman came and picked up Oswald one weekend.
That Jack Ruby did indeed have ties to both the Lansky Syndicate and to the CIA involving Cuba is, today, not in doubt.
However, during the period of the Warren Commission investigation, the official government ""investigation"" preferred to look the other way.
After they were arrested and jailed, both men said they had been manipulated.
Whether Ruby—and Oswald—did, in fact, know that the assassination of Kennedy was in planning is another story.
Michael Milan, who has written of his role in working as part of a secret United States government team collaborating with the Lansky Syndicate says there were at least several people operating in Dallas who believed that they were not involved in a conspiracy to kill John F Kennedy, but, instead, in a conspiracy to kill Texas Governor John B Connally.
According to Milan, he played a part in the JFK assassination cover-up.
Milan claims that following the assassination he was dispatched to Dallas by J Edgar Hoover himself.
When Milan asked who set up the shooting, Brinkman said, ""I never met the guy before I was introduced to him by this broad at Carousel Club.
But I don't know who they are or where they was when the shooting started.
We was just supposed to shoot at the governor when they passed and get out of there.
When he returned to Washington he was met at the airport, he says, by Hoover who said, ""You already know too much.
LANSKY'S COURIER IN DALLAS One day prior to the JFK assassination one of Meyer Lansky's longtime personal couriers, one Jim Braden, was visiting in Dallas.
He was also on the scene in Dealey Plaza when JFK was assassinated, actually being taken into custody by the Dallas police, and then released.
Standard accounts of the role of organized crime in the JFK assassination conspiracy have frequently pointed out Braden's strange doings in Dallas.
What has been ignored, however, is his close relationship to Meyer Lansky.
David Scheim, writing in Contract on America, provides his readers a lengthy discussion of Braden, but never once mentions his connection with Lansky.
Scheim prefers to leave the reader with the impression that Braden was a ""Mafia"" courier—not a Lansky courier.
What Blakey does not mention, however, is that Braden was so much a key figure in the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate that he was a charter member of the Lansky Syndicate-financed La Costa Country Club.
In Chapter 10, as we have seen, it was Blakey who was on the payroll of Lansky associate, Morris Dalitzone of the founders of La Costa, after Dalitz and his partners sued Penthouse magazine for publicizing the mob links of the Carlsbad, California resort.
Blakey, in fact, served, in effect, as a character reference for the Lansky Syndicate defending the resort against the accusations—something Blakey, for obvious reasons, would not be inclined to brag about when proclaiming himself a crime-buster.
Hunt Oil Company that Jack Ruby visited on November 21, 1963—the afternoon before the assassination—and at approximately the same time.
Ruby visited the Cabana Motel sometime around midnight on the night before the assassination—November 21, 1963—while Jim Braden was a guest there.
During this same period in late 1963, David Ferrie was working for Mafia leader Carlos Marcello on the same floor . . . in the same building . . . just down the hall from Braden—in Room 1707.
In Chapter 11 we examined the role of CIA contract agent David Ferrie and his connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy in some detail.
That one of Meyer Lansky's chief couriers would be in Dallas and moving in Ruby's sphere of operations is evidence that the fine hand of Meyer Lansky himself was in motion in Dallas and, more than likely, this is a direct link between Lansky and Ruby.
Anything to do with a hit, a gambling operation, to go somewhere or to see somebody, was by courier.
Another Lansky associate, Michael Milan, has also written of the importance of mob couriers and the need for secrecy.
He kept it all in his head, too."" a There is evidence, however, that Ruby and Braden did indeed have a very close connection.
Lansky's courier Jim Braden was also a ""friend""*® of Lansky's Mexico City representative, ""Happy"" Meltzer,"" whom we met earlier in this chapter as the head of a drug-smuggling operation in which Ruby was evidently involved.
Obviously, Lansky's courier, Jim Braden, may have indeed been bringing a message from Lansky to Ruby.
But whatever his role in Dallas, there's no question but that he was there for a purpose.
All of this, taken together, suggests, as we have said, that the Lansky-Ruby connection is much deeper than might be perceived and far more than some ""crime solvers"" would have us realize.
What is especially interesting, further, is an additional Lansky connection to Ruby that surfaced after the assassination of JFK and after the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald.
MELVIN BELLI COMES TO TOWN In Chapter 13 we examined the strange—and little known role—of Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Cohen—himself a longtime Ruby associate and the Dallas mobster's role model—was obviously a key figure in the network of conspiracy.
It was Cohen's longtime friend—and attorney—Melvin Belli who stepped forward as Jack Ruby's defense attorney.
In fact, Belli was a regular at the Los Angeles nightspot, Rondelli's, of which Cohen was the secret owner.
The two were so close that Belli even once had Cohen introduced as ""Professor O'Brien from Harvard who's going to give you a talk on tax laws,"" “*° to a meeting of the American Bar Association in Miami.
According to Cohen, writing in his memoirs, the Los Angeles mobster assumed the platform and then began rattling on for some time, essentially saying nothing.
We heard a report that Seymour Ellison, a lawyer associated with Belli, got a phone call from “a Las Vegas attorney’ who said, 'Sy, one of our guys just bumped off the son of a bitch that gunned down the President.
He said Earl Ruby came to California three days after his brother was arrested; he watched Belli sum up a murder defense in a Los Angeles courtroom and he asked him to take the case.
He had learned that his fee would be paid by the sale of Ruby's story to newspapers, and he did not care to be involved in that sort of exploitation.
As a consequence, any final determination of just what role Ruby played in the JFK assassination scenario became another mystery in an endless series of mysteries.
This was not the end of Melvin Belli's role in the JFK controversy, however.
As pioneer JFK assassination investigator Mark Lane noted in his second book on the assassination, A Citizen's Dissent, Belli emerged as one of the leading defenders of the official Warren Commission version of the assassination.
According to Lane, ABC-TV's Les Crane show wanted to stage a debate between Lane and Belli.
It was during the first debate, in San Francisco, that Belli came on stage, wearing a cape over his tuxedo, and in his concluding remarks made his final judgment on the JFK assassination conspiracy.
He declared ""If we cannot trust the FBI, the CIA and Earl Warren, then God pity us.
Perhaps those assembled that evening constituted the largest paying audience to witness a debate in many years in San Francisco.
That which is not found within its many pages ostensibly did not happen.
A WELL-PLACED ERRAND BOY Although Jack Ruby's actual role in the planning stages of the JFK assassination conspiracy will probably never be fully known, there is no question that, in the end, Ruby became a critical factor in the cover-up.
His murder of Lee Harvey Oswald silenced the one man who could no doubt fill in at least some of the missing pieces of the puzzle.
Jack Ruby was a wellplaced errand boy, not only for Meyer Lansky and his global crime syndicate, but also, it appears, for the covert arm of the CIA as well.
Although Ruby sought to speak freely, the Warren Commission refused his entreaties to be allowed to come to Washington to tell his story.
The story of how Chief Justice Earl Warren refused to give Ruby the opportunity to leave Dallas and tell his story is a famous part of JFK assassination folklore.
As a consequence, Ruby never did have the chance to give his version of what really happened.
Just one player—albeit, in the end, an important one—Ruby played a starring role in a drama orchestrated far beyond his seamy Carousel Club in Dallas.
Ruby was an errand boy in a high-stakes operation—the assassination of an American president—that was being undertaken by the joint alliance of the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate, the CIA and Israel's Mossad.
A STRANGE STORY As this book was being completed, a very strange story about Jack Ruby came to this author's attention that bears repeating, if only for the reason that it should be part of the permanent record, particularly considering our contention that Israel did indeed have a hand in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The original source was a now deceased Idaho woman named Grace Pratt who related the story to a friend whose name must remain anonymous.
This author has spoken with the Oregon man, an elderly retiree, and has concluded that he believes very strongly in the reliability of Mrs.
George had worked in the Navy yard and Grace had cooked for many years in many of the big restaurants in San Francisco.
Tiny's had a side-by-side restaurant and bar with a door between, opening into the anteroom between the dining room and the kitchen.
After the dinner rush was over, Grace would fix her plate and one for Jack Ruby, and they would eat in the anteroom.
A big husky man came back, gripped her by the arm until she thought he would crush it and said, 'You didn't see anything, did you.
Anyone who knew Jack Ruby that well would always be able to recognize him going or coming.
She said she thought he was giving the message to someone that he had made it and was on his way.
She said there had already been a number of JFK assassination witnesses who had mysteriously died.
Two years after seeing him board for Israel, she heard through the underground that Ruby had gone to Brazil.
The source who provided the author with this unusual memorandum firmly believes that Mrs.
Pratt herself was convinced that she had seen Ruby boarding the plane for Israel.
It is worth remembering that even as these words are written, many leaders in Israel and leaders of the Israeli lobby in the United States are working tirelessly for the pardon of American-born Israeli spy, Jonathan Jay Pollard, sentenced to life in prison for passing United States defense secrets to Israel.
SOMEBODY WAS HELPING RUBY It is interesting to note that on October 6, 1966, at the time Ruby was granted a new trial, the Washington Daily News carried a story proclaiming that ""It's Possible for Ruby to Go Free,"" as a result of a second trial.
What's more, it's interesting to note a little-noticed column by veteran crime reporter Dorothy Kilgallen who had an abiding interest in the JFK case.
In her column datelined DALLAS, February 21, reporting on the Ruby trial, Miss Kilgallen reported that ""one of the best kept secrets of the Jack Ruby trial is the extent to which the federal government is cooperating with the defense.
It appears that Washington knows or suspects something about Oswald that it does not want Dallas and the rest of the world to know or suspect.
She reportedly told several friends, shortly before her ""accidental"" death from a combined drug overdose and alcohol, that she was about to crack the Kennedy case wide open.
That Ruby's path to possible freedom was being assisted by the FBI does raise questions.
Then, coupled with his reported ""death"" prior to a second trial—especially considering the story told by the late Grace Pratt—the mystery deepens.
The answer to that question has no direct bearing on the thesis of Final Judgment, but it may be a mystery that deserves further scrutiny.
Following the release of the first edition of Final Judgment, the author came across an obscure volume entitled The Ruby-Oswald Affair, published in 1988.
The author was the late Alan Adelson who had served as the attorney for Jack Ruby's family in the probate of Ruby's will.
I had heard rumors that Kennedy was not really dead, but was hidden away in South America.
In this case, the reference came from someone who had not actually known Jack Ruby in person.
Although photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald as well as photographs of John F Kennedy have been widely circulated, there are no known such photographs of Ruby.
Frankly, I do not find Adelson's posthumously-published proclamation of having seen ""Jack"" as any refutation of the story by Grace Pratt.
For the record, however, it seems appropriate to record the comments attributed to Adelson.
Obviously, Kaufman very much wanted to keep the ADL—an arm of Israel's Mossad— from being associated with Jack Ruby.
As readers may recall from the opening pages of Final Judgment, the author received an unusual manuscript from Dallas in the opening days of 2005.
Now, thanks to the Dallas manuscript, I have to confess that my efforts to ""be moderate"" and not focusing on someone who happened to be Jewish caused me to miss or ignore distinct Israeli connections in Dallas to the JFK conspiracy.
Despite all this, evil critics who charged that my book and my motivations were ""antiSemitic to the core"" have been proven wrong, very wrong, and as far as I am concerned this alone clears me of the charge.
Because I was not writing from an ""anti-Semitic"" viewpoint, as the liars charged, I missed some very serious points that, thankfully, have now been covered in this book.
Although the Grace Pratt story of Jack Ruby's phony ""death"" is controversial, I recently received an item from the Feb., 1978 edition of The Village Voice, written by Alexander Cockburn and James Ridgeway.
We have examined the interplay between the relatively small group of individuals whom we have linked to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Let us move forward and determine a critical point of contact that ties together the diverse—yet closely connected—elements behind the conspiracy that took the life of John F Kennedy.
This is vital to recognizing and understanding the central role of Israel's Mossad in the crime of the century.
Israel, the CIA, the Lansky Crime Syndicate and the Plot to Kill John F Kennedy Central to understanding the joint Mossad-CIA-Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate nexus in the plot to assassinate John F Kennedy is to recognize the importance of a littleexplored corporate entity based in Rome and known as Permindex.
New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw, indicted by Jim Garrison for conspiracy in the JFK assassination, served on the Permindex board of directors.
All of the firm evidence indicates Permindex was an Israeli operation—with close CIA connections—and _ tied inextricably with the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
Unraveling the mystery of Permindex explains the web of intrigue that ties all of the key players in the conspiracy together.
The Permindex connection is also the famous ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination.
And as we shall see, the French connection is, actually, the Israeli connection.
In Oliver Stone's film, JFK, actor Kevin Costner (portraying Jim Garrison) confronts actor Tommy Lee Jones and displays Italian newspaper articles exposing the activities of a Rome-based operation known as Permindex.
Shaw, an international trade executive, served on the board of Permindex.
The film audience is left with the impression that Permindex was a covert CIA operation, the purpose of which—at least in the film—is never defined.
However, as the evidence now shows, Permindex was a Mossad arms trading and money laundering venture operating in conjunction with the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
And Clay Shaw, a longtime CIA asset, serving on the Permindex board, was a prime player in the New Orleans phase of the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Therein, quite simply, lies the key to the mystery behind the JFK assassination.
Therein lies the explanation as to why Jim Garrison's investigation of Clay Shaw, a director of Permindex, had to be scuttled.
Not only had Garrison stumbled upon a definitive CIA link, but he had also discovered the Israeli connection.
THE SECRET ABOUT PERMINDEX Israel's Mossad was the key force behind Permindex.
In fact, one of the chief shareholders in the Permindex holding company was the Banque De Credit International of Geneva,” established by Tibor Rosenbaum, the longtime Director for Finance and Supply of Israel's Mossad.
It was BCI, as we saw in Chapter 7 and Chapter 12, which served as Meyer Lansky 's chief money laundering bank in Europe.
That Tibor Rosenbaum's BCI was a controlling force behind the enigmatic Permindex entity places Israel and its Mossad in the very center of the conspiracy behind the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Clay Shaw's positioning in New Orleans, site of one operational rung of the conspiracy, resulted in Shaw's implication in the investigation conducted by Jim Garrison.
Ultimately, as we now know, Garrison came to recognize that Israel's Mossad was intimately involved in the events in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
However, in the beginning, Garrison surely never even suspected it and certainly had no reason to do so.
JFK's secret war with Israel was an unknown factor in the geo-political events of the period.
It is clear, based upon the evidence that we shall review in these pages, that Permindex, which played so central a role in the JFK assassination conspiracy, was indeed one of these transnational ""overt, structured arrangements or forums"" of which Scott speaks.
Author Paris Flammonde's 1969 account of the Garrison investigation, The Kennedy Conspiracy, contains valuable information on Permindex, although, unfortunately, Flammonde didn't pursue the matter as far as he could have.
Had he done so he would have unearthed the IsraeliLansky Organized Crime Syndicate connection.
Flammonde cites several articles that appeared in the foreign press, specifically Italy's Paesa Sera and the Canadian publication, Le Devoir as his source for much of the information he provides his readers on Permindex.
These articles provide the unusual background of Permindex and point toward its real origins.
At the time CMC was established, it was asserted that CMC would function as an international commercial organization, that it would aid in the establishing of a permanent worldwide network of trade expositions, and generally assist concerns involved in trade matters.
Clay Shaw, of course, was the founder and director of the International Trade Mart in the key port city of New Orleans.
Thus, Shaw's connection with an international trade entity seems logical.
We refer to Shaw's tie to Seymour Weiss who ran New Orleans, alongside Carlos Marcello, for the Lansky syndicate and was Lansky's contact man with Louisiana's famed ""Kingfish,"" Huey P Long.
It was Weiss, however, who emerged as the Lansky syndicate bagman and political operative working in conjunction with Marcello.
To do so, of course, as we noted in Chapter 10, would point in the direction of Meyer Lansky.
In fact, one New Orleans-based CIA contract agent investigated by Jim Garrison—the ubiquitous and colorful Gordon Novel—is known to have written a letter to a ""Mr Weiss"" in which Novel discussed the dangers of the Garrison investigation.
The letter surfaced at the time that Garrison's inquiry was in full swing and Novel was seeking to avoid giving testimony.
Many have opined that the Mr Weiss in question was probably Novel's CIA superior, although others have suggested the ""Mr Weiss"" may have been another Weiss—and not Seymour.
Whatever the case, there is no question but that Seymour Weiss—a prime figure in the Lansky syndicate— was tied closely to the intelligence community and undoubtedly worked on its behalf in the context of his role with Standard Fruit.
The major fruit companies, as numerous works can attest, had extensive interplay with the CIA inasmuch as their vested interests in the so-called ""Banana Republics"" of Latin America were directly affected by the governments therein.
And needless to say, the CIA played a major role in the affairs of Latin America from almost its very inception.
THE MEN BEHIND SHAW You see, it was during the time that Weiss served as a director of the CIA-linked Standard Fruit that the powerful corporation was under the management of one Rudolph Hecht, a leading figure in the small and tightly knit but highly influential Jewish community of New Orleans.
Shaw maintained the high public profile with the Trade Mart that won him his place in New Orleans society, while Hecht and his associates were the real powers behind the scenes.
And among those who likewise served on the board of the International Trade Mart was another powerful figure in the Jewish community, Edgar Stern, Jr., whose father Edgar and his mother Edith were among the most prominent financial angels for the Israeli lobby in America.
As we shall see in Chapter 17 and Appendix Three, the Sterns—perhaps Shaw's closest friends—were the forces behind the WDSU media empire that played a key role in portraying Lee Harvey Oswald as a ""pro-Castro agitator"" prior to the JFK assassination, setting him up as the patsy.
Thus, there is indeed much more to Clay Shaw than what we have been told.
As we do, the reality of what Permindex was—and how it was intimately tied to the JFK assassination—will become more apparent.
Major Louis M Bloomfield of Montreal, Canada, a devoted and influential supporter of the Israeli cause.
In fact, Permindex had _ its headquarters in Bloomfield's base of operations in Montreal until 1961 at which time it was relocated to Rome.
There we learned how Bloomfield played a critical role in helping establish the state of Israel and its Mossad.
This rather intriguing detail suggests that Bloomfield's wide-ranging financial interests were, in fact, those of the Bronfman family.
The Bronfman family, which built its fortune working with the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate in the illegal liquor trade, have been key backers of Israel and leaders in the Zionist cause.
Edgar Bronfman most recently served as president of the World Jewish Congress.
But there is yet another intriguing Bronfman family link to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
When a Russian translator was needed for Lee Harvey Oswald's Russian wife, Marina, it was Texas oilman Jack Crichton, a former military intelligence officer who made the arrangements.
Bloomfield also maintained close links with Israel in his own Canadian business and social affairs.
The director of the Israeli-Canadian Maritime League, Bloomfield also served as Chairman of the Histadrut Campaign in Canada.
This bank, as we shall see, was implicated in Permindex intrigue in Europe that comes full circle back to New Orleans and the Clay Shaw connection.
In addition, it turns out, in the critical year of 1963, Bloomfield actually transferred $7. million into BCI's coffers.
This was ostensibly for the purpose of rescuing the Mossadcontrolled bank after the government of Liberia defaulted on a substantial loan from BCI, supposedly putting the bank in peril.
It helped channel money from rich investors around the world into Israel and performed any number of services for the country.
Once when Defense Minister Shimon Peres, when director general in the defense ministry, called Rosenbaum and told him that Israel needed $7 million within 24 hours for her national security, Rosenbaum found the money overnight.
Other accounts were held by the Histadrut, the Israeli labor federation, by Solel Bonhen (the Histadrut-owned supply and construction company), the Zim Navigation Co. and Israel Corporation, an investment company.
BLOOMFIELD AND United States INTELLIGENCE And, as we have already seen, the intelligence connections of Permindex chief Bloomfield were impeccable.
Although a Canadian by birth, Bloomfield was hired by J Edgar Hoover to serve as a recruiting agent for the FBI's counterespionage division, Division Five.
Bloomfield was also given an officer's rank in the United States Army during World War II and assigned to the Office of Strategic Services —just as had been the American who ultimately became his fellow Permindex director, Clay Shaw.
Angleton himself may have had contact with Shaw at that time, although there is no firm evidence to prove it.
However, there is One intriguing item which points to a possible connection between Shaw and Angelton during that period.
While serving with United States intelligence during World War II, Shaw was stationed for a time in France where he certainly had contact with the French intelligence.
At that time, one of the highest-ranking French intelligence officers was one Gustave Bertrand who was, in fact, a close friend for another OSS officer, James J Angleton.
This is speculation, of course, but there is no question, as the evidence now shows, that Angleton and Shaw were certainly moving in the same circles during World War I—and much later.
And as we shall see in this chapter and in Chapter 16, the French intelligence connections to Permindex and to the JFK assassination conspiracy are very strong indeed.
Yet, there is one definitive Angleton-Shaw connection that has been documented and it is interesting indeed.
When Shaw was later arrested by Jim Garrison, it was discovered his address book contained the private telephone number of the Principessa Marcelle Borghese.
As we saw in Chapter 7, it was Meyer Lansky who was the middle man between the OSS and organized crime, helping arrange for Sicilian Mafia support for the invading Allied troops in Italy.
MORE STRANGE CONNECTIONS That Clay Shaw's contacts in the Mossad-linked Permindex entity had a wide-ranging array of international interests in the world of intrigue is further evidenced by some of the other personalities involved.
Among those who were either investors in Permindex or who shared seats on the board of Permindex were several interesting characters with equally interesting connections.
The former premier of Hungary was a fierce anticommunist who maintained close connections not only to Israel's allies in the America CIA, but also to the anti-Castro Cuban colony in Miami, itself practically a joint operating subsidiary of both the CIA and the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
Seligman was intimately involved with the Israel-oriented Zionist agency known as the Jewish Colonization Association.
Dalitz was a longtime Lansky intimate who was Benjamin Siegel's successor as Lansky's point man in Las Vegas.
It was shortly thereafter that Blakey was placed in charge of the House Assassinations Committee investigation of the JFK murder.
Dalitz himself, as noted in Chapter 10, was also a longtime fund-raiser for the Israeli lobby in the United States and honored by the aforementioned Anti-Defamation League for his services. e Carlos Prio Socarras.
The President of Cuba from 1948-1952, Prio Socarras had been a front-man for Meyer Lansky's partner-in-crime, Cuban strongman Fulgencio Batista.
In fact, it was Lansky who persuaded Batista with a hefty bribe to ""step down"" in favor of Prio Socarras.
ISRAEL'S ROLE COMES FULL CIRCLE As we have noted, however, it is the Tibor Rosenbaum-BCI connection with Permindex that points most definitely toward the Israeli Mossad interest in Permindex.
BCI, as we have seen, was very much a creature of Israel and its Mossad.
Among the directors of Rosenbaum's BCI was Ernest Israel Japhet, also chairman and president of the Bank Leumi, the largest bank in Israel.
BCI and Bank Leumi were involved in the diamond trade and tied into Far East drug trafficking.
Two other directors of BCI—as we noted in Chapter 7—were Ed Levinson, front man at the Fremont Casino in Las Vegas for Lansky's close friend, Joseph ""Doc"" Stacher, who died in exile in Israel and John Pullman, Lansky's international money courier.
In Chapter 8 we learned that Eisenberg later became a business associate of CIA figure Theodore Shackley.
Shackley, as we discovered in Chapter 11, was the CIA's chief of station in Miami during the CIA-Lansky Crime Syndicate plots against Fidel Castro.
And, in Chapter 12, we learned, it was Shackley who was CIA chief of station in Laos during the period of the close working relationship between the CIA and the Lansky syndicate in the global drug racket.
It was Feinberg, as we saw in Chapter 4, who was the American Jewish fund-raising contact of the 1960 Kennedy for President campaign.
Feinberg's heavy-handed tactics so infuriated Kennedy that he privately told a close friend that, as president, he intended to enforce changes in campaign fund-raising regulations that would prevent powerful groups such as the American pro-Israel lobby from wielding so much influence.
Feinberg, additionally, of course, was close to Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion and, in fact, helped arrange the bitter meeting between Kennedy and Ben-Gurion recounted in Chapter 5.
The manager of Rosenbaum and Feinberg's Swiss-Israel Trade Bank was Gen.
Julius Klein, a United States Army officer, who had engaged in illegally re-routing shiploads of supplies and equipment scheduled to go to post-war Germany to the Haganah, the military forces of the Jews in Palestine.
However, Klein's services on behalf of the state of Israel were even more significant.
It was Klein who had been involved in setting up Israel's Mossad and in training its officers.
It was during his days working with the American OSS and Naval Intelligence—and the Lansky Crime Syndicate—that Stephenson cemented his ties with the Jewish anti-Nazi underground.
This particular operation, though seemingly far removed from the story of Palestine, in the long run greatly helped Israeli Intelligence in the early days of the state of Israel.
Here, almost certainly, Stephenson had contact, during those early days, with a young American who became a friend of Churchill—Clay Shaw, that American Army officer detailed to the Office of Strategic Services.
THE PERMINDEX PLOT Obviously, the connections between Tibor Rosenbaum’'s Israeli Mossad banking operation, the Banque de Credit International, and a wide-ranging array of figures tied closely to the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and—even—to Clay Shaw, a member of the Permindex board of directors, brings the conspiracy full circle.
That BCI was one of the primary shareholders of the Permindex entity clearly points toward a Mossad role in the Permindex plot that ended the life of John F Kennedy.
LANSKY 'S MIAMI-GENEVA COURIER Research by former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow not only sheds light on the connections between Lansky's Miami banks and Mossad officer Tibor Rosenbaum's BCI, but also provides us evidence of a role by Meyer Lansky in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Shortly after Morrow had published his first book, Befraya/, in which he described his own connections through the CIA with a number of the figures involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy, he was contacted by a young man with an incredible story he wanted to tell.
According to Morrow's source, Albert Moakler, ""The tapes were indicative that there was a conversation going on which was more than idle gossip.
It definitely concerned Jersey and Miami . . . the areas, people in the areas.
Morrow also determined that Weiner made regular runs between Switzerland and Miami where he would visit the Bank of Miami Beach.
Thus, it's clear that Lansky's courier definitely had ""inside"" information about the JFK assassination.
We may even go so far as to speculate that it was Lansky's courier who was providing funds from Permindex to the assassination conspirators stateside.
ANOTHER ISRAEL CONNECTION A ""high level financial backer"" of the Permindex operation, according to Paesa Sera, was one Dr.
This committee was the American affiliate of the Israeli Histadrut for which Permindex board chairman Louis M Bloomfield was a chief fundraiser.
And note also that ex-CIA man Philip Agee has said that the Committee for Labor Israel is often used as a CIA cover.
In fact, it was Biegun who oversaw the liquidation of CMC/Permindex after the company was expelled from Switzerland and Italy in 1962, subsequently relocating the operation to Johannesburg, South Africa.
And as we shall see, it is here that we find even more intriguing connections between Permindex and the JFK assassination.
Earlier in these pages, as we have seen, the rebel Secret Army Organization—known by its acronym OAS—was bitterly opposed to DeGaulle's decision to grant independence to Arab Algeria.
The OAS launched numerous assassination attempts against DeGaulle, none of which were successful, of course, but they did later inspire Frederick Forsythe's famous novel , The Day of the Jackal.
Following an investigation of one attempt, in 1962, French intelligence charged that Permindex laundered money into the OAS coffers to finance the attempt on DeGaulle's life.
SOUSTELLE, THE OAS AND THE IRGUN One of the harshest French critics of Algerian independence was Jewish-born convert to Christianity, Jacques Soustelle, former governor-general of Algeria.
Described by Israeli historian Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi as being known as one of ""Israel's friends in France,""*** Soustelle, as French Atomic Energy Minister from 1958 to 1959, cooperated closely with Yuval Ne'eman, the father of Israel's atomic bomb project, in helping Israel develop the groundwork for a nuclear arsenal.
Bitterly condemning Degaulle's reversal on Algeria, Soustelle went into self-imposed exile.
In fact, Israeli intelligence came to Soustelle's aid when he went into exile.
According to Henissart, "" attracted hotheads including some Jews who belonged to Irgun Zvai Leumi, the Israeli underground military organization.
Then, when Algeria was finally independent and sought admission to the UN, only Israel voted against it.
At the same time, in fact, these same elements were using their Permindex connection in yet another plot, this one aimed at the life of John F Kennedy.
THE OAS, PERMINDEX AND NEW ORLEANS There is, interestingly, a New Orleans connection here.
Banister's agent, Maurice Brooks Gatlin, in turn, carried the money to the OAS in Paris.
When a Latin American regional conference of a global anti-communist confederation was set in place, organized by CIA operative and Banister contact, E Howard Hunt, the chairman of that conference was Antonio Valladares.
This same Valladares, based in Guatemala, also happened to serve as an attorney for New Orleans Mafia chief Carlos Marcello whom, as we have seen, was assisting in financing Banister's anti-communist activities.
In attendance at the conference, which ultimately merged into the World Anti-Communist League, was Maurice Brooks Gatlin,”’' suggesting that the New Orleans connection to the CIA and other worldwide intrigue was very strong indeed.
The aforementioned Bank Hapoalim was the bank established by Israel's labor bund, the Histadrut, for which Permindex chairman Louis Bloomfield served as chief fundraiser in Canada.
Guy Banister's activities were explored earlier in Chapter 10, Chapter 11 and Chapter 14.
According to Gilbert LeCavelier, an associate of the late Bernard Fensterwald , Banister's office also served as a New Orleans headquarters for OAS-connected mercenaries.
Among those OAS mercenaries was Jean Souetre who, we noted in Chapter 12, was reported to have been picked up in Dallas on November 22, 1963 and expelled from the United States.
Former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow asserts in his book, Betrayal, that Permindex board member Clay Shaw was, in fact, Banister's immediate superior in coordinating CIA operations out of New Orleans.
Thus, we have CIA asset Clay Shaw, serving on the board of Permindex, which is in turn operating in conjunction with Banister's office in plots against Charles DeGaulle.
And in the same period we have Banister involved in manipulating the activities of Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans just prior to the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Ferrie, as we have seen, also had a long-standing connection with Lee Harvey Oswald and, by all accounts, was associating regularly with Oswald in New Orleans in the summer of 1963.
And we now know for certain that Ferrie and Shaw were intimately acquainted.
The connections between Ferrie, Shaw, Banister and Oswald do come full circle.
Former CIA man Morrow also reports that during his activities with the CIA, working in conjunction with David Ferrie, he and Ferrie visited a warehouse in Europe where vast amounts of arms were stored—arms intended for the anti-Castro Cuban underground.
BANISTER'S ISRAELI CONNECTION However, interestingly enough, there is yet another Israeli connection to the New Orleans scenario that set up Lee Harvey Oswald as the fall guy in the JFK assassination plot.
Botnick, who reportedly considered himself ""a super communist hunter,"" was obsessed with communism and, like Banister, believed communism to be a major force behind the civil rights movement.
At the national level, and under Botnick in New Orleans, the ADL had a history of deploying agents into left-wing groups in order to spy on their activities.
What's more, according to the ADL's Forster, many of the ADL's factfinders were ""retired local or federal government investigators""””—such as, perhaps, a likely former American intelligence agent named Oswald who had once done covert work in the Soviet Union.
It is thus not so extraordinary to suggest that perhaps Oswald was being ""sheep-dipped"" as a ""pro-Castro"" agitator by the ADL (under the guise of ADL ""fact finding"") which was functioning as a conduit for the Mossad and its CIA allies.
Although he does not pinpoint the ADL as a force behind Banister's activities, respected JFK assassination researcher Peter Dale Scott has lent credence to the possibility that there was much more to Banister's operations than would seem to meet the eye.
Those stressing the intelligence angle, notes Scott, point to Banister's FBI and CIA and Office of Naval Intelligence connections while those stressing the ""Mafia"" point to Banister's connections, through David Ferrie and others, to New Orleans Mafia chief Carlos Marcello.
The FBI files of another prominent Black civil rights leader of the 1960's, Dick Gregory, demonstrate conclusively that the ADL which was actually monitoring his public lectures and then turning the information over to the FBI as part of its COINTELPRO operations.
And as we saw in Chapter 7, it was COINTELPRO, carried out by the FBI's Division Five, that was under the direct control of William Sullivan, who was effectively a CIA ""mole"" inside the FBI for his close friend, the Mossad's CIA ally, James J Angleton.
Whatever the case, it is very clear that the Mossad and the CIA had a direct hand in the strange activities of Clay Shaw, Guy Banister, David Ferrie and Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans during the summer of 1963.
Both the Mossad and the CIA were intimately tied with the Permindex plot against French President Charles DeGaulle and with the Permindex plot against John F Kennedy.
A VISIT FROM PERMINDEX That New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison was indeed on the right track is illustrated by a strange visit that Garrison got during the early days of his investigation.
A Denver oilman, later identified by investigators as John King, appeared in Garrison's office and offered to arrange the district attorney's appointment to a federal judgeship in return for Garrison's abandonment of his investigation.
King very clearly had inside information about the nature of Garrison's inquiry and was obviously interested in shutting it down before it went any further.
Garrison would not be bribed, however, and promptly showed the gentleman to the door.
They hoped to silence Garrison before his inquiry went further—before he made the Clay Shaw connection, before he discovered the real origins of the Permindex plot that led to the murder of John F Kennedy.
Permindex and its backers were determined to stop the investigation in its tracks.
John King's visit to New Orleans is very clear evidence, indeed, that the role of Clay Shaw and Permindex is the key to the JFK assassination mystery.
By 1967, a key player in the Permindex network of Tibor Rosenbaum and John King was the super-lawyer who represented IOS interests in Washington: Myer Feldman.
And today, it just so happens, Feldman apparently serves as an attorney for the Kennedy family itself, overseeing the most private legal matters of the family of the slain American president.
They suggest that Clay Shaw was some innocent figure who was only rehabilitating French Quarter carriage houses.
Yet, despite the link between Permindex and the Lansky Syndicate money laundering Banque De Credit International, those who say that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" say absolutely nothing about Shaw's very firm ties— through Permindex—to this criminal banking entity, very much linked to ""the Mafia"" through Lansky.
To disregard the Israeli linkage to Permindex is to avoid the truth altogether.
This is why those who seek to point the finger of blame toward ""the Mafia,"" for example, are so determined to vindicate Clay Shaw.
To look Shaw's direction is to look in the direction of Israel—and that is why it was so vital that Garrison's investigation had to be scuttled at all costs.
Obviously, there's much more to the Permindex controversy than many people would like to admit.
Yet, there is something about Miss Brussell's background that is significant in light of the Israeli role in the JFK assassination as dissected here.
Brussell would not be inclined to follow Permindex to its Israeli antecedents.
Brussell and her acolyte, Dave Emory, contended that high-ranking former Nazis such as General Reinhard Gehlen who were brought under the wing of American intelligence following World War II were ultimately responsible for the Kennedy assassination—through Permindex.
However, the fact is that Israeli intelligence was working closely with the Gehlen organization in the post-World War II period.
John Loftus and Mark Aarons have written of how Israeli operatives—although they found the new relationship distasteful—did indeed work with reputed former Nazi war criminals in Gehlen's operation.
What's more, the Israelis had completely infiltrated the Gehlen organization.
But, as we know now, it was not a Nazi plot—the fantasies of Dave Emory and Mae Brussell notwithstanding.
It is probably worth noting, for the record, that the first nationwide publicity that Mrs.
Brussell's theory that ""the Nazis Killed JFK"" received was when it appeared in the pages of the short-lived magazine, The Rebel, published by highly controversial pornographer Larry Flynt.
The Nazis believed that the Max network was their secret intelligence source inside the Kremlin, and it did in fact give 'good' intelligence to the Germans but it was strictly controlled by the Communists.
That the Israelis were blackmailing Angleton, according to Loftus and Aarons, who are undoubtedly pro-Israeli partisans, explains much about Angleton's behavior throughout his CIA career and in the events which involved Angleton in the circumstances of the JFK assassination, more about which we shall discuss in Chapter 16.
A TRANSNATIONAL ARRANGEMENT In light of all this, we now understand why Zionist operatives collaborated with so-called ""Nazi"" forces in the strange transnational entity known as Permindex.
There were—as Peter Dale Scott said—common modes of interaction between a variety of interests involved in complex, multi-centered intrigues where these diverse elements, each with distinctive motives, worked together on common projects, each for their own ends.
Through the so-called ""false flag"" technique in which the Mossad is so skilled , ""Mafia"" figures, anti-Castro Cubans, lowlevel CIA operatives and an assortment of other strange figures were drawn into the Permindex web behind the JFK assassination conspiracy.
In the end, however, it was Permindex board member Clay Shaw who became the one person to be charged with having participated in the conspiracy.
Whether Shaw knew of the impending assassination will probably never be known.
That Shaw was trafficking with the likes of David Ferrie and Guy Banister—Oswald's immediate handlers—has now been firmly established.
Whether Shaw knew that Oswald, ultimately, would be the patsy is another mystery.
Nonetheless, the Clay Shaw link to the assassination—and to Permindex— points directly toward the Mossad role in the conspiracy.
Permindex is the key to understanding the full nature o f the JFK assassination conspiracy.
To ignore the Permindex connection is to ignore the reality about the origins of the plot that led to the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The tentacles of Permindex reached far and wide, inextricably intertwining the Mossad, the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate.
Although, recently, Warren Commission enthusiast Max Holland penned an essay in the spring 2001 issue of The Wilson Quarterly purporting to ""prove"" that the Soviet KGB was responsible for effectively sponsoring ""disinformation""—namely the Paese Sera articles that linked Clay Shaw to Permindex—Holland's opus does no more than to prove that Permindex was the subject of controversy in the first place.
Final Judgment answers the question beyond any shadow of a doubt, but it's not likely Holland will respond to that.
In our next chapter we will review, at last, the most recent, startling and definitive evidence which proves that it was Israel's ally at the CIA headquarters, James Jesus Angleton, who played a key role in the assassination conspiracy and cover-up.
What's more, we will examine important new information which suggests that there was much more happening in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963 than otherwise might meet the eye.
We will also discover that the so-called ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination is, in fact, the Israeli connection.
The Truth About the ''French Connection"" It was in a little publicized libel trial conducted in Miami in 1985 that veteran Kennedy assassination investigator Mark Lane proved to the satisfaction of a jury that the CIA played a part in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Lane's groundbreaking best seller, Plausible Denial, published in 1991, told the whole incredible story.
Evidence from that trial also points toward Israel's connection to the assassination through the offices of Israel's CIA ally, James Jesus Angleton.
There is also strange new evidence that there was much more happening in Dealey Plaza in Dallas than even many o f those involved in the events surrounding the JFK assassination really knew.
Mark Lane's Plausible Denial proved conclusively that the CIA had a hand in the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
As we saw in Chapter 9, Lane's book told how the Washington-based Spotlight newspaper's libel trial with ex-CIA man E Howard Hunt brought into a Florida courtroom the first hard evidence linking the CIA to the Kennedy assassination.
As noted previously, Lane agreed to serve as The Spotlight's defense attorney after Hunt won a $650,000 libel judgment against the populist weekly.
It was Lane who successfully handled The Spotlight's defense after the case again went to trial after the initial libel verdict was overturned.
The libel action stemmed from an article published in the pages of The Spotlight in 1978.
After leaving the CIA, Marchetti became a journalist, specializing in matters relating to the CIA and the intelligence community in general.
As such he was a recognized authority in his field and had done a number of intelligence-related articles for The Spotlight, among numerous other publications, both here in the United States and abroad.
Marchetti's article suggested that upper echelon executives of the CIA had decided to frame E Howard Hunt for involvement in the Kennedy assassination.
Not that Hunt was involved in the crime—simply that the CIA had decided to frame Hunt for the deed.
Over the years, several assassination buffs had claimed that the famous photographs taken in Dealey Plaza of three so-called ""tramps"" being led away from the scene by police officers revealed Hunt as one of those tramps.
However, there are those who believe that the ""Hunt as a tramp"" story was, in fact, deliberately trumped up as part of the CIA's scheme to frame Hunt for involvement in the assassination.
It was the CIA's plan to implicate Hunt that Victor Marchetti exposed in The Spotlight.
Weberman has also been closely associated with Mordechai Levi, a known agent provocateur of the Israeli Mossad's propaganda and intelligence arm, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, which we examine in further detail in Chapter 17. , created by militant Rabbi Meir Kahane.
In Chapter 8 we saw that Kahane was a CIA asset and protégé of Jay Lovestone who handled CIA liaison with the Meyer Lansky-linked French Corsican and Sicilian Mafias.
It may very well be that the ""Hunt as a tramp"" story being touted by Weberman was indeed a CIA-Mossad concoction to further muddy the waters.
What is interesting is that in 1975—precisely at the time when Weberman was publishing and promoting a book that named Hunt as one of the tramps—a strange letter appeared, anonymously, in the mailbox of another assassination researcher, Penn Jones, Jr.
The letter was written in Spanish and its envelope earned a Mexico City postmark.
In light of the then-current rumors about Hunt's alleged role in the JFK affair, coupled with his known connections to the CIA and, in particular, Mexico City, where he had been active during his CIA career, the suspicions about E Howard Hunt were quite natural.
It is interesting, though, that the letter was sent from Mexico City, Hunt's former base of operations.
Whether the letter was real or not, it is obvious that someone wanted to throw further suspicion on E Howard Hunt—and succeeded.
That the Weberman story of ""Hunt as a tramp"" and the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter appeared at the same time are particularly intriguing in light of another matter we are about to consider.
Both the ""Hunt as a tramp"" story and the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter appear to be part and parcel of a CIA black propaganda operation run by the Mossad's man at the CIA, James J Angleton.
HUNT WAS IN DALLAS Ironically, as we shall see, the evidence suggests that E Howard Hunt was indeed in Dallas—on, at the very least, November 21, 1963—and very much involved in strange activities in league with key players in the JFK assassination scenario.
According to Marchetti, widespread public suspicion of CIA involvement in the president's murder was forcing the CIA to play its hand and ""admit"" that, in fact, one of its more notorious longtime operatives, Hunt, had indeed been in Dallas on the day that Kennedy was killed.
Obviously, Hunt—with his well-known ties to the anti-Castro Cubans, often considered prime suspects in the JFK assassination—would have a difficult time explaining why he had been in Big D on that fateful day—if indeed he had been.
Interesting, Marchetti's article never said that Hunt had, in fact, been involved in the assassination conspiracy.
Marchetti's article said only that top-ranking CIA officials had decided to frame Hunt for the crime.
Marchetti's article reported that a strange in-house CIA memo—allegedly written some years previously—had somehow ended up in the hands of investigators for the House Assassinations Committee and that Hunt, as a consequence, would ultimately be forced to explain his reported presence in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
The Spotlight's editors didn't, in fact, feel that the article implicated Hunt in the president's murder.
Inexplicably, however, the ex-CIA man decided to sue, even though he ultimately admitted under oath that when he first read The Spotlight's story that Marchetti's contentions seemed plausible indeed.
In short, that Hunt did believe that his former colleagues would be willing to throw him to the wolves—for their own nefarious reasons.
However, The Spotlight's management did not take the lawsuit seriously.
They did not believe either that the article damaged Hunt's reputation or that Hunt's attorneys could prove that the newspaper had published the article maliciously.
During that trial, The Spotlight's attorney unexpectedly stipulated that the newspaper did not believe that Hunt had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
The trial, however, resulted in a massive $650,000 libel judgment against the newspaper.
LANE ENTERS THE CASE It was at this point that famed JFK assassination investigator Mark Lane, an attorney, entered into the case—almost purely by chance, having been introduced to the publisher of The Spotlight by a mutual acquaintance shortly before the case was heard on appeal.
Based upon his own decades of intensive research, Lane had long been convinced that the CIA had been instrumental in orchestrating the JFK assassination, but he had never had a legal forum in which to conduct an investigation of this sort.
The new trial—which took place in 1985 (some seven years after the controversial article had first been published) gave him that opportunity.
He contended that Hunt had indeed been in Dallas just prior to the president's murder and that he would be able to prove it.
This took Hunt's lawyers by surprise, to say the least, but despite their efforts to derail Lane's new approach, they were unsuccessful.
The key witness in the second libel trial was Marita Lorenz, a former CIA operative who had testified before the House Assassinations Committee in 1978, relating what information she had in connection with the president's assassination.
Miss Lorenz, a German-born beauty, had, in fact, been the one-time mistress of Cuban dictator Fidel Castro, but she had ultimately turned on the Cuban leader and had become involved in anti-Castro activities under the CIA's tutelage.
Among her key contacts in the CIA during this period was the CIA's chief liaison with the anti-Castro Cuban operatives, E Howard Hunt, as well as veteran CIA contract agent Frank Sturgis who essentially functioned as her handler.
Mark Lane asked Miss Lorenz to testify in the Hunt trial in The Spotlght's defense, restating—again under oath—what she had told the House Assassinations Committee and what she had told Lane himself years previously.
HUNT & RUBY IN DALLAS So it was that during the Hunt libel trial, Miss Lorenz testified in a deposition that just one day prior to Kennedy's assassination, she, along with Sturgis and several anti-Castro Cuban exiles, met in Dallas with not only E Howard Hunt, but also nightclub operator Jack Ruby who later killed Lee Harvey Oswald, the president's alleged assassin.
According to Miss Lorenz, Hunt was the CIA paymaster for a top-secret operation, the purpose of which she did not know.
However, feeling uneasy, Miss Lorenz left Dallas on November 22 and never participated in the operation.
It was later she learned that President Kennedy had been assassinated and that, of course Jack Ruby had killed Lee Harvey Oswald, the president's alleged assassin.
Lane took excellent advantage of Hunt's sworn statements (in deposition and during the two trials, as well as several other forums) to show those contradictions.
What's more, the witnesses called in Hunt's defense by the ex-CIA man's attorneys only ended up suggesting Hunt had more to hide than he had to admit.
Many of these witnesses, in fact, were an assortment of Hunt's former CIA colleagues, a number of whom were represented during their testimony in deposition by CIA-dispatched lawyers.
However, it was the testimony of Marita Lorenz that convinced the jury, once and for all, that The Spos/ight had a much more plausible story than Hunt.
Thus, the stunning courtroom victory for The Spotlight, vanquishing Hunt's libel action.
Very little about Hunt's courtroom defeat appeared in the media, particularly the sum and substance of Miss Lorenz's amazing allegations.
This, of course, was real news in every sense but the media chose to ignore what had taken place in that Miami courtroom.
Interestingly, however, as we shall see, there was yet another newspaper report which—like Marchetti's—suggests that there was a lot more to the story than meets the eye.
THE ANGLETON CONNECTION In fact, the in-house CIA memorandum linking Hunt to the JFK assassination was the work of Israel's ally at the CIA, James Jesus Angleton, whose own history we examined in Chapter 8 and whom we have met repeatedly throughout these pages.
This is not to suggest, though, that Hunt was not in Dallas on either November 21 or November 22, 1963.
On the contrary, the evidence we are about to relate suggests that Hunt's presence in Dallas—for whatever purpose—was indeed linked in some fashion to the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination conspiracy.
This evidence suggests, as we shall see, that it was Angleton—who was also responsible for leaking the memo he drafted that linked Hunt to the JFK assassination.
A few months ago, in March, there was a meeting at CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., the plush home of America's super spooks overlooking the Potomac River.
It was attended by several high-level clandestine officers and some former top officials of the agency.
They were calculated to both fascinate and confuse the public by staging a clever 'limited hangout' when the House Special Committee on Assassinations holds its open hearings, beginning later this month.
A ""limited hangout"" is spy jargon for a favorite and frequently used gimmick of the clandestine professionals.
When their veil of secrecy is shredded and they can no longer rely on a phony cover story to misinform the public, they resort to admitting—sometimes even volunteering—some o f the truth while still managing to withhold the key and damaging facts in the case.
The public, however, is usually so intrigued by the new information that it never thinks t o pursue the matter further.
We will probably never find out who masterminded the assassination of JF K—or why.
There are too many powerful special interests connected with the conspiracy for the truth to come out even now, 15 years after the murder.
But during the next two months, according to sensitive sources in the CIA and on HSCA, we are going to learn much more about the crime.
But once again, the good folks of middle America will be hoodwinked by the government and its allies in the establishment news media.
In fact, we are being set up to witness yet another cover-up, albeit a sophisticated one, designed by the CIA with the assistance of the FBI and the blessing of the Carter administration.
A classic example of a limited hangout is how the CIA has handled and manipulated the Church Committee's investigation two years ago.
The committee learned nothing more about the assassinations of foreign leaders, illicit drug programs, or the penetration of the news media than the CIA allowed it to discover.
And this is precisely what the CIA is out to accomplish through HSCA with regard to JFK's murder.
Chief among those to be exposed by the new investigation will be E Howard Hunt, of Watergate fame.
His luck has run out, and the CIA has decided to sacrifice him to protect its clandestine services.
The agency is furious with Hunt for having dragged it publicly into the Nixon mess and for having blackmailed it after he was arrested.
Besides, Hunt is vulnerable—an easy target as they say in the spy business.
The death of his wife, Dorothy, in a mysterious plane crash in Chicago still disturbs many people, especially since there were rumors from informed sources that she was about to leave him and perhaps even turn on him.
In addition it is well known that Hunt hated JFK and blamed him for the Bay of Pigs disaster.
In the public hearings, the CIA will ‘admit’ that Hunt was involved in the conspiracy to kill Kennedy.
The CIA may go so far as to 'admit' that there were three gunmen shooting at Kennedy.
The FBI, while publicly embracing the Warren Commission's 'one man acting alone' conclusion, has always privately known that there were three gunmen.
Now, the CIA moved to finger Hunt and tie him to the JFK assassination.
HSCA unexpectedly received an internal CIA memorandum a few weeks ago that the agency just happened to stumble across in its old files.
Some day we will have to explain Hunt's presence in Dallas on November 22, 1963—the day President Kennedy was killed.
Hunt is going to be hard put to explain this memo, and other things, before the TV cameras at the HSCA hearings.
Hunt's reputation as a strident fanatical anti-communist will count against him.
So will his long and close relationship with the anti-Castro Cubans, as well as his penchant for clandestine dirty tricks and his various capers while one of Nixon's plumbers.
E Howard Hunt will be implicated in the conspiracy and he will not dare to speak out— the CIA will see to that.
Who else will be identified as having been part of the conspiracy and/or cover-up remains to be seen.
The fact that some may have had connections with organized crime will prove to be only incidental in the long run.
Those with provable ties to the CIA or FBI will be presented as renegades who acted on their own without approval or knowledge of their superiors.
As for covering up the deed, that will be blamed on past Presidents, either dead or disgraced.
Thus, Carter will emerge as a truth seeker, and the CIA and FBI will have neatly covered their institutional behinds.
First of all, as noted previously, Hunt himself initially admitted that he believed that the story had a basis in truth—that it was plausible, that indeed his former colleagues in the CIA did consider framing him for involvement in the JFK assassination.
The origin of the memorandum linking Hunt to the JFK assassination is interesting as it is presented by Marchetti.
In other words, one might presume from Marchetti's flippant reference, the CIA had, instead, perhaps concocted the memo.
That the agency ""just happened to stumble across"" the memo at a time when public suspicion of CIA involvement in the JFK assassination was growing is, of course, interesting, to say the least.
If Hunt were indeed in Dallas either on the day JFK was killed—or even the day prior—it would look suspicious.
Hunt's long-standing involvement with anti-Castro Cubans through the aegis of his CIA activities—would make Hunt a likely suspect were he, in fact, proved to have been in Dallas at the critical time.
As Marchetti points out, linking Hunt to the JFK assassination would be a cover story that the public would easily accept.
The CIA, as an institution, would absolve itself of any responsibility, having thrown Hunt to the wolves as an independent operator out of the CIA's control.
Indeed, the CIA could then lay claim to having ""solved"" the JFK assassination at last.
Hunt's alleged involvement would also draw in a number of other false flags—not only the anti-Castro Cubans, but also ""right wingers"" in general.
What's more, considering Hunt's involvement in Watergate (and with Richard Nixon having left the presidency in shame), Nixon himself may have taken some of the heat with many of the public suspecting the very worst—that perhaps Nixon might have had a hand in arranging the JFK assassination.
Not only had Nixon been involved in the earliest high-level anti-Castro planning, alongside Hunt and the CIA, but Nixon himself had been vanquished in the 1960 presidential campaign by Kennedy.
That one of Nixon's Watergate burglars was being implicated in the JFK assassination would do no service to Nixon's already tarnished image.
This ""limited hangout"" by the CIA would have, as a consequence, covered up the role of the Israeli-linked Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
To delve too deeply into the real origins and linkage of the crime network would have dragged the Israeli connection into the open—if pursued to its logical conclusion.
Now, obviously, the scenario presented in Marchetti's article—the framing of Hunt by the C[A—never, in fact, took place.
That it had a basis in truth—that Hunt was being pondered as a ""fall guy""—however, seems apparent.
While the claims made in the second article are somewhat different than those which appeared in Marchetti's article, it is clear that the similarities, in general, are what are most significant.
The article appeared in the Wilmington, Delaware Sunday News Journal on August 20, 1978.
WASHINGTON—A secret CIA memorandum says that E Howard Hunt was in Dallas the day President John F Kennedy was murdered and that top agency officials plotted to cover up Hunt's presence there.
Some CIA sources speculate that Hunt thought he was assigned by higher-ups to arrange the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Sources say Hunt, convicted in the Watergate conspiracy in 1974, was acting chief of the CIA station in Mexico City in the weeks prior to the Kennedy assassination.
Oswald was in Mexico City, and met with two Soviet KGB agents at the Russian Embassy there immediately before leaving for Dallas, according to the official Warren Commission report.
The 1966 secret memo, now in the hands of the House assassination committee, places Hunt in Dallas Nov., 1963.
Richard M Helms, former CIA director, and James J Angleton, former counterintelligence chief, initialed the memo according to investigators who made the information available to the Sunday News Journal.
Asked to explain why a potentially damaging coverup plot would be put out on paper, one high-level CIA source said, ''The memo is very odd.
One committee source says the memo ""Shows the CIA involvement in the Kennedy case could run into the CIA hierarchy.
Hunt's aipentenee on the scene in Dallas and Mexico City at the time of the murder adds strength to a theory shared by some internal CIA investigators.
They believe Oswald was working for United States intelligence, that he was ordered to infiltrate the KGB, and that this explains his life in Russia.
They also believe that Oswald proved to be so unstable that he was ""handled"" by the KGB into becoming a triple agent, and assigned for the Dallas job.
The same investigators theorize that Hunt was in Dallas that day on the orders of a high-level CIA official who in reality was a KGB mole.
Hunt allegedly thought he was t o arrange that Oswald be murdered because he had turned traitor.
Actually he was to kill Oswald to prevent him from ever testifying and revealing the Russians had ordered him t o kill Kennedy, the CIA sources speculate.
CIA investigators are most concerned that either Helms or Angleton might be that mole.
Boris Pash, was ordered to eliminate suspected double agents and lowranking officials.
It was also learned from CIA and committee sources that during the time that the Warren Commission was investigating the Kennedy assassination, Angleton met regularly with a member of the commission—the late Allen Dulles, then head of the CIA and Angleton's boss.
Dulles, on a weekly basis, briefed Angleton about the direction of the investigation.
Angleton, according to sources, in turn briefed Raymond Rocca, his closest aide and the CIA’s official liaison with the commission.
First of all, one of the coauthors, Joseph Trento, admitted under oath during the E Howard HuntSpotlight libel trial that he had actually seen the controversial memo in question.
Trento also noted that he knew James Jesus Angleton of the CIA and had utilized him as a source on occasion.
In fact, we know, as a consequence of the Hunt libel case against The Spotlight that intelligence writer, William R Corson—a longtime Angleton asset in the media—was actually the immediate source of both the Marchetti and Trento stories.
Corson was obviously working as Angleton's ""cutout"" passing on the information that appeared in the two stories.
While the Trento story claims that the CIA memo was ostensibly drafted in 1966, the actual date the memo first appeared is subject, of course, to question, as is the actual intent of the memo itself.
The article itself notes that a ""high-level CIA source"" considered the memo to be ""very odd"" in that it recorded—in writing—the alleged presence in Dallas of longtime CIA operative, Hunt, at the time of JFK's murder.
The evidence suggests that the reason why Angleton's memo was put on paper—and then subsequently released—was that Angleton wanted the story to be leaked to the press—as part of a continuing cover-up of the real origins of the JFK assassination.
Hunt—a lower level CIA operative —-was being hung out to dry and the real conspirators at the top were washing their hands of the matter.
Joe Trento has subsequently revealed that Angleton did in fact leak the memo to the House Assassinations Committee.
That the Trento article suggests that Hunt was in fact in Dallas and that he was there on an assignment involving Lee Harvey Oswald is significant as well.
Yet, as we shall see, there is much more to the story of the role played by the CIA's Mossad ally James J Angleton in the JFK assassination and cover-up.
THE CIA & THE MEXICO CITY SCENARIO The Trento article accepts, as its basis, the story that Lee Harvey Oswald had been in Mexico City meeting with the Soviets and the Castro Cubans.
However, as Mark Lane demonstrated in Plausible Denial, the story that Oswald had been in Mexico City meeting with the communists was an outright fraud—a concoction of the CIA itself.
One of the central tenets of the lone assassin theory is Lee Harvey Oswald's presence in Mexico City.
Proof that Oswald had been in the Cuban Embassy, the CIA reported, came from Senora Silvia Duran, a Mexican employed at the Cuban Embassy.
The CIA told the Warren Commission that Oswald had met with a Soviet KGB officer named Valeriy Kostikov who was a specialist in assassination and sabotage; that Kostikov was in charge of Sovietorchestrated assassinations in the United States.
Clearly, the CIA's implication was that Oswald had been meeting with the KGB officer to plan JFK's murder.
However, even the Warren Commission was suspicious and asked for evidence of Oswald's activities in Mexico City.
Some four months went by before the CIA could provide anything other than the testimony of the aforementioned Miss Duran.
After she was released from custody, she spoke out about her experience and the CIA cabled the Mexican police to re-arrest the young lady, but cautioned the police to make sure that Miss Duran knew nothing about the CIA's involvement in her imbroglio.
In 1977 David Atlee Phillips, former head of the Western Hemisphere for the CIA, admitted publicly that Oswald had not been to the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City.
Phillips, if anybody, should have known inasmuch as he had been CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time of Oswald's alleged visit.
The magnitude of this CIA misconduct can be fully understood only when its conspiracy to cover up is traced to its origin.
For the CIA charade, which evidently included employing an imposter for Oswald, began no later than October 1, 1963.
The fate of the world was in the hands of Chief Justice Earl Warren and his fellow commission members.
If the public learned that Oswald was a pawn of the Soviets, a nuclear war could break out.
As Mark Lane commented, Warren was “held hostage""*”” by the CIA's provocative lie.
During his debate with David Atlee Phillips, Mark Lane exposed all of this before the audience.
And in light of the mysterious appearance of the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter mailed from Mexico City, we can only speculate as to whether Angleton himself may have been the mastermind behind the leak of that hitherto unknown document as well.
It was Angleton who most vociferously accused Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko of being a KGB plant.
The story told by Nosenko disproved Angleton's thesis entirely—which perhaps explains why Angleton dealt so harshly with Nosenko.
That Trento's story—leaking the Angleton memo on Hunt—would incorporate a major portion of Angleton's JFK cover story is interesting, to say the least.
Pointing toward the intra-CIA turmoil which, in fact, had resulted in Angleton's ouster from the CIA, is the interesting suggestion in Trento's story that sources within the CIA had suggested that Angleton was suspected by some of being a KGB mole.
This, of course, is part of the great irony of Angleton's complex life in that it was Angleton who was the prime mover behind long-term internal CIA inquiries into possible infiltration of the agency at the highest levels.
However, Angleton's fiercest critics, as we have seen, have suggested that Angleton was indeed a mole—but not for the Soviets; that instead, Angleton was a full-fledged co-opted agent for Israel.
In the context in which we have examined Angleton's role in the CIA, working for—Israel and its Mossad, this appears to be the real driving force behind Angleton's dealings insofar as the JFK assassination was concerned.
That Trento's story notes Angleton's interest in the Warren Commission investigation only displays part of the picture, however.
JFK assassination investigator Bernard Fensterwald detailed how very much interested Angleton was in the JFK assassination.
He disclosed that one of these CIA files, on Warren Commission critic Bernard Fensterwald, Jr., contained copies of several high-level internal CIA memos which clearly showed that James Angleton was the key CIA official in dealing with matters related to the Kennedy assassination.
In this confidential memo, Angleton .. . went on to request that Hoover run some kind of vaguely defined identification check on Fensterwald and three other Warren Commission critics associated with him.
In June, 1976, new information became available regarding Angleton's key role in dealing with the Warren Commission investigation.
So it was that Israel's chief advocate at the CIA became that agency's number one in-house handler for JFK assassination investigation—some would call it a ""cover-up""—during the Warren Commission's controversial inquiry into the president's murder.
What's more, Angleton's close friend , William Sullivan, number three man at the FBI, was detailed as the FBI's liaison with the Warren Commission.
THE MURDERED MISTRESS Angleton's interest in the affairs of John F Kennedy were evidently broad-ranging.
For example, The Washington Post reported on February 23, 1976 that after Washington socialite Mary Pinchot Meyer was shot to death on October 12, 1964, it was Angleton who obtained Mrs.
Meyer, in fact, had been a longtime lover of President Kennedy's— one of many, apparently, and her diary contained much information about her relationship with the president.
It was her sister, Toni Bradlee, wife of Post editor Ben Bradlee who provided Angleton Mrs.
There have been those who have speculated that the diary may have contained secrets about the CIA-Organized Crime plots to assassinate Castro that JFK may have told Mrs.
However, of course, it is just as easy to speculate that perhaps the diary also contained Mrs.
Meyer's written memories of President Kennedy's musings about his most unpleasant relationship with the state of Israel.
Angleton's own relationship with Hunt is also quite mysterious to say the least.
If indeed Angleton did sign off on a 1966 memo pinpointing Hunt as having been in Dallas, the CIA's shadowy counterintelligence chief seemed to have forgotten by 1972 at the time of the Watergate break-in.
According to investigative reporter Jim Hougan, Angleton, on June 19, 1972 denied ever having seen Hunt, following revelations that Hunt had been involved in the Watergate burglary.
Or, logically, we could also suggest that the memorandum itself was not, in fact, drafted in 1966 as we have been told.
It could, instead, have been drafted at a much later time and then given the earlier date.
What's more, of course, Angleton was knee-deep in the Bay of Pigs invasion planning and it is inconceivable that he would not be aware of the existence of Hunt, the chief political liaison to the anti-Castro Cuban exiles involved in that operation.
Whichever the case, it strongly suggests that there was a lot more to the Angleton-Hunt relationship than meets the eye.
What we do know, however, is that it was Israel's friend at the CIA, the enigmatic James Jesus Angleton, who was the prime mover behind the memorandum that would have been used to frame Hunt for involvement in the assassination.
Angleton's link to Israel and its Mossad is the key to understanding Angleton's unusual behavior that we have outlined.
The Mossad loyalist, James J Angleton, was the central player in the intrigue between the CIA and the Mossad in the JFK assassination.
Never-before-published information that we will be reviewing later in this chapter confirms our contention that Angleton was indeed the primary high-level CIA collaborator in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Angleton was the CIA figure involved with the Mossad—if not in the actual planning of the JFK assassination itself—then certainly in key aspects of the subsequent cover-up.
E Howard Hunt, indeed, may have been Angleton's fall guy—another patsy—from the beginning.
He has, instead, chosen to deny any responsibility or involvement—for whatever reasons—and bitterly contests any suggestions of his connection to the events in Dallas.
Hunt was bitter toward Kennedy for the president's moves against the CIA and Hunt himself probably felt then (as perhaps he does today) that Kennedy was getting a taste of his own medicine.
What's more—and perhaps most importantly, in a personal sense for Hunt—the ex-CIA man cannot fail to note that many of the key JFK assassination witnesses over the years have met early—and violent—deaths.
Whatever Hunt does know, we will probably never find out—and Hunt intends to keep it that way.
In the February 1, 1992 edition of his newsletter, New American View, a monthly critique of the Israeli lobby and its power in America, Marchetti recently commented on the renewed furor over the JFK assassination.
Marchetti's earlier controversial article in The Spotlight, as we have pointed out, never suggested that Hunt had actually been in Dallas or that he played a part in the assassination—only that the CIA was considering the option of framing Hunt for the president's murder.
And, as we have seen, it was Israel's contact at the CIA, James J Angleton who was behind the impending operation against Hunt.
However, Marchetti's final comment about Hunt's possible appearance in Dallas is interesting, particularly in light of what we are about to consider.
There is evidence that Hunt, in fact, may have been inadvertently caught up in intrigue involving the JFK assassination conspiracy—intrigue beyond his own control.
There have been suggestions that perhaps Hunt was not actively involved in a genuine assassination plot against Kennedy—as indeed as suggested in Trento's aforementioned article—and that he was in Dallas for another purpose entirely.
Our source for this little-known information is Gary Wean, formerly of the Los Angeles Police Department's criminal intelligence squad.
It was in Chapter 13 that we first became acquainted with Wean who detailed his own dealings and surveillance of Meyer Lansky's Hollywood henchman, Mickey Cohen.
THE COP, THE MOVIE STAR & THE SHERIFF It was shortly after the JFK assassination that Wean stumbled upon information relating to the president's murder—information that sheds new— and interesting—light on how E Howard Hunt may have come to be implicated in the crime of the century.
According to Wean, it was just several weeks after the president's murder that he happened to become acquainted with Dallas Sheriff Bill Decker through their mutual friend, Audie Murphy, the ex-war herotumed-film star.
It was Decker, in fact, who had ordered his men to investigate the railroad yard behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll from where shots at the president's motorcade appeared to have originated.
Decker told Wean that he was certain that Lee Harvey Oswald was innocent of the president's murder.
The three gentlemen, all of whom were familiar with firearms, didn't believe that Oswald could have carried out the crime with the weapon he was alleged to have used.
There has been a terrible double cross somewhere and everybody is scared shitless of everybody else.
According to Wean's source, CIA man E Howard Hunt was indeed involved with Lee Harvey Oswald—but not in planning the president's assassination.
Wean reports that John told him that Hunt had something else in mind altogether.
Essentially, according to Wean's source, Hunt—like other leaders in the anti-Castro movement—was becoming frustrated with the Kennedy' administration's moves to achieve at least an informal detente with Castro.
Hunt, of course, had devoted much energy to the drive to undermine Castro and now all of his work was being undone.
His scheme was to inflame American people against Castro and stirring patriotism to a boiling point not felt since Pearl Harbor.
FOOTPRINTS TO CASTRO'S DOORSTEP ""There was to be an attempt on the life of President Kennedy so ‘realistic’ that it's failure would be looked upon as nothing less than a miracle.
Footprints would lead right to Castro's doorstep, a trail that the rankest amateur could not lose.
It was only two months before the 'fake assassination’ when Hunt gave Oswald the rifle, explaining his part in the plan.
He'd remain in hiding until after Cuba was invaded by the United States A fake trail to Mexico City ending at the Cuban Embassy would lead investigators to think he'd fled to Cuba, the belief that ‘Castro planned the assassination’ of President Kennedy and the 'assassin' was being harbored under protection in Cuba would stir the Americans to a feverish pitch of anger .. ."" os According to Wean's source, Hunt told Oswald that President Kennedy himself was not aware of the plan, but high-ranking cabinet officers were in on the deal.
Oswald would be free to come back and live as a free man after Castro was dealt with.
By my God, this was no break-down or neglect of performance, or even bad luck.
Shots were actually fired at JFK's motorcade and the president was indeed killed.
However, John did not believe that the blame lay at the hands of either the Mafia or the anti-Castro Cubans.
Still it's clear, whoever shot Kennedy had to know all these minute details to pull it off the way they did.
However, it was just several days later that John asked that they forget what they had been told.
According to Wean, Murphy informed him that he had been advised from Dallas that ""Hunt and his agents have regrouped from their horrified panic and sprung back into action.
According to Murphy, military intelligence, the FBI and the CIA were all in a panic.
In fact they have solemnly determined that national security is at stake.
Murphy himself may well be one other on the long list of additional victims of the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Quite accurately, Wean himself has described how Hunt and Oswald both must have reacted if the story that John told Wean and Murphy was indeed true.
There is additional documentation about the activities of an individual named ""John"" who was active in the Dallas area and in Miami (Hunt's base of operations with the anti-Castro Cuban exiles) immediately before and after the JFK assassination.
In his book Conspiracy, Anthony Summers describes one John Martino who was known to have connections to both the Mafia, Meyer Lansky's lieutenant, Santo Trafficante, Jr., in particular, and the Central Intelligence Agency.
In fact, Martino admitted in 1975 that he had been a CIA contract agent and that he had inside knowledge about the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination.
Summers quotes Martino as having said, ""The anti-Castro people put Oswald together.
After Martino died in 1978, Summers notes, his widow claimed that ""the Company"" picked up his body to determine the cause of death, which was established to have been a heart attack. oes Martino and film star Audie Murphy unquestionably had at least one connection, indirect, at the least, that can be documented.
Murphy was employed for a period during the mid-1960s by New Orleans businessman, D'Alton Smith.
The story told by John Martino, at the very least, has a ring similar to the story told by the ""John"" whom Gary Wean met in Dallas.
However, shortly before Final Judgment went to press, Wean revealed to this author the identity of the gentleman named John who told him what had really happened in Dallas.
According to Wean when he wrote his book describing his meeting with John, he deliberately did not reveal John's last name, although he knew exactly who John was.
What's more, according to Wean, he slightly altered his physical description of John in order to protect his identity.
However, on April 5, 1991 John died, like Audie Murphy, in a bizarre airplane explosion that made national headlines.
He was John Tower who, in 1961 had been the first Republican in this century to win a Senate seat from Texas.
A stalwart ally of the CIA throughout his career, it was Tower who took many of the secrets of the Iran-Contra scandal to his grave, having headed the commission which critics contend was a CIA whitewash of the events, particularly those involving Israel's role in the affair.
As Russell notes, ""Many people in the CIA had reasons to cover up their own relationship to Oswald, even if this had nothing to do with an assassination conspiracy.
According to Russell, "" Gerry Patrick Hemming, who still keeps his ear to the ground in Miami's Little Havana, maintains that some of the exiles who thought they knew the score in 1963 have today become convinced that they were being used.
They were told that their dream of retaking their homeland was dead—unless something drastic was done.
Implicating a few Cuban refugees in the assassination was not desirable, but it would not come at a high cost, especially if . . . they had worked diligently to build a cover as Castro agents.
Hemming himself has spoken of at least one faction of anti-Castro Cuban exiles who seemed to be out of the conventional loop.
There was a third force—pretty much outside CIA channels, outside our own private operation down in the Keys—that was doing all kinds of shit, and had been all through 1963.
Not until later did we figure out that most of the exiles being approached were being set up as patsies themselves.
Israel, its Mossad and Israel's powerful domestic American lobby and its contacts at all levels.
In fact, there have been several widely-read works relating to the JFK assassination which have indeed suggested that Oswald, at least, was roped into some sort of ""dummy assassination"" type of operation which he was led to believe was of the nature described by Gary Wean's source in Dallas.
Executive Action, the book loosely based on the film of the same name, presents Oswald as being manipulated in this fashion.
More recently, Don DeLillo's novel, Libra, presents Oswald at the center of a ""dummy assassination"" attempt which was manipulated by others and went awry.
However, there is yet one quite extraordinary piece of the puzzle which actually implicates a known longtime Mossad asset with direct involvement in the events in Dealey Plaza.
It involves the apparent role by longtime CIA contract operative Frank Sturgis in the actual assassination itself.
What few people know is that Sturgis had ties to Israel's Mossad, going back fifteen years prior to the JFK assassination.
Writing in the July 1975 issue of Argosy magazine, F Peter Model reported that Sturgis was a ""Hagannah mercenary during the first Israeli-Arab war,"" °” and that Sturgis also had a girlfriend in Europe in the 1950s who worked for Israeli intelligence and with whom he worked.
Weberman as having said that he assisted his girlfriend as a courier in Europe in a number of her endeavors on behalf of the Mossad.
George—who knew Sturgis quite well and spent time with Sturgis alongside Castro in the hills of Cuba during the Cuban revolution—has also reported that it was well known among anti-Castro Cuban exiles that Sturgis had also worked for the Mossad and had done so for a long period of time.
George has also revealed, during the heyday of the CIA's anti-Castro operations in Miami with which Sturgis and E Howard Hunt were so closely associated, some 12 to 16 Mossad agents worked out of Miami under the command of Mossad Deputy Director Yehuda S Sipper, their influence reaching throughout Latin America and the Caribbean.
JFK writers Warren Hinckle and William Turner have said that ""most of funding came from dispossessed casino owners and was funneled through Norman Roughouse' Rothman,""** who was, according to author Gus Russo, not only ""the partner of Meyer Lansky""®® but also the original ""mobster middleman""**° between the CIA and the Lansky syndicate in the Castro assassination plots.
Russo, however, says that Rothman's support for Sturgis came ""from unknown sources"" yet cites Hinckle and Turner as his source.
STURGIS, BANISTER, FERRIE AND OSWALD As we shall see, this speculation may not be far off the mark.
Citing a February 1, 1977 CIA Security Office memo, Newman says the anti-Castro Cuban training grounds around Lake Ponchartrain outside New Orleans were run by Hemming as part of Interpen and that Sturgis was connected with those Interpen operations.
In any case, we not only find CIA asset Clay Shaw of New Orleans tied to the Mossad through his association with the Permindex operation (as were Banister and Ferrie), but we also find two other CIA-connected players in the anti-Castro operations out of New Orleans were in the Mossad's sphere of influence.
In light of all of this, we would not be venturing into the world of fantasy to suggest that the operation involving Sturgis, Marita Lorenz and the anti-Castro Cubans who traveled to Dallas, arriving there on November 21, 1963 to meet with E Howard Hunt was actually a Mossad ""false flag"" operation, deliberately involving a clique of anti-Castro Cubans manipulated by their Mossad-connected CIA handler.
Since, according to Miss Lorenz, Sturgis later admitted that his team in Dallas did actually participate in the assassination, it is conceivable that although Sturgis and his group did meet up with Hunt in Dallas that Hunt himself did not know that the Sturgis team was going to be involved in an actual assassination attempt or thought they were only involved in a ""dummy"" assassination attempt—if he even knew that much.
As we have said, Hunt's knowledge—or lack thereof—remains a mystery and his actual culpability in any assassination conspiracy per se cannot be pinned down.
But the circumstances do suggest that Hunt does know a lot more about what happened in Dallas than he has admitted.
In any event, there is no question that, based on the facts about Sturgis that we now do know that at least one person who has reportedly confessed to actual involvement in the JFK assassination—Frank Sturgis—did have multiple longtime links to the Mossad for many years prior to the time of the JFK assassination.
This, in itself, is a major revelation and one that is quite relevant when considering the thesis put forth in Final Judgment.
A character named Chauncey Holt, who claims to have been in Dallas and involved in the circumstances surrounding the assassination summarized things quite well.
It's always been my theory that whoever was the architect of this thing—and no one will ever know who was behind it, manipulating all these people.
Michael Milan, whose book The Squad outlines his role in working as part of a secret United States government team collaborating with the Lansky Syndicate says that there were at least several people operating in Dallas who believed that they were not involved in a conspiracy to kill John F Kennedy, but, instead, in a conspiracy to kill Texas Governor John B Connally.
In his biography of Connally, James Reston, Jr. suggests that Oswald had been recruited by Jack Ruby as part of an organized crime plan to kill Connally, rather than Kennedy.
The unusual contention that Connally was the target and that Kennedy was an unintended victim has some very interesting support.
Former Mossad operative Victor Ostrovsky writes in his book By Way of Deception that part of his Mossad training included an in-depth review of the JFK assassination which was part of the required course of study for all new Mossad recruits.
To test their theory, they did a simulation exercise of the presidential cavalcade to see if expert marksmen with far better equipment than Oswald's could hit a moving target from the recorded distance of 88 yards.
According to Ostrovsky, the Mossad had every film taken of the Dallas assassination, pictures of the area, the topography, aerial photographs—everything.
That the Mossad would go to the length of calculating an extensive cover story is interesting in itself and perhaps further evidence that the Mossad had a very particular interest in the JFK assassination.
There were clearly many forces at work in Dealey Plaza, perhaps beyond the comprehension of any one conspirator—including Oswald, Ruby or even Hunt or Sturgis or any of the others involved.
Some of the conspirators may have indeed been led to believe this was a Mafia hit on Connally and that it, in fact, turned out to be a hit on Kennedy.
The Mossad story that it was a botched operation aimed at Connally and resulting in the accidental killing of Kennedy sounds like nothing less than— to borrow a phrase from Ostrovsky—""pure, unadulterated hokum"" coming from the Mossad itself.
And then there is the question of the manner in which Lee Harvey Oswald was being made to appear as though he were a pro-Castro/pro-Soviet agitator through the Mexico City Scenario and of his manipulation in New Orleans by the Clay Shaw-Guy Banister apparatus, which, in turn was directly involved in the activities of CIA and Mossad asset Frank Sturgis in the affairs at Lake Ponchartrain.
One can only imagine, for example, the surprise of a hidden gunman firing at John Connally when he realized that another gunman was firing at John F Kennedy.
However, all of the evidence we have seen suggests that the JFK assassination conspiracy was multi-leveled and ranging out in a variety of directions.
If so, we cannot help but be reminded of the Mossad's famous use of false flags in its criminal endeavors.
One investigator, Scott Thompson, who believes in the ""dummy assassination"" theory, has gone so far as to charge that the provocation against Castro was being carried out with the full knowledge of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy.
Thompson alleges that E Howard Hunt was, in fact, in charge of coordinating the fraudulent assassination attempt.
Former CIA contract agent Robert Morrow has lent credence to the ""dummy assassination attempt” scenario.
Morrow has reported that he had been told that CIA operatives, working with Cuban exiles, ""had some kind of test they were doing, a fake assassination attempt against Kennedy.
While the book contains much intriguing information, there is a very good possibility that the book is classic CIA-Mossad disinformation.
Russo claims that shortly after the JFK assassination—when Robert Kennedy launched a private inquiry into his brother's murder, utilizing a British intelligence asset who was a long-time Kennedy family friend (an inquiry which we referenced at the beginning of Chapter 9)—the British investigator hired two former French intelligence operatives to conduct the investigation.
Russo says that one was Andre Ducret, former head of the French intelligence agency, and that the other was known only as ""Philippe,"" but believed to be Philippe deVosjoli, former head of French intelligence in Washington.
The French investigators then spent several years conducting the investigation, finally providing RFK a report that alleged, generally, that Texas oil barons in league with Lyndon Johnson had been behind the assassination.
Although RFK was killed shortly after receiving the report, the British agent who sponsored the investigation asked the surviving brother, Sen.
Kennedy said his family was not interested, according to Russo, and at that point the report was turned over to Herve LaMarre who then fashioned the report into the book Farewell America.
However, while the book may have contained grains of truth, there is good reason to believe that it was largely CIA-Mossad disinformation.
If indeed Philippe deVosjoli was one of those who handled the ""investigation"" for the Kennedy friend in British intelligence, the fact is that Vosjoli had a ""long friendship special relationship"" with the Mossad's CIA loyalist James J Angleton ©° to the point that deVosjoli not only refused French orders to spy on the United States, but instead apparently helped Angleton conduct espionage against France.
Considering this, we can understand why Farewell America was so vague and so inconclusive and steered the finger of blame away from both the CIA and the Mossad, and, for that matter, suppressed the little-known ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination that has been long discussed, but which, if dissected as we shall now do here, points directly toward not only Angleton at the CIA, but the manipulations of disloyal elements in French intelligence by both Angleton and his Mossad allies.
It's an amazing story that has never been told before, but which we will outline here for the first time ever.
Even the CIA contract the services of other members of the intelligence community to wash dirty linens.
And the executioners are not interested in the aftermath of their mission.
According to Neuville, ""There are no coincidences in the suspicion business—just cover-ups.
It was Angleton (often prodded by his Mossad allies) who had a history of fingering alleged Soviet infiltrators in other nations' intelligence services, creating mass disarray, confusion, bitterness and resentment in their ranks.
Following World War II Angleton served as American intelligence liaison with the SDECE and maintained close friendships with a number of French intelligence officials throughout his career.
And undoubtedly these were Frenchmen who shared Angleton's devotion to Israel.
One particularly embittered high-ranking SDECE officer, Leonard Houneau, who had been caught in Angleton's web and was ultimately cleared of the slander that he was a Soviet mole, later said, ""The whole story was invented.
In Chapter 12 we noted that it was Souetre who was picked up in Dallas on November 22, 1963 and expelled from the United States and who was also CIA man E Howard Hunt's OAS liaison.
What's more, Souetre maintained ties with Meyer Lansky's allies in the Corsican Mafia.
All of this, certainly, suggests a very clear pattern which spells more than coincidence.
As we saw in Chapter 12, there is some question as to whether the individual picked up in Dallas was, in fact, Souetre or someone using his name.
Souetre has suggested that it was another Frenchman, one Michael Mertz, who may have been the guilty party who was actually in Dallas and using Souetre's name.
What makes this allegation most provocative is that Mertz was a former French SDECE officer who had infiltrated the antiDeGaulle OAS and foiled a plot against DeGaulle's life.
Mertz was also engaged in the illegal drug racket, said to be Paris connection man for the Lansky-Trafficante-Corsican Mafia network examined in Chapter 12.
Former CIA insider Robert Morrow, enmeshed in much of the intrigue surrounding the activities of the Clay Shaw-Guy Banister operation in New Orleans, contends it was Mertz who was on one of the assassination teams that struck down John F Kennedy in Dallas.
ISRAEL'S FRENCH CONNECTIONS Although the SDECE was DeGaulle's own service, the agency was as much apparently out of DeGaulle's actual hands-on control as the CIA was out of JFK's control.
Oe Th fact, at least one assassination attempt against DeGaulle by the Permindex-and Israeli-backed OAS came as a direct result of ""inside"" information.
Like its self-centered American counterpart, the CIA, ""the SDECE's main worry, according to well-informed sources, was to protect its own personnel and interests during difficult period [of conflict between DeGaulle and the OAS]. oe Intelligence historian Richard Deacon has noted, for his own part, that in France, during this difficult period, there was ""a good deal of unofficial support for Israel, notably in the ""™ pointing further toward the role of SDECE officers in arranging the assassination of John F Kennedy on behalf of its allies in the Israeli Mossad.
According to Stewart Steven, an authority on the history of the Mossad, ""Brilliant in many respects, the SDECE had the reputation internationally of being the rogue elephant of the world's intelligence circus.
The CIA regarded it as being ‘leaky as a sieve,’ and probably with some justification, for few services had so many departmental heads constantly at loggerheads with one another, all serving different masters, either within France itself or in some cases abroad.
As an ally in the tricky world in which the Mossad was obliged to operate, the SDECE had proved itself extremely useful, principally because its officers did not feel obliged to necessarily receive political authority for its operations.
This gave the service a freebooting quality very much like the Israelis themselves but without Israeli discipline and order.
To complicate matters, DeGaulle himself had reached a truce with the OAS in early 1963 and had helped arrange for its members to set up operations elsewhere.
The likelihood that an Israeli-linked faction of DeGaulle's intelligence service, the SDECE, might have recruited an assassin—particularly a Corsican—for the hit against JFK is very strong.
According to Frederick Forsyth's background account of the conflict between DeGaulle and the OAS these Corsicans, ""had been professional thugs from the underworld before being enlisted, kept up their old contacts, and on more than one occasion enlisted the aid of their former underworld friends to do a particularly dirty job for the government.
So it seems Frederick Forsyth knew whereof he spoke when he described a fictional OAS-sponsored ""Jackal"" seeking to destroy DeGaulle.
THE INTRIGUE COMES FULL CIRCLE However, there is even more evidence suggesting that the so-called ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination is indeed, instead, the Israeli connection reaching all the way to Dallas.
In 1965 a bizarre crime took place which exposed the close ties between certain elements in DeGaulle's intelligence agency, the Israeli Mossad and the French Corsican Mafia underworld.
And, incredibly enough, this same crime implicated individuals whose names have been linked with the JFK assassination as a consequence of subsequent revelations.
The crime in question was the murder of a Moroccan political figure, one Mehdi BenBarka who was a critic of the ruling regime in his native country.
According to historian Stewart Steven, ""As always ... one arm of the SDECE didn't know what the other was doing.
He immediately ordered that the secret service's house be put in order.
What makes this all the more intriguing is that David has claimed knowledge of a French team of assassins being involved in the JFK murder.
And it was Jack Ruby (who killed Lee Harvey Oswald) who mentioned to his lawyers his connection with Davis.
THE CIRCLES INTERSECT IN DALLAS That Charles DeGaulle would have had an interest in getting to the bottom of the JFK assassination is evident, inasmuch as there were multiple French connections to key players in the conspiracy.
DeGaulle clearly discovered that elements of French intelligence and/or agents of his sworn enemies in the OAS had been brought into the JFK assassination conspiracy by the Mossad.
It seems apparent that one or more of the French assassins who played a role in the events in Dallas were recruited by the Mossad through its allies within DeGaulle's intelligence service.
In addition, those in the ClA-connected New Orleans faction of the assassination conspiracy—those framing Lee Harvey Oswald as a pro-Castro agitator—were tied directly the OAS network and the Mossad's Permindex operation that had conspired against DeGaulle.
And at CIA headquarters at Langley, Virginia there was the Mossad's devoted friend and longtime associate of top SDECE officials, James J Angleton, engaged in intrigue that clearly points to his own involvement in the conspiracy and the subsequent cover-up.
In the end, Hunt's apparent visit to Dallas just prior to the assassination—evidently at Angleton's orders—where he met with longtime Mossad asset Frank Sturgis, put Hunt squarely in the middle of the intrigue.
The later attempt to publicly link Hunt to the assassination reaches directly back to Angleton.
These details, taken together with all that we have examined in the pages of Final Judgment, explain the socalled ""French connection"" to the JFK _ assassination, although, as we have seen, the origin of the conspiracy to kill the American president was not, in fact, French.
There were, very clearly, many, many people involved in the periphery of the assassination conspiracy—whether as active conspirators or not.
French President DeGaulle had a direct interest in finding out how his own intelligence service and/or individuals connected thereto had been manipulated by the Mossad and a direct interest in covering it up.
The Mossad's CIA man James J Angleton's own machinations—his purported discovery of KGB ""moles"" in the SDECE's ranks—had created havoc in French intelligence forcing the French president to take action.
This, of course, recalls DeGaulle's decision during the same time frame— as noted previously—to expel the Mossad from France.
In light of all that we have considered here, it is likely that a large part of DeGaulle's move against Angleton'’s CIA and Angleton'’s Mossad allies arose directly from his discovery that his own intelligence service had been directly compromised through the involvement of SDECE officer Georges deLannurien in helping facilitate the JFK assassination.
PERMINDEX AND THE FRENCH CONNECTION As we saw in Chapter 15, the Permindex connection (through Clay Shaw in New Orleans) did indeed tie together not only the CIA and the Lansky Syndicate and the Mossad—but also the French connection to the assassination conspiracy.
Evidently Garrison perceived Permindex as only an indication of Shaw's intelligence connections and nothing more.
Unfortunately, at least at first, the ""French connection"" (which is actually the Israeli connection) seems to have gone right by Garrison and perhaps led in part to his failure to convict Shaw in the JFK conspiracy.
ISRAEL, AGAIN In fact, there is an Israeli connection to evidence linking OAS elements to a plot against President Kennedy.
Russell says that (as known by the CIA and the Warren Commission in 1964) Dinkin had discovered OAS foreknowledge of an assassination plot against President Kennedy supposed to take place in Texas.
Thus, by taking his story to the Israelis, Dinkin was effectively alerting the OAS that he had stumbled upon their connections to the impending assassination of the president.
THE DRIVING FORCE There clearly is much more to the so-called ""French"" connection to the assassination of President Kennedy than meets the eye.
Here in Final Judgment, however, we have outlined the parameters of the French connection as it has never been done.
Pinning down the truth of precisely what happened in Dealey Plaza will never be possible, but we believe that in the pages of Final Judgment we have come closer to the truth than ever before.
The information supplied by the former French intelligence officer relative to Israeli Mossad orchestration of the JFK assassination through the aegis of other intelligence networks, specifically James J Angleton's CIA, and with pro-Israel forces in the SDECE, meshes with other facts assembled in this chapter and through the pages of this volume.
The role of Israel was the unsuspected but ever-present ""missing link"" in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Let us now move forward and examine the manner in which the media maneuvered and/or was manipulated by the CIA and the Mossad in covering up the truth about the president's murder.
His death was indeed a critical part of the cover-up of his brother's assassination in Dallas.
The Media's Silence— Why Israel's Role in the JFK Assassination Could Not Be Exposed The influence of Israel and its lobby over the American media would have made it difficult for anyone who even suspected that Israel had a hand in the JFK assassination to get the word out.
The media promoted the conclusions of the Warren Commission and savaged its critics.
The reporting of syndicated columnist Drew Pearson and the sensational Oliver Stone film JFK are classic case studies of how Israeli-linked media sources have manipulated public perception of the murder of President Kennedy.
However, as we have seen, in Chapter 5, in particular, very little was in fact known about JFK's secret war with Israel and the major Middle East foreign policy turn-about that came on the heels of JFK's assassination.
Thus, even the harshest critics of the Warren Commission which ostensibly ""investigated""—most would say ""covered up""—the assassination conspiracy had no reason to suspect that there might be an Israeli connection to JFK's murder.
The final conclusions of the Warren Commission hardly satisfied anybody—except, of course, for the friends of Israel and the CIA in the Establishment media who gave the Report's conclusions wholehearted support.
Without question—and this is significant—the media almost unanimously sided with the Warren Report, despite all of the evidence which proved the report a fraud.
GARRISON AND THE CIA-MOSSAD LINK The media certainly went into a frenzy with its hysterical coverage of New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison's 1967-1969 inquiry into the JFK murder and his prosecution of Crescent City businessman Clay Shaw.
At the time Garrison began pursuing Shaw, the facts that we now know today about Shaw and his connections with the Lansky-Mossad-CIA-linked Permindex operation based in Rome, were not so obvious.
It wasn't, in fact, until 1975 that former CIA official Victor Marchetti acknowledged publicly that Shaw had ties to the CIA and that the CIA was very much interested in assisting Shaw during the period of his prosecution in New Orleans.
If Jim Garrison had had that proof at the time of Shaw's trial, the verdict indeed may have been different.
ANGELTON'S INTERVENTION There is yet additional evidence of attempts by the CIA to undermine Garrison's investigation.
This evidence directly implicates the CIA's director of counterintelligence, James J Angleton, whose own unique ties to the Mossad and whose central role in the JFK conspiracy cover-up we examined in Chapter 8, Chapter 15 and Chapter 16.
Author Anthony Summers, in his recently-released biography of former FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, described how the alleged compromising photos of Hoover engaged in homosexual activities managed to surface in relation to the Garrison investigation.
According to Summers, he was told by former CIA contract operative Gordon Novel that he was shown such photos by James J Angleton.
Novel, who operated out of New Orleans, had popped up in Jim Garrison's investigation as a possible suspect and, as a direct consequence, he had filed a lawsuit against Garrison.
Novel said that he was being urged to pursue his lawsuit against the New Orleans district attorney by his associates in the CIA, but that Hoover was opposed to the lawsuit.
It was then that Angleton contacted Novel, displayed the compromising photos, and suggested that Novel discreetly advise Hoover that he had seen the photos which Novel says he did, much to the FBI director's dismay.
When he launched his investigation of Shaw, Garrison thought he was doing his patriotic duty.
He was trying to prosecute a man he believed was connected to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
However, the New Orleans district attorney was greeted with a hurricane onslaught by the media—and, in particular, a media outlet with close ties to elements in the pro-Israel lobby.
THE 'STERN GANG' The evidence indicates, in fact, that the fine hand of pro-Israel propagandists were at work, orchestrating the attack on Garrison.
The owner of WDSU was Edgar Stern, of the powerful New Orleans Stern family, major contributors to not only the American Jewish Committee and the American Jewish Appeal, but also the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
Additionally, a close friend of Clay Shaw was Edgar Stern's wife, Edith Stern, whose support for Shaw in the face of his prosecution was prominently noted in James Kirkwood's account of the Shaw trial, American Grotesque. i As we shall see in this chapter, the ADL not only functions as a foreign intelligence operation for Israel, but it also works closely with American intelligence.
More importantly—the ADL uses its influence to play a major role in shaping American media news coverage.
This was critical to covering up the truth about the JFK assassination.
WDSU's malicious attack on Garrison, however, was a much bigger project than it might have appeared.
NBC's coordinator for the project was a former Justice Department official, Walter Sheridan, who had also previously worked for the National Security Agency.
According to Sheridan, Edgar Stern was ""a courageous, liberal man who shared our views concerning Garrison and his probe.
WDSU was the only voice in the Louisiana wilderness speaking out against what Garrison was doing"" ©” However, how courageous and liberal the Stern family may have been is subject to question, in light not only of their attack on Garrison, but also in light of their widely known support of the ADL and its activities, particularly in New Orleans.
In 1968, during the midst of the Garrison-Shaw controversy, it was the ADL's New Orleans office that provided $36,500 of its own funds toward an FBI operation designed to entrap Ku Klux Klansman Tommy Tarrants and a young woman named Kathy Ainsworth.
SABOTAGE The aforementioned Walter Sheridan's involvement in the Garrison case went far beyond being a reporter who was simply out to do a hatchet job.
Instead, Sheridan was actually trying to sabotage Garrison's investigation by interfering in the actual course of the inquiry.
As Garrison pointed out, Sheridan and his associates were ""going far beyond word games.
They were engaged in an organized effort to derail an official investigation of a major city's district attorney's office.
It was on August 16, 1963 that Oswald and a colleague appeared outside Clay Shaw's International Trade Mart distributing pro-Castro leaflets.
This, however, was not the end of WDSU's involvement in promoting Oswald's public image as a pro-communist agitator prior to the assassination of President Kennedy.
On August 17 William Stuckey of WDSU Radio arranged for a radio interview with Oswald in which the young man proclaimed his leftist views.
On August 19 WDSU's Stuckey again contacted Oswald and arranged for Oswald to appear in a debate with an anti-Castro activist over his radio station.
The next day WDSU turned a copy of the debate transcript over to the FBI office in New Orleans.
OSWALD'S 'FREE PUBLICITY' The ADL-connected WDSU television and radio had thus provided ""one lone nut""—Lee Harvey Oswald—with more free publicity than any other single leftist in the city of New Orleans could have dreamed about.
Immediately after Oswald was arrested in Dallas on November 22, it was—once again—WDSU that played a part in portraying Oswald, now to a national television audience, as a proCastro agitator.
The young WDSU cameraman who filmed Oswald's demonstration, Johann Rush, emerged some thirty years later—in 1993—as an ""expert"" whose ""enhancement"" of the Zapruder film of the JFK assassination was hailed as the final proof that Oswald acted alone.
Rush collaborated with author Gerald Posner in the publication of a volume entitled Case Closed which was widely hailed in the Establishment media as the ultimate refutation of JFK assassination conspiracy theorists.
United States News & World Report, published by outspoken Israeli enthusiast Mortimer Zuckerman, devoted an extended special issue promoting the book in its cover story However, the Posner-Rush book is rife with errors, contradictions, misstatements and distortions of fact.
The book is quite disingenuous in its thesis that while the Warren Commission was wrong on some points—thus sparking criticism—its basic thesis was correct.
The authors ignore critical evidence of CIA and other intelligence connections to Oswald and Ruby and suggest that virtually all of the many witnesses who were able to provide information which pointed toward a conspiracy were either mentally unstable or outright liars or both.
So it is that Johann Rush, a veteran of WDSU's conspiracy to frame Lee Harvey Oswald as a pro-Castro agitator, has once again returned to the center of the media's cover-up of what really happened in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
This was the firm of a former Justice Department colleague of Sheridan's named Nathan Lewin who, by this time, had emerged as one of the Israeli lobby's most prominent legmen in the city of Washington.
It was from his office in Lewin's firm that Sheridan laid the groundwork for the establishment of a security firm that provided exclusive services to the Caribbean resort empire known as Resorts International:””” As we noted in Chapter 7, Resorts International is generally perceived as a joint intelligence operation linking the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate alongside the Israeli Mossad.
This is not surprising, of course, in light of all that we have seen regarding Sheridan and the forces behind the effort to destroy Jim Garrison's investigation of Clay Shaw and the JFK assassination conspiracy.
GARRISON PILLORIED In any case, it is very clear that forces with close ties to the Israeli lobby were among those leading the assault on Garrison.
His integrity was questioned and his methods of inquiry were called into judgment.
So it was with anyone who questioned the ""official"" word on the JFK assassination.
The CIA even went to the trouble of preparing a review of Warren Commission critic Mark Lane's best-selling Rush to Judgment that was distributed to CIA friends and assets in the media This was all part and parcel of the campaign to discredit those who were on the brink of uncovering the real truth about the JFK assassination, something that neither Israel nor its allies at the CIA could permit.
SABOTAGE FROM WITHIN In his own memoirs, Garrison notes how, time and again, he and his fellow investigators in the New Orleans District Attorneys office discovered evidence that their work was being sabotaged from within.
Government infiltrators and others were not only spying on Garrison's activities, but they were attempting to undermine the whole investigation.
To Garrison's dismay, even some seemingly dedicated volunteers who had offered to help the professional investigators turned out to be saboteurs.
This young Englishman, in fact, was one Tom Bethell, who later ""broke"" with Garrison—if he had ever really been working on the same side as Garrison to begin with—and became a source for Garrison's critics.
Perhaps we now know what Bethell's reward was, now that time has passed.
Former CIA man William F Buckley, Jr. later hired on young Bethell as an editor for his National Review magazine, touting him as one of the great young conservative writers of the era.
Thanks to Buckley's patronage, Bethell's career as a journalist moved along quite nicely.
There is other evidence of apparent CIA meddling in the Garrison investigation.
When, in 1968, Garrison critic, author James Kirkwood, published his book American Grotesque, he inadvertently let the cat out of the bag regarding an intelligence community-linked effort to sandbag Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw.
Describing how journalist James Phelan had provided him with his own account of how he was trying to disprove Garrison's case against Shaw, Kirkwood published a transcript of a taped interview he conducted with Phelan.
Phelan told Kirkwood how Garrison provided him a number of key documents, in confidence, which he was supposed to return the next morning.
So I got up early and made a call to Bob Mayhew at the Desert Inn and told him I needed a Xerox and needed it fast.
I had to have two documents Xeroxed and I did not want anyone else reading them or knowing they were being copied.
They Xeroxed the copies for me and I returned the originals to Garrison and made no comment about the thing.
When Kirkwood first revealed the Phelan-Maheu machinations, Maheu's behind-the-scenes activities were still a deep, dark secret.
In Chapter 11 we examined Maheu's involvement with the CIA and such organized crime figures as Johnny Rosselli, Sam Giancana and Meyer Lansky lieutenant Santo Trafficante in detail.
It will also be recalled that the aforementioned Desert Inn (by this time the property of billionaire Howard Hughes) was initially established by Meyer Lansky's trusted associate, Morris Dalitz, whose activities and strange connections we examined in Chapter 10 and Chapter 15.
So it was that the CIA did have its collaborators in key positions to undermine the Jim Garrison investigation.
GARRISON & MARCELLO Some of Garrison's more creative foes in the media cleverly came up with a new way to discredit the New Orleans prosecutor.
Instead of really seeking the truth about the JFK murder, they said, Garrison was, in fact, trying to cover it up.
Garrison—so they said—was a willing tool of Mafia chieftain Carlos Marcello.
By pointing his finger in the direction of the CIA, the Garrison critics claimed, the D.A. was trying to take the heat of suspicion off Carlos Marcello who, they said, was the more likely suspect.
If Garrison were deliberately trying to cover up any Marcello connections—if any—to the assassination conspiracy, he was going about it in the wrong way.
It was Billings, of course, who later served as a top advisor to the House Assassinations Committee which pointed the finger of blame for the JFK assassination on ""The Mafia,""—and Marcello in particular.
Ferrie himself was standing alongside Marcello in a federal courtroom in New Orleans at the very moment JFK was shot.
By first inquiring into Ferrie's activities, Garrison was practically walking right into Marcello's office itself.
This fact alone nullifies the creative ""Mafia cover-up"" critique of Garrison that continues to hang over Garrison's memory to this day.
Yet, those who push the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" ignore this fact.
Evidently the people of New Orleans didn't buy the Establishment's heavy-handed assault on Garrison.
This is all the more remarkable in that it was the very newspapers of New Orleans who were Garrison's fiercest at-home critics.
It was Garrison who linked Clay Shaw to the JFK assassination conspiracy and it was Shaw who sat on the board of Permindex, the shadowy Israeli Mossad-linked entity that played so central a role in the murder of the American president.
How much Shaw knew about the impending murder of the president will never be known, but there is no question that Shaw was tied to the core of the conspiracy.
THE FEDS VERSUS GARRISON No wonder then that the full force of the federal government came down on Garrison's head.
He was hit with a wholly-concocted indictment on bribery charges but subsequently—and rightly—was acquitted.
The key witness against him, a former friend named Pershing Gervais, admitted in a press interview that the charges against Garrison were a Justice Department concoction.
Garrison beat that charge, but his Establishment critics continue to allege (in a last desperate effort to pummel Garrison) that the jurors in that case—as in the previous case—may have been bribed to bring in a not guilty verdict.
THE MEDIA TRASHES THE KENNEDY IMAGE What's more, thanks to the media, the image of John F Kennedy likewise has been repeatedly savaged in the years following the assassination.
Kennedy's reputed sex life became the subject matter not of just the tabloids, but of the Establishment press itself.
His affair with Marilyn Monroe became the subject of conversation at every dinner table.
The media eagerly pounced on the Massachusetts senator's every mistake and—as the 30th anniversary of the JFK assassination approached in 1993— began hyping several malicious books attacking Ted Kennedy with what many people might accurately assume was the purpose of preventing the youngest Kennedy brother from ever reaching the White House.
THE HUNT-CIA CONNECTION SUPPRESSED Despite all the media's fascination with the Kennedy family, the media was strangely silent about the astounding revelations that came forth in the E Howard Hunt-Spotlight newspaper libel trial in Miami in 1985.
It was then, as we saw in Chapter 16, that the jury concluded that the CIA had indeed played a part in John F Kennedy's assassination.
However, the CIA's friends at The Washington Post had barely a word to say about Hunt's stunning loss during the trial.
THE CIA AND THE MEDIA That the CIA, of course, has had a major role in subverting the First Amendment and influencing the American media is now a widely accepted truth.
Through the United States Information Agency as a “cut-out,’ the CIA subsidized major publishers to produce books, some of which were then sold in the United States bearing no government imprint to warn the unsuspecting purchaser.
By the mid-sixties, more than $1 million had been spent by the government on its 'book development' program.
It is a subject that deserves far more consideration than we can provide in these pages.
However, there are four volumes in particular which give the reader an in-depth look at the way Israel and its lobby in this country have had such a powerful impact on the way news relating to Israel is reported.
This volume is of particular interest in that it displays documents from ADL files which prove the role of the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith in seeking to silence critics of Israel through wideranging techniques including threats, economic boycott and other unsavory and illegal measures contrary to American tradition.
It is the activity of the ADL, in particular, which seems to have had a recurring role in the JFK assassination conspiracy cover-up by the media.
Perhaps above any other organization, it is the ADL which has consistently had a major impact on the America media.
And in the case of the media's coverage of the JFK assassination, the Warren Commission investigation, and the subsequent critiques of the commission, the ADL's fine hand is, as we shall see, quite visible.
That the ADL, as a voice for Israel, would have an interest in stifling any suggestion that Israel—and for that matter, Israel's allies at the CIA— had a hand in the JFK assassination cannot be disputed.
After all, the ADL has adopted as its mission the defense of Israel and the defamation of its critics—both real and perceived.
THE ADL AND THE LANSKY SYNDICATE What's more, the ADL has—to this day—very close ties to the remnants of the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate and has throughout its history.
According to a 1968 study by Father Dan Lyons, a Jesuit priest, at that time fully $5,500,000 of the ADL's total budget of $6,183,000 came from contributions from the liquor industry.
The liquor industry was a virtual fiefdom of powerful Jewish families known for their devotion to Israel, most notably the family of ex-bootlegger Samuel Bronfman.
All of this is, of course, significant when we consider the ADL's activities in the context of the media's assault on those who ponder the possibility of a conspiracy behind the JFK assassination.
However, the ADL has—as we shall see—connections above and beyond the organized crime interests that stood to benefit from the JFK assassination.
This, of course, is but one example which demonstrates the pervasive influence of Israel's ADL and its clandestine efforts to control public discussion of United States Middle East policy on all fronts—particularly in the American media.
SPY SCANDAL At the beginning of 1993, however, the ADL's history of covert—and illegal—domestic spying finally became the topic of widespread public controversy.
Ironically, among the targets of the ADL's spying included organizations that had, over the years, cooperated with the ADL in a number of joint ventures, including the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the American Civil Liberties Union.
SPYING ON EVERYBODY Contrary to popular perception, the ADL was not spying only on socalled ""right wing"" or ""anti-Semitic"" groups.
Instead, the ADL appears to have maintained constant surveillance of a wide variety of groups and individuals.
THE ANGLETON CONNECTION The longtime chief of the ADL's spy network (euphemistically called its ""fact finding division"") was one Irwin Suall who operated out of ADL headquarters in Manhattan.
Formerly active in the labor movement, Suall was a protégé of Jay Lovestone, whom we first met in Chapter 8.
Suall's mentor, it will be recalled, was Mossad-allied CIA spymaster James J Angleton's point man in the CIA's dealings with the Lansky Syndicate-linked Corsican and Sicilian crime organizations.
These foreign crime elements (which handled the Lansky-run drug racket in Europe) were also utilized by the CIA in its campaign against left-wing labor movements in the Mediterranean during the post-war period.
Since James J Angleton was dismissed from his CIA post after revelations of his involvement in illegal domestic spying by the CIA, we cannot help but speculate that, in light of revelations about ADL spying, Angleton almost certainly relied upon the good offices of his friends at the Mossad-linked ADL for much information.
THE ADL AND THE JFK ASSASSINATION That the ADL would have a hand in shaping JFK assassination news coverage was inevitable, particularly in light of the revelations we have put forth in the pages of this volume.
In fact, on the first occasion when the Establishment media put forth a theory that perhaps Lee Harvey Oswald was indeed part of a much bigger conspiracy, it was in a news story leaked by two major columnists who were very close to not only the ADL but also to key figures in the Meyer Lansky Crime Syndicate.
The case study we are about to examine is highly significant and illustrates the point all too well.
THE PEARSON/ANDERSON COVER STORY On March 3, 1967, syndicated columnist Drew Pearson and _ his understudy, Jack Anderson, floated a story which suggested that Fidel Castro had been behind the JFK murder.
It was some years later that Anderson revealed that Mafia figure Johnny Rosselli had, in fact, been the alleged initial source of the story which Anderson said had been told to CIA-linked Washington lawyer, Edward P Morgan.
With good reasons which they cite, Rosselli's biographers, Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker, don't believe the Pearson/Anderson story in the least.
Finally, with the benefit of hindsight, Rosselli's story of CIA marksmen being ‘turned’ seems highly implausible, a product of Korean War recruiting films.
Mafia enforcer and one-time ""acting boss"" of the Mafia families in California, Jimmy Fratianno, told of a meeting with Rosselli in 1976, around the time that Rosselli was providing congressional investigators with details of CIA-Organized Crime assassination plots aimed at Fidel Castro.
Sometimes I'd like to tell them the mob did it, just to see the expression on their stupid faces.
You know, Castro retaliating against Kennedy because of our attempts on his life.
I've also been dropping by Jack Anderson's office and we're getting pretty chummy, having lunch and dinner together.
EARL WARREN CONNED Drew Pearson's own interest in JFK assassination cover stories was of long standing.
Apparently one of the subjects discussed by Pearson and Khrushchev was the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The secret talks between Pearson and the Soviet dictator were never recorded in Pearson's gossip column.
It was apparently during this period that Pearson first promoted the Castro conspiracy theory which later came to the public's attention in 1967.
This apparently was the ruse needed to convince Warren to hide what he mistakenly believed to be the troublesome truth.
PS Whatever the case, the Pearson-Anderson story about the alleged Castro conspiracy against JFK created a sensation and muddied the waters at a time when JFK assassination conspiracy allegations were gaining widespread credibility.
However rational the story may have sounded at the time, the evidence was flimsy at best as we have seen.
The fact is that the PearsonAnderson ""revelations"" are nothing more than deliberate disinformation.
SHIFTING THE FOCUS OF CONTROVERSY The Pearson-Anderson columns, in effect, ""cleared"" the CIA of involvement in JFK's murder and pointed the finger at Castro.
The Pearson-Anderson columns, likewise, shifted focus away from the Garrison investigation in New Orleans which was focusing on likely CIA involvement and which had stumbled upon the Clay Shaw-Permindex connection bringing the inquiry right onto Israel's doorstep.
That Drew Pearson, in particular, would have an interest in shielding any Israeli involvement as well is beyond doubt.
ISRAEL'S FAVORITE COLUMNIST Of Jewish extraction, Pearson was a devoted friend of Israel—from the beginning.
In fact, in the period leading up to the establishment of the state of Israel, Pearson functioned as a hit man for the Israeli lobby in the United States, pounding away in his column at those perceived inimical to Israeli interests.
One of Pearson's favorite targets was then-Secretary of Defense James Forrestal.
According to Pearson's biographer, ""When Forrestal persuaded Truman to take the Arab side against the Jews in Palestine for military reasons, Pearson saw his opportunity.
He lathered and shaved Forrestal as a bureaucratic voice for American oil companies with enormous stakes in the Mideast.
There are many, though, who believe that Forrestal was in fact murdered—precisely because of his powerful opposition to the Israeli lobby.
Pearson himself had cemented his ties with the Israeli lobby and had engaged in behind-the-scenes intrigue with Israel's intelligence and propaganda arm, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith for decades.
Stephenson, as we saw in Chapter 7 and Chapter 15 was not only the guiding force behind the assembly of Israel's Mossad, but also the brains behind the Allied intelligence operations during World War II which utilized the resources of Meyer Lansky and his organized crime network.
He was also a close associate and mentor of Louis M Bloomfield, president of the Mossad-backed Permindex entity that was central to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Pearson's other connections were equally interesting and point further toward his interest in covering for Israel and its allies in the JFK assassination conspiracy—both the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
THE ISRAELI LOBBY AND PEARSON According to Pearson's associate, John Henshaw, Pearson was engaged in sharp business practices with his partner, attorney Max M Kampelman, a key figure in the Israel lobby in Washington and a longtime top-level Anti-Defamation League director.
Kampelman, the personal attorney for then-Vice President Hubert Humphrey, and Pearson were trying to wrest control of television channel 14 away from a Black-owned station, WOOK, in Washington.
The connections between Pearson and the Israeli lobby in Washington were even more intimate.
Pearson's stepson , Tyler Abell, an attorney, had been employed by the law firm of David Ginsburg, a registered foreign agent for Israel.
Ginsburg, like several other top figures known for their interest in promoting Israel's interests in Washington, were among those close to Hubert Humphrey.
THE MICKEY COHEN DEAL In 1968 Pearson worked hand-in-glove with Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, in an effort to wreck Richard Nixon's presidential campaign in favor of his Democratic opponent, Humphrey.
According to Cohen, writing in his memoirs, President Johnson arranged for Pearson to call Cohen who was, by then, in jail.
Pearson wanted to uncover dirt about Nixon from the former Vice President's days in California when, according to Cohen, he had provided underworld financial backing for Nixon.
Pearson's relationship with the publishers of the National Enquirer newspaper (which has made a specialty out of trashing the Kennedy family and likewise publishing often loony JFK assassination conspiracy stories) is also interesting, particularly in light of the Enquirer's CIA and Israeli lobby connections.
PEARSON AND THE NATIONAL ENQUIRER As reported by Pearson's legman, John Henshaw, in the July 1, 1969 issue of the Washington Observer newsletter, the company which published the Enquirer, World Wide Features, Inc. had interesting origins.
It was owned by the three brothers, Anthony, Fortune and Generoso Pope.
The Pope family were longtime contributors—through the Generoso Pope Foundation—to pro-Israel causes.
The foundation was also widely suspected of being a secret conduit for CIA funds.
Pope, Jr. had worked for the CIA during the Korean war and was himself famously friendly with Lansky's longtime partner, Frank Costello.
In return, Pope promptly gave Pearson a contract to write a weekly column for his £/ Progresso, the leading Italian language newspaper in the country.
The $150-aweek contract was more than any other newspaper paid for just one weekly column.
In the mid-1960's Pearson and Fortune Pope, along with Lyndon Johnson's TV-and-radio advisor, Leonard Marks, went into partnership and acquired the Bell-McClure Syndicate and the North American Newspaper Alliance.
THE JOE TRENTO CONNECTION It is of more than passing interest to note that for a period, Generoso Pope's Washington bureau chief was journalist Joe Trento, who emerged as an authority on the intelligence community.
It was Trento, as we saw in Chapter 16, who co-wrote a controversial article alleging that former CIA man E Howard Hunt may have been in Dallas on the day JFK was shot.
Trento, as noted, had excellent CIA connections—James Jesus Angleton, in particular, and we know for a fact that Trento was being used as a media conduit by Angleton for whatever insidious purposes of his own.
JACK ANDERSON'S CONNECTIONS Drew Pearson's partner and protégé, Jack Anderson, himself had notable ties to not only the Israeli lobby, but also the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate.
Not only did Anderson once share his offices with at least one registered lobbyist for Israel, who was also close to Lansky's protégé, Carlos Marcello, ’* but he also maintained a close working relationship with Herman Greenspun, a longtime Lansky syndicate associate and arms-smuggler for Israel.
According to Lansky's friendly biographer, Robert Lacey, Stacher's death affected Lansky greatly.
According to The Washington Observer, ""Early in the Palestine War, Hank Greenspun was dispatched by the Jewish underground to Hawaii to buy surplus United States Army arms and equipment.
By bribing security guards at the United States Naval Air Station on Oahu, he raided a stockpile of armaments and stole 15 tons of .30and .50caliber aircraft machine guns.
The contraband machine guns were packed in 58 crates marked ‘engine parts' and shipped to Los Angeles, then transshipped to Mexico and on to Israel.
Greenspun ran the British blockade in a ship delivering arms to Israel.
Later he pleaded guilty to violating the United States Neutrality Act, and was given a 3-year suspended sentence.
Greenspun, who became a major figure in Las Vegas, went on to establish a chain of newspapers in Nevada and Colorado, publishing The Las Vegas Sun.
As we saw in Chapter 7, the Israeli arms-smuggling underworld of which Greenspun was a part, was a very tightly knit little clique.
It was, of course, Louis Bloomfield (later chief executive officer of the Permindex entity) who was once a key coordinator for Israeli arms smuggling working with the Lansky Syndicate and, Anderson's associate, Greenspun.
Anderson and Greenspun were themselves involved in yet another venture linked to the Lansky Syndicate.
The two, along with CIA-linked attorney Edward Morgan (the alleged conduit for the Castro conspiracy story floated by Pearson and Anderson) were middlemen in the sale of Lansky associate and ADL ""Torch of Liberty"" winner, Morris Dalitz's Las Vegas gambling palace, the Desert Inn, to Howard Hughes.
Jack Anderson was also a very public and longtime ""close friend""’’ of Mossad and CIA asset Frank Sturgis, beginning as early as 1960—three years before Sturgis, by his own reported later admission, played a part in the events in Dealey Plaza.
Although the media in general had initially backed the Warren Commission cover-up, public dissent about the conclusions—stirred on largely by the work of pioneer commission critic Mark Lane and his friend, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison—forced Israel's friends in the media to play their hand.
Stories that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" and about ""Castro"" plots against JFK suddenly began emerging.
And Pearson himself actually had a hand in convincing Earl Warren that there had been a conspiracy that made it necessary, for the public good, to cover up the truth.
In fact, Pearson and his Israeli and CIA allies were seeking to keep the real truth hidden.
MORE DISINFORMATION One rather interesting JFK assassination story appeared in the form of a book by former CIA contract agent Hugh McDonald, co-written with prolific author Geoffrey Bocca.
The McDonald-Bocca book, Appointment in Dallas, received wide distribution.
The book featured an interview with an international hit man named ""Saul"" who confessed to McDonald that he was the real murderer of President Kennedy.
The hit man said that he was hired by a private group, and not by the CIA for whom he had done contract work in the past.
While many JFK assassination critics were highly skeptical about the book, looking upon it as some form of disinformation (perhaps from the CIA itself)—although not necessarily questioning McDonald's sincerity—it would have been more instructive to consider Geoffrey Bocca's role in the writing of the book.
Needless to say, in light of the ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination conspiracy, the appearance of an OAS propagandist as the coauthor of a book which effectively ""cleared"" the CIA of involvement in the crime is interesting, to say the least.
His co-author, who had solid links to the CIA, Robin Moore, was best known, interestingly enough, for his famous book, The French Connection—on the French intelligenceand Lansky Syndicate-linked international heroin racket.
Whatever the case, McDonald's second book received little, if any, recognition, although it did muddy the waters further.
A PRO-ISRAEL 'CRITIC' The tell-tale hand of Israeli sympathizers within even the ranks of the ""critics"" of the Warren Commission's conclusions has also now become apparent.
When a group of self-styled Warren Commission ""critics"" formed an organization known as the Assassination Information Bureau, one of them included liberal journalist Jack Newfield, a devout and outspoken supporter of Israel.
The Post, of course, has been one of the media's primary pro-Israel voices—almost to the point of obsession.
Any conspiracy that might somehow link Israel—or its allies in the CI[A—could not be tolerated.
Almost immediately, the rest of the Establishment media picked up the scandal sheet's ""exclusive"" and began hyping it.
The purpose was to discredit the conspiracy that was finally being exposed to millions of Americans.
The Washington Post, long a CIA disinformation source, also published the story.
As did the staunchly pro-Israel conservative weekly, Human Events which consistently maintained, otherwise, that any conspiracy in the JFK assassination—particularly involving the Cl[A—was a madman's fantasy.
According to Ragano's unlikely story, Ragano took the message to New Orleans rackets boss Carlos Marcello and to Tampa mob chieftain Santos Trafficante, both of whom, we have seen, were immediate underlings of Meyer Lansky.
Now all of this is most peculiar in that Ragano says that he—a toplevel criminal lawyer with high-ranking connections—managed to ""suppress"" these memories until just recently.
Ragano said he was ""guilty and ashamed"" because of his association with organized crime; according to Ragano, his guilt feelings caused him to suppress those memories.
However, he might also have been interested in adding some spice to his memoirs which were later published.
What's more, Ragano, who was appealing a second federal income tax evasion conviction, might also have had something else in mind by telling this story which clears the CIA and any other federal agencies that may have been involved in the assassination and its cover-up.
Hoffa biographer Dan Moldea shed some interesting ""inside"" information regarding the truth about Hoffa—and his murder.
According to Lerner, ""The Mafia has always figured among the major possible scenarios for the killing, along with the KGB and Cuba's Fidel Castro.
But not until the Ragano account had the pieces of the puzzle begun to fall together.
Marcello headed the Mafia operation in New Orleans, Trafficante in Tampa and Cuba.
He ignored the central part Meyer Lansky played in manipulating the activities of both Marcello and Trafficante.
SUN MYUNG MOON, ISRAEL & THE CIA That The Washington Times would have an interest in promoting the Hoffa-Mafia story is no surprise.
After all, the Times itself has close links to the intelligence community and is a strident editorial supporter of Israel.
The Washington Times is funded by the bizarre global conglomerate of Korean cult figure Sun Myung Moon.
Moon himself has been repeatedly linked to the Korean CIA which is, of course, intimately tied with its American counterpart.
Additionally, Moon has forged a close working alliance with Israel and its American lobby and has pushed a pro-Israel agenda on the so-called ""conservative movement"" in the United States.
Moon's editor at The Washington Times at that time was Arnaud deBorchgrave, a former top correspondent for the CIA-linked Newsweek and a reputed ""former"" intelligence operative.
What's more, deBorchgrave himself is closely connected by marriage to the Rothschild family.
The Rothschilds, as we have seen, have been longtime financial backers of the state of Israel.
THE CONSERVATIVE COVER-UP The response to JFK conspiracy allegations from another ""conservative"" source is equally interesting.
The organization, quaintly named Accuracy in Media, a self-styled conservative ""media watchdog,"" took great umbrage with suggestions that there might have been a conspiracy behind the president's assassination.
At the time Mark Lane's Plausible Denial and Oliver Stone's JFK were released, AIM chairman Reed Irvine, seemingly inexplicably, signed on with the rest of the media in denouncing the conspiracy theories presented in the book and the motion picture.
Writing in the pages of the conservative weekly, Human Events, media critic Irvine paid tribute to the Establishment media for its attack on the theories.
Irvine went on to dismiss Lane as a ""leftist"" and announced emphatically that anyone who believes that there was any kind of domestic conspiracy behind the JFK murder was being taken in by Soviet propaganda.
The AIM response was interesting, particularly in the context of the background of some of AIM's leading lights.
Irvine himself was a former economist for the big bank-controlled Federal Reserve System.
That Lansdale's former Vietnam era associate would come out swinging against JFK conspiracy theories, then, is no big surprise.
AIM'S ISRAELI CONNECTION The aforementioned Yoh is also affiliated with the International Security Council , a think tank notable for its central devotion to the advancement of Israel's interests in United States foreign policy-making.
Joseph Churba, an ordained rabbi whom we first encountered in Chapter 8 as a protégé of Jay Lovestone who coordinated CIA contacts with the Corsican and Sicilian Mafias on behalf of the CIA's James J Angleton.
Interestingly enough, Churba was also a key figure in the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs and in an entity known as Americans for a Safe Israel established in the United States as an outgrowth of the Israeli underground terrorist group, the Irgun.
ANOTHER CIA-LANSKY CONNECTION Another AIM figure is equally interesting in light of the organization's critique of JFK assassination conspiracy theories.
It might be added, in passing, that AIM has consistently also been a strident defender of Israel and its interests.
To even hint at any conspiracy which might involve Israel and its allies in the CIA would be an outrage, insofar as AIM would be concerned.
The irony, as we shall see, is that although Oliver Stone himself seemed to have asked that very question in a big, big way—through the aegis of his controversial film JFK—the fact is that Stone himself has, in a sense, proven in the end to have become a major factor in the continuing cover-up of the real truth about the assassination of John F Kennedy.
It is ironic indeed that although Stone's film JFK has focused widespread international attention on the JFK assassination conspiracy, there has been quiet speculation that the media's furor might be part of a highlevel plan to further cover up the truth about the conspiracy.
The facts about the assassination conspiracy are sensational enough without fictional details being added, he and others have pointed out.
POINTING IN THE WRONG DIRECTION Although Stone's film referenced, in passing, the CIA connections of David Ferrie and Clay Shaw—and actually mentioned Permindex—the film's primary thrust was that the conspiracy originated in the so-called ""militaryindustrial"" complex.
The primary conspirators were presented as high-level military men and their allies among the multi-billion-dollar defense contracting companies.
The intelligence community's role was understated, to say the very least.
STONE'S LANSKY-ISRAEL CONNECTION That distribution for Stone's film was handled by Warner Brothers is somewhat unsettling in light of the conclusions reached in Final Judgment.
In fact, Warner Brothers, a subsidiary of the giant Time-Warner media empire, evolved from a film production company established by longtime Meyer Lansky associate, Louis Chesler, a Canadian of somewhat dubious reputation.
It was in 1956 that Chesler, a Lansky front man, established Seven Arts Productions in Montreal, Canada.
Although ostensibly a film production company, Seven Arts functioned as a money-laundering facility for Lansky and others among his associates.
In 1967 Seven Arts shook Wall Street and stunned Hollywood when it gained control of the famous Warner Brothers Studios—in short, a Lansky take-over.
The move was a mystery to many at the time, but little did they know of the behind-the-scenes Lansky Syndicate dealings which made the wheeling and dealing possible.
Not surprisingly, it just so happens, it was Bernie Cornfeld's Investors Overseas Service which ""owned major blocks of stock""’*° in Warner-Seven Arts.
Cornfeld of IOS, as we saw in Chapter 15, was a front man for Tibor Rosenbaum, former Mossad official and the prime mover behind the Lanksy-linked Permindex operation that was so central to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
THE 'ISRAELI MAFIA' In 1981 a major scandal rocked Warner Communications.
Several of its top figures—Solomon Weiss, Stephen Ross and Jay Emmett—were caught up in tax fraud, bribery, and assorted other racketeering charges brought by the Justice Department.
It was, as we have seen, ironically enough, on November 22, 1963, that Swiss Israel assumed management of American Bank and Trust.
The latter firm, however, ultimately went belly up, having been looted by financier David Graiver, himself a longtime Mossad operative.
THE GANG AT TIME-LIFE It was in Chapter 10, for example, that we learned how Life correspondent Richard Billings went to New Orleans and sabotaged Jim Garrison's investigation into the JFK assassination.
Billings and company presented Garrison as a shill for New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello, but, of course, ignored Marcello's secondary positioning to Marcello's sponsor, Meyer Lansky.
Billings himself later served on the staff of the House Assassinations Committee which blamed the JFK murder on ""the Mafia,"" working alongside the committee's director, G Robert Blakey, who several years previously had been employed as a character witness on behalf of longtime Lansky confidant Morris Dalitz, ostensibly ""proving"" that Dalitz was not linked with the underworld.
So it was that Time-Life and Warner Communications merged, becoming Time-Warner.
And, of course, it was one of Time-Warner's subsidiaries, Warner Brothers, which ultimately became the distribution company for Oliver Stone's JFK—which blamed ""the military-industrial complex""—not Israel's Mossad, not the Mafia, not even the CIA itself—for the JFK assassination.
THE BRONFMANS, AGAIN Interestingly enough, in early 1993 the Lansky syndicate-linked Bronfman family, through their Seagram Company, purchased a substantial controlling interest in Time Warner, further cementing the media giant into the tightly-knit circles of the CIA-Lansky Syndicate-Israeli Mossad connection that have swirled around the company since its inception.
It was, as we saw in Chapter 15, Major Louis M Bloomfield, chief executive operative of the Permindex entity, who had been longtime personal attorney for the Bronfman interests and a major figure in the Israeli lobby in Canada.
That a company which has been intimately tied from its earliest years not only with the inner circles of Meyer Lansky and his international crime syndicate, but also with Israel and its Mossad, should be the sponsor of Oliver Stone's grand conspiracy theory is enough to make one wonder, to say the least.
It is somewhat interesting to note that when Stone hired on a public relations agency to handle the publicity and controversy which emerged when the film was released, it was the powerful Washington, D.C. firm of Hill & Knowlton.
After all, it was Hill & Knowlton that orchestrated major propaganda in favor of American involvement in the Persian Gulf War against Iraq—and in favor of Israel.
STONE'S ADL CONNECTION What's more, the Hill & Knowlton executive who handled his firm's efforts on behalf of Stone, Frank Mankiewicz, got his start in the public relations business working on behalf of the pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith in Los Angeles.
In Washington, D.C., on February 16, 1994, an associate of this author attempted to present Oliver Stone with a copy of the first edition of this book, Final Judgment.
This came several months after the book was first advertised in the program of the annual symposium on the JFK assassination sponsored by the JFK Assassination Information Center in Dallas, Texas.
After all, a full-page advertisement promoting a book featuring an introduction by Stone appeared opposite a full-page advertisement for Final Judgment.
The ""maverick"" self-styled freethinker, Stone, turned his back and walked away, moments later accepting another package of material presented to him by another individual.
Stone did, in fact, know of the socalled ""French connection"" to the JFK assassination documented in Final Judgment and referenced in the advertisement in the program of the JFK forum in Dallas.
STONE AND 'THE FRENCH CONNECTION' You see, shortly after Final Judgment went to press, Ron Lewis, who was a friend of Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans and who also worked in Guy Banister's ""French""-connected operation, revealed something very interesting about Stone and the ""French"" connection.
So it also was that Oliver Stone ignored the ""French"" connection—a connection which, in turn, brings forth the Israeli connection to the assassination of John F Kennedy.
A wise move indeed for a film-maker whose sponsors had intimate ties to the guilty parties involved in the crime that Stone brought to grisly life on film.
STONE'S MOSSAD CONNECTION However, there is one last rather intriguing fact about Oliver Stone and his widely-promoted film that deserves mention.
Although Stone was, beyond question, the undeniably talented creative genius responsible for JFK, one must always remember that in the motion picture arena, it is ultimately money—pure and simple—that determines whether or not a film will be made.
The all-important task of arranging financing falls into the lap of the film's producer.
A company he owned was once caught smuggling nuclear weapons fuses to Iraq.
It also turns out, according to Riordan, that Milchan made available what Riordan described as ""French money"" for the production of Stone's film.
Thus, we have a Mossad figure in the center of Israel's nuclear development program providing the financing—along with his French partners—of a film that not only 1) suppresses the so-called ""French connection"" (described even by one of the film's consultants, the aforementioned Ron Lewis) but which 2) never once hints at JFK's bitter conflict with Israel, in particular the struggle over Israel's drive to assemble a nuclear arsenal.
It is probably worth noting, additionally, that since Final Judgment was first published I have been told—but have never been able to confirm—that Oliver Stone has been a generous contributor to the America-Israel Public Affairs Committee, the lobby for Israel.
If true, then this is simply another interesting detail which helps further explain why Stone might choose to ignore all of the evidence which does demonstrate a definitive Israeli connection to the assassination of John F Kennedy.
I would relish the opportunity to debate Oliver Stone in a public forum.
After all, we do agree that Jim Garrison was on to something when he launched his investigation of Clay Shaw.
Where we part company, it seems, is just how far the conspiracy really went.
If there are any readers of Final Judgment who could arrange such a debate, by all means let me know.
As we have seen, one political force that was opposed to John F Kennedy and would benefit from his assassination was Israel, yet Stone himself evidently prefers not to name that particular force.
Despite all the criticisms we have aimed at Stone—and they are very much deserved—Stone's film has still led the way for new popular perceptions about the obvious fact that it was a conspiracy that ended the life of John F Kennedy.
Stone failed to nail down the source of that conspiracy but in the pages of Final Judgment we have done just that.
What a shame indeed that Oliver Stone could not have told the entire story of the conspiracy.
THE MEDIA REJECTS A FINAL JUDGMENT Clearly, the media's coverage—or be it non-coverage---of the JFK assassination was critical to the cover-up of the real origins of the conspiracy that resulted in the president's assassination.
That the media played a major part in perpetuating the cover-up is unquestioned and that Israel and its lobby has a major influence in shaping the American media can likewise not be questioned.
Although the media initially supported the Warren Commission's conclusions, public skepticism forced the media to bring forth a wide variety of cover stories and limited portions of the truth.
Chapter Eighteen The Heir to the Throne The Assassination of Robert F Kennedy Israel, Iran, Lansky & the CIA The murder of Sen.
Robert F Kennedy, younger brother of the slain president, was vital to the continuing cover-up of the truth about the JFK assassination.
If RFK had made it to the White House he would finally have had the power to bring his brother's killers to justice.
The slaying of Robert F Kennedy links not only Israel and its allies in the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, but also SAVAK, the secret police of the Shah of Iran.
On its face, the ""official"" explanation of the circumstances surrounding the death of former Attorney General Robert F Kennedy is as simple as the Warren Commission Report on the assassination of John F Kennedy.
In both instances, so the story goes, ""one lone nut"" was responsible for the crime.
Robert F Kennedy's assassination in Los Angeles in 1968 came just after RFK had won the critical California Democratic presidential primary.
This put the younger Kennedy in the lead for his party's presidential nomination and thus potentially in line to move into the White House following the general election.
It was in the ballroom of the Ambassador Hotel where RFK delivered his California victory speech to an assembled crowd of supporters.
After concluding his speech, the triumphant Kennedy wanted to work his way through the crowd in the ballroom to make his exit from the hotel.
However, according to one campaign volunteer who was on the scene, one of Kennedy's handlers repeatedly insisted that Kennedy exit through the hotel kitchen behind the ballroom.
The handler who was so insistent that RFK exit through the kitchen was Frank Mankiewicz, who had started his career in the public relations business at the Los Angeles office of the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith, and who, as we saw in Chapter 17, handled publicity for Oliver Stone's JFK extravaganza.
The Arab-American assailant was pummeled to the floor, arrested, convicted and sentenced to prison.
The public was somberly told that Sirhan was dissatisfied with Kennedy's strong pro-Israel stand and that this was one of the driving motivations that led him to commit the crime.
So it was that an ArabAmerican was held up to the world as the killer of a martyred American president's younger brother, himself a popular public figure.
What an irony that it was an Arab-American who would happen to be the assassin of the Kennedy brother who was perceived by ""insiders"" to be, at least in private, an anti-Semite in the mold of his father.
That Kennedy did indeed take a strident pro-Israel stand during his years in the United States Senate is not in doubt.
Thus it was that an Arab patsy took the fall for RFK's murder—a crime that had evolved from a conspiracy that was decidedly not Arabic in its origins.
THE RFK CONSPIRACY In this chapter we shall explore the source of the conspiracy that removed Robert Kennedy from the political arena and thereby precluded him from ever having the power to investigate the conspiracy that ended his brother's presidency.
Unlike Lee Harvey Oswald who proclaimed himself a ""patsy,"" Sirhan Sirhan responded almost without protest, with a certain passivity.
Yet, perhaps precisely because of the continuing doubts over the first Kennedy assassination, public awareness of the serious questions arising from the second Kennedy assassination did not reach the same level.
Although many believed that the murder of Bobby Kennedy was directly linked to the murder of his brother five years earlier, no one seemed able to fit the pieces of the puzzle together.
ENTER SAVAK In fact, as former CIA contract agent, Robert Morrow, has demonstrated in his little-noticed book, The Senator Must Die, there are connections between the two events—deeper than one might have imagined.
According to Morrow's own extensive investigation, during the final weeks of Robert F Kennedy's ill-fated presidential campaign in 1968, one Khyber Khan, a high-ranking member of the Shah's SAVAK, had infiltrated RFK's California campaign headquarters.
Khan additionally brought in other SAVAK agents to work on the campaign.
RFK allowed Khan into his inner circle because he believed Khan to be an opponent of the Shah of Iran.
In the early 1960's Khan had become embroiled in a feud with the Shah over a business deal gone sour and in revenge had come to Washington where he provided then-Attorney General Robert Kennedy with evidence of the Shah's misappropriation of United States foreign aid to Iran.
The resulting bad blood further strained relations between the Kennedy administration and the Shah which had never been stable.
However, Khan and the Shah had made amends shortly thereafter and an alliance had been cemented.
Khan, in fact, set up SAVAK operations on the West Coast in 1963—all of this, of course, unbeknownst to Robert F Kennedy.
According to Morrow's account, both Sirhan and the other gunmen were on the scene when RFK was assassinated.
Sirhan was using the .22 caliber pistol that was taken from him after the assassination.
The other gunman, however, was carrying a CIAmanufactured .22 caliber gun disguised as a camera.
After Kennedy gave his final address and made his way into the kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel, Sirhan, of course, thrust his own weapon out and began firing toward the senator.
This resulted in Sirhan being the focus of attention, although one witness said that he had told the authorities that Sirhan never got close enough for a point-blank shot.
The other gunman, meanwhile, was also firing his weapon and probably delivered the fatal shot.
Obviously, it would not have done the assassination conspiracy good to have the other gunman captured with a CIA-manufactured weapon.
OTHER POSSIBLE GUNMEN Many RFK assassination conspiracy theorists have pointed in the direction of a character named Thane Caesar who was on the scene at the time of the senator's murder, employed at the last minute by the Ambassador Hotel as a replacement for another security guard.
Although Caesar has been popularly described as a ""bodyguard for Howard Hughes"" , his real connections are far more interesting.
Caesar, evidently, had more firm ties to the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate through his Las Vegas connections.
In the end, the Thane Caesar story is just another one of those distractions that really don't point anywhere.
Meanwhile, in her new book, The Assassinations (Los Angeles, Feral House, 2003), Lisa Pease has come forth with evidence that a British national of Jewish origin, Michael Wien, who went by the name of ""Michael Wayne,"" was in the Ambassador Hotel ballroom before the shooting of RFK and seemed to have had advance knowledge of the impending events.
After the shooting there were allegations that Wien (or ""Wayne"") was carrying what appeared to some to be a cardboard tube or some similar item and some people thought he had a gun concealed inside.
Although the police apparently took Wien into custody for a brief period, Pease suggests that there are many more questions about Wien—and other suspicious individuals who were there that day-that remain unanswered.
Morrow says that the operatives were officers Manny Pena and Enrique Hernandez, both of whom were known to have worked for the CIA, along with their work for the police department.
This, in essence, is the reconstruction of the RFK assassination conspiracy which Morrow documents so convincingly in his book The Senator Must Die.
Although in his public persona he was the popular maitre de of the exclusive Rotunda Restaurant on Capitol Hill, Goodaryi was also the immediate SAVAK superior of Khyber Khan, the West Coast SAVAK operative who coordinated the RFK murder.
Goodaryi himself was murdered in early 1977—just one month after he spoke with Morrow.
Thus, we once again see the specter of Meyer Lansky in the murky background in the assassination of a Kennedy.
During the time that Sirhan Sirhan was being groomed for his role in the slaying of Robert F Kennedy, the young Arab-American worked in the stables of the Santa Anita racetrack.
Santa Anita, in fact, was one of the primary profit-centers for Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, rackets boss of Southern California.
We can only speculate that Cohen and his underlings may have had a hand in some aspect of the RFK assassination.
The CIA's role in toppling a nationalist Iranian ruler, Mohammed Mossadegh, and restoring the Shah of Iran to his throne in 1953 is well-known and widely documented.
What is less-known, however, is the close working relationship between Iran's SAVAK and the Israeli Mossad.
ISRAEL AND IRAN In 1958 Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion proposed to American President Dwight D Eisenhower a united front against Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser.
According to Ben-Gurion, ""With the purpose of erecting a high dam against the Nasserist-Soviet tidal wave, we have begun tightening our links with several states on the outside perimeter of the Middle East.
Iran was one of those countries that Ben-Gurion proposed be part of this new alliance.
In fact, Israel had been actively engaged in attempting to interfere in Iran's domestic affairs for some time.
Although, according to the Cockburns, the relationship between Iran and Israel was uneasy and involved much international intrigue ""the connection between the Shah's Iran and Israel rested on firm foundations.
The two countries shared a strong suspicion and dislike of the Arab nations on their borders.
Israel, for its part, could offer valuable expertise in the fields of intelligence, and domestic security.
Writing in his memoirs, Rafizadeh reveals that SAVAK was set up at the joint urging of Israel, the United States and Britain.
In charge of the CIA's training of SAVAK operatives was an operation known as the International Police Academy in Washington.
This academy also played a major part in training operatives of Israel's Mossad.
The academy was run by one Joseph Shimon, a man with additional interesting connections.
Shimon counted among his close friends Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana and the Mafia's roving ambassador, Johnny Rosselli, whose own roles in the JFK assassination conspiracy we reviewed in detail in Chapter 11.
Shimon, in fact, also testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee in 1975 that he participated in meetings between Giancana, Rosselli and CIA operatives in Miami in preparation for CIA-Organized Crime assassination plots against Fidel Castro.
When he received the news of Kennedy's death, he asked for a drink to celebrate.
The Shah viewed that course as a derided threat to his power and so had refused.
PERPETUATING THE COVER-UP The murder of Robert F Kennedy by the Shah's SAVAK was a reaffirmation of a long-standing hostility between the Kennedy brothers and the Shah.
RFK's murder helped perpetuate the cover-up of the role that SAVAK's allies in the CIA and the Mossad had played in the previous Kennedy assassination.
It was again—as in the JFK assassination—a case of mutual interests coming into play.
RICHARD HELMS AND THE SHAH There is yet another interesting personal connection between the Shah of Iran and the CIA worth noting.
In fact, in the early 1930's Richard Helms (who later became director of the CIA in 1966) and the Shah had been best friends and schoolmates together as children at boarding school in Switzerland.
Thus it was that through his relationship with Iran and SAVAK, as Robert Morrow notes, that Helms ""suddenly would have at his beck and call a worldwide, covert strike-force of dedicated, trained, professional agents and assassins.
It was during his tenure at the CIA, as we have seen in Chapter 8, that Helms was the ""chief patron"" of the CIA's Mossad liaison, and devoted supporter of Israel, James Jesus Angleton.
And it was after Helms became director that he and Angleton became entangled in a little-noticed controversy involving a CIA memorandum that ostensibly fingered CIA operative E Howard Hunt as having been in Dallas the day that John F Kennedy was assassinated.
With Robert Kennedy eliminated from the presidential race in 1968 those who were responsible for the assassination of his brother would have no fear of retribution in the event that RFK assumed the presidency.
It should be noted that The Globe supermarket tabloid was hit with a major libel judgment after a Pakistani-American filed suit against the tabloid for publishing Robert Morrow's allegations that this person was the ""second gun"" in the assassination of Robert Kennedy.
Morrow himself died shortly after the judgment was reached, and which judgment was upheld by the Supreme Court on May 17, 1999.
Morrow alleged that he was the second gunman, although it is now clear he was not.
That this individual was innocent does not mean, however, that there was not a ""second gun” or that Morrow's basic theory is off base.
Yet, for the record, as I have noted elsewhere in the pages of Final Judgment, I have long had reservations about many of Morrow's allegations regarding other matters.
However, if my thesis about Israel's role in the JFK assassination is correct , it is logical that RFK's assassination was indeed orchestrated by forces within Israel's sphere of influence.
In short, I tend to believe that, on the whole, Morrow's overall thesis regarding RFK's assassination is correct.
In the ""conclusion"" which follows we tie together the basic parameters of the JFK assassination conspiracy that have been outlined in the pages of Final Judgment.
It has been a complex web, in a certain sense, but when one considers the fact that the Israeli connection is ever present, the assassination conspiracy that has been outlined is rather simple indeed.
However, in the appendices which follow, we will see that there are many other facets of the conspiracy and cover-up that have been otherwise ignored, suppressed, un-recognized or forgotten.
In those appendices we will see, again and again, the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination that was never before documented until the publication of Final Judgment.
Nehemiah 4:8 The State of Israel had integral links with all of the major power groups that wanted John F Kennedy removed from the American presidency.
Israel's global network had the power to orchestrate not only the assassination of Kennedy, but also the subsequent cover-up.
Israel was indeed a key player in the JFK assassination conspiracy and, the evidence suggests, a primary instigator of the crime.
All of Israel's co-conspirators—and those who had an interest in seeing Kennedy dead—had good reason to assist in the cover-up.
His brother Attorney General Robert Kennedy's prosecutions of Mafia and Meyer Lansky-bossed Organized Crime figures had many in the crime syndicate very angry, to say the least.
The early stages for the prosecution of Meyer Lansky himself were already underway.
A case had already been made against Lansky's New Orleans front man Carlos Marcello.
Not only was the President's father, Joseph P Kennedy considered an enemy of the Jewish people, but he was also believed by Lansky to hold a grudge against him because of a Lansky-orchestrated hijacking of one of Kennedy Sr.'s illicit whiskeyrunning deals.
Considering John F Kennedy's secret alliance with the mob during the 1960 campaign, his war against Lansky's underworld syndicate was a double-cross that could not be tolerated.
LYNDON JOHNSON The president was also planning to drop his Vice President, Lyndon Johnson, from the 1964 ticket.
It was possible that Johnson—long financed politically by Lansky and his New Orleans Mafia henchman, Carlos Marcello—could end up spending the remainder of his years in prison.
Baker, of course, conducted several of his major deals with Lansky associates, including Ed Levinson, a director of the Mossad-linked Banque de Credit International, founded by former Mossad official Tibor Rosenbaum.
THE ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS What's more, Kennedy was preparing for a rapprochement with Castro's Cuba and therefore the Lansky syndicate would not be able to re-invigorate its massive gambling interests there as a consequence.
The change in Cuban policy was also distressing to the anti-Castro Cuban community in Miami, New Orleans and elsewhere.
The anti-Castro Cubans had, of course, been cooperating closely with the Lansky syndicate in anti-Castro activities.
Likewise, the new Cuban policy enraged the CIA which was the primary sponsor of the anti-Castro forces.
As we have also seen, the Mossad played a major part in the intrigue involving the anti-Castro Cubans through its base in Miami.
He was making moves to dismantle the CIA and was engaged in a secret war with that agency stemming from his clear intent to withdraw United States forces from Vietnam.
This would have been a major blow to the so-called ""military-industrial complex"" that stood to make immense profits from a continuing United States presence in Southeast Asia.
HOOVER Ultimately, Kennedy planned to merge all of the American intelligence agencies—the FBI included—into a single entity under his brother Robert's direction.
This plan, of course, was not greeted enthusiastically by FBI Director J Edgar Hoover whom Kennedy also planned to dethrone following the 1964 election.
Hoover, as we have seen, had his own secret arrangements with Lansky, individually, and with organized crime in general.
Hoover also had a foundation established in his name with funding from Lansky-linked liquor industries and the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, which functions as a de facto United States propaganda and intelligence arm of Israel's Mossad.
If Hoover himself did not actively conspire against the life of John F Kennedy, he certainly looked the other way if he knew a conspiracy to assassinate JFK had been hatched.
VIETNAM & DRUGS Kennedy's intended change in Vietnam policy—his plan to unilaterally withdraw from the imbroglio—infuriated not only the CIA but elements in the Pentagon and their allies in the military-industrial complex.
The joint Lansky-CIA operations in the international drug racket were a lucrative venture that thrived as a consequence of deep United States involvement in Southeast Asia as cover for the drug smuggling activities.
We know today that the Mossad has emerged as a major player as a ""middleman"" in much of this drug-smuggling activity.
ISRAEL, THE CIA & THE LANSKY SYNDICATE John F Kennedy's bitter behind-the-scenes conflict with Israel brought him into combat with an ally of not only the CIA but also the Lansky syndicate, both of which entities also maintained intimate connections to the anti-Castro Cubans.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson's Lansky-Mafia and defense industry ties, coupled with his close relationship to the Israeli lobby, and his long-standing friendly dealings with both the CIA and Hoover's FBI made Johnson an acceptable alternative (among these diverse special interests) to a Kennedy dynasty.
Kennedy himself had long been suspect in the eyes of Israel and its allies as we saw in Chapter 4.
We also now know that even the famed ""Chicago Mafia"" under Sam Giancana was heavily immersed in wide-ranging international dealings with Israel's Mossad—largely through the good offices of the real boss of the Chicago syndicate, Meyer Lansky's partner-in-crime, Hyman Lamer.
So the theory that even ""the Chicago Mafia killed JFK""—we find—has a very distinct ""Mossad connection"" beyond any doubt.
MICKEY COHEN As early as 1960 , Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, was using Kennedy's filmland bedpartner, actress Marilyn Monroe, as a conduit for attempting to learn Kennedy's intentions toward Israel.
Although ""official"" history acknowledges the president's stormy affair with Miss Monroe, its real origins—and the intent for which it was orchestrated—have been covered up and forgotten.
Cohen, a long-standing disciple of Israel and one of its earliest adherents, had more than a passing interest in the Middle East state.
According to one account, we have discovered, Cohen was less than happy with Kennedy's stance toward Israel.
At Kennedy's last official press conference, he bemoaned the Israeli lobby's deliberate sabotage of his own efforts to build bridges to the Arab world.
Little did JFK know that the seeds of his own destruction had been sown as a consequence of his efforts to bring peace to the Middle East Israeli leader David Ben-Gurion had developed an intense personal distrust—even hatred and contempt—for Kennedy.
He believed that Kennedy's presidency was a danger to the very survival of the state of Israel—the nation that Ben-Gurion had helped create.
It was because of his contempt for Kennedy and the American president's stance toward Israel that Ben-Gurion left his post as prime minister.
It is likely that his last act as prime minister was to order Mossad orchestration of a hit on John F Kennedy.
We have learned that it was then-Mossad assassination team chief Yitzhak Shamir who took care of the arrangements necessary to set the conspiracy in motion.
Shamir knew, of course, that a diverse array of interests—domestic and international—would like to see Kennedy removed from the White House.
That code name would be as reasonable as any, considering Ben-Gurion's hatred for Kennedy—a modern-day Haman in his eyes.
THE CONSPIRACY IS SET IN MOTION A network of assassin recruitment and planning was set in motion through the aegis of the Mossad-CIA-Lansky combine, with the shadowy Permindex entity at the very center of the operation.
Many people on the periphery of the conspiracy—indeed, perhaps even many of those at the center—did not know how or why they were being directed to undertake many of the actions that they did that advanced the ultimate aim of removing JFK from the White House.
Throughout his career, Angleton's activities had intersected with those of the Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate, particularly in the CIA's dealings with the Corsican Mafia.
It was Angleton's Israeli desk at the CIA that coordinated the agency's strange alliance with the Corsican crime figures.
As we have seen, anti-Castro elements in the CIA were involved in setting up the patsy, Lee Harvey Oswald.
In New Orleans, the CIA's assets including Permindex board member Clay Shaw, Anti-Defamation Leaguelinked Guy Banister and David Ferrie were coordinating anti-Castro activities among the Cuban exiles.
Banister and Ferrie were also involved in the machinations outside New Orleans at Lake Ponchartrain of CIA operative Frank Sturgis.
The WDSU media empire of the Stern family—major backers of Israel's Anti-Defamation League and close friends of Permindex board member Shaw—contributed to the conspiracy by publicizing Oswald's activities and making them available to the FBI, further laying the groundwork for Oswald's identification as a Castro agent.
THE FRENCH CONNECTION And as we saw in Chapter 15, there are further indications that CIAlinked French OAS operatives were also utilizing Guy Banister's headquarters in New Orleans.
Many of these same OAS operatives also had ties to the Lansky drug racket.
They were also hostile to John F Kennedy who had supported Algerian independence from France.
What's more, it was the CIA's chief liaison to the anti-Castro Cubans, E Howard Hunt, who was also liaison to one of the leading longtime OAS operatives, Jean Souetre, whose own alleged presence in Dallas—like that of Hunt—is the subject of some controversy.
As we noted in Chapter 16, a former French intelligence officer contends that a French assassin was involved in the events in Dealey Plaza on contract for the Mossad, his presence in Dallas arranged through a faction in the French secret service, the SDECE, under the direction of Col.
THE 'DUMMY ASSASSINATION' Evidence suggests that the CIA's E Howard Hunt may have had his own anti-Castro operation (in the guise of a faked assassination attempt on the president) underway.
However, it appears that this ""faked assassination attempt"" was manipulated and/or infiltrated by elements who intended, in fact, to kill the president.
Perhaps Hunt himself was as surprised as anybody when those fatal shots were fired in Dallas.
Only Hunt can tell us just what he was doing in Dallas—or what he thought he was doing.
Hunt himself admitted, under oath, that he believed it possible that his former colleagues at the CIA would consider framing him for the Kennedy assassination.
However, Hunt has never explained—at least publicly—what he was doing in Dallas on November 21, 1963, the day before John F Kennedy's assassination.
Longtime Mossad asset Frank Sturgis—who also doubled as a CIA contract agent—met with Hunt in Dallas the day before the assassination.
Later Sturgis told Marita Lorenz, that he had been involved in the assassination itself.
Looking at Sturgis alone, we can thus say, without qualification, that a known Mossad asset has thus confessed to have played a direct part in the president's murder.
In addition, as we have seen, various sources have suggested that there were at least several people operating in Dealey Plaza on November 22 who believed that they were there as part of a ""Mafia"" hit aimed not at Kennedy, but instead at Texas Governor John B Connally The use of ""false flags,"" has been a classic Mossad tactic, a standard practice of Israel's spy agency.
And as we saw in Chapter 16, according to former Mossad operative, Victor Ostrovsky, he and his fellow Mossad trainees were told by their superiors that Kennedy's assassination was, in fact, an accident.
Cohen also had a longstanding link to Jack Ruby who was, himself, involved in smuggling arms to Israel.
Just shortly before the JFK assassination, Al Gruber—a henchman of Mickey Cohen and a longtime Ruby friend (who hadn't seen Ruby in years)—showed up in Dallas to visit Ruby.
Then, just about an hour after Lee Harvey Oswald's arrest was made public, Ruby called Gruber.
It may be speculated that Ruby called Gruber to advise him that the chosen patsy had not been killed before his arrest, as planned, and that Ruby was then told it was his responsibility to finish the job.
It was James Jesus Angleton of the CIA who attempted to perpetrate the fraud that the Soviet KGB was behind the Kennedy assassination.
Angleton vehemently disputed the reliability of Soviet defector Yuri Nosenko who insisted that he had been Oswald's KGB handler in the Soviet Union and who said that Oswald had not been a KGB agent.
As we have seen, Angleton was—at his own insistence—the CIA's key ""point man"" in the agency's relationship with the Warren Commission.
What's more, Angleton's close friend, William Sullivan, number three man at the FBI, was the FBI's liaison with the commission.
It was, perhaps not coincidentally, Angleton (through a strange inhouse CIA memo) who fingered CIA man E Howard Hunt for possible involvement in the Kennedy assassination, presumably as a ""renegade"" agent, acting on his own.
This frame-up took place at precisely the time when public suspicion of the CIA's institutional involvement was being widely discussed.
EARL WARREN Chief Justice Earl Warren, apprised by the CIA of possible Soviet Communist involvement in the president's murder was pressured into covering up what he mistakenly believed to be the truth about the assassination.
The CIA's ""Mexico City scenario""—handled by Angleton's desk at the CIA and coordinated by David Atlee Phillips, who was the CIA's Mexico City station chief at the time—was presented to Warren as proof the Soviets were implicated in the president’s murder.
Pinning the assassination on ""one lone nut"" was Warren's way of protecting America's national security.
Warren himself probably never had any idea as to the real truth—or even part of the truth—as to what really happened or where the assassination conspiracy originated.
What's more, as we shall see in Appendix Four, there were immense and multiple Israeli influences on the Warren Commission staff itself—a factor never considered until the release of Final Judgment.
Additionally, Warren was also under the influence of his close friend, syndicated columnist Drew Pearson, himself an asset and longtime collaborator of Israel's propaganda and intelligence arm in this country, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
It was Pearson who floated the blatantly fraudulent story that Fidel Castro had been the prime mover behind the JFK assassination.
Even Lyndon Johnson himself may not have known from where the order to kill Kennedy emerged, although there have been allegations (never documented) that Johnson himself was in on the assassination planning.
Johnson certainly had no reason himself to intervene or to attempt to stop the assassination from being carried out.
ROBERT F KENNEDY The assassination of Senator Robert F Kennedy—with an Arab as the ""false flag""—the fall guy—was a part of the continuing cover-up of the murder of President Kennedy.
In the RFK assassination, as we have seen, the Iranian SAVAK—a joint creature of the CIA and the Israeli Mossad—was responsible for coordinating the hit on the senator.
Robert Kennedy's death prevented the younger Kennedy from ever bringing his brother's killers to justice.
ISRAEL & THE MEDIA Researchers into the JFK assassination over the past 28 years have not, until just recently, had access to the evidence of Kennedy's secret war with Israel over the nuclear bomb.
As a consequence, there has never been any suspicion that Israel—like other often-named suspects in the crime— may have had a reason to collaborate in a conspiracy against John F Kennedy.
The controlled media with its devotion to Israel, of course, has never pointed in this direction.
The media has been content with promoting the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK""—but the media ignores the Lansky connection.
Obviously, the full truth—all of the sordid details—will never be known.
As a consequence, we must rely upon the information that we do have—information that enables us to make a final judgment.
THE IMPACT OF THE ASSASSINATION The assassination of John F Kennedy had a major political impact, far more profound than the simple elevation of Lyndon Johnson to the presidency.
It is, beyond question, the final result that is the most striking of all, and it is not subject to debate.
In the pages of Final Judgment we have outlined, for the first time, the entirety of the conspiracy that led to the assassination of John F Kennedy and the cover-up that followed.
We do not pretend to have all of the answers, but we believe that the missing link has now been supplied.
Never before has the evidence been assembled as it has been in these pages.
A SMALL CIRCLE OF CONSPIRATORS The close connections between a relatively small circle of people and those in their immediate spheres of influence is no coincidence.
That all of them, in some fashion, were part of the circumstances surrounding the assassination of John F Kennedy is also no coincidence.
Critics of JFK assassination conspiracy theories contend that a conspiracy so immense would require a vast number of people involved.
In fact, the mechanics of initiating the conspiracy described in Final Judgment involved perhaps no more than 20 people.
Most of those ultimately involved in the conspiracy were probably not even aware of the activities of the others who were involved.
So then, let us name, for the record, those whom we believe had advance knowledge that John F Kennedy was going to be killed on November 22, 1963.
Evidence strongly points toward French mercenary Michael Mertz as one of those gunmen.
In any case, as we have seen, at least one assassin was contracted by the Mossad through disloyal elements in French intelligence, although it is probable that there were several assassination teams in place. e CIA contract agent and longtime Mossad asset Frank Sturgis claimed to have played a part in the events in Dealey Plaza.
Although it is likely that Meyer Lansky's Mafia lieutenants—Santo Trafficante, Jr. of Tampa and Carlos Marcello of New Orleans—had advance knowledge of the impending assassination itself, it is not clear that they, or, for that matter, Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana or the Mafia's ""roving ambassador,"" Johnny Rosselli, were actually involved in the planning of the assassination itself.
However, we do know today that both Giancana and Rosselli were under the thumb of Mossad-connected crime boss Hyman Lamer—and that opens up a whole new can of worms.
The role of the Italian-American organized crime figures in the JFK assassination is more media-generated myth than reality.
In Appendix Nine we will also consider the likely role—at least as an intermediary—that top-ranking Mossad figure Shaul Eisenberg played in the events surrounding the assassination, suggesting that Eisenberg did, in fact, have advance knowledge of the impending assassination.
Lee Harvey Oswald; CIA operative E Howard Hunt; CIA station chief for Mexico City, David Atlee Phillips; CIA contract agent and Permindex board member Clay Shaw; CIA contract agent Guy Banister; CIA contract agent David Ferrie; Maurice Brooks Gatlin; Permindex courier; CIA contract agent Robert Morrow; Dallas mob associate Jack Ruby; CIA associate, United States Senator John Tower and ° Assorted anti-Castro Cuban exiles and others, including CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz.
Meyer Lansky's West Coast henchman, Mickey Cohen, and Israeli diplomat Menachem Begin, had been involved in Israeli-related intelligence intrigue against President Kennedy, but it cannot be said definitively that they were cognizant of an assassination conspiracy before the fact, although it is likely that Cohen's associate Al Gruber may have given Jack Ruby the order to kill Lee Harvey Oswald.
Various members of the CIA, figures in the Mafia and the Lansky Syndicate, FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, and some investigators for the Warren Commission and the subsequent House Assassinations Committee may have gleaned some information over the years as to portions of what had happened, but few would be aware of the entirety of the conspiracy.
Those on the periphery participated in various aspects of the cover-up as did certain figures in the media such as Drew Pearson and Jack Anderson, among others.
French President Charles DeGaulle, whose own intelligence service was compromised by the Mossad.
The evidence we have put forth demonstrates that there is a very strong foundation for the thesis presented in this volume.
Israel's Mossad was a primary behind the scenes player in the conspiracy that ended the life of John F Kennedy.
Through its own vast resources and through its international contacts in the intelligence community and in organized crime, Israel had the means, it had the opportunity, and it had the motive to play a major frontline role in the crime of the century—and it did.
Newly-emerging evidence strongly suggests not only that George Bush has been a CIA asset for most of his adult life— since his college days in fact—but that he also has had unusually intimate ties to the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination and the subsequent high-level cover-up.
In his best-selling Plausible Denial, author Mark Lane did a great service to the American public when he re-published, as appendices, two important articles that appeared in The Nation magazine, but which received little national notice outside the elite circles who read that journal.
The Nation articles, written by Richard McBride (published in the July 16/23 and August 13/20, 1988 issues) took note of a declassified FBI memorandum dated November 29, 1963.
The memorandum, from FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, was addressed to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research at the Department of State.
Our Miami, Florida, Office on November 23, 1963 advised that the office of Coordinator of Cuban Affairs in Miami advised that the Department of State feels some misguided anti-Castro group might capitalize on the present situation and undertake an unauthorized raid against Cuba, believing that the assassination of President John F Kennedy might herald a change in United States policy, which is not true.
An informant who has furnished reliable information in the past and who is close to a small pro-Castro group in Miami has advised that these individuals are afraid that the assassination of the President may result in strong repressive measures being taken against them and, although pro-Castro in their feelings, regret the assassination.
Needless to say, the existence of this memorandum presented a problem for George Bush who had claimed to have had no prior service with the CIA prior to his appointment as director of the agency in 1976.
However, Bush's spokesmen suggested that there must have been another ""George Bush"" working for the CIA at the time in question and that it was he who was referenced in the controversial Hoover memorandum.
Richard McBride, the author of the Nation articles, did some checking, only to find out that there was indeed a George William Bush who had worked for the CIA at the time—and for a very short time—and only as a low-level researcher and analyst.
George William Bush told McBride that he was never part of any inter-agency briefing and knew neither of the other people referred to in the memorandum.
Evidently working, as he had been for some time, as an operative for the Central Intelligence Agency.
New research suggests that Bush was with the CIA as long ago as his college days at Yale.
What's more, it was another Bonesman, Henry Neil Mallon, longtime chairman of the board of Dresser Industries, based in Houston, who gave Bush his first job in the oil business.
Mallon, a classmate and close family friend of Bush's father, Senator Prescott Bush, set young Bush up as a salesman for International Derrick and Equipment Company , a subsidiary of Dresser.
Lee Harvey Oswald's friend—and suspected ""CIA handler""—George DeMohrenschildt whose CIA connections we examined in Chapter 9.
Kimery says that his sources contend that Bush and DeMohrenschildt continued to meet secretly in Houston after Bush had left Midland to set up the Houston office of his Zapata Off-Shore Oil Company.
Kimery's research suggests that the Bush-DeMohrenschildt relationship stemmed from not only their mutual interests in the oil business, but also from their mutual background in intelligence work.
All of these dealings between Bush and DeMohrenschildt would appear to be innocent behind-the-scenes intrigue between two spies named George if it weren't for the fact that the more one traces Bush's connections, the more one finds that the CIA man is enmeshed all the more deeply in the circumstances surrounding the assassination of John F Kennedy.
THE ANTI-CASTRO OPERATIONS For instance, the evidence strongly suggests that Bush, in fact, was a major player in the CIA's drive to destroy Fidel Castro.
Fletcher Prouty who points out that not only was the CIA's top-secret code name for the Bay of Pigs invasion ""Operation Zapata"" but that two of the ships utilized in the operation were christened the Houston (Bush's home base) and the Barbara . a Bush's connections to the CIA's operations against Castro go even deeper, however.
According to Kimery, ""There is evidence that prior to Bush's appointment as DCI in 1976, he was well-acquainted with legendary spook Theodore George ""Ted"" Shackley who joined the Agency in 1951.
When Bush arrived on the scene at Langley, it was clear to longtime Agency insiders that there was a bond between these two men that went back many years.
It was Shackley who served as CIA Station Chief in Miami, then the largest CIA station in the world, and the base of the CIA's operations against Castro being jointly conducted with Meyer Lansky's syndicate henchmen.
Kimery points out that, ""In 1976, shortly after he became DCI, without seeking advice, Bush promoted Shackley to Associate Deputy Director of Operations.
Bush himself, however, was also developing intimate ties with Israel, ties which, of course, had been cemented during his service as CIA director.
In 1979, then Republican presidential candidate Bush attended the Jerusalem Conference on International Terrorism, an event hosted by the Israeli government and attended by most of Israel's top intelligence officials.
The delegates to the conference from the United States were all tried-and-true friends of Israel, Democrat and Republican alike.
Bush's Team B was a new, secret supervisory body for the CIA empowered to re-evaluate, criticize or dismiss the CIA's intelligence reports.
Significantly, however, Team B was composed of a clique of high-level officials who were bound together primarily by their devotion to advancing Israel's interests.
THE COVER-UP For his own part, it was while Bush served as CIA Director that the Senate Intelligence Committee was probing the connections between Jack Ruby, Lee Harvey Oswald, the CIA, organized crime and the anti-Castro operations conducted by the CIA and its mob collaborators.
Clearly, George Bush was just a bit more curious about the inquiries into the JFK assassination than he would have us believe.
Bush “telephonically advised that he wanted to relate some hearsay that he had heard in recent weeks, date and source unknown.
It was after George Bush left the CIA in 1977 that he continued to maintain close ties with business interests which had, in turn, intimate ties to Israel and its lobby in this country.
The Hunts were owners of a 15% controlling interest in Gulf Resources and Chemical Corporation, a Houston based company which controlled half the world's supply of lithium, which is an essential component in the production of hydrogen bombs.
Gulf Resources had taken over the Lithium Corporation of America as a wholly-owned subsidiary some years previously.
Among the directors of both Gulf Resources and the Lithium Corporation was John Roger Menke, who was also a director of Israel's Hebrew Technical Institute.
All of this is significant in that it was during this period that Israel was continuing in its secret development of nuclear weaponry, the most monumental issue of conflict between John F Kennedy and Israeli prime minister David Ben-Gurion, discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
All of this taken together places George Bush in the center of a wideranging network of international corporate bodies with long-standing ties to Israel and its major backers—including one corporation with a particular interest in the development of nuclear weaponry.
Hunt as the mastermind behind the JFK assassination, presumably driven by his hard-line conservative opposition to Kennedy's progressive domestic and foreign policy stands.
What those who have been pointing the finger at Hunt have failed to do, however, is to trace Hunt's connection back to the Gulf Resources Corp. with its own intimate links to Israel.
Hunt or George Bush—together or alone—in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
However, they do pinpoint the strange—and little-noticed—tole played by Israel and its high-level backers in the ever-converging circles surrounding the JFK assassination conspiracy.
In any case, Bush's closest associates during his CIA years, as we have seen, and his activities, have all repeatedly bound Bush to circumstances which tie together the CIA and the Meyer Lansky Organized Crime Syndicate in joint ventures not only in the Castro assassination plots of the early 1960's, but the joint CIA-Lansky drug-running operations in Southeast Asia.
The evidence we have reviewed here suggests that perhaps George Bush does indeed know more about the assassination of John F Kennedy than he might be willing to admit.
APPENDIX TWO The Man From the Klan Lee Harvey Oswald's ""Nazi"" Connection The Alleged Assassin's Little-Known Ties to Undercover Intelligence Operatives in the Neo-Nazi Underground Among those whose names appeared in Lee Harvey Oswald's address book was one Daniel Burros.
Just two years after the JFK assassination, Burros died mysteriously of multiple gunshot wounds.
However, despite the strange circumstances of Burros' demise, it was ruled a suicide.
Frankhauser, it just so happens, claims to have been associated with Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The story of Lee Harvey Oswald's possible connection to Daniel Burros has never been explored in any other work on the JFK assassination.
Yet, the evidence, as we shall see, suggests that there is much more to the Oswald-Burros connection than meets the eye.
This expose was the ostensible trigger that led to Burro's ""suicide"" at the Reading, Pennsylvania home of his fellow ""Nazi,"" Roy Frankhauser.
In his short career in the political underworld, Dan Burros is known to have indeed been closely associated with ADL undercover informants and was perhaps such an informant himself, although it is unlikely that the full truth will ever be known.
Although Madole was apparently a dyed-in-the-wool Nazi, it is an established fact that his organization was infiltrated, funded in part and manipulated by agents of the ADL's undercover spy apparatus.
The ADL's operative inside the NRP was one Emmanuel Trujillo who also went by the name Mana Truhill.
In turn, Truhill worked closely with Sanford Griffith, then the ADL's chief spymaster.
Two ""right wing"" activists of the 1950s era—author Eustace Mullins and businessman DeWest Hooker —have confirmed to this author that the ADL was indeed active in ""infiltrating"" rightist groups at the time and that the aforementioned Griffith was a familiar figure moving in and out of the right-wing orbit during the period.
That Daniel Burros was himself deeply a part of this unusual circle being manipulated by the ADL is an intriguing fact.
As we noted in some detail in Chapter 15, however, there is strong evidence to suggest that Banister was also being deployed by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith in its own ""fact-finding"" operations aimed against left-leaning civil rights groups.
The evidence regarding the Minutemen, however, suggests that the Minutemen were, for all intents and purposes, a government-infiltrated— perhaps even government-controlled—""right wing extremist"" outfit.
It is the Minutemen link that opens up the door in the Oswald-Burros connection to some highly unusual facts about a strange individual named Roy Frankhauser who just happens to have been associated with both Oswald and Burros.
John George and Laird Wilcox, in Nazis, Communists, Klansmen, and Others on the Fringe, have provided us with a wealth of information about Frankhauser's operations inside the Minutemen in particular.
Here's what George and Wilcox wrote about the government's infiltration of the Minutemen and the role of the Roy Frankhauser.
According to Eric Norden, in his long essay on the paramilitary right appearing in the June 1969 issue of Playboy magazine, virtually all of the major Minutemen cases were cracked with the assistance of government infiltrators and informants.
Frankhauser was well-known for having taken the Fifth Amendment thirty-three times when questioned about his Ku Klux Klan involvement by the House Un-American Activities Committee in 1965.
Unaware of Frankhauser's role, Norden interviewed him extensively for his article.
We have to put our main stress on the nigger question, of course, because that's what preoccupies the masses—but were not forgetting the Jew.
If the Jews knew what was coming—and believe me, it's coming as surely as the dawn—they'd realize that what's going to happen in America will make Nazi Germany look like a Sunday-school picnic.
Burros was a fanatic American Nazi who served as Rockwell's [American Nazi party] lieutenant for years, then resigned in 1962 to edit a magazine called Kill and finally became a Klan leader.
Another theory, also not confirmed, is that Frankhauser may have encouraged Burros’ suicide inasmuch as his cover had been blown.
DePugh, who examined the gun, said it was unlikely that Burros killed himself.
What is also possible is that in 1965 Frankhauser was working as a government informant and that Dan Burros was too, perhaps reporting to Frankhauser.
At the time of this writing Frankhauser still resides in the Reading, Pennsylvania, house where the death occurred; blood stains are still imbedded in the ceiling.
Frankhauser denies it, but his own United States Army records suggest otherwise.
During October 1973 DePugh was a featured speaker at Liberty Lobby's annual Board of Policy meeting in Kansas City, Missouri.
Frankhauser, as security director, was his constant companion and lived with the DePugh family in Norborne for several weeks—all the time working for the ATF as an undercover informant.
According to United States Army documents released under the Freedom of Information Act in 1988, Frankhauser was enmeshed in deep personal problems long before he entered the army.
The victim of a broken home and an alcoholic mother, and regarded by school officials and various employers as emotionally unstable and unreliable, he enlisted in the United States Army on November 6, 1956.
Long a collector of Nazi memorabilia and a Ku Klux Klan sympathizer even as a young man, he was engaged in a number of half-baked plots that immediately brought him to the attention of army authorities.
He developed a scheme to have himself declared officially dead so he could leave the army and join the neo-Nazi movement, hoping to rise to a position of prominence.
In fact, he went AWOL and arrived in Miami, Florida, on July 5, 1957, to do precisely that.
He was taken into custody shortly thereafter and returned to his military unit.
It first came to light in July 1975 when the Washington Star reported on his role in an undercover operation in Canada authorized by the top-secret National Security Council, Frankhauser was assigned to infiltrate the 'Black September’ terrorist organization.
This brought about his eventual indictment on February 28, 1974, on charges of stealing explosives, at which time he used his relationship with the agency as a defense.
The fact that Dan Burros died under mysterious circumstances in the home of a long-time covert operative is likewise quite interesting.
It is known, based upon official Justice Department documents that have been released under the Freedom of Information Act, that Frankhauser's government-sponsored undercover activities—on at least one occasion—were financed by a Jewish community organization.
In that instance, the Jewish Community Center of Reading, Pennsylvania.
There is an even more explosive Frankhauser link to the JFK assassination.
An article regarding Frankhauser's Oswald connection written by Scott M Thompson and published in the November 20, 1975 issue of New Solidarity magazine is republished here in pertinent part.
Inclusion of this material is in no way intended by the author of Final Judgment to serve as an endorsement of the information related therein, but is simply provided so that there may be as complete a record as possible of all the little-known areas involving JFK assassination conspiracy research which can be examined by independent-minded individuals who are truly interested in finding out the truth.
Both Paines have been closely linked to Lee Harvey Oswald (who described himself as the 'patsy' in the Kennedy killing moments before he was shot in the Dallas jail) by both the Warren Commission and by independent investigators of the assassination.
She was the one who drove Oswald to Mexico City so that he could be photographed by the CIA in front of the Soviet Embassy.
She also took Oswald to New Orleans where together they opened a franchise of the SWP front, Fair Play for Cuba, with the approval of SWP national leaders.
Although all of Frankhauser's reports on this operation were turned over by Governor Patterson's office to the FBI in Mississippi, no arrests were made.
Also a CIA stringer, Duggan worked within the Buckley family network of Catholic fascist terrorists, recruiting Gusanos for the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion.
Duggan also recruited and trained several teams in preparation for the Kennedy assassination.
The FBI in turn deployed him into the Minutemen where he quickly became a national figure.
Tabbett had worked for the FBI in the Klan Bureau of Intelligence before joining De Palma in Connecticut. "" 1964 subpoena to testify before the Warren Commission was quashed by the FBI on ‘national security’ grounds.
It is interesting to note, and not just incidentally, the connections of the aforementioned Ken Duggan whom Frankhauser alleged had ties to some aspect of the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Among those with whom Ken Duggan was associated were none other than two Cuban brothers, Guillermo and Ignacio Novo.
It was in Chapter 9 and in Chapter 16 where we learned of the Novo brothers trip to Dallas, Texas in the company of CIA contract agent Marita Lorenz as well as long-time CIA and Mossad asset Frank Sturgis.
Upon their arrival in Dallas one day before the president's assassination, the Novos and their associates met with not only long-time CIA officer, E Howard Hunt, but also Jack Ruby, who later killed Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Novo brothers were not only involved in some fashion in the circumstances surrounding the JFK conspiracy, but, in later years, were convicted in the murder of maverick Chilean diplomat Orlando Letelier.
IOS, of course, was the operation run by financier Bernard Cornfeld, front man for veteran Mossad official Tibor Rosenbaum, one of the key figures behind Permindex, the shadowy corporate body linked to all the primary forces behind the JFK assassination.
James L Buckley (brother of the aforementioned William F Buckley, Jr.) that the Novos plotted the Letelier murder.
As we noted in Chapter 16, it appears likely that there were at least several assassination teams in place in or near Dealey Plaza before and during the JFK assassination, all part of a grand multi-leveled ""false flag"" operation.
The allegations made by Frankhauser, indeed, jibe completely with the conclusions reached in Final Judgment.
VAN LOMAN AND THE JIM HARRIS CONNECTION The author is indebted to Van Loman, who brought the magnitude of the little-noticed Oswald-Burros connection to my attention.
Loman himself has his own unusual connection to the netherworld of intelligence.
As a teenager Loman adopted as his father figure and mentor a cagey and colorful Cincinnati, Ohio-based roustabout named Jim Harris whose remarkably checkered career came to an end with his death in December of 1994.
Although Harris publicly postured as the Grand Dragon of the Ohio Ku Klux Klan, he was, in fact, a long-time informant for J Edgar Hoover's FBI and a self-described contract agent for the CIA, actively collaborating in the CIAMafia plots against Castro—and perhaps more.
Among Harris' key associates was none other than Roy Frankhauser, his fellow intelligence operative.
Thanks indeed to Van Loman for pointing out the significance of the OswaldBurros connection.
To dig too deeply into this little-explored area will, inevitably, begin turning up rocks under which the tentacles of the ADL and its collaborators in American intelligence lie hidden.
This author believes that the Oswald-Burros connection is indeed another avenue that JFK assassination investigators should explore further and one which, in the end, adds further compelling evidence that solidifies the foundation upon which our final judgment is based.
The conflict led to Ben-Gurion’s abrupt resignation in June of 1963 and set the stage for a role by Israel’s intelligence agency in JFK’s assassination.
The driving force behind Permindex was the Geneva-based Banque De Credit International , founded by Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum , a financier and arms procurement officer for the Mossad.
Rosenbaum’s bank also served as the chief money laundry for the crime syndicate of international mob boss, Meyer Lansky , whose criminal empire came under fire when the Kennedy administration launched a major crackdown on organized crime.
Garrison apparently ultimately concluded that the Mossad was linked to the assassination but expressed his suspicions only in an unpublished novel.
The chairman of Permindex was Montreal attorney Louis M Bloomfield , a major figure in the Israeli lobby of Canada and a longtime henchman of liquor baron Sam Bronfman who was both a major patron of Israel and a top-level figure in the Lansky Crime Syndicate.
In league with Clay Shaw of Permindex, New Orleans-based CIA contract agents Guy Banister and David Ferrie worked with the operatives of the French Secret Army Organization in plots against Charles DeGaulle that were being financed through the Mossad’s Permindex front.
Shaw, Banister and Ferrie also were responsible for the “sheep dipping” operation that portrayed accused JFK assassin Lee Harvey Oswald as a “pro-Castro” agitator.
Shown is a 1970 article by Courtney Buss lanl fy ansion hailing Israel as a roadblock in the path of Soviet expansionism.
Courtney’s view of Israel exactly reflected that of James Angleton, b ont LOUrnyy ennener 2 19] Israel-the historic, ideological homeland of the the CIA’s Mossad liaison.
This monument in Israel is one of several honoring Angleton for his services to Israel.
The photograph of the monument was taken exclusively for this book and is the only known photograph of this monument ever to be published.
Georges deLannurien , a high-placed Mossad ally in French intelligence.
It is no coincidence that on the day of the JFK assassination, deLannurien was huddled at CIA headquarters in Washington with the Mossad’s high-ranking ally at the CIA, James J Angleton.
Media disinformation promotes the myth the Kennedy family was involved in Monroe’s death, when, in fact, evidence suggests Cohen was responsible.
Many people believe Phillips— who later went to work for a company involved in smuggling arms for the Mossad—was the CIA operative seen with Oswald in Texas shortly before the assassination.
This “artist’s impression” of “Maurice Bishop” was issued by the House Assassinations Committee.
In 1986 Israeli nuclear technician Mordechai Vanunu blew the whistle on Israel and revealed to the world that Israel did indeed have nuclear weapons.
Just before the fourth edition of Final Judgment went to press, an American couple—peace activists Nicholas and Mary Eoloff of St.
Paul, Minnesota who adopted Vanunu—released an October 12, 1997 letter to them from their adopted son in which Vanunu alleged there was a link between the JFK assassination and the 1967 Six Day War that Israel launched against its Arab neighbors.
Vanunu’s revelations—particularly in light of his background in Ismel’s nuclear program— obviously point toward confirmation of the allegations that had already been made in the first edition of Final Judgment released in 1994.
Evidence indicates Israel’s CIA ally, James Angleton, was behind the scheme to frame Hunt.
Angleton’s confidant, journalist Joe Trento , believes Angleton sent Hunt to Dallas in November of 1963 and then—15 years later—leaked a CIA memo placing Hunt in Dallas at the time of the assassination.
Hunt was working with many of those involved in the assassination and knows far more than he will admit.
Although CIA-connected British writer Christopher Andrew asserts the famous letter to “Dear Mr Hunt’ —purportedly written by Lee Oswald two weeks before the JFK assassination—was a KGB forgery, this letter was more likely part of the “limited hangout” campaign by James Angleton’s Mossad desk at the CIA to frame Hunt and confuse JFK research further.
The letter came to light at precisely the time in 1975 that Mike Canfield and Alan Weberman were releasing Coup d’etat in America which promoted the myth Hunt was one of the “tramps” picked up in Dallas after the assassination.
Not only has Weberman been closely associated with Mordechai Levy, a known operative for the Mossad-linked AntiDefamation League, but Weberman has revealed that the Capitol Hill power broker who played an early instrumental role facilitating Weberman’s effort to spread the “Hunt as tramp” theory was Richard Perle , a longtime Mossad asset who is now a key player in the “neo-conservative” pro-Israel network.
In addition, the Nigerian who published Weberman’ s book was also publisher of Israeli leader David Ben-Gurion’s writings.
Interestingly, it was Weberman who revealed that New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison was quietly suggesting Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination—a point even many Garrison admirers are hesitant to acknowledge.
Testimony by former CIA operative Marita Lorenz revealed that Hunt had met in Dallas the day before the JFK assassination with CIA-Mossad asset Frank Sturgis and a team of anti-Castro Cubans, but also Lansky-Bronfman henchman Jack Ruby.
Some years later, a Mossadand CIA-connected intelligence asset, Andrew Allen, orchestrated another lawsuit against The Spotlight forcing the newspaper into bankruptcy, giving federal Judge S Martin Teel, the opportunity to shut down the publication in 2001.
Veteran CIA asset William R Corson , a longtime media “cutout’ for the Mossad’s CIA liaison, James Angleton, leaked the “Hunt in Dallas” story that embroiled The Spotlight in the Hunt lawsuit.
Later, after Corson’s death, one of Corson’s associates carried on his work, energetically scheming behind the scenes to discredit Mark Lane and Michael Collins Piper and to stop distribution of Final Judgment.
The “black operation” against Lane and Piper involved distribution of disinformation documents purporting to “admit” CIA and Israeli involvement in the JFK affair.
The phony documents were released with the expectation that they would be easily discredited, as indeed they were.
Marita Lorenz testified that Sturgis led the two-car caravan from Miami to Dallas that arrived there on November 21, 1963—one day before the JFK assassination—at which time Sturgis and his team of anti-Castro Cubans met up with CIA officer E Howard Hunt and Jack Ruby.
According to Miss Lorenz, Sturgis later told her that his team had been involved in the events in Dealey Plaza.
Cuban intelligence concluded, based on its own investigation, that Sturgis was indeed involved in the JFK assassination.
The unique positioning of Sturgis thus firmly places a known Mossad asset in CIA circles in the center of the intrigue surrounding the assassination, providing yet another “missing link” pointing toward Mossad collaboration with the CIA in the murder of President Kennedy.
Legendary CIA contract operative Gerry Patrick Hemming was associated with Mossad-linked CIA figure Frank Sturgis in training anti-Castro Cuban exiles outside New Orleans—a_ project with which JFK assassination figures David Phillips, Guy Banister, David Ferrie and Clay Shaw—not to mention Lee Oswald—were involved.
A key sponsor of Hemming’s anti-Castro intrigue involving Sturgis was Theodore Racoosin, described by Hemming as “one of the key founders of the state of Israel’’ Mossad-connected American Jewish gambling interests are known to have funded the New Orleans operation.
Hemming told Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper that he had known since the late 1960s that the Mossad was aware of the impending assassination of President Kennedy, although Hemming says he knows of no evidence of direct Mossad involvement.
According to Hemming, the Mossad launched its own investigation of the JFK assassination and maintains the files of its investigation to this day.
Later, the Novos were convicted along with international adventurer Michael Townley for the 1976 murder of Chilean diplomat Orlando Letelier.
Nominally headed by Bernie Cornfeld , IOS was a front for the wide-ranging Mossad intrigue of Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum whose Permindex operation was central to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Robert Vesco (bottom right), who later took control of IOS, ultimately broke with the Mossad and alleged that “the same forces” behind the JFK assassination were behind the “Watergating” of Richard Nixon.
Yet, Blakey never once pointed a finger at Lansky and tried to keep the Lansky connection to the assassination under wraps.
Earlier Blakey had been on the payroll of Lansky associate and Permindex investor Morris Dalitz whose chief lieutenant, Ed Levinson, served on the board of Mossad official Tibor Rosenbaum’ s Banque De Credit International which laundered “dirty money” for the Lansky Syndicate and which has been linked to the JFK conspiracy.
Although the major media promotes Blakey’s legend that “The Mafia Killed JFK,” the wide-ranging interplay between Israeli intelligence and American organized crime is suppressed.
The media also ignores the pivotal role played by Jewish mobsters at the highest level of organized crime, focusing instead on the Italian Mafia “Godfather” image.
Although discussion of the subject is considered taboo, what might be described as a significant “sensitivity to Jewish concerns” may be one reason why the owners and editors of many major media news sources have determined that it is inappropriate to provide accurate coverage of the Jewish and Israeli ties to the American mob.
This means then to even suggest “The Chicago Mafia Killed JFK” points even further to Mossad involvement.
The Mossad connection to the JFK assassination—through numerous venues and on several levels—is simply inescapable.
Not only was Bronfman’s longtime henchman, Louis Bloomfield, chairman of the Mossad-sponsored Permindex corporation, but new evidence indicates that Dallas mob figure Jack Ruby was actually on the Bronfman payroll.
In addition, while another Bronfman associate in Dallas, oilman Jack Crichton, functioned as a “translator” for Lee Harvey Oswald’s widow after the JFK assassination, another Bronfman functionary—‘super lawyer’ John McCloy }—served on the Warren Commission.
McCloy was a director—and Crichton served as vice president—of the Empire Trust, a financial combine controlled in part by the Bronfman family.
As far back as 1949, Allen Dulles —ater the CIA director fired by JFK and also a Warren Commission member—served as an attorney involved in the private business ventures of Bronfman’s daughter Phyllis.
Within minutes of the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald on November 24, 1963 by Jack Ruby, Eugene Rostow, then dean of the Yale Law School, began lobbying President Johnson for the establishment of what became the Warren Commission that covered up the truth about the JFK assassination.
A fanatic hard-line Cold Warrior, Rostow was a founder of the “neo-conservative”’ Committee on the Present Danger which deemed Israel’s security to be central to all United States foreign policy concerns.
Fisher not only had longstanding ties to the Lansky Crime Syndicate, but he was also a business partner of Mossad officer Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum and Israeli billionaire Shaul Eisenberg who were prime movers behind the Permindex web that was central to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Eisenberg, the Mossad’s longtime liaison with Red China, was a key player in the highly secretive joint nuclear bomb development programs between Israel and Red China.
President Kennedy’s plan to launch a military strike on Red China’s nuclear bomb production facilities was reversed by Lyndon Johnson within 30 days of the JFK assassination, with the result that the Chinese effort went forward.
Evidence suggests that “China’s” first explosion of a nuclear device was, in fact, a joint venture between Israel and Red China.
Another of Mossad figure Tibor Rosenbaum’s partners in intrigue was controversial Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands , whose dealings with Rosenbaum were the object of scandal.
Perhaps not coincidentally, at the time of the Warren Commission inquiry, Bernhard (the founder of the powerful Bilderberg Group) was playing host to not only Ford but also another commission member, John McCloy, at one of Bilderberg’s conclaves.
Bernhard also had dealings with Rosenbaum’s Permindex associate, Clay Shaw of New Orleans, going back as far as 1954.
Like most of the key Warren Commission staffers, both Specter and Jenner had close ties to the Israeli lobby.
Jenner, prior to serving on the Warren Commission, was attorney for Chicago billionaire Henry Crown who was not only linked to the Lansky Crime Syndicate, but whose vast financial empire also helped bankroll Israel’s nuclear weapons development program which was a thorn in the side of President Kennedy and the source of JFK’s secret conflict with Israel.
Russian-bom nobleman George DeMohrenschildt functioned as a “CIA babysitter” for Lee Harvey Oswald in the spring of 1963 and later claimed that there was a conspiracy behind the assassination and that he had been unwittingly used as part of that conspiracy.
Just prior to his purported suicide DeMohrenschildt said that “the Jews” and “the Jewish Mafia” were out to get him.
Today, ClA-connected writer Gerald Posner, author of Case Closed, which claims that Oswald was a “lone nut,” is quick to assert that DeMohrenschildt’s claims were evidence of the nobleman’s paranoia and insanity.
Sullivan coordinated the FBI’s infamous COINTELPRO operations infiltrating dissident organizations.
There is evidence that veteran CIA asset David Ferrie was one of Sullivan’s COINTELPRO operatives involved in the burning of a Black Masonic lodge in Louisiana in 1962.
Meanwhile, new information suggests that the infamous Barry Seal —a top drug smuggler involved in the CIA’s Iran-contra operations—launched his career as Ferrie’s CIA protégé and that it was Seal who was a get-away pilot in the JFK assassination.
Seal himself was assassinated in 1986 in what sources say was a contract hit ordered by the Mossad, utilizing assets from the CIAand Mossad-linked Colombian drug cartel.
Noted conspiracy theorist Mae Brussell contended that former Nazi general Reinhard Gehlen , who worked for Western intelligence following World War II, was a likely conspirator in the JFK assassination.
Thus, if Brussell was right about a “Nazi connection” to the assassination, one could logically suggest that the ex-Nazi orchestrated the JFK assassination on behalf of his allies in the Mossad.
One can indeed find a Mossad connection to the JFK affair in the most unlikely places.
Levine expressed unusual interest in Oswald’s association with Alexander Ziger, a Russian Jew who may have been involved in intelligence intrigue—even including working for the CIA and/or Israel’s Mossad—and perhaps directing Oswald.
Clearly, these are the little known “ugly rumors” circulating overseas that the Warren Commission was determined to squelch.
Had Americans heard these rumors, they might have started investigating JFK’s policy toward Israel and discovered the Mossad did have the motive, means and opportunity to collaborate in the JFK assassination.
In recent years, Syrian defense minister Mustafa Tlas declared publicly on Syrian television that he believed there was a Mossad role in the JFK assassination.
At right is the famous, well-dressed “umbrella man,” widely believed to have played a part in the assassination.
Although the “umbrella man’s” companion is often said to be “Latin looking,” a veteran of Middle East travel told Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper that the individual instead has the appearance of a typical Sephardic Yemenite Jew.
In fact, the “umbrella man” may be famed Mossad assassinations specialist Michael Harari who was in the field in 1963.
William Pepper, attorney for Martin Luther King’s alleged assassin, James Earl Ray, has linked Ray’s handler “Raul’—along with Jack Ruby—to a U.S.-based arms smuggling operation which, in 1963, included a top Mossad officer who was almost certainly Harari.
The ever-exquisitely-attired fashion plate and Mossad assassinations specialist Michael Harari is shown in a rare 1985 photo.
Harari’s record suggests that if the Mossad deployed any of its own operatives in Dallas, it would have been Harari.
Longtime CIA official and later CIA Director Richard Helms , a close friend of the Shah and James Angleton’s CIA patron, was implicated in Angleton’s scheme in 1978 to frame E Howard Hunt for involvement in the JFK assassination.
Later, hoping to derail the Watergate scandal, President Richard Nixon attempted to blackmail Helms and the CIA over the CIA’s role in the JFK assassination.
Relying in part on the revelations of the book, Katharine the Great (by Debra Davis), Final Judgment demonstrates that the Watergate affair was orchestrated by Angleton’s little-known CIA desk in the White House to force Nixon from office.
After Garrison’s death, Garrison’s family brought legal action against Milchan’s enterprises because the family did not receive all of the proceeds their father was promised when Stone bought the rights to Garrison’s memoir.
Although James DiEugenio’s Destiny Betrayed, is a fine, fact-filled examination of Jim Garrison’s investigation of Clay Shaw, DiEugenio (who has publicly scoffed at Final Judgment) has been careful not to explore the multiple Mossad links of the Permindex corporation on whose board Shaw served.
Close friends of Clay Shaw, the Sterns were owners of the WDSU media empire which played a central role in Shaw’s “sheep-dipping” of Lee Oswald as a “pro-Castro agitator’ prior to the JFK assassination.
Although we now know Garrison recognized Mossad involvement in the JFK affair, he voiced his suspicions only in an unpublished novel—a fact many choose to ignore.
Foxman made the preposterous assertion that anybody who believed that even the “militaryindustrial complex” had been involved in the assassination might also believe that the Holocaust was a hoax.
Marcia Milchiker , an ADL-affiliated college trustee in Orange County, California, later played a key role in the ADL’s successful effort to prevent Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper from speaking about his book at a college seminar.
A major frenzy erupted and newspapers across the country reported on the controversy . ‘college coiiee ‘FK slain in conspiracy 2 Vemeene cane Sa and.
Martin Luther King’s alleged assassin, James Earl Ray , hinted—in his book, in public statements and in legal documents—that he suspected a Mossad link to the murder of Dr.
Final Judgment has also demonstrated a number of other strange details relating to King’s assassination which point toward a very definitive Israeli connection.
Best known for writing a book proclaiming blacks to be inferior to whites, Jared Taylor once tried to sabotage a speaking engagement by Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper because Taylor was offended by Piper’s criticism of the CIA and the Mossad.
Taylor’s writing has been featured in CIA man William F Buckley Jr’s National Review and praised in Commentary, edited by ClA-connected Norman Podhoretz. of the American Jewish Committee.
Taylor’s opposition to Final Judgment is no surprise since Taylor once maintained behind-the-scenes contact with the late Irwin Suall , longtime chief “fact finder’ for the ADL which shares Taylor’s opposition to both affirmative action and Final Judgment.
One American conservative, Morris Bealle, figured out Welch’s game early on.
In the June 19, 1965 edition of his Capsule News, Bealle reported that Welch had declared Bealle’s book, The Guns of the Regressive Right— which pointed a finger in the direction of the CIA—“all wrong” and told his Birch followers that it was not the CIA but Lyndon Johnson behind the JFK assassination.
Newhouse , a major power in the Israeli lobby, has played a key role in suppressing evidence of conspiracy in the JFK affair.
It’s probably no coincidence that Newhouse’s lifelong friend, mob attorney Roy Cohn }—who used his clout to influence Newhouse publications—was a foe of the Kennedy family and linked to the Mossad’s Permindex operation that played a central role in the JFK conspiracy.
The story was written by Jack Newfield, a columnist known for his sympathy toward Israel.
Like the “Castro Killed JFK” story shown above, this is all part and parcel of efforts by pro-Israel factions in the media to cover up the truth about the assassination of President Kennedy and confuse the public with wildly diverse competing theories.
Readers say that Final Judgment is the first book ever to tie most of the conventional theories together in a way that makes ultimate sense.
During that time, Findley noted, the diplomat had been urging Findley to write a book documenting the Mossad role in the JFK assassination.
Findley also offered to forward Piper’s manuscript to the diplomat for his review.
After receiving the manuscript, the diplomat contacted Piper and gave him inside information delineating the so-called “French connection’—which the diplomat asserted was, in fact, a key Mossad link—to the JFK assassination.
The details confirmed Piper’s initial findings and, on the basis of the diplomat’s input, Piper researched further and substantially enhanced his manuscript regarding the “French” connection prior to publication.
On November 16, 2003, just days before the 40th anniversary of the JFK assassination, the hawkish “right wing” Zionist Organization of America—a leading pro-Israel group— gave its award for “outstanding journalism” to “conservative” Joseph Farah , editor of the Internet-based WorldNetDaily.
Although, in some respects, the authors echoed Michael Collins Piper research about the “French connection” to the JFK conspiracy, Farah’s writers studiously avoided mentioning the multiple Mossad links that can be found though the “French” connection.
What the authors call “new” evidence—a CIA document relating to a French mercenary—had already been noted by Piper and scores of JFK writers before him.
Because Farah is known both for his fervent support for Israel—despite his Arabic heritage—and for his ties to billionaire Richard Scaife , Piper suspects Farah’s book is “black propaganda’”’ designed to distort the picture and suppress the real truth about the “French” connection.
Cette condamnation atest couverte par aucune des dispositions ammistiantes actuellemeat en vigueur En outre, la prescription de sa peine ne lui sera acquise que le L6 mars 1979, J'ai L*honneur de vous demander de bien vovloir envisager 4 faire porter 4 la connaissance de M NEUVLLLE que sa requice précitte uc peut &tre prise en considération.
The never-before-published document announces the refusal by the French government to grant clemency to Pierre Neuville, a former French diplomat and intelligence officer who was sentenced in absentia to twenty years of forced labor for “treason” and “breach of state security” for exposing a joint Mossad French intelligence plot to kill Egyptian President Nasser in 1956.
Pierre—who fled France and went into exile—later provided Michael Collins Piper with critical information in the writing of Final Judgment.
Pierre believes that Bernard Ledun (the French government official who released this document against the wishes of his superiors), was murdered in retribution in Paris on February 1, 1994 when the Mossad realized that Pierre was a source for Piper in the writing of Final Judgment.
John F Kennedy, Jr. enraged the Israeli lobby when he published allegations of Israeli intelligence collaboration in Rabin’s murder in his magazine, George.
Shortly before JFK Jr.’s death, Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper received an anonymous typewritten letter praising Piper for being “gutsy” and saying the author of the letter “knew” Piper’s thesis was right.
Piper later discovered that the typewritten return address on the envelope was that of the office of JFK Jr.’s magazine.
In addition, close friends of a top figure from JFK’s White House inner circle have privately endorsed Piper’s thesis of Mossad involvement in JFK’s murder.
In fact, there were Israelis in Dallas on the day of the assassination, including Mossad figure and future Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, then a high-ranking military officer, purportedly on a “military briefing tour,’ according to Rabin’s widow.
Two weeks later Rabin was promoted to chief of staff of the Israeli Defense Forces.
Pe ee me reaity wot eet 2, U-S-Israeli dual citizen and _ self-described former Mossad operative, writer C David Heymann , popped up in the wake of the tragedy that claimed the life of John F Kennedy, Jr. and told what now appears to be a thoroughly fraudulent —although widelypromoted—story that purported to “explain” why JFK Jr.’s plane crash had to have been an accident and nothing more.
Kenan, founder of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee , the lobby for Israel.
Kenan’s attacks on JFK prove beyond doubt that JFK was not a “special friend of Israel” as the Israeli lobby have suggested in order to counter the foundational thesis of Final Judgment.
The 2003 book, Support Any Friend by Israeli educated Warren Bass—the first-ever overview of JFK’s Middle East policy—was funded by pro-Israel foundations and is clearly part of the operation to defuse growing awareness of the assertions made in Final Judgment.
The Israeli-sponsored book makes the contorted, clearly specious argument that JFK’s conflict with Israel actually strengthened the U.S.-Israeli relationship and claims that because JFK provided Israel with conventional weapons (effectively paying extortion hoping to stop Israel from building nuclear weapons) is somehow “‘proof’ that JFK was the spiritual father of the “‘special relationship” between the United States and Israel.
Not surprisingly, the American media—particularly Jewish newspapers—have given the book wide play.
Critics of Final Judgment cite the Bass book as an effective refutation of Final Judgment.
The documents also demonstrate that other aspects of JFK’s policy were highly controversial as far as Israel was concerned.
The more recent book, Israel and the Bomb, by Israeli historian Avner Cohen, also provides new light on the long-secret conflict between JFK and Israel, although Cohen himself has denounced Final Judgment.
Letter from Secretary of State Rusk to the Deputy Secretary of Defense , August 30, 1961.
From a domestic point of view, the American supporters of Israel would be pleased and would be less critical of our policy.
Against Would constitute a direct challenge to the Arabs by the US, destroying growing Arab confidence in our impartiality, and remove the protective covering of the UN behind which we deal with most Palestine issues. ii.
Could not be counterbalanced by creation of a corre-— sponding relationship with the Arabs. iii.
Would render the United States responsible in Arab eyes for every Israeli military venture. iv.
Would encourage the more fanatical Arabs to seek a similar relationship with the Soviet Union and would hand the Soviets a very useful propaganda weapon.
Would be the only United States security arrangement with another country not directed against the Sino-Soviet bloc, and would cause us further problems with Pakistan in refusing to take Pakistan’s side in the Kashmir dispute. vi.
Would lead to increasing Israeli demands for sophisticated weapons. vii.
Would put greater pressure on Arab leaders well-dis-— posed toward the United States viii.
We consider it important not to give in to Israeli and domestic pressures for a special relationship in national security matters.
To undertake, in effect, a military alliance with Israel would destroy the delicate balance we seek to maintain in our Near East relations.
These graphics were designed by Final Judgment author Michael Collins Piper.
The shaded area represents the Mossad linkage which interconnects with all of the other commonly accepted “suspects” linked to the JFK assassination and its cover-up.
According to Piper, this model demonstrates that all of the major theories about the JFK assassination which are widely accepted all fit quite easily into the “Mossad Box,” if all of the evidence (as laid out in Final Judgment) is taken together.
Piper adds that “‘the oil barons” and “right wing extremists’ and the FBI itself could also be added to the list, as Final Judgment has shown.
All of the pieces on the front of the puzzle are, in intelligence jargon, “false flags,” used with exquisite skill to confuse those seeking the truth about who really killed John F Kennedy—and why.
However, if you look at “the other side of the jigsaw puzzle” you see that all the pieces taken together illustrate a startlingly clear picture of the Israeli flag.
Israel’s Mossad which, in this model, is represented by the Mossad logo in the center.
PEKING MOSSAD FRENCH OAS CIA FRENCH SDECE v LANSKY SYNDICATE This fourth model—which Piper calls “the Permindex Star’’—also demonstrates the centrality of the Mossad link to all of the key elements involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy and cover-up in one aspect or another.
This model includes the “Peking” connection referring to the secret joint nuclear bomb production program between Israel and Red China, forged by the Mossad’s Shaul Eisenberg, a key player in the Permindex web.
Jack Ruby’s ties to Lansky and to Israeli arms smuggling or the control of the Chicago Mafia by Mossad collaborator Hyman Larner.
The relationship between all of these seemingly diverse elements is outlined in Final Judgment.
However, even Frank Sturgis—a longtime CIA and Mossad asset who claimed to have participated in the JFK assassination—can be considered a part of this nexus through his role in training anti-Castro Cuban exiles outside New Orleans.
A self-described “Zionist” who says he is “committed to the strength and survival of Israel,” Chamish accepts Final Judgment’s contention that the Permindex corporation was a Mossad front for covert operations and that it is plausible that Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion would have lent Mossad expertise to the plot to the kill JFK as a result of Ben-Gurion’s dissatisfaction with JFK’s opposition to Israel’s nuclear aims.
Earlier, on Aug., 1996, Ray Kalainikas, a reader of Final Judgment, encountered famed CBS broadcaster Walter Cronkite at the farmer’s market in West Tisbury on Martha’s Vineyard.
Kalainikas outlined the thesis of Final Judgment to Cronkite, who listened intently.
This revelation added fuel to the impeachment drive against Clinton at a time when there was growing conflict between Clinton and Israel.
Later, Clinton enraged the Israeli lobby by publicly raising questions about Israel’s “secret” nuclear arms program—following in the footsteps of his hero, John F Kennedy who had done the same thing privately.
Although numerous Israeli “connections” to the circumstances surrounding the Lewinsky affair did emerge, the full story about the Mossad role in the matter remains untold.
The program noted that “This event is a tribute to the strong bond between the Kennedy family and the State of Israel’—although, of course, that is simply a myth that has no bearing in geopolitical or historical reality.
WASHINGTON, DLC Ht ’ iD TFB Fe a Senty he Lamy ~ ee Bag eee pte ee to] The 1966 United States Note , is in the possession of a highly regarded veteran critic of the Federal Reserve.
Its existence proves, beyond question, that it is an absolute myth that no United States Notes were issued after the JFK assassination and refutes the theory that JFK was killed because he ordered United States Notes taken out of circulation and that, upon his death, his successor, Lyndon Johnson, reversed JFK’s order.
Final Judgment demonstrates that JFK’s order had nothing to do with United States Notes whatsoever.
Although the Kennedy family did oppose the Federal Reserve and ultimately intended to challenge that monopoly, the myth about “JFK’s Greenbacks” has muddied the waters in the debate over the JFK conspiracy and it is a myth that simply refuses to go away, the facts notwithstanding.
What most people don't know is that Banister's best-known ""right wing"" associates—Kent and Phoebe Courtney—were staunch supporters of Israel and_ widely suspected of being assets of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
The truth about the Courtneys puts a new light on the Banister connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
There's much more to the New Orleans aspect of the conspiracy that needs to be told.
Most often noted is Banister's connection to a flamboyant couple— vigorous anti-communists—Kent and Phoebe Courtney, founders of an organization known as the Conservative Society of America.
Courtney is even said to have ordered her steaks ""Communist Blood Red,"" for which we thank her for the title of this appendix.
The Courtneys reportedly claimed after the assassination that Oswald had tried to get employment on their newspaper, The Independent American during his sojourn in New Orleans the summer before the assassination.
Perhaps the most notable and most readily documentable instance of this came in 1960 when a wide-ranging group of American conservatives were gearing up to form a third party to compete in the 1960 presidential election.
Courtney's action, needless to say, created much controversy among conservative circles, and in the February 1960 issue of Right, a clearinghouse for news and views in the ""right wing"" movement, Verne P Kaub, the president of the American Council on Christian Laymen, released an ""Open Letter to Phoebe Courtney"" responding to her allegation that ""haters""—or so Mrs.
The infiltrators are representatives of Communist and Zionist organizations and influences.
It is these forces of deception and dissension . . . which raise the false cry of anti-Semitism, thus resorting to the worst possible form of bigotry.
This outfit is as Red as they come, and merely a front for the Anti-Defamation League.
In fact, there were widespread rumors within the ""right wing"" that not only were the Courtneys financed by the Stern family of New Orleans, but also that Mrs.
We also considered the very real possibility that Lee Harvey Oswald's activities in New Orleans were, in fact, part of an ADL ""fact finding"" operation contracted out by the ADL to Banister's private detective agency.
In this context, then, it is thus appropriate to recall other interesting details that have been lost in the debate over who was manipulating Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination of President Kennedy.
In 1962, Ned Touchstone, editor of the Bossier Press in Bossier City, Louisiana, investigated the bombing of a black Masonic lodge in Louisiana.
While the rest of the media portrayed the crime as the act of the KKK, Touchstone believed that since most of the KKK leaders in the area were Masons that it was unlikely they would destroy a Masonic lodge.
Thus, a year prior to the JFK assassination Touchstone concluded Ferrie had been working as an agent of the FBI's COINTELPRO in association with Banister's ADL contact, Botnick, who was indeed working closely with the FBI in connection with the bombing.
However, by March 15, 1964, Touchstone had independently pinpointed Ferries connection to the JFK assassination * all the more pertinent because of Ferries ties to both Oswald and Banister.
Although such would-be conspiracy debunkers as the ClA-connected Gerald Posner have sought to deny that Oswald had any connections with CIA contract operative David Ferrie there is photographic evidence refuting Posner and the debunkers.
There has now been discovered a 1955 photograph of a young Oswald in the company of Ferrie, then Oswald's commander in the Civil Air Patrol hee Yet Touchstone's discoveries have remain suppressed precisely (or, at least in part) because they pointed directly toward the ADL's ties to these key figures in the JFK assassination conspiracy who were, in turn, also linked to the intrigue of both the FBI and the CIA in the same time frame.
The ADL most assuredly would have been one of Hosty's primary contacts.
So not only do we have Guy Banister and David Ferrie, both closely connected to the ADL, working with Oswald in New Orleans prior to the assassination, but we also find an ADL-connected FBI agent in Dallas engaged in some sort of intrigue with Oswald, the actual details of which will probably never be known.
For example, William Sullivan, the FBI official who headed COINTELPRO once estimated that for every 25 Ku Klux Klan members there were 3 COINTELPRO operatives among them.
Thus, taking Sullivan's figures at face value, let's consider the case of Jack Ruby, the Dallas nightclub keeper who killed Lee Harvey Oswald.
Thus, for all intents and purposes, the Courtneys were functioning as ADL assets.
And it is highly unlikely that they would have associated so closely with Guy Banister if they would have perceived him to be among the ""haters"" that they so loudly opposed.
Their perception of the Middle East state was remarkably similar to that of the CIA's James Angleton and others of that mode who proclaimed Israel as some sort of bulwark against Soviet aggression—a theory that lost much of its luster after the fall of the Soviet Union as a Cold War target for American anti-communists.
In any case, Kent Courtney outlined this theory in an editorial in yet another of his publications, The Patriot Tribune, which he published out of Pineville, Louisiana.
In a May 28, 1970 editorial entitled ""Israel Can Stop Russian Expansion"" Courtney laid to rest any doubts about his support for the Zionist cause.
Today, Israel is surrounded by enemies who were administered a stunning defeat in June 1967.
However, quite clearly, we can also contend, based upon Courtney's ideological affinity for Israel, that the evidence is just as logical that Courtney were sympathetic to the Zionist cause.
This is not to suggest that Banister was cognizant of a Mossad connection ultimately behind the JFK assassination conspiracy.
What it does suggest, however, is that Banister was very clearly moving in circles that were sympathetic to the interests of Israel.
The Courtney theory regarding Israel (mirroring that of James Angleton at the CIA) was adopted by many of those on the ""right wing"" in America and it was—as we saw in our appendix on George Bush and his pro-Israel allies on the CIA's ""B-Team""—the guiding theory behind much of the United States arms buildup during the Reagan era of the 1980s.
It is really neither here nor there as to whether or not the Courtneys were actually paid ADL informants or assets, for there is no question (as we have seen) that they shared the ADL's world view.
The fact is that they were moving in the same circles—more so than many people realize.
In fact, in the end, there is really some question as to whether Edgar and Edith Stern of New Orleans were really so ""liberal"" after all.
What's more, it now turns out, the Sterns were members—and major financial supporters—of the New Orleans-based Information Council of the Americas, run by noted anti-communist, Dr.
Alton Ochsner, Sr. who himself had long-standing and intimate ties to the intelligence community.
Ochsner himself served on the board of directors of the Foreign Policy Association of New Orleans with the Stern's close friend, Clay Shaw,**® who also served on the board of the Mossad's Permindex operation which was so central to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
And this most definitely sheds new light on the Courtney connection, although it is not something that fits in with the standard perception of Kent and Phoebe Courtney.
When I saw that, I realized that the right-wing was right wing more in appearance than in reality.
Garrison added that the CIA had actually penetrated numerous groups and used them for its own nefarious purposes in the assassination conspiracy, ** although Garrison, it might be noted, could just as easily have commented that Israel's Mossad—through the ADL—had done likewise.
Had Garrison then been cognizant of many of the then-hidden factors documented in Final Judgment, he may well indeed have uncovered the Mossad connections that we have uncovered here and which Garrison later did discover on his own.
ATTACKING FINAL JUDGMENT What is interesting is that the very individuals—Ellen Ray and Bill Schaap—whose Sheridan Square Press published Garrison's memoir, On the Trail of the Assassins, are among those who have been attempting to discredit Final Judgment despite the fact that Final Judgment concurs with Garrison's basic conclusions.
What was particularly interesting about the article was that CAQ's opening thrust speared The Spotlight for publicizing the release of Final Judgment with much fanfare in January of 1994—+esulting, it might be added, in the sale of nearly 8,000 copies within two weeks time.
In fact, the results of Lane's work in that case have never once been mentioned in CAQ at all.
This is unusual, to say the least, in light of CAQ's professed role as a CIA watchdog.
Perhaps it has something to do with the fact that the Institute for Media Analysis (a ""media watchdog"" organization also sponsored by Ellen Ray and Bill Schaap) has received substantial funding from an influential foundation known as the Stern Family Fund—funded by that same Stern family about whom we have heard so much in this book.
In fact, CAQ could not very well have ignored the ADL spy scandal affair, inasmuch as even ""mainstream"" media outlets (including Editor & Publisher magazine) actually carried reports on the scandal.
What's more, because many self-styled ""progressive"" groups and individuals had discovered that because they were targets of the ADL's spy operations, CAQ—by virtue of its claim to be a voice for those same progressives—was obligated to comment on the affair.
However, as noted previously, CAQ is otherwise reticent about daring to criticize the Mossad.
Thus, CAQ's effort to discredit The Spotlight and its publicizing of Final Judgment is no real surprise, especially in light of the financial backing that CAQ's publishers have received from the Stern family so central to the New Orleans intrigue documented in this book.
That we find the Sterns so intimately connected in so many ways to the circumstances surrounding the assassination of John F Kennedy is interesting indeed.
Since this was originally written, CAQ has come under new direction and has been more forthright in its criticisms of Israel and the intrigues of the Mossad.
Although the details of Lee Harvey Oswald's sojourn in New Orleans, moving in the Banister-Courtney-Shaw-Stern sphere of influence, has been heavily documented, there are a few mysteries that remain.
What we do know is that the Leon Israel Company was engaged in the import of coffee.
What we don't know is why Lee Harvey Oswald claimed that he worked there.
Evidence suggests that the principal figure behind the Leon Israel Company, Samuel Israel Jr., was indeed connected to Clay Shaw and the International Trade Mart during the period surrounding the JFK assassination—and perhaps for even much longer.
According to Who's Who in America , Israel was more than just a coffee importer.
Not only did Israel serve as vice president of the Board of Commissioners of the Port of New Orleans and on the Council of the Lower Mississippi River Port Interests (which would certainly put him in trade executive Clay Shaw's immediate sphere of association), but Israel also—intriguingly—won the French Medal of Merit for his service in the United States Army transportation corps in Europe.
THE BARRY SEAL CONNECTION There is yet one last matter relating to the New Orleans connection that bears mentioning.
Barry and the Boys—From Dallas to Mena,**' focusing on Hopsicker's threeyear long investigation of CIA pilot and drug smuggler Barry Seal, best known for his role in the CIA's arms-drugs-and-money laundering operations out of the tiny Mena, Arkansas airport during the 1980s as part of the infamous Iran-contra operations that (largely unknown to the American public) very much involved Israel and the Mossad.
What's more, Hopsicker has uncovered new information which suggests that Seal may have been a get-away pilot for one or more of the JFK assassins.
Thus perhaps Ferrie himself was not a get-away pilot per se (as long surmised) but instead he was actually coordinating Seal's role in that regard, a role which would explain Ferries famous mad dash across Louisiana into Texas immediately after the assassination.
And although Hopsicker does not delve into the Mossad connection, the fact is the CIA and the Mossad have worked closely in the global drug trade, using its resources to finance their joint international operations.
It is thus conceivable that this would provide us yet another as-yet-undetermined Mossad connection as far as the activities of David Ferrie are concerned.
THE BIG PICTURE OF 'THE BIG EASY' These are the types of details—taken together—that paint a picture fully in line with the thesis of Final Judgment and which demonstrate that the New Orleans connection is critical to understanding the forces behind the intrigue surrounding Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the murder of President Kennedy.
What's more, one of the commission's most active members—Gerald R Ford—was the protégé of a figure long linked to both the Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate.
Another commission member, John McCloy, was intimately associated with some of the most powerful families in the Jewish elite.
If the Warren Commission had been sincere in investigating the JFK conspiracy—and discovered an_ Israeli connection—the immense ""Jewish presence"" within the commission could have provided the means whereby the Israeli connection would undoubtedly have been covered up.
Although the Warren Commission has been damned to the ends of the earth for nearly forty years, few actually know who really pulled the strings behind the scenes as this now-infamous deliberating body carried out its purported investigation into the assassination of John F Kennedy—or the real origins of how the commission actually came about.
On November 22, 1964 The Washington Post published a glowing endorsement of The Warren Commission Report by Eugene Rostow, then dean of the Yale Law School.
Rostow and the Post were able to get away with this deception because the truth is that Rostow's pivotal role in the creation of the commission was not publicly detailed in any consequence until thirty years after the JFK assassination.
For those thirty years, the ""idea"" for the commission had been attributed to others.
However, in 1993, transcriptions of recorded telephone conversations in the Johnson White House were released for the first time.
According to JFK researcher Donald Gibson, the transcripts reveal that ""the idea of a presidential commission to report on the assassination of President Kennedy was first suggested by Eugene Rostow in a telephone call to LBJ aide Bill Moyers during the afternoon of November 24th,""** within minutes of Lee Harvey Oswald's murder by Jack Ruby.
And because we now know there were ""top secret"" United States intelligence documents circulated after the assassination indicating the Arab press was alleging ""the Zionists"" were behind the president's murder, *° —citing, as an indication, for example, the fact Jack Ruby was Jewish—we can rightly speculate that these were among the kind of ""ugly rumors"" in the foreign press the Warren Commission was established to suppress.
The facts demonstrate that there was a substantial ""Jewish presence"" at this staff level that could have impacted substantially on the handling of any evidence of Mossad involvement or Mossad connections of persons who came under scrutiny in the course of the investigation, assuming the claim by the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith—that American Jews are ""sensitive"" to the concerns of the state of Israel—is true.
For the record, this author does not buy the theory that all Jewish Americans are necessarily partisans of Israel or obligated to be.
In fact—to reiterate what has already been said here—some of the most forthright critics of Israel and its misdeeds have been Americans of Jewish descent.
However, inasmuch as the ADL, which has relentlessly attacked Final Judgment, purports to speak for the concerns of the Jewish community and says that the thesis of this book is ""offensive"" to the Jewish community, we will therefore accept the ADL's contention that Jewish Americans are sensitive to Israel's concerns.
Therefore, it is not a leap of logic to contend that in the event evidence linking Israel's Mossad to the JFK assassination had come forth that Jewish Americans on the commission staff would be constitutionally inclined to cover up any evidence that did emerge.
All of that having been said, let us examine—for want of a better way of describing it—the unusually-pervasive ""Jewish presence"" on the Warren Commission staff at the investigative level.
What follows is a summary of Kaplan's details, and additional information readily available in the public domain.
Of the seven ""other staff members"" named in Kaplan's article, four were Jewish.
This means that of the 22 lawyers in question, nearly half of them could be described as constituting a ""Jewish presence"" on the commission.
However, as we shall see, the political connections of other staff lawyers suggests that the ""Jewish presence"" was even more substantial.
A deputy to the commission's chief counsel, J Lee Rankin, Redlich was the actual author of the final disreputable document known as the Warren Commission Report.
He was involved at a high-level in Jewish community affairs prior to service on the Warren Commission, having been recruited as a member of the American Jewish Congress committee on law and social action in 1962; later he served as a member of the board of overseers of the Jewish Theological Seminary.
This firm once represented shadowy conservative operative John Rees, who is known for his ties to Israeli intelligence.
On the Warren Commission, Eisenberg served as the assistant to Norman Redlich and was also responsible for analysis of scientific evidence on ballistics.
Modern-day JFK assassination buffs who spend endless hours reexamining such topics as ""where the shots came from"" can thank Eisenberg for his contributions to their debate, although Eisenberg has been eclipsed in infamy by his Warren Commission colleague, Arlen Specter.
Today Specter is not only a steadfast enthusiast of the Warren Commission Report but is also one of the Israeli lobby's chief legislative tacticians in Congress.
Specter frequently travels at United States taxpayer expense on ""official business"" to Israel where his Americanborn sister has taken up residence.
Until his recent demise, Belin remained perhaps the most vocal former staff member defending the Warren Commission.
Described as a ""respected Midwestern Republican lawyer who would add geographical diversity to the staff,""**’ A partner in a prestigious Des Moines firm before he came to the commission, Belin popped up in 1975 as staff director of the so-called ""Rockefeller Commission"" instituted by Belin's former Warren Commission associate, President Gerald Ford.
Ostensibly charged with investigating CIA misdeeds, Belin proved himself a valuable defender of CIA interests.
In the 1975 inquiry one of Belin's major concerns, according to JFK researcher James DiEugenio, was trying to refute the idea that the CIA's E Howard Hunt was connected to the events in Dallas.
As a former law clerk for Chief Justice Earl Warren from 1955-1956, Stern was thus well-placed to influence the chief of the commission on an intimate level.
As a consequence Stern has almost necessarily had connections with the intelligence community as part of his global ventures.
He was recommended by a childhood friend, attorney Nathan Lewin, who was then a special assistant in the United States solicitor general's office.
Another staffer, Mosk was the son of California State Supreme Court Justice Stanley Mosk, one of the most prominent members of the powerful Los Angeles Jewish community.
Another former law clerk for Chief Justice Warren, Pollak later served in the Justice Department and as an attorney in private practice in San Francisco which is reported by famed Jewish corruption fighter Sherman Skolnick to be a key American ""station"" for Israel's Mossad.
In 1993 the Mossad's intelligence and propaganda unit—the ADL—was revealed to be running its number one undercover informant, Roy Edward Bullock out of San Francisco.
Having clerked for United States Supreme Court Justice John M Harlan from 1963-1964, prior to joining the Warren Commission staff, Weinreb assisted Norman Redlich in the editing and final preparation of the commission's report.
After a brief stint in the criminal division of the Justice Department, Weinreb went on to serve as a Harvard law professor.
THE OTHERS The other Warren Commission lawyers who were not Jewish did still, in many cases nonetheless, have very distinct connections to political interests and individuals who were, in turn, attune to the interests of the powerful Israeli lobby.
The chief counsel to the Warren Commission, Rankin knew Warren from the time that Rankin served as United States solicitor general under President Eisenhower.
Ball, in short, was a political crony of the chief justice and certainly not one to rock the boat.
Ball was purported to be the commission's ""expert"" on Lee Harvey Oswald and by virtue of that status can rightly be called one of the great myth makers of all time.
A major player in the Chicago legal community, personally recruited to the commission by Earl Warren, Jenner was a senior member of a commission group that prepared the commission's fraudulent profile of Lee Harvey Oswald as ""one lone nut"" who had no CIA or other intelligence connections.
At the time Jenner was named to the commission he served as the personal attorney to Chicago construction and real estate tycoon Henry Crown.
Although highly ""reputable"" in his later years, Crown established much of his clout in Chicago through his ties to organized crime.
In any case, it's clear that Jenner, too, can be deemed—through his association with Crown—as part of the ""Jewish presence” on the Warren Commission.
A former New Orleans District Attorney who could have uncovered details about Lee Harvey Oswald's sojourn in New Orleans, Hubert was instead assigned to investigate the activities of Jack Ruby in Dallas.
Thus, Boggs and Hubert were positioned to restrict inquiries into the Shaw-Banister-Ferrie apparatus in New Orleans that was intertwined with the Lake Ponchartrain Cuban-exile training operations of CIA contract agent and Mossad asset Frank Sturgis.
A junior member of Leon Hubert's commission team investigating Jack Ruby's background, Griffin was a former assistant United States attorney and practicing lawyer in Cleveland.
Later a Cleveland trial judge, Griffin—like Hubert—ultimately expressed some doubts about the commission's findings but was never vocal about his reservations.
At the time of his appointment to the commission, Coleman was one of the most prominent Black attorneys in the nation, associated with the ""political"" law firm of Dilworth, Paxon, Kalish, Levy & Coleman, headed by Philadelphia's former Democratic Mayor Richardson Dilworth.
Coleman's edge up the political/legal ladder came, however, when he clerked in 1948-49 for Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter, one of the most ardent leaders of the Jewish community in America.
Coleman's clerkship came at the very time that the state of Israel was being established.
Although Adams was supposed to be teamed with Arlen Specter to track President Kennedy's activities in Dallas as well as investigate the motorcade, Adams was, according to the National Law Journal, ""rarely present,""*°' so much so that Chief Justice Warren mistook him for a coroner testifying before the commission.
Perhaps the least known of all of the commission staff was its only female staffer.
Scobey, then 51 and considerably older than virtually all of her colleagues, was appointed to the staff at Russell's recommendation.
She served as his ""observer"" since the senator did not attend many commission meetings.
In light of the fact that Russell was later known to be one of the Warren Commission ""dissenters,"" Ms.
Among all of the commission staffers—and perhaps precisely because of her alertness—Ms.
Scobey never rose to any type of prominence, returning to work as a law clerk until her retirement.
Also practically forgotten as a member of the Warren Commission staff, Shaffer was an aide to the United States attorney general both before and after the Warren Commission.
Shaffer's claim to fame is that his most famous client was Watergate figure John Dean who helped bring down the Nixon administration.
So perhaps Shaffer's reappearance in Watergate is really not a coincidence after all.
Another of the little-known junior staffers—only 24 at the time—this Yale graduate was rewarded for his service on the Warren Commission with a clerkship under Chief Justice Warren after the commission closed up shop.
Clearly, then, there was a definitive ""Jewish presence"" on the staff of the Warren Commission in virtually every key aspect of its inquiries.
And even where a Warren staffer was not necessarily Jewish, many of those staffers had other connections which would make them ""sensitive"" to Jewish concerns.
This is not a pleasant topic and one which certainly invites allegations of ""anti-Semitism,"" but it is a topic that deserves examination for the record, particularly in light of what is suggested in Final Judgment.
GERALD FORD'S MOSSAD-LANSKY CONNECTION However, the ""Jewish presence"" on the Warren Commission has another interesting facet—and one that has never been explored elsewhere to the knowledge of this author.
This startling allegation, on its face, might appear a bit extraordinary to some, but let's look at the facts.
At the time that Ford was appointed to the commission, one of his closest political allies and major financial backers was a Detroit-based figure named Max Fisher.
Fisher, he said, was ""a prominent Detroit businessman who was chairman of the Jewish Agency for Israel.
FISHER, ROSENBAUM AND THE MOB But Fisher's less public political and financial antecedents—prior to his rise to prominence—are far more interesting, particularly in light of his access to the Warren Commission through Gerald Ford.
At the time of the JFK assassination, Fisher was actually a business partner of longtime Mossad figure Tibor Rosenbaum, the driving force behind the shadowy Permindex corporation (discussed in depth in Chapter 15) which played a central role in the assassination conspiracy.
In 1957, in partnership with Tibor Rosenbaum's Swiss-Israel Trade Bank, Fisher bought a controlling interest in Israel's Paz conglomerate—long owned by the Rothschild family of Europe—which maintained a monopoly over Israeli oil and petrochemical interests.
However, Fisher's Israeli connections went back much further and were far deeper.
Fisher's mentor—in terms of his role in promoting Israel's interests— was no less than General Julius Klein, the former American army officer who played a major role in helping set up Israeli's Mossad and who later served as president of the Swiss-Israel Trade Bank.
In the late 1940's and early 1950's Fisher traveled to Israel with Klein and was involved in training the Israeli armed forces and intelligence services as part of the activities of the Sonneborn Institute with which none other than Major Louis Bloomfield was associated.
Later, of course, Bloomfield would serve as president and chairman of the board of Tibor Rosenbaum's Permindex operation.
As we noted, the Institute not only had wide-ranging intelligence connections—but also intimate ties to the Lansky Syndicate.
Therefore it will come as no surprise to the reader to learn that one of Fisher's contacts in both petroleum and weapons smuggling to the Jewish Haganah through Sonneborn was rising Lansky Syndicate figure Morris Dalitz, then of Detroit's Purple Gang, and one of the leading Mid-West dealers in military surplus.
That Fisher and Dalitz should be working together at this time is interesting, inasmuch as during the early 1930's—nearly 20 years previously—Fisher had been a ""runner"" for Dalitz's Purple Gang in Detroit, carrying cash receipts to Bronfman family bootleggers in Canada in advance payment for forthcoming shipments of illicit goods.
The two successful businessmen who rose to affluence in the seamy world of the Lansky Crime Syndicate were now engaged in covert activities to advance the cause of Israel.
Fisher's activities in the public arena on behalf of Israel brought him to public respectability.
Until then he was simply known as a successful but still relatively small-time oilman.
However, in 1957 when he was brought into Israel's Paz conglomerate as a partner with Tibor Rosenbaum and Shaul Eisenberg, Fisher's fortunes and political influence grew immensely.
But Ford and Rosenbaum themselves shared another interesting mutual friend.
And, as we shall see, this mutual friend—like Max Fisher— played a pivotal role in advancing Gerald Ford's political career at a critical juncture in time.
Final Judgment 44] In their friendly biography of Meyer Lansky, authors Dennis Eisenberg, Uri Dan and Eli Landau feature an entire chapter devoted to Lansky's Mossad associate, Tibor Rosenbaum, and examine Rosenbaum's colorful and intriguing international connections.
At any rate—at the same time that Bernhard was engaged in intrigue with Tibor Rosenbaum he was also bringing Gerald Ford into the highest circles of the international elite.
The meetings had been held regularly at locations around the world since 1954, named after the Bilderberg Hotel in Holland where the first such meeting was held.
On April 11, 1964 Senator Jacob Javits rose on the Senate floor to announce that he had been in attendance at the 1964 meeting in Williamsburg, Virginia.
This international meeting—which concluded precisely four months after the death of President Kennedy—could not have failed to have addressed the impact of JFK's assassination on world affairs.
What's more, there can be no doubt that the ramifications of a possible conspiracy in the assassination—particularly one emanating from a foreign source (whether it be Castro's Cuba, the Soviet KGB—or the Mossad)—was also the subject of discussion.
Although the subject of Bilderberg and their impact on world affairs is beyond the scope of this book—and has been analyzed in far better scope elsewhere (particularly in The Spotlight newspaper and now in American Free Press), there is no question Bernhard had ushered Ford into higher ranks than he had ever been in before.
The Bilderberg meetings—although ""fronted"" by Bernhard—are financed jointly by the Rockefeller and Rothschild families whose representatives are very much in attendance, along with a handful of political figures from the United States and Western Europe, joined by select names from major foundations, academia and labor.
Also on hand are big names from the media—although they are sworn to secrecy and never report about the private discussions held during the conference.
In any event, Gerald Ford himself was cognizant of the big honor that had been bestowed upon him by Prince Bernhard when he was invited to attend this select gathering.
However, Ford's first participation in the Bilderberg meeting in 1964 was not, in fact, the first time he was invited.
In 1961 Ford was also invited to attend a Bilderberg gathering in Quebec, but due to a heavy work load and family problems—his children were ""quite ill with scarlet fever"" “’—young Congressman Ford was unable to attend that elite confab.
Thus, it is no stretch of the imagination—nor is it any ""conspiracy theory""—to suggest that precisely because of his service on the Warren Commission (coupled with his entree into the Bilderberg elite at precisely the same time), Gerald Ford's ascension to higher office was assured.
JOHN McCLOY We would be remiss in not discussing the other interesting (and little known) ties of Ford's fellow participant at the 1964 Bilderberg meeting (and fellow Warren Commission member) John McCloy.
Not only did McCloy serve as a director of the Empire Trust,*’ a joint financial venture of such powerful international Jewish families as the Lehmans, Loebs and the Bronfmans,*** but ""his career had long been intertwined with the Warburgs,"" **° to the extent that he jointly owned property with them **° but also served as a legal counsel for members of the family.
And in 1964 their close associate John McCloy was conveniently serving on the Warren Commission, carefully placed to cover up any Israeli connection to the JFK affair that might emerge.
SOME CONCLUSIONS We can rest assured, considering Ford's fealty to Max Fisher, that if Fisher and his mob and Mossad cronies wanted ""inside"" information relating to the Warren Commission inquiry that Ford was willing and able to provide what they needed.
Similar conclusions can rightly be reached about John McCloy in light of his close ties to the Warburg family and other interests intimately associated with the fortunes of the state of Israel.
There was no way that the Warren Commission would have—or could have—ever determined the truth.
Appendix Five JFK's Greenbacks— The Truth About The Federal Reserve Connection.
Final Judgment was the first book ever to document the fact that the Kennedy dynasty did indeed have intentions of ultimately breaking the back of the Federal Reserve financial monopoly over America's money system.
However, there are still those who—in all sincerity—are inadvertently spreading misinformation about the JFK assassination conspiracy by claiming that JFK—by executive order—reintroduced nonFederal Reserve controlled "" United States Notes"" into the American economy during his administration.
Yes, United States Notes were issued during the Kennedy administration—there's no question about it—but there's much more to the story that needs to be told.
The story that ""The Federal Reserve Killed JFK"" is a part of the lore in the JFK assassination conspiracy controversy.
At the same time, however, there is much misinformation about this subject and here I will attempt to address the issue, although I am certain that no matter what I say there will be those ""true believers"" who will not be interested in the facts, if only because the facts contradict something that they have always long believed as an article of faith.
This is almost certainly the primary reason that he was assassinated, but you only mention the Fed in passing.
To my surprise, I received such complaints despite the fact that in Chapter 4 of Final Judgment, 1 do document—for the first time—a Kennedy family plan to move all-out against the Fed.
This was outlined by Joe Kennedy in a private meeting with a personal long-time friend of mine, international businessman and long-time patriotic leader, DeWest Hooker, years before JFK was elected president.
So there's no question but that the Kennedys were indeed wise to the ways of the Fed and eager to bring it into line when they could.
When discussing the family's plans vis-a-vis the Fed, Joe Kennedy was talking in the long term.
He knew that it would be impossible, virtually overnight, to dethrone the Fed and its controllers in the international banking community.
That's why the ultimate goal of the Kennedy family was to consolidate their power and then move to strip the Fed bare.
The fact is, as I do additionally point out in Final Judgment, that there were interest-free United States Notes issued during the Kennedy administration.
These notes would have been issued no matter who was president at the time—unless, of course, a populist president had come to power and knocked out the Federal Reserve completely.
Kennedy apparently reasoned that by returning to the Constitution, which states that only Congress shall coin and regulate money, the soaring national debt could be reduced by not paying interest to the bankers of the Federal Reserve System, who print paper money then loan it to the government at interest.
I'm sorry to report that he cites my own former newspaper, The Spotlight, specifically its issue of October 31, 1988 , as the source of this information.
An inexperienced junior editor had inserted a brief news item in a column in the newspaper and it had slipped past the other editors.
The information, in fact, was based on misinformation that had been circulating for some years in an assortment of other newsletters that had reprinted the story verbatim, without question.
Our junior editor had seen the story, found it thought-provoking, and committed it to print.
So, essentially, at issue is whether Executive Order 11,110, signed by JFK on June 4, 1963 and supposedly repealed by LBJ within hours of JFK's death, approved more than $4 billion in United States Notes, issued directly by the treasury, in place of Federal Reserve Notes which earn interest for the Federal Reserve banks.
In fact, it was the Reagan administration—not LBJ—that finally repealed EO 11,110.
And this EO dealt with silver certificates—not greenbacks—when Reagan signed EO 12,608, which revoked several outdated executive orders.
EO 11,110 dealt with granting the Secretary of the Treasury the authority to issue rules and regulations pertaining to freeing the secretary to act without presidential approval on silver bullion sales.
To repeat, the issuance of ""greenbacks"" (technically known as United States Notes) was not even the subject of JFK's EO 11,110.
The greenbacks that were issued during the Kennedy administration were issued pursuant to long-standing federal legislation mandating that a certain number of United States Notes always be in circulation by the Treasury Department although, as we shall see momentarily, the Treasury has not been following that mandate.
If all the money in use in this country were issued by the United States government, we would not have periods in which the volume of money suddenly diminished for some ‘mysterious’ reason.
However, for the record, we will cite here the correct explanation as to why 1) United States Notes were indeed issued during the Kennedy era and why 2) United States Notes appear to now be ""withdrawn"" from circulation.
However, as a Treasury Department officer, Rudy Villareal, thendirector of the Currency Operations Division at the Treasury Department admitted to The Spotlight in a 1982 interview, the Treasury itself was not issuing United States Notes into circulation even though it was mandated to do so by the long-standing congressional legislation.
Instead, the issuance of United States Notes during the Kennedy era was done in pursuance of a law already on the books.
Those who cite an executive order by JFK that, in fact, refers to Silver Certificates, are making a big mistake and— unintentionally or not—are doing a disservice to serious research in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
The Spotlight published these stories to try to counteract the misinformation that it played a part in circulating, only to find that there have been so many people committed to the story and so determined to prove that ""The Federal Reserve Killed JFK"" that they have actually taken umbrage at The Spotlight's efforts to set the record straight.
GETTING THE STORY STRAIGHT But suffice it to say that The Spotlight was not part of any ""cover-up"" of Fed involvement.
Instead, The Spotlight was trying to get at the truth of the matter, no matter what the cost, and attempting to prevent sincere patriots and critics of the Fed from embarrassing themselves by circulating misinformation that will only make them look foolish and give further ammunition to the Fed when it seeks to discredit its critics.
There's no doubt, as I've said, that the would-be Kennedy Dynasty had big plans to undo the Federal Reserve monopoly on America's money, but EO 11,110 was most emphatically not part of that long-range plan.
This story does continue to pop up again and again despite the efforts by The Spotlight and others to set the record straight, it's taken on a life of its own and I'm truly afraid that the story will never be put to rest.
Brown delves into the sticky question of JFK's stance in relationship to the privately-owned money monopoly known as the Federal Reserve System and rehashes the popular myth that we've dissected above.
The fact is that Brown's perception of what constitutes ""right wing"" versus ""left wing"" in American politics is obviously off base, for if Brown did any semblance of investigating, he would find that it is the American ""right wing"" that has been so vociferously critical of the Federal Reserve System.
With a few rare exceptions, such as two Texas populists of the left— Rep.
Jerry Voorhis, the California Democrat whom Richard Nixon defeated for reelection to the House of Representatives, the fiercest and most vocal critics of the Federal Reserve and its money manipulation have been ""right wing"" populists, ranging from Father Charles Coughlin, the radio priest of the 1930’s to Col.
James ""Bo"" Gritz, the widely-decorated Vietnam War hero who ran for president as an independent candidate in the 1992 election.
Gritz himself claimed that the first thing he would do when elected president would be to re-instate JFK's executive order issuing United States Notes into the economy.
It is interesting to note that the aforementioned Jim Marrs also includes the theory that ""The Federal Reserve Killed JFK""—my description of the myth, not his—in his chapter in Crossfire entitled ""Rednecks and Oilmen—Rightwing Extremists and Texas Millionaires"" as though there is some relation between the interests of the ""right wing extremists"" and the controllers of the Federal Reserve.
Again, as we have seen, this is based on misperception at best and bad research at worst, but it does further muddy the waters on an already controversial element of an even more controversial overall topic.
The Federal Reserve certainly has it within its power the ability to manipulate ""right wing extremists"" for its own purposes.
The banking interests that profit from the Federal Reserve monopoly are, it should be noted, tied closely to the European Rothschild dynasty as documented in such works as Eustace Mullins' monumental study, The Federal Reserve Conspiracy, which is undoubtedly the most authoritative work on the subject and one which has been the cornerstone of all subsequent writing on the subject.
So when one recalls that the Rothschild family, in fact, has been a primary patron of the state of Israel, we can easily suggest, then, that even the theory that ""The Federal Reserve Killed JFK"" has its own legitimate ring of truth, insofar as the role of Israel's Mossad—in league with the CIA and the Lansky mob—does indeed point back to a Rothschild and Federal Reserve connection to the assassination conspiracy.
It is in the private possession of a veteran critic of the Federal Reserve System.
The very fact that this 1966 United States Note exists is proof positive that it is an absolute myth that no United States Notes were issued after 1963.
In the end, those who are truly seeking the facts about the JFK assassination conspiracy do themselves no service by promulgating false information about the Federal Reserve connection.
Thus, I am pleased to be able to use this opportunity in an attempt to set the record straight.
The death of former CIA director William Colby in a strange boating ""accident"" in the spring of 1996 gave conspiracy theorists much grist for the mill.
Colby's death was highly reminiscent of the equally bizarre death in 1978 of former CIA official John Paisley.
Both Colby and Paisley were sharp critics of Israeli influence at the CIA and Colby himself was preparing—before his death—to begin active work on behalf of the Arab cause.
There is indeed strong historical evidence to suggest that both men died precisely because of their opposition to Israel.
And, at least in the case of Paisley, there's an unusual JFK assassination connection that definitely needs further exploration.
Although the tabloid provided no evidence whatsoever that this was the case, there is no question but that Colby's strange demise did give many people—and not just so-called ""conspiracy theorists""—reason to pause.
Colby himself had indeed made cryptic remarks about the JFK assassination in one interview shortly before his death, so perhaps there is reason for suspicion.
However, as we shall see, there is strong evidence to suggest that if indeed William Colby did have ""inside"" knowledge about the assassination of President Kennedy and knew that Israeli intelligence was indeed involved—Colby would have been the most likely former high-ranking intelligence figure to blow the whistle.
The fact is, that while serving as CIA director, William Colby was considered hostile to Israel's interests, so much so that it was Colby who actually fired the Mossad's longtime agent-in-place at the CIA, James Jesus Angleton, who has been documented in Final Judgment as the key CIA player in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
ISRAEL THE SOURCE OF FRICTION Evidently, most press reports at the time, describing Colby's sacking of Angleton, didn't tell the whole story.
CBS News reporter Daniel Schorr has described meeting with Angleton just shortly after he had been dismissed by Colby.
According to Schorr, Angleton ""rambled on circuitously, the conversation disjoined.
So it was that Israel's biggest partisan at the CIA had gone completely out of his mind—and a new CIA director, William Colby, was perceived as being hostile to Angleton’s friends in Israel.
Their assessment of the United States national interest has dovetailed more with the traditional Arabist view at the State Department than with the Angleton . . . school of thought.
The November 1975 closed-door testimony on the Middle East arms balance offered by outgoing CIA Director William Colby was one of the first indications of this attitude.
His testimony, which disputed figures offered by Israeli officials, was widely seen as having damaged the administration's own pending request before the Congress for $1. billion in military aid for Israel during that fiscal year.
So it was that William Colby himself was ultimately fired from the CIA, having run afoul of Israel and its lobby in Washington.
Thus, it should be no surprise for readers to learn that shortly before his ""accidental"" death, Colby had entered into negotiations to begin high-level consulting work for Arab interests—an interesting little detail that seems to have been forgotten in much of the speculation surrounding Colby's death.
According to a former federal security administrator who attended one of the meetings, Colby and his Arab associate ""had shared concerns.
Both men knew that their respective governments were being infiltrated and manipulated by Israeli agents.
THE ISRAELI LOBBY's CIA POWER GRAB It is interesting to note further that Colby's death came at a critical time when the Israeli lobby in Washington was engaged in a major behind-thescenes effort to substantially expand the power of the CIA and its thendirector, John Deutch, a Belgian-born Jewish refugee and longtime Washington figure known for his close ties to Israeli intelligence.
The so-called ""reform"" measures—designed to increase the power of the CIA director—were of such a nature that a genuine CIA reformer such as William Colby would have certainly emerged as a very loud and very public critic of such proposals, particularly since the fine hand of the Israeli lobby was very clearly at work behind the scenes.
On April 24, 1996—two days before Colby disappeared—a little-noted Senate committee vote laid the groundwork for a bizarre and unprecedented proposed restructuring of the United States civilian and military intelligence system.
Arlen Specter—the infamous former Warren Commission staff attorney—now the Republican chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee pushed through a vote on a measure to extend the author of the CIA director to control the budgets of all United States intelligence agencies, most of which were then under the purview of the military divisions.
Under Specter's proposal the CIA director would also have been granted the authority to play a major role in the appointments of the directors of the various intelligence agencies, including those inside the Pentagon.
On April 25 even the Washington Post was moved to comment (quite correctly) that ""Such a radical change is likely to run into strong opposition not only from the military services themselves but also from other congressional committees with Pentagon oversight.
Colby herself does not buy the claim that her husband's death was an accident.
However, as an experienced diplomat, wise to the dangerous ways of the world of intelligence, she has no percentage in going public with her suspicions and probably never will.
Thus, it is highly unlikely that Colby's real views on the JFK assassination itself will ever be made public.
However, we do know his views toward Israel and its influence on United States policy-making.
It is probably no coincidence then that one of Colby's protégés from the days when Colby served in the CIA in Vietnam is—like his mentor—a sharp critic of Israeli intrigue.
John DeCamp, a former army officer in Vietnam who served under Colby and who is now a prominent maverick lawyer in Nebraska, tangled with the Israeli lobby during the years that he served in the Nebraska legislature.
ANOTHER STRANGE DEATH Colby's words are quite striking when one considers that Colby's death on the water recalled to many another similar strange death and one that, in fact, may truly be linked in some way to the JFK assassination conspiracy and which involves another attempt by a CIA official to resist Israeli intrigue in Washington.
Although his death was ruled a ""suicide,"" few believed it then and few believe it today.
It was not only the similar circumstances of the deaths of the two men that observers found so intriguing.
What was more notable is that Paisley— like Colby—had adamantly tried to resist high-level Israeli intrigue.
Paisley had discovered—and tried to block—a major Israeli penetration operation targeting the CIA's Office of National Estimates, where the command-level intelligence summaries guiding United States presidential decisions were compiled.
What's more there is no question but that Paisley—perhaps even more so than Colby—had good reason to know long-hidden intelligence secrets relating to the CIA's manipulation of JFK's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald.
It is thus probably no coincidence that Paisley died at a critical juncture during the House Select Committee on Assassinations Investigation at which time the committee was exploring—or at least pretending to explore—possible CIA links to Lee Harvey Oswald and the assassination of President Kennedy.
PAISLEY AND OSWALD Although Paisley's name never came up during the House investigation, one of its reports said an ex-CIA employee had revealed that ""the CIA maintained a large volume of information on the radio factory in which Oswald had worked.
The information was stored in the Office of Research and Reports"" °'’—which would have been Paisley's office at the relevant time.
Thus, if Oswald were in fact a CIA asset while posing as a ""defector"" in the Soviet Union, as many have suggested, John Paisley—if anyone—would have known it.
According to veteran intelligence journalist Tad Szulc, the 25-year old Paisley was recruited into the CIA in 1948 when he went to Palestine as a radio operator for the UN peacekeeping mission.
And according to Szulc, it was none other than Israel's friend at the CIA—James Angleton—who recruited Paisley into the CIA at this time.
Angleton's denial of having known Paisley recalls Angleton's similar denial of having known E Howard Hunt when all evidence would suggest otherwise.
Veteran JFK assassination investigator Dick Russell has looked into the Paisley affair.
The answer to this question points directly toward solving the question of who killed Paisley and why.
And it relates again—precisely—to the conclusions that we have reached in Final Judgment regarding the question of who killed John F Kennedy and why.
Although the death of John Paisley has been of much fascination to those who have charted the covert wars between the CIA and the KGB (of which James Angleton was very much a part), it is quite notable that those who have delved into Paisley's demise have—like Dick Russell—been reticent to discuss what is very clearly the Mossad connection to the affair.
In the years prior to Paisley's demise, hawkish factions in the Israeli government were lobbying hard in Washington for more arms aid and cash infusions through the United States foreign aid program.
However, United States intelligence analysts were scoffing at Israel's alarmist cries.
Led by senior analysts in the Office of National Estimates, they reassured the White House that, at least for the moment, the Soviets had neither the intent nor the capability to attack a major target of vital United States interest, such as the oil-rich Gulf states. oe A-TEAM vs B-TEAM Nonetheless, Israel's Washington allies maneuvered in an effort to counter-balance the findings of the Office of National Estimates.
However, as we noted in Appendix One of Final Judgment, the newly established and ostensibly ""independent"" group—B-Team—headed by Harvard professor Richard Pipes, a devout supporter of Israel, became an outpost of Israeli influence.
And, of course, not surprisingly—considering his familial attachment to B-Team sponsor Leo Cherne—then CIA Director George Bush became a promoter of the B-Team's findings.
PAISLEY vs THE B-TEAM It was John Paisley, recently retired from the CIA, who was assigned to provide liaison and guidance between the CIA's in-house A-Team and the BTeam.
AS a consequence, during the next two years, Paisley launched his own internal intelligence community campaign against the Israeli attempt to manipulate United States policy-making.
He also started talking to Washington newsmen and congressional investigators, exposing what he saw happening.
According to one of Paisley's friends, ""He met with physicists and other scientists who knew Israel was wildly exaggerating Soviet military capabilities and war plans.
ISRAELI DISINFORMATION The Israeli-influenced B-Team report said that the Soviets were secretly developing a so-called ""first-strike"" capability, because Soviet strategic doctrine assumed that such a sneak attack would make them the winners of a nuclear exchange with the United States.
The B-Team dismissed the estimates of analysts such as Paisley and others who held that Moscow was unlikely to start a nuclear conflict unless attacked.
In the end, of course, the B-Team findings prevailed and the direct consequence was that there was a virtual revival of the arms race and a massive new infusion of United States military and other aid to Israel during the 1980.
Drawing on fraudulent estimates provided by Israeli intelligence—the foundation of the B-Team's report was the warning that the Soviet Union was fast running out of energy.
As a consequence, the B-Team forecast that beginning in 1980 Soviet oil production would suffer critical shortfalls, forcing Moscow to import as much as 4. million barrels a day for its essential needs.
Starved for oil—the Israeli disinformation claimed—the Soviets would invade Iran or another oil-rich Gulf state even if it meant a nuclear confrontation with the United States.
Nonetheless, Paisley carried on his one-man drive to counter the distortions, exaggerations, and Israeli influence behind the B-Team arguments.
Those of us familiar with the case of Paisley know that he was killed by the Mossad.
That is, Inman said he was being attacked in the media—particularly by syndicated columnist William Safire—because he had run afoul of Safire and the Israeli lobby in years prior.
At that juncture, Inman, then serving as acting CIA director during CIA director William Casey's absence from the country, gave orders limiting Israeli access to such strategic national intelligence.
Then, after CIA Director Casey returned to the United States, William Safire—a longtime friend and a former campaign manager for Casey when Casey made an unsuccessful bid for Congress—complained to Casey who countermanded Inman's decision.
Casey's own ties are somewhat suggestive of a long-standing connection to not only Israeli intelligence but to other elements that have popped up in the course of inquiries into the JFK assassination conspiracy.
According to organized crime writer Dan Moldea, Casey was the founder, general counsel and member of the board of directors of Multiponics, an agribusiness firm that owned some 44,000 acres of farmland in several southern states including Louisiana.
What is particularly interesting, though, is that when the Multiponics venture between Casey and the Marcello associate filed for bankruptcy in 1971, it owed some $20. million to various creditors including none other than Bernard Cornfeld of Investors Overseas Services, °3° whom we discovered in Chapter 7 was functioning as a front man for Tibor Rosenbaum's international money laundering ventures for the Mossad.
CASUALTIES OF WAR Suffice it to say that there has been a very long and definitive and influential Mossad influence within the CIA and we can thus understand why when the CIA's deputy director, Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, had reason to question Mossad influence that he found himself slapped down by William Casey on more occasions than one.
Although it has no direct bearing on the JFK assassination, the conflict that Bobby Ray Inman had with Israel and its powerful lobby in Washington does indeed illustrate what can happen to high-ranking American officials who run afoul of Israel by questioning its power and influence on United States policy-making.
Inman, in his own fashion, was as much a casualty of behind-the-scenes secret wars with Israel as were those before him such as William Colby, John Paisley and John F Kennedy.
Whether, in fact, there is a direct link between the deaths of Colby and Paisley and that of John F Kennedy we will not likely ever know.
But the facts about their deaths all do point toward an Israeli connection.
And for that reason alone it is appropriate to note this here in Final Judgment.
THE ANGLETON CONNECTION Rest assured that we have not, however, seen the last of Israel's CIA ally—and Colby's nemesis—James Angleton, in the pages of Final Judgment.
And we will see indeed that there is a connection between Watergate and the JFK assassination—and that connection is Angleton.
Appendix Seven ""Deep Throat"" Dallas and Watergate Were Connected— But Not in the Way That Many People Think.
James Jesus Angleton, Israel and the Fall of Richard M Nixon The Dallas-Watergate Connection has been the basis for an incredible amount of misinformation and disinformation since the fall of Richard Nixon in 1974.
The true Dallas-Watergate Connection is the long-hidden role of Israel's CIA man, James Jesus Angleton—the prime CIA mover not only behind the JFK assassination but also the forced resignation of Richard M Nixon.
Peter Dale Scott and Carl Oglesby have written at length on the subject.
However, as we shall see in this appendix, there is much more to the ""Dallas-Watergate Connection"" than meets the eye—and if truth be told, the real connection is the hidden role played by Israel's CIA ally, James Jesus Angleton, not only in the assassination of President Kennedy but also in the Watergate intrigue that led to the fall of Richard Nixon.
In fact, as we shall see, Nixon—like JFK—had begun to run afoul of the Israelis and—like JFK—was targeted for destruction.
Nixon had barely won the presidency in 1968, narrowly defeating Hubert Humphrey, a devoted supporter of Israel who was highly popular among Jewish voters.
However, in 1972 Nixon was overwhelmingly re-elected in one of the largest popular landslides in American history and, at that juncture, Nixon evidently decided that he had a genuine mandate to actually begin flexing some real clout.
Haldeman, writing in his book The Ends of Power, the president intended to overhaul the entire federal bureaucracy and bring it under the direct control of his own handpicked loyalists in the White House inner circle—trusted longtime colleagues who were not part of the Establishment elite.
That reorganization in the winter of 1972—very little known to the American public—eventually spurred into action against Nixon the great power blocs in Washington.
I'm going to [tell the American people] we didn't do it when we came in before, but now we have a mandate.
This move, needless to say, made many in the American Jewish community uneasy.
Rumors of Nixon's ""lists"" of Jews in high-ranking positions in the executive branch and the agencies began circulating, adding fuel to the already long-standing suspicions of Nixon.
And as all of this was taking place in the United States, events in the Middle East began to unfold that set a new tone to Israel's perception of the American president.
NIXON CROSSES THE ISRAELIS Following his massive 1972 re-election victory, Nixon crossed the line as far as his previous support for Israel was concerned.
Nixon was well aware that, apart from J Edgar Hoover, only the Israelis knew enough about his past to cause him major political damage.
For example, respected British journalist Alan Hart has noted that as early as 1973 Nixon's Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, was warning the government of Israel that Nixon might be preparing to cut off arms to Israel.
The truth is, as Hart has pointed out, Nixon was actively aligning himself with King Feisal of Saudi Arabia in attempting to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict once and for all.
Hart has described Nixon's efforts (through the good offices of King Feisal) to engage Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in back-channel negotiations for a comprehensive Middle East peace settlement.
However, when Kissinger learned of the negotiations (which had initially been conducted behind his back) he intervened and put a kibosh on the NixonFeisal peace effort, evidently viewing it as a threat to Israel.
In addition, Hart has noted that, according to his sources, at one point Nixon himself told King Feisal that if the Israelis and their American lobby continued to frustrate Nixon's efforts to settle the Middle East conflict that he— Nixon—was fully intent upon tearing up his pre-prepared State of the Union address and go on national television and radio and explain to the American people how Israel and its American lobby were the real obstacle to peace in the Middle East.
Clearly, there was much more afoot behind the scenes in the fateful years of 1973-1974 during which time the Watergate scandal began to escalate and—ultimately—bring down Richard Nixon.
There is, in fact, evidence that high-level plans to move against Nixon were already underway—even before his big re-election victory in 1972.
In a March 24, 1974 interview with Walter Cronkite of CBS, international financier Robert Vesco (by then living in exile in Costa Rica, fleeing prosecution in the United States) had some interesting allegations that have hardly ever been noted.
CRONKITE: Mr Vesco, you said . . . that six months before the Watergate break-in, the Democrats had come to you with a plan for impeachment of the president.
The plan was essentially as I have stated previously, where they were going to attempt to get initial indictments of some high officials, using this as a launching board to get public opinion and—in their favor and using the press media to a great degree.
Because Oglesby never takes into consideration the fact that both the ""liberal Democrat"" and the ""conservative Republican"" had come into conflict with Israel and its American lobby and because he is blinded by the ""liberal-conservative"" dichotomy, Oglesby thus fails to understand the big picture.
Clearly, as Vesco said, the forces that threatened him were ""the same politically"" that assassinated John F Kennedy and then moved against Richard Nixon.
In fact, Vesco's rise to power in the financial world came when he assumed control of flamboyant financier Bernard Cornfeld's Investors Overseas Service , 48 which, as we saw in Chapter 7 and in Chapter 15 was an integral part of the Kennedy assassination-linked Permindex network set in place by longtime high-level Mossad operative Tibor Rosenbaum.
And as we noted in Chapter 9, it was Michael Townley—actually an IOS operative at the time of the JFK assassination—who was later convicted of the murder of Chilean diplomat Orlando Letelier.
Townley's co-conspirators in that crime were Cuban exiles Guillermo and Ignacio Novo whom, as we have seen, arrived in Dallas on November 21, 1963 and met with CIA man E Howard Hunt and evidently played some role along with Hunt in the circumstances surrounding events in Dallas that were linked to the assassination conspiracy.
And there would have been some poetic justice in the event had Vesco succeeded with this ploy,""””’ he added.
Thus, in light of Vesco's intimate connections to the Permindex web behind the JFK assassination conspiracy, it is likely that Vesco indeed knew the facts about Mossad complicity with the CIA in the JFK affair and was thus using his leverage to strike out at those who were attempting to bring him back to the United States for trial.
Vesco ultimately took refuge in anti-Zionist Cuba with Fidel Castro's assent and there he undoubtedly gave Castro an earful about what he— Vesco—knew about the JFK affair.
This, of course, would have been of special interest to Castro inasmuch as the plotters behind the JFK assassination went to great lengths to ""sheepdip"" the president's alleged assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, as a Castro sympathizer.
In the end, of course, Castro ultimately had a falling out with Vesco and the famed ""fugitive financier"" was imprisoned by his long-time host on charges of involvement in the drug trade.
Haldeman, in which Haldeman described how Nixon sought to have the CIA intervene to prevent the burgeoning Watergate scandal from going any further.
Nixon told Haldeman how he should approach then-CIA director Richard Helms and convince Helms to cooperate.
Nixon advised Haldeman to remind Helms how ex-CIA man E Howard Hunt was one of the Watergate burglars.
This involves these Cubans, Hunt, and a lot of hanky-panky that we have nothing to do with ourselves."" ae Haldeman said that, at the time, he had no idea what ""hanky-panky"" Nixon was talking about.
So they should call the FBI in and for the good of the country don't go any further into this case.
There were others who also believed that the CIA was a prime mover behind the Watergate scandal.
Colson portrayed the president as a virtual Oval Office captive of suspected high-ranking conspirators in intelligence circles, against whom he dare not act for fear of international and domestic political repercussions.
His underlying suspicion was that the CIA planned the break-ins at Watergate.
However, there is a great likelihood that, from the very beginning, the bungled ""break-in"" at the Watergate was actually a set-up that was designed to fail.
A piece of masking tape ""accidentally"" left over a door latch—horizontally, rather than vertically, thereby exposing it— alerted Watergate security that shenanigans were afoot.
While it has been suggested E Howard Hunt himself was one of those who helped ""bungle"" the break-in—a view evidently held by G Gordon Liddy and certainly by Eugenio Martinez,’°°® two of the other burglars—another likely double agent was James McCord who was directly responsible for the travesty of the tape.
He had not only been the senior CIA security official in Europe but was also later responsible for security at CIA headquarters at Langley,’ not insignificant positions by any means.
Yet, in ostensible ""retirement"" the CIA's high-ranking security expert managed to ""bungle"" a two-bit burglary.
In fact—and this is very important—McCord was a close friend of Angleton,”” and in his long-standing capacity as a CIA security official, McCord worked directly with Angleton.
What's more, as a Biblequoting Christian, McCord shared Angleton's devotion to Israel.
In addition, the fact that we also find a veteran Mossad asset, CIA contract agent Frank Sturgis, and his old CIA partner E Howard Hunt, back in the loop in the bungled burglary is also significant indeed.
For years there has been speculation as to the real identity of ""Deep Throat"" and one of the candidates whose name has often been mentioned— although he denies it—is General Alexander Haig who served as White House chief of staff at the time of Nixon's demise.
Among those who point to Haig as ""Deep Throat"" are the aforementioned pro-Israel writers, John Loftus and Aarons.
They speculate that by October of 1973 Haig became embittered by President Nixon's anti-Jewish outbursts and even angrier that Nixon had nearly let Israel be victimized by a surprise Arab attack and ""took it with both hands"" °° and became ""Deep Throat"" for the purpose of doing in Nixon and forcing him out of office.
However, there is much stronger evidence that suggests that we should lay the wreath of honor at the tomb of James Angleton.
If Angleton wasn't ""Deep Throat"" per se, he was certainly the CIA handler for ""Deep Throat""—and thus was ultimately responsible for the destruction of Richard M Nixon.
Graham put forth her immense clout and had it pulled from the bookstores and pulped.
Ben Bradlee, recently remarried, is a European correspondent for Newsweek.
He left the embassy [in Paris, where he served as press attaché] for Newsweek in 1953, a year before CIA director Allen Dulles authorized one of his most skilled and fanatical agents, former OSS operative James Angleton, to set up a counterintelligence staff.
But there's no question that by the time Bradlee had begun his work for Newsweek and was collaborating with James Angleton ""with the Israelis in Paris,"" Ober was Angleton's trusted deputy.
Angleton and Ober are intelligence operatives who travel between Washington and Paris, London, and Rome.
Bradlee also managed to find himself in the thick of the Algerian controversy that, back in the United States, young Sen.
John F Kennedy had embroiled himself—much to the dismay of Israel's supporters who objected to the concept of Arab Algeria of becoming an independent republic.
According to Davis, Bradlee's ""most notable feat as a foreign correspondent was to obtain an interview with the FLN, the Algerian guerrillas who were then in revolution against the French government.
In any event, remarkably enough, here we find Bradlee—while working with Angleton, some 17 years before Watergate—in the midst of yet another project of special interest to Israel and which would ultimately prove to be part of the so-called ""French Connection"" to the JFK assassination conspiracy of which Angleton was a central player.
However, just shortly after the JFK assassination itself, we once again find Angleton and Bradlee secretly working together behind the scenes.
As we pointed out in Chapter 16, after JFK's mistress, Mary Pinchot Meyer was found shot to death on October 12, 1964 Angleton obtained Mrs.
Some years later, after a Washington Post editor, James Truitt, became engaged in a conflict with Bradlee, Truitt went public with the story of Angleton and Bradlee's procurement of Mrs.
Prior to this time Angleton had managed to avoid the spotlight, but his connection to the Mary Meyer intrigue brought him some unwanted public recognition indeed.
The operation was run for Angleton by his longtime deputy, the aforementioned Richard Ober.
This particular fact— reported by Deborah Davis—has apparently never been mentioned elsewhere in all the wealth of information published in reference to Watergate and the intrigue of that era.
Handling the affairs of Angleton's Israeli desk at the White House—a virtual Mossad outpost—was Angleton's deputy, Richard Ober.
Thus, Angleton and Ober were well-placed at a critical time when Richard Nixon, flush with victory following his triumphant landslide re-election, began moving to assert control over the CIA and against Israel As we have seen, the bungled two-bit Watergate burglary of 1972 had already taken place, and Nixon and his inner circle had begun a foolish cover-up attempt.
But the evidence suggests that the burglary, from the beginning, was a set up.
It was James Angleton's longtime ally at the Washington Post, Ben Bradlee, who began the media push that made ""Watergate"" a household word and led to the series of official inquiries that brought down Nixon.
But the Post couldn't have orchestrated the public outrage if it hadn't relied so thoroughly on ""Deep Throat""—a highly-placed White House insider who was able to provide Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein the information they needed to make Watergate a big, big story.
Davis has concluded that the ""voice"" for the source, ""Deep Throat,"" in fact, was James Angleton's deputy, Richard Ober.
And this means, of course, that Ober most assuredly was doing Angleton's bidding as part of a campaign to bring down Richard Nixon.
Either Angleton sent Ober to Woodward or Angleton directed his longtime Post ally, Bradlee, to have his reporter Woodward seek out Ober.
The answer lies in the simple proposition that Nixon—like John F Kennedy before him—had become perceived as a threat to Israel's survival.
And so it was that the Watergate operation was set in motion to remove Nixon from the White House.
Once Nixon and his inner circle were enmeshed in the web and began their often-ridiculous cover-up attempts (which, of course, were their own doing) they helped set the stage for their own undoing.
Nixon, further, began making blackmail attempts against the CIA, clearly threatening the agency—as we have seen—with use of his knowledge of CIA involvement in the JFK assassination.
Once, however, that the Washington Post—at Angleton's instigation— became actively involved in the campaign against Nixon, the president's fate was sealed.
The widely-heralded Senate investigation of the Watergate affair became a daily staple of television coverage and the House of Representatives began proceedings for impeachment.
And highly placed in the intrigue against Nixon as the chief counsel to the Senate Watergate Committee was Sam Dash, a former national commissioner and member of the national advisory council of the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith ””’—the American intelligence conduit for Israel's Mossad.
And serving as the ""Republican"" minority counsel—well placed to monitor Nixon's GOP defenders—was Albert Jenner, whom we met in Appendix Four as the former Warren Commission staff member with intimate ties to the mob-linked Chicago empire of Zionist billionaire Henry Crown.
We can thus rest assured that all interested parties were fully versed in the secrets of the Watergate affair and its progress.
His only chance for survival, once Watergate unraveled, would have been a virtual counter-coup.
In this regard, we do know that Israel's other key partisan inside the White House, Alexander Haig, actively moved to prevent Nixon from making any attempts at fighting back.
More than one published account has described how Haig actually instructed the armed forces to ignore any military orders by President Nixon unless they were cleared with him first.
As it was, Angleton, Haig and the Post never had to play their ""Mafia"" card against Nixon.
It might be added, if only as an afterthought, that it seems that the choice of the moniker ""Deep Throat"" was some sort of ""inside joke"" on the part of Woodward and his colleagues at the Post.
Angleton, of course, was known as a heavy drinker and chain smoker who was often enveloped in a haze of smoke.
So the use of the ""Deep Throat"" code name was obviously a not-sosubtle way of signaling to those in the know in official Washington that the real force behind the leak of information to the Post was, in fact, Israel's CIA ally, James Angleton.
And thus, anyone in the loop would realize immediately that the ""Watergating"" of Richard Nixon was a dirty tricks operation being conducted out of Angleton's Israeli desk in the White House.
Although Richard Ober appears to have been the actual ""voice"" for ""Deep Throat,"" James Angleton was the ventriloquist behind the scenes.
But there's no question, all things considered, that this is the real key to understanding Watergate and the ""Dallas-Watergate connection"" that has so long been pondered but never fully understood—until now.
No wonder—among other reasons—that William Colby forced Angleton out of the CIA in 1974.
Angleton's ouster from the CIA was certainly a setback for Israel and its Mossad at a critical time, but Angleton was old and sickly (perhaps even verging on clinical madness by some less than friendly accounts) and he would have ultimately been forced into retirement for this alone.
Angleton, in the end, was an expendable anachronism who, in his heyday, had served his Israeli allies well.
The Israeli connection can be traced in scandals that encircled both Vice President Spiro Agnew and former Texas Gov.
John Connally, who had joined the Nixon administration as Treasury Secretary and who was Nixon's first choice as a successor in 1976.
Or Else, if Nixon had stood firm and backed Agnew when Agnew himself came under fire, Nixon himself may not have been forced to resign.
In fact, in Agnew's view, he, Agnew, was even more hated by the powers-that-be than Nixon.
However, because President Nixon was already under siege as a consequence of the burgeoning Watergate scandal, he refused to come to Agnew's defense and would not undertake any efforts to quash the investigation of Agnew that ultimately led to Agnew's resignation.
In retrospect, there's no question that the scandal that brought down Agnew was as contrived as any in American history.
In the midst of the Watergate ""crisis,"" Barnet Skolnik, a liberal Jewish prosecutor in the United States attorney's office in Maryland brought bribery charges against Agnew that are— as the evidence shows—suspect to this day.
Skolnik got his chance to ""get"" Agnew when Lester Matz, a prominent Jewish businessman who was under investigation for paying kickbacks to public officials in Maryland in return for county and state contracts, dredged up his previous on-again, off-again relationship with Agnew during the vice president's years in Maryland politics.
M Hammerman and Jerome Wolff—also claimed to have paid off the former Maryland governor.
The swift rise like a Fourth of July rocket, the sudden fall from political grace—both involved Jews.
Not as the victim of Israeli intrigue, as he most certainly was, the naysayers notwithstanding.
One Jake Jacobson, a lobbyist for the milk industry, claimed that Connally, a multi-millionaire, had accepted a $10,000 bribe (while serving as Treasury Secretary) in return for helping secure a 1971 increase in government milk price supports.
However, the fact is that in his capacity as treasury secretary Connally had no official powers in regulating the Department of Agriculture's milk price support programs.
Connally's accuser Jacobson had previously been indicted by the Justice Department for misappropriation of funds involving nearly $1 million in loans from a Texas savings and loan—but when Justice Department lawyers learned of his past association with Connally, Jacobson suddenly remembered the ""bribe"" he purportedly had given to Connally and entered into a plea bargain.
In order to avoid going to jail himself, Jacobson became the ""star witness"" against Connally.
Connally was acquitted, but his 1976 White House ambitions were shattered, even though the evidence against him had been brought by an unsavory felon who was angling for a reduced sentence in an unrelated criminal case.
As in the Agnew case, however, the media gave full play to the charges against Connally and helped further the perception that Nixon and his intimate associates were engaged in widespread criminal conduct.
In fact, most of Nixon's key lieutenants, with the notable exception of Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Chief of Staff Alexander Haig and legal adviser Leonard Garment—pro-Israel partisans—ultimately went to jail.
But although some anti-Semites said that Jacobson was part of a ""Jewish plot"" to ""get"" John Connally, the fact is that the outspoken Texan did ultimately, in fact, fall victim to a very real ""Jewish plot"" that prevented him from achieving the presidency.
In 1979 when Connally launched a well-financed bid for the 1980 Republican presidential nomination, he publicly challenged the power of the Israeli lobby in a highly controversial speech that, by all accounts, led to the end of Connally's presidential ambitions once and for all.
Comparing Connally to Haman, the ancient enemy of the Jewish people, Rackman—a rabbi—issued his call for Connally's assassination in the November 18, 1979 issue of The Jewish Week-American Examiner, the publication of the Israeli-government owned Jewish Telegraph Agency, a subdivision of the worldwide Jewish Agency.
Does it not mean that in Connally we have, for the first time, a candidate who in no uncertain terms is telling the American people that he does not want the support of Jews and that he wants to prove that one can be elected president without Jewish support.
If only we had stopped Hitler early enough, millions of Jews would still be alive.
It is sufficiently early to make Connally look ridiculous and destroy him politically without bloodshed.
He encountered us in his path and casually sought to exterminate us as vermin.
But his political career came to a halt after the major media began a campaign against him.
However, when John Connally died in 1993, the doctors said that Connally's fatal lung condition was a direct outgrowth of the chest wounds that he had received in the shooting in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
So ultimately, in the end, John Connally did prove to be yet another victim of Israel—as much as if he had died on the same day as John F Kennedy.
Gary Hart from the race for the 1988 Democratic Presidential nomination.
As a member of the Senate, the maverick Hart had been in the forefront of inquiries not only into the JFK assassination, but also into the intrigue of the CIA in general, including its involvement with the Lansky Syndicate and the Mafia in assassination attempts against Fidel Castro.
Needless to say, this did not win Hart many friends in certain circles.
His affair with a young woman, Donna Rice, was bared by the press, forcing Hart out of the race for the presidency.
Some of those involved in Hart's Miami-Bimini weekend turned out to have links to organized crime and cocaine trafficking and, in spiraling circles beyond, to crime bosses of the Jewish and Italian syndicates, who in turn possessed ties to the United States intelligence community dating back to the Bay of Pigs and earlier.
In fact, as a subsequent independent investigation would show, Hart had been under surveillance by unknown parties for days and perhaps weeks before""””’ the events that led to the scandal that led to Hart's demise.
One more politician who had run afoul of the CIA and the Mossad and the Lansky syndicate thus was removed from the scene.
TWO PRESIDENTS, TWO COUPS—SAME PLOTTERS What we have seen here does indeed spell out the ""Dallas-Watergate Connection"" as it has never been outlined before, placed on the record in its complete context for the first time.
Watergate—like the Kennedy assassination—was a coup d'etat conducted by traitors within the American government who were under the discipline of the same foreign influence.
It is no coincidence that two key CIA players in Watergate, James Angleton and Frank Sturgis (both with long-standing Mossad loyalties)—not to mention E Howard Hunt— once again are central to the scenario.
Two different American presidents from two different political parties were brought to heel by Israel and the results of two elections were thus negated.
And as in the JFK assassination before, the media played a critical role in keeping the real facts buried away from the eyes of the American people.
A Commentary on the Major Published Works Relating to the Assassination of John F Kennedy By no means have I read all of the books on the JFK assassination, but I certainly have read the primary works (along with some lesser-known volumes) and I am thoroughly familiar with all of the various theories about the assassination that have been presented over the years.
I'd like to break down my commentary into several sections, since the books about the assassination come from a wide variety of approaches, so I'd like to examine these volumes from that perspective. e There are, first of all, the books that examine the flaws of the Warren Commission.
They were essentially the first books that were published on the subject of the assassination.
Then, as time went by there were a number of books that were overviews of the theories about the assassination that had been emerging, encompassing critiques of the forensic evidence, autopsy information, etc. e With the advent of Jim Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw there were a number of books written exclusively about that subject and this opened up a whole new realm in the arena of the JFK inquiry—which, in my view, is a key period of transition in JFK research. e Following that, there were a number of interesting volumes appeared that were actually novels—fiction.
Although they were novels they were important because some of them contain grains of truth.
Although both authors accept the basic conclusions of the Warren Commission, the volumes do provide a good historical background and overview of the assassination and the immediate events that followed.
It's important for people to read these books to become familiar with the subject.
It wouldn't hurt to even read the Warren Commission Report or the hard-to-find multiple volumes of exhibits that were issued along with the report.
MARK LANE Obviously, Rush to Judgment, by Mark Lane, was the first major book to expose the Warren Report's claim that Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone assassin for the outrageous fraud that it was.
And although the book is now nearly 30 years old, it still remains the single book that anyone must read if they wish to understand why people began to doubt the Warren Report.
This book sparked the explosion of research into the JFK assassination that led, in the end, to my own writing of Final Judgment.
It was, after all, Rush to Judgment, that led Jim Garrison into his monumental investigation that I believe that came as close to anything in revealing the truth about the JFK assassination.
Mark Lane also wrote a book called A Citizen's Dissent that appeared in 1975—several years after Rush to Judgment—but unfortunately this volume is not one that many people are familiar with.
I've told Mark myself that I think this book is even better than Rush to Judgment, for several reasons.
First of all, because it came out later and incorporates many of Mark's new findings in the wake of Rush to Judgment.
Secondly, and more importantly, it's highly significant in that in this second book Mark delves into the aspect of how the media treated his inquiries into the JFK assassination and how the FBI and the CIA and the rest of the Establishment responded.
Although the book is hard to find, I would suggest that anyone who wants a startling perspective on how the government responded to what Mark called ""a citizen's dissent"" read this volume.
Mark Lane's final volume on the JFK assassination, Plausible Denial, which I've already discussed at length in these pages, represents in many ways Mark's own unique long-term perspective and sets the stage, I believe, for Final Judgment.
In many ways, Final Judgment is perhaps a sequel to Plausible Denial—or so it has been suggested.
This is a highly detailed examination of the Warren Report that is a valuable exposition of all the flaws in the case against Lee Harvey Oswald.
This book will interest those who are fascinated by ballistics, autopsy evidence, etc.
Profusely illustrated, this volume establishes that there were several assassins in Dealey Plaza beyond any question and that the official autopsy evidence doesn't jibe with the truth.
Those interested in the photographic evidence should refer to Robert Groden's The Killing of a President.
James Fetzer's Assassination Science is the latest look at the scientific evidence.
In the area of books that consider the JFK assassination from a larger overview, Crossfire, by Jim Marrs is probably the best.
This book is flawed largely because Marrs presents multiple theories, one on top of the other, and does not really reach any firm conclusions.
Those who think that they will find the solution to the assassination in the book, more than likely, will find themselves overwhelmed by the multiple theories.
Marrs never firmly establishes in the reader's mind that there can be multiple interests working together to achieve the same goal.
He seems to treat the assassination in the context that either A did it or B did it or C did it, never really suggesting a combination of elements were responsible.
Conspiracy by Anthony Summers is an interesting treatment of the JFK controversy up to and including the House Assassinations Committee investigation in the late 1970's.
Now Summers himself had also written a book on the life of Marilyn Monroe but he leaves the reader with the idea that the Kennedy family had a hand in her death, whether by accident or by murder.
In his revised edition Summers also falls flat by failing to give the French Connection, which he mentions, the analysis it is certainly due.
Likewise with Robert Sam Anson's They've Killed the President which is an interesting book.
But I hasten to add that I find Anson's attack on Jim Garrison off the mark and reprehensible.
In one published article Anson claimed that in his own book Garrison never mentioned that he had been indicted on corruption and tax evasion charges.
In fact Garrison has a whole chapter on this in his book and this leads me to believe that Anson hadn't read the book.
The Facts & the Theories by Carl Oglesby is quite good, but my own problem with Oglesby is that although he acknowledges the Permindex Connection he falls into that peculiar trap of suggesting that Permindex is some sort of ""Nazi Connection"" to the JFK assassination when, as we've seen, nothing could be further from the truth.
The Dallas-Watergate Connection by Peter Dale Scott, a slim monograph on the subject, is fascinating.
It examines the special interest groups in Washington that were opposed to JFK and their ties to Organized Crime and the intelligence community.
Needless to say, however, Scott doesn't get into the Israeli Connection.
This book is severely flawed in that just when one thinks that Scott is about to get into the Israeli Connection , Scott very carefully tiptoes away.
Scott's research is deficient in that despite the depth and breadth of his work he never gets into the Garrison investigation whatsoever.
One never knows precisely who Scott suspects of responsibility for the assassination.
As I have said, Scott says very much, but at the same time, says very little.
THE 'FICTIONAL' APPROACH At this juncture I'd like to discuss several of the novels that have appeared over the years dealing with the JFK assassination.
The most notable is Executive Action by Mark Lane and Donald Freed which actually appeared in the wake of the film by the same name.
This book demonstrates how high-level power brokers could have orchestrated the assassination.
Robert Morrow's novel, Betrayal, is similar in many ways to Executive Action.
It is presented as a novelized treatment of Morrow's own purported experiences as a CIA contract operative who became unwittingly enmeshed in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
In subsequent years Morrow issued a revised edition of this book in a nonfiction format and I will discuss that later.
I think it's interesting in that it provides a good overview of the intrigue in a Kennedylike family and their inter-play with the American Establishment.
Promises to Keep by George Bernau—another novel—paints a Kennedy-like president actually surviving the assassination attempt and shows the post-attempt intrigue involving some very recognizable characters.
Libra by Don DeLillo has Lee Harvey Oswald as its main character and shows how Oswald may have been manipulated into the assassination conspiracy by ClIA-connected plotters.
There's a character in the book who is a CIA operative along the lines of the real-life E Howard Hunt and this character is portrayed setting up a ""dummy"" assassination attempt that others turn into the real thing.
American Tabloid by James Elliott presents the interplay between Organized Crime, Jimmy Hoffa, the FBI and the Kennedy family and ends with the JFK assassination.
Quite a good read, this book is interesting in that it sets the tone for what undoubtedly was a lot of the inter-play between these real-life figures who appear as characters in the book.
There may be a few ""fictitious"" elements that are really not far off the mark.
STUDIES OF THE GARRISON CASE The books that have appeared on the Jim Garrison-Clay Shaw case are in a category of their own and are important.
The first major book on this was Paris Flammonde's The Kennedy Conspiracy.
Although the book was published before the Shaw trial was finished, it contains much valuable material and is interesting reading.
I should point out that although Flammonde does mention Permindex, he does not draw the Israeli Connection out as he could have done and should have done.
Kirkwood was a major Shaw booster, but the book contains a lot of material taken directly from the Shaw trial itself and contains a lot of detail about many of the interesting people who appeared in the course of the Garrison investigation.
Frankly, every time I re-read the book I continue to be amazed that the author couldn't see how much evidence there really was against Shaw and it's evidence that Kirkwood actually presents in his book.
It's an all-out attack on Garrison—a slender volume that I wouldn't mention if it otherwise weren't for the fact that it was Epstein who wrote the book.
Epstein suggests that Oswald had been co-opted by the KGB and that he committed the crime acting alone—with or without the orders of his KGB superiors.
Interestingly, Epstein also wrote the book Inquest that was hailed by the media as an important critique of the Warren Commission Report.
However, I've always felt that this volume was an Establishment ""cover story"" suggesting that while there were problems with the way the Warren Commission conducted its investigation, there was nothing to worry about in the end.
Entitled On the Trail of the Assassins, it's an interesting and well-written book.
I would suggest, however, that the book is somewhat of a disappointment in that it is more a free-flowing personal memoir on the case, rather than a detailed account of the investigation that many would have found far more enlightening.
The most recent study focusing on the Garrison investigation is James DiEugenio's Destiny Betrayed.
This is an important book in that it examines much of the evidence in the Garrison investigation (more so even than Garrison's own book) and essentially proves that Garrison was right when he targeted Clay Shaw for involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
We don't know precisely what role Shaw played in the conspiracy, but DiEugenio demonstrates beyond question that he was mixed up somewhere in the middle of it.
As I told DiEugenio in correspondence, his book fails in that he does not pursue Shaw's Permindex Connection to its ultimate Israeli Connection.
The book was published under the auspices of the Sheridan Square Press (which, incidentally, also published Garrison's book) which is affiliated with the Institute for Media Analysis.
This institute, as we already noted in Appendix Three, receives money from the Stern Family Fund.
Had Garrison's inquiry not been sabotaged so repeatedly and relentlessly, it may have ultimately unearthed the truth about the JFK assassination long before Final Judgment was ever released.
I strongly suggest that people focus, focus, focus on the Garrison investigation.
By getting to the bottom of what Clay Shaw and Guy Banister and David Ferrie were up to in New Orleans involving Lee Harvey Oswald we will be able to come a little bit closer to knowing more of the truth about the JFK assassination.
THE 'OFFBEAT' VOLUMES The next series of books in JFK assassination lore are the ones that might be described, for want of a better term, as those of an ""offbeat"" nature.
One that comes immediately to mind is The Assassination Tapes by former CIA analyst George O'Toole.
The book describes O'Toole's use of voice stress analysis to determine whether key witnesses in the JFK case lied.
He concludes that Oswald did not lie when he denied having killed the president and also that some of the Dallas police officers on the case may not have been telling the truth either.
As a former CIA man, O'Toole has a certain bias in that he seems to suggest that the FBI might have been somehow culpable in the JFK assassination cover-up , but all in all the book is worth reading and people will find it entertaining.
David Lifton's much-discussed Best Evidence contends that there were post-death alterations made of President Kennedy's wounds even prior to the official autopsy back in Washington.
This book is a ponderous volume and quite detailed but I must say that it is so overwhelming that one becomes lost.
Much of the technical evidence is beyond the comprehension of the average reader and because of that, I'm afraid, the book doesn't make a major contribution other than to confuse the JFK assassination controversy even further.
A very particularly interesting first-hand account is Flashback by Ron Lewis.
A man with a rather checkered background, Lewis was associated with Lee Harvey Oswald through Guy Banister's CIA contract operation in New Orleans.
A few people question Lewis's credentials, but his book does provide an account of Oswald's association with Banister from a unique first-hand perspective.
I couldn't find anything in Lewis' book that conflicted in any way with my own findings in Final Judgment regarding the strange activities conducted out of Banister's office.
Conspiracy of Silence presents a firsthand account of what the doctor saw in the emergency room in Dallas and shows the ""official"" JFK autopsy reports to be garbage.
Crenshaw took a lot of heat for daring to come forth with his knowledge and he deserves quite a bit of credit for having done so.
Another book that I must mention (because I have been asked about the book on more than one occasion) is Mortal Error by Bonar Menninger.
This book contends that the fatal shot that killed the president was accidentally fired by a Secret Service agent in the follow-up car behind the JFK limousine.
I have read the book and I will say right up front that it is not akin to the outlandish, nonsensical story (believed with religious fervor by some) that JFK was killed by a shot fired by his Secret Service chauffeur.
But if, per little chance, the thesis was right, it doesn't essentially conflict with the overall general thesis of Final Judgment, inasmuch as Final Judgment does contend that Oswald was in the midst of circles within circles who were conspiring against the president and trying to frame Oswald to make it appear as if he did fire from the book depository.
If indeed a shot was accidentally fired at JFK by the Secret Service, it doesn't remove the fact that shot was fired in response to an assassination attempt from elsewhere.
With all of this said, I have to suggest that no matter how sincere the authors of the volume, the book is a wild distraction for serious students of the JFK conspiracy.
It's quite an inventive theory, but I don't think it has much credibility, to be perfectly honest.
So, essentially, in my view, this volume evidences a new widening of horizons in JFK research.
L Fletcher Prouty, former liaison between the Pentagon and the CIA during the Kennedy years.
Unfortunately, I might note, when it comes to discussing the CIA's ""allies"" Prouty does not delve into the Mossad arena.
Otherwise it's a very important book and the CIA did its best to keep the book under wraps.
Prouty's other book, JFK (ponderously subtitled ""The CIA, Vietnam and the Plot to Assassinate John F Kennedy"") is equally interesting.
The title itself is somewhat misleading as even Colonel Prouty himself has said, noting that it was his publisher who insisted on the title.
Instead, the book focuses on the role of the United States in Indochina and the behind-thescenes maneuvering in the years leading up to American involvement in that tragedy.
The book is important in that it demonstrates conclusively that President Kennedy did want to get out of Indochina and that he faced the opposition of power forces—both domestic and international—and this was one of the key considerations by the CIA in its decision to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Once one has studied these volumes, there can be no question in mind that the popular perception of JFK being a ""friend"" of Israel—at least in the mind of the Israeli leadership at the time—is far from being on the mark.
There's no question but that by the time of his death JFK was considered by the Israeli leadership to be a threat to Israel's continued survival.
Anyone who has any ambitions of being an authority on the assassination of JFK can not—I repeat, can not—examine the assassination without reading these books that touch on this aspect of JFK's foreign policy.
Those who avoid the subject are obviously afraid of getting dirtied up in the Israeli Connection.
I've already discussed these volumes and their highly flawed thesis at various junctures throughout the pages of Final Judgment.
These volumes have, nonetheless, received widespread coverage in the Establishment media because, I'm certain, it takes the focus off the real conspirators.
ROBERT MORROW At this point I want to discuss the works of Robert Morrow.
It's an interesting book but I am cautious about the volume if only for the reason that, as I pointed out in Final Judgment, it was printed by an American affiliate of an Israeli publishing concern.
Aside from that I will say that in my opinion there is no question that Morrow himself was involved with people who were involved in the intrigue surrounding the assassination, in particular with those CIA elements that were collaborating with the anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
That is, in the sense that I don't actually see the Cuban exiles as being real conspirators, but, instead, ""facilitators""—-even patsies—who were being manipulated as much as Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Cubans—both the proand antiCastro Cubans—were, in my view, little more than additional ""false flags"" planted in the midst of the assassination conspiracy landscape by those ultimately responsible for the crime.
In Final Judgment I relied heavily on Morrow's book, The Senator Must Die, for information on the assassination of Senator Robert F Kennedy.
There had long been a close covert relationship between the Mossad and the CIA and the Iranians, although many people have been unaware of this fact.
So if RFK was killed by SAVAK as Morrow says, that to me suggests that we should look further into an Israeli connection there, although Morrow, of course, doesn't get into that.
I do have to say that I do have some doubts about Morrow's overall reliability in the sense that it is sometimes very difficult to determine what is indeed his own first-hand knowledge or what is his opinion or what others have told him.
However, I am deeply concerned that Morrow seems to suggest that James Angleton of the CIA was somehow out of the loop as far as the JFK assassination and cover-up was concerned—and nothing could be further from the truth.
The fact that Morrow was a CIA contract operative moving in some rather unsavory circles is another factor to consider in all of this.
People in such a position don't always know who they really are working for.
Sometimes they think they are working for one purpose when, in fact, they are working for another purpose.
So Morrow's own experiences have inevitably been colored by all of this.
I'm not suggesting that Morrow was a dupe or a patsy, but I suggest that we should look at his first hand account with caution.
I have been reliably informed that Morrow is familiar with the thesis presented in Final Judgment and by this time he may well have read the book.
I've pointed out that I don't find either of these works particularly credible.
The second book, co-written by Robin Moore, who's long had ties with the intelligence community, parrots the James Angleton line that the Soviets were behind the JFK assassination.
The book also says that the KGB manipulated Lyndon Johnson into covering up the Soviet connection.
The only reason I mention them here is because people continue to ask me to comment on their contents.
The books are High Treason, High Treason I1, Killing the Truth and Killing Kennedy—all published by Carroll & Graf.
I would have to say that the third title is a pretty apt summary of what all four volumes really do.
As a writer myself, I hate to be critical of the writing styles of other authors.
I've been critical of the motivations of other writers in the JFK field, recognizing that they have axes to grind and that they have special interests behind them promoting their efforts for often less than noble causes.
In the case of Harrison Livingstone, however, I am amazed that his books were ever published in the first place.
This is perhaps more a reflection upon his publisher than upon Livingstone himself.
The second and third volumes, in particular, appear that they've had no editing whatsoever.
One gets the impression that the publishers gave Livingstone free rein to rant and rave and wander from subject to subject without any restraint of any kind.
He lashes out at his own critics in a highly personal fashion and suggests that he is the one and only author who has written anything on the JFK assassination worth reading.
His co-author on the first edition of High Treason, Robert Groden, a highly respected JFK researcher, is also subjected to savage attacks by Livingstone in the subsequent volumes.
Livingstone actually says that because Lane had a ""left wing"" reputation that he had no business getting involved in researching the facts about the JFK assassination.
That, according to Livingstone, made it appear that only ""left-wingers"" were interested in the assassination and that average Americans were not.
Livingstone also actually scoffs at the idea that the CIA was involved in the assassination.
These mammoth volumes contribute absolutely nothing to JFK assassination research, yet a major publisher has picked up these volumes, printed them and given them widespread distribution.
However, there is emerging evidence that the Zapruder film itself has been doctored.
Now as I say the only reason that I have even spent this much time discussing the books by Livingstone is that I am disturbed that they have gotten the widespread distribution that they have.
I bear Livingstone no ill will and I emphasize that J don't doubt his personal sincerity, but I question the motivations and the wisdom of his publisher.
THE CASE OF GERALD POSNER The case of Gerald Posner is one that deserves special analysis, to say the least.
I personally discovered more than a handful of blatant contradictions and distortions appearing in the pages of the book after only a cursory review.
Then, upon actually reading the book, I realized that it was little more than a rehash of the Warren Commission Report's biographical overview of the life of Lee Harvey Oswald.
There are lots of criticisms of Case Closed by many, many people, but T'll outline just a few of my own random comments based upon my own review of the book.
Had I spent more time reviewing Posner's volume, I'm sure I could have found many more contradictions, but those that I cite here, I think, are highly representative of his highly misleading work.
However, when a finding by the HSCA doesn't jibe with Posner, he dismisses the HSCA out of hand.
This is interesting because in other instances when other witnesses who contradict Posner's thesis had not come forth and told their stories initially, Posner questions their reliability.
However, when a late-coming witness, such as this one, seems to confirm Posner's thesis, he cites such a witness as being reliable and ""proof of his correctness.
POSNER'S NAME-CALLING e Posner's primary talent is ad homenim attacks on witnesses whose testimony does not jibe with his conclusions, which are, of course, nothing more than the same conclusions reached by the Warren Commission some thirty years before.
But that's only one example of many. e In an attempt to discredit Delphine Roberts, who was the secretary and mistress of CIA contract operative Guy Banister, Posner attacks some of her rather exotic political and religious beliefs—which have absolutely nothing whatsoever to do with the fact that Mrs.
Roberts claims that Lee Harvey Oswald had a close association with Banister and his activities. e When Posner approaches the allegations about Oswald's CIA connections made by well-known former CIA contract operative Gerry Patrick Hemming, Posner calls Hemming a ""self-promoter"" who has provided ""outlandish and unproven '‘disclosures'"" about the JFK assassination.
Hill has repeatedly and consistently said that the transcription of the deposition was inaccurate and a distortion of what she actually told Specter to begin with.
What's more, obviously, it seems unlikely that Specter would have permitted his own threatening remarks to become a part of the record anyway.
But this is another primary example of how Posner plays fast and loose with the facts. e In another instance Posner seeks to discredit one of Jim Garrison's witnesses who says that he contacted the FBI about Oswald (after the assassination) to report on an apparent visit by Oswald (prior to the assassination) to Clinton, Louisiana.
This, of course, suggests that the FBI was totally above-board in the JFK assassination inquiry and kept records of all matters relating to Oswald and the JFK assassination conspiracy—which we know is not the truth.
Posner would have us believe that Oswald had just achieved the greatest accomplishment of his pathetic life and now had nothing to say about that fact. e When attempting to dismiss the possibility that Oswald was a CIA operative, Posner relies on the CIA's own repudiation of a claim by a former CIA employee that Oswald was indeed on the CIA's payroll.
POSNER'S DISTORTIONS OF TRUTH e In his appendix on many of the mysterious deaths surrounding the JFK assassination, Posner commits a number of outrages against the truth.
Now needless to say, many of the so-called ""mysterious deaths"" are not so mysterious at all.
But in the case of Posner there are at least two glaring instances where, again, Posner plays fast and loose with the facts.
In fact, Gatlin died after he fell from a hotel window—perhaps after having been pushed, of course.
Posner says that Davis was a gun-runner who ""also knew Ruby"" and suggests that there is nothing to actually link him to the JFK conspiracy.
Posner does not mention that Davis ran guns to the French OAS and had been picked up in North Africa just prior to the JFK assassination, at which time he was initially reported to have had on his person letters making reference to Lee Harvey Oswald.
POSNER'S BIGGEST FRAUD Perhaps Posner's most egregious assault on his readers, actively aided and abetted by his Establishment media promoters, is his claim to have solved the JFK mystery through the presumably indisputable magic of computers.
In his book Posner relies heavily on a computer-generated analysis of the JFK assassination by a company known as Failure Analysis Associates, which ""proves"" that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone.
So the primary selling point of Posner's book—the famous computer analysis of the assassination—that the media gave such coverage is itself based upon distortions of the truth as they appeared in the pages of Posner's book.
As I pointed out earlier in Final Judgment, one of Posner's collaborators, Johann Rush, who provided Posner an ""enhanced"" version of the famous Zapruder film of the assassination, also just happens to be the same Johann Rush who was one of the cameramen for WDSU television in New Orleans (owned by the ADLand Clay Shaw-linked Stern family) that always seemed to be on hand when Lee Harvey Oswald was making ""pro-Castro"" pronouncements.
No one really takes his book seriously, not even, I suppose, his sponsors behind the scenes.
They do know who killed JFK, but they don't want you to know and that's why they have people like Posner ready to pull out of a hat.
That's the message being put forth by the controlled media in this country in the wake of the release of Seymour Hersh's new book, The Dark Side of Camelot.
Those who haven't heard about Hersh's book attacking the character of John F Kennedy, were not reading the mainstream press at the time of the 34th anniversary of the JFK assassination.
The book was being promoted everywhere—including a cover story on the November 17 issue of Time magazine.
Dozens— perhaps hundreds—of other books have talked about Kennedy family links to the mob, JFK's womanizing, etc.
We all have heard about the Kennedy family's antics—the subject of endless media coverage for nearly thirty years.
It's been that way ever since Mark Lane started asking questions about who really killed John F Kennedy and why.
Lane's book, Rush to Judgment, opened up some real problems for the people who orchestrated the JFK assassination and cover-up.
And then when in Plausible Denial Lane documented the CIA's link to the assassination, the powers-that-be determined that conspiracy theories about the assassination had to be contained.
Those theories that are ""acceptable"" say that ""the Mafia did it"" and place blame on long-dead mobsters.
Time magazine, which is promoting the new ""debunking"" of JFK, is owned by the mega-rich Bronfman family.
And, of course, as documented in Final Judgment, a henchman of the Bronfman family, Louis M Bloomfield, was a key player in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
It was Hersh's book, The Samson Option, which first exposed that JFK had been engaged in a long-hidden behind-the-scenes war with Israel's Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, over Israel's effort to build a nuclear bomb.
Final Judgment cites Hersh's work extensively—much to the dismay of those who want to keep Israel's war with JFK a deep dark secret from the admirers of President Kennedy.
The November 1997 issue of Vanity Fair magazine revealed that Hersh worked closely with Michael Ewing, who was involved in the 1978 House Assassinations Committee investigation into the president's murder.
Final Judgment demonstrates the ""French connection"" is, in reality, the Israeli connection.
And in light of what Hersh clearly knew about JFK and Israel, it's obvious he could not have helped but had some inkling of the Israeli connection.
According to Vanity Fair, Hersh dropped his own research into a book on the JFK assassination and shifted his focus to JFK's personal shenanigans.
This apparently happened, after Final Judgment came out in January of 1994 so it appears as if Final Judgment stole Hersh's thunder.
Hersh now says he never found any evidence that there was a conspiracy behind the JFK assassination.
All he can find evidence for is the fact that JFK had a very interesting personal life and that JFK was supposedly engaged in assassination plots against others.
However, there are those who dispute Hersh's ""evidence"" as even Time admitted.
Whatever the case, Hersh'’s new book is regurgitating ancient allegations about Kennedy, putting them into circulation once again.
That's why those who were behind the assassination are thrilled to give Hersh's book all the free publicity it's receiving.
MAKE YOUR OWN FINAL JUDGMENT This has been an extended summary of my own personal reactions and opinions regarding books about the JFK assassination.
If you haven't read the books that I've recommended, I suggest you do so.
Once you've read all of these books, I think you can make your own final judgment—and I don't think you'll find that my own general conclusions are off base at all.
For those who are interesting in writing their own books on the JFK assassination, I would urge them to avoid the distractions, the nonsensical areas that bog down otherwise serious research.
And don't try to write yet another overview of the assassination conspiracy.
That's what I did, but I added a new angle that had never been considered before.
I think that in the pages of Final Judgment I've laid the groundwork for extensive research in a number of new areas that are little-explored or have otherwise never been explored.
Find some new area of interest related to the JFK assassination and explore it in every way possible.
Not only United States policy toward Israel reversed upon JFK's assassination.
Although it's virtually forgotten, John F Kennedy was planning a military assault on Red China's nuclear weapons development facilities in the months prior to his assassination.
However, one month after JFK's death, Lyndon Johnson canceled the project and allowed China to proceed with the assembly of its nuclear arsenal.
The big secret is that at the time of JFK's assassination, Israel's Mossad and Red China's intelligence service were working behind the scenes on joint nuclear weapons development.
The evidence suggests that ''the China card"" played a critical factor in Israel's participation in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
In early November of 1997, while preparing the fourth edition of Final Judgment, I discovered an item buried amidst a stack of old news clippings about the JFK assassination.
It was a 1970 column by veteran Washington pundit, Paul Scott, in which he pointed out that just prior to his assassination, John Kennedy was planning a military attack on Red China's nuclear weapons development program.
What's more, according to Scott, one month after JFK's assassination, his successor, President Johnson, ordered the impending attack halted.
I found it interesting, indeed, that JFK was not only working to thwart Israel's nuclear bomb program but that he was also taking active steps to thwart Red China's as well.
I wondered if there might not be some sort of ""Red Chinese Connection"" to the Mossad's role in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Then, after only brief research—in the right places—I did find such a connection.
I think the readers will also be intrigued and will agree that what is outlined here points further toward a Mossad role in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
However, since that time I have yet to see anywhere—other than in the pages of Final Judgment—any mention of the Mossad connection to the ""China card"" in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
This doesn't surprise me, of course, but it is a tragedy that even ""truth seekers"" refuse to look the evidence in the face.
And so it is with virtually all of the key points in the wide variety of areas related to research into the JFK assassination conspiracy.
The facts are that in 1963 Red China and Israel were secretly engaged in back-channel joint nuclear weapons development.
And what's more, the key figure in the joint Red ChineseIsraeli dealings was none other than the late Shaul Eisenberg, longtime business partner of Mossad arms procurement and finance officer, Tibor Rosenbaum, the driving force behind the Permindex corporation that was central to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
So although it is now apparently ""acceptable"" in JFK assassination research circles to suggest that JFK may have been assassinated because he was standing in the way of Red China's nuclear bomb development program, it is still considered ""outlandish"" to suggest that JFK's secret war with Israel over Israel's nuclear bomb program played a part in leading to his assassination.
But the facts are there for those who are interested in finding them—as I have done.
Let us then take a look at the Peking connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Like the ""French Connection,"" this ""Chinese Connection"" is, in reality, a guidepost pointing to the Israeli connection.
JFK'S PLAN TO ATTACK CHINA Let us begin by reviewing what well-connected ""conservative"" columnist Paul Scott wrote on February 13, 1970—just over six years after the Kennedy assassination.
Authorized by Kennedy approximately 10 weeks before his assassination, the contingency planning was abruptly called off by President Johnson shortly after he took office.
He asked if there was any chance for ‘accommodation’ with the Chinese communists.
The thing could be done as a surgical operation, without nuclear weapons, using high explosives,’ the official continued.
The official told Alsop that Kennedy pointed at him meaningfully and said, ‘You do that.
At their first meeting, the group was told that President Kennedy had decided in principle that China must be prevented, by whatever means, from becoming a nuclear power.
White House records show that shortly after Kennedy's death, President Johnson was briefed about the project by Rusk.
As a consequence of Johnson's decision not to act, on October 18, 1964, less than a year after JFK's assassination, China exploded its first nuclear bomb.
It is more than of passing interest to note that CIA Director McCone who was, according to Hersh, ""committed to the concept of nuclear nonproliferation,""""""* and urging the attack on the Chinese nuclear facilities, was also one of the primary forces encouraging JFK to oppose Israel's nuclear proliferation.
As we saw in Chapter 5, it was out of McCone's office at the CIA that the Kennedy administration conducted its secret surveillance of Israel's nuclear bomb production program.
Kennedy clearly trusted longtime Kennedy family friend McCone—but not the CIA as an institution—to handle this delicate, top-secret intelligence operation.
JFK was probably aware that, as we noted in Chapter 8, Israel's loyalist at the CIA, James Angleton, had been providing Israel with secret nuclear information in the late 1950s well before JFK himself came into office.
What is even more of interest, however, is that JFK’ s ally McCone had been fighting Israel's nuclear bomb program even before he accepted the post of CIA director in the Kennedy administration after JFK fired CIA Director Allen Dulles in 1961 following the Bay of Pigs disaster.
During the previous Eisenhower administration, McCone had served on the Atomic Energy Commission and in 1960, when Eisenhower's term was coming to a close and McCone turned in his resignation from the AEC, it was McCone who first leaked the story to reporter John Finney that Israel was building a nuclear reactor to produce plutonium.
One can only imagine the response of the hardnosed Israelis and their allies in Washington to learn of McCone's opposition.
What's more, McCone also obviously had good reason to be disturbed about China's nuclear success, in spite of his previous determined efforts to block China from securing nuclear weapons capability.
It is at this juncture that we will now turn to ""the Israeli connection"" to Red China and we will discover that there is much more to the picture than we might at first realize.
In fact, a good argument can be made that it was Israel—working behind the scenes—that enabled China (already in the process of developing its bomb) to launch its first successful nuclear test.
Ultimately, if the truth ever comes out, we will probably discover that China's first nuclear blast was, in reality, a joint Israeli-Red Chinese accomplishment.
Seymour Hersh himself points out that China's first nuclear test caught the West by surprise.
This, of course, was at the same time that Israel was moving steadily along in its own nuclear development program.
In the meantime—and in the decades which followed—a strange little spy story involving an American nuclear company was evolving.
The immediate suspicion—or so the story goes—was that Shapiro had used NUMEC' s resources and diverted the enriched uranium to Israel.
Over the following years the NUMEC story became a minor cause celebre among investigative reporters and within the intelligence community, and ultimately the story managed—on numerous occasions—to ""leak"" into the major media in the United States and around the globe.
Seymour Hersh has concluded that there's no firm evidence whatsoever to conclude that Shapiro and NUMEC were, in fact, responsible for diverting the nuclear resources to Israel.
However, to this day, there are those who continue to insist (and who evidently believe) that NUMEC was a primary source for enriched uranium necessary for Israel's nuclear bomb.
Yet, as we've noted, there's no real evidence for this conclusion, however exciting it may be.
In short, it appears—although Hersh never says this himself—the whole NUMEC story appears to have been a carefully crafted diversion that was deliberately leaked to provide a cover for the genuine source of Israel's ultimate nuclear success.
Some critics of Israel (always eager to find Israeli espionage at work) jumped on the story and gave it further widespread distribution and at least one CIA official staked his reputation on the story.
But there was never—at least according to Hersh—any real basis for the accusations that had been made.
As we shall see, publicly available facts (if assembled and examined in their contextual entirety) do indeed suggest that it was through highlysecretive cooperation with Red China that Israel succeeded in its long-time goal of building the nuclear bomb.
From a historical standpoint, China—perhaps alone among many nations—was one of the few where the Jewish people were able to thrive and prosper.
Jewish community in China for centuries, but, in more recent years—prior to World War II—many European Jews sought refuge in China in the aftermath of Hitler's rise to power in Germany and his expansion of German military might throughout Europe.
It is thus no wonder then that upon the founding of the state of Israel, David Ben-Gurion, the grand old man of Zionism, was eager to establish relations with the newly-established communist government in Peking—then still consolidating its power after the struggles of the postWorld War II period.
Ben-Gurion, notes Kurzman, had ""delved into Chinese history and culture and even studied Buddhist thought.
China, he was convinced, would inevitably evolve into the greatest power on earth, and its support would be invaluable.
The Chinese leaders were militant Communists, yes, but the best way to moderate them, Ben-Gurion felt, was to talk and trade with them, not force them into snarling isolation.
In January 1950 Israel was still on speaking terms with the Soviet Union, and nominally nonaligned.
As the decade wore on, it was the Chinese who became interested in developing relations.
In fact, Israel's Mossad and the Red Chinese intelligence service were engaged in quiet diplomacy at the highest levels.
In fact, as Deacon pointed out, nuclear bomb production has indeed been a major part of the covert relationship between Israel and Red China, conducted through their respective intelligence agencies—although this is a critical point that has otherwise been carefully suppressed.
This covert nuclear relationship between Red China and Israel was one that cemented the ties between the two nations, so much so that they increasingly began cooperating in other spheres—and gradually moving toward open acknowledgment of their long-standing behind-the-scenes contacts through their two intelligence agencies.
CHINESE INTRIGUE FOR ISRAEL It was following Israel's role in the conspiracy that removed John F Kennedy from the presidency and saved China's nuclear bomb development facilities from destruction by American forces, that the Chinese actually began engaging in intrigue against their former Arab ally, Nasser of Egypt.
Richard Deacon said, quite correctly, that one of those areas was ""in a joint effort to thwart Russian influence in the Middle East""'”’* which, in the coming years, led the two countries to engage in a wide variety of endeavors even while, publicly, Israel and the Asian communist giant were ostensibly at odds.
Fearing leaks to the press, they refuse to deal with Israel's foreign ministry.
However, when we nail down the precise name of the individual who served as the liaison between the Israelis and the Red Chinese during this critical period, we see indeed that there is a ""Chinese connection"" (via the Israelis) to the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Israel's longtime middleman in the Mossad's secret dealings with China—Shaul Eisenberg—was so deeply involved in dealings with Red China that when he dropped dead of a sudden heart attack at age 76 on March 27, 1997, it was not even in Israel, but in Peking.
Eisenberg—whom we first met in Chapter 7—was closely and directly connected to the Permindex operation which spun the web of conspiracy in the JFK assassination.
Once described by an Israeli writer as ""the richest Jew in the world""'”* Eisenberg was, as we have seen, not only a key figure in Israel's nuclear development programs but also a partner of Permindex banker Tibor Rosenbaum in the Mossad financial operation known as the Swiss-Israel Trade Bank.
He settled in Japan, where he married a Japanese woman and made his fortune selling war surplus and scrap metal.
He never lost his awareness of being a Jew, however, and his emotional ties led him to set up businesses in Israel and then to move his family there.
He kept his interests in the Far East and in the late 1970s was able to pave a pathway to Beijing for Israeli military exports.
He controlled the giant Israel Corporation holding company and held a 49 percent share in the national shipping company, Zim, one of the largest shipping and transportation companies in the world.
EISENBERG'S FRENCH CONNECTION In reference to the Zim shipping company, it will be recalled, as we noted in Chapter 9, that it was Zim, jointly owned by Eisenberg and the Israeli government, that hired French General Maurice Challe, one of the leading conspirators in the Permindex-backed OAS, after Challe was released from prison for his involvement in plots against Charles DeGaulle.
So clearly, Eisenberg was most definitely a ""man in the middle"" in many ways in relation to key players and events that have been linked to the intimate circles of conspiracy that led to the JFK assassination.
However, despite all of Eisenberg'’s vast wealth, according to the Washington Times, ""What made most interesting were his links to the Israeli secret service, the Mossad.
In fact, it was only well after Eisenberg's secret (but really not so secret) arrangement of the first arms sales to China was set in motion in 1979 that the major media in the West began reporting at the revelations of Israel's arms deals with Red China—the giant Asian colossus that we had otherwise been told was hostile to tiny Israel.
THE TRUTH EMERGES The first notation of an important arms relationship between China and Israel came in the staid and little-read British journal, Jane's Defense Weekly, in November of 1980 14_five years after Eisenberg's ""official"" entree into dealings with China on behalf of Israel.
It was some three months later that the general public heard mainstream media reports about Jane's revelations of the Israeli-Red Chinese arms deals.
Thus, after nearly forty years of covert dealings between the Mossad and the Chinese intelligence service that had never been reported in the press, the Western media began to advise its readers that—lo and behold—Israel had been selling billions of arms to China since the deal was first set in place by Shaul Eisenberg in 1979.
However, the secret relationship, as we've seen, was one which seems to have been cemented firmly by about 1963—probably on November 22 when John F Kennedy's plans for a military attack on Red China's nuclear Final Judgment S11 facilities came to an abrupt end.
And less than one year later Red China exploded its first nuclear bomb.
Although it is now an ""open secret"" that Israel has nuclear weapons, Israel had to have tested its capabilities somewhere.
And in 1964, it now appears likely, Israel did test its own first nuclear bomb—in secret conjunction with its secret ally, the People's Republic of China.
The ""official"" story is that Israel ""may have"" conducted its ""first"" atomic test off the coast of South Africa in 1979, but, as we have seen, there is evidence to suggest otherwise.
The assassination of John F Kennedy by Red China's secret ally, the Mossad, in league with the Mossad's other allies in the CIA and the Lansky Crime Syndicate, made possible the success of the joint Israeli-Red Chinese nuclear bomb project that would have been frustrated had JFK lived.
Also said to favor the traffic is Stephen Bryen, a deputy assistant secretary of defense, [a Bryan's principal deputy] who was formerly president of the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs,""'°** an influential lobby for Israel.
So it was that Jewish power brokers in the highest ranks of the Reagan administration, known for their devotion to Israel's cause (and for their fervent criticisms of the Soviet Union), came forth as heavy-duty advocates of the Israeli-Red Chinese alliance.
However, it's clear that Bryen and Perle, among others, were simply endorsing the new policy because that is precisely what Israel wanted.
And, of course, by 2003—when the United States launched a ""preemptive"" invasion of Iraq, with strong prodding from pro-Israel partisans, it was the aforementioned Richard Perle who was a virtual ringmaster in organizing the public relations drumbeat on behalf of war.
In any event, although the facts about this alliance between Israel and China were there for those who were interested, the press (during this period) did not make too much of the open dealings between Red China and Israel, inasmuch as this was before the Soviet Union fell and the Cold War was still unofficially underway.
In fact, several years after the first reports about the new Israeli-Red Chinese dealings, the Washington Post reported candidly on May 23, 1988 that ""little has been published in the United States about Israel's flourishing arms relationship with China""’™” but noted that a ""a rare discussion of the linkage""'””’ was published in April of 1988 by the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency—hardly a forum read by the average American voter who might have some questions about Israel's dealings with the communist empire.
In June 1991 China and Israel signed a bilateral agreement on scientific cooperation.
On January 24, 1992 China and Israel established formal diplomatic relations to much fanfare in the world press and with much celebration in the worldwide Jewish media.
Taken together and analyzed, the evidence indicates that unity between Israel and Red China had been forged, in large part, through the Mossad's role in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
And one of those common interests was the joint success of their respective efforts to build nuclear arsenals.
The possibility that Red China had a hand in the affair was never mentioned— although, of course, a Red Chinese motive was more logical than any attached to either Cuba or Soviet Russia.
In fact, to point a direction of blame toward Red China could have actually started some people looking in the direction of Israel if the full truth about China's secret nuclear arrangements with Israel ever came out.
If the subject of JFK's opposition to China's nuclear weapons program had been made an issue, it was entirely possible that someone could have dared point out that JFK was also opposed to Israel's nuclear intentions.
And so, when John F Kennedy began moving to stop the two allied nations from building nuclear weapons, Israel took affirmative measures to counter the American president.
Thus, although Shaul Eisenberg will be largely remembered in the ""official"" histories as the legendary figure who ""opened up"" Red China for Israel, it is also clear that Eisenberg was most assuredly a central figure in arranging the quid pro quo between Red China and Israel that ultimately played a part in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Shaul Eisenberg not only helped Israel survive a critical period in its history , but he also helped Israel's Red Chinese allies develop the nuclear clout they needed to become a major player on the world scene.
For if—in the event that they did—the Red Chinese were very clearly doing it in alliance with their allies in Israel's Mossad.
In summary, the ""Chinese Connection"" to the JFK assassination—like the so-called ""French Connection""—is really the Israeli Connection.
Many Israelis today believe that Israeli intelligence played a part in the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
In the closing months of 1997 there was a highly-charged political frenzy underway in Israel—one that still continues to this day.
The controversy stems from allegations that elements in Israeli intelligence were, in fact, involved in the November 4, 1995 assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
The British newspaper, the Guardian, described the ""prevailing tone of bitterness and division"" '°® in Israel that followed Rabin's death as charges and countercharges were being made between rival political factions.
This debate has been longstanding but Rabin's assassination exacerbated matters considerably.
However, the popular support for Axelrod's opinions are also borne out by a survey conducted among Israeli Jewish adults and released on the anniversary of the Rabin assassination.
What is fascinating is that the Israeli conspiracy theories regarding the Rabin assassination are at least as complex as some of those that have come forth in the aftermath of the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
According to the American Jewish weekly, Forward, ""Most of those theories center on the actions of Avishai Raviv, an agent provocateur who overstepped the mandate given him by General Security Service to infiltrate and report on the right-wing extremist groups that spawned"" °° Prime Minister Rabin's assassin, Yigar Amir.
Working with Amir, Raviv organized paramilitary training for the very circle of right-wing extremists that Mr Raviv was penetrating.
Following this logic, a failed attempt would allow Rabin to crack down on right-wing opponents who believed his concessions to the Palestinians squandered the Biblical inheritance and endangered the state.
According to the theory, the security official was promised a top post in the General Security Service.
SPEAKS To make matters worse for Israel, international attention has been focused on the growing conflict arising from the Rabin assassination and the conspiracy theories that have evolved.
The first major report in the mainstream media in America about the controversy in Israel came from a very interesting source, especially considering what we have explored in the pages of Final Judgment.
In the March 1997 issue of his magazine, George, John F Kennedy Jr. published an article by the mother of Yitzhak Rabin's assassin in which the woman, Geula Amir, alleged that her son, Yigal Amir, was goaded into killing Rabin on November 5, 1995 by Avishai Raviv, who was an undercover agent for Shin Bet, Israel's security agency.
In fact, not long afterward, JFK Jr.'s friend, business partner and co-publisher, Michael Berman quit George magazine, citing differences with his partner.
Some observers suggested that it was precisely that inflammatory article that offended Berman, who is Jewish and said to be a strong supporter of Israel.
Later, in the question-and-answer section, we'll discuss the strange death of JFK, Jr. and demonstrate the unusual role that a ""former"" Mossad operative played in the events surrounding that tragedy.
SUPPORT FOR ASSASSINATION AS POLICY Whatever the case, what is all the more ironic is that even as all of these charges and counter-charges were being made within Israel, its foreign intelligence service, the Mossad, was caught in an embarrassing failed assassination attempt against a Palestinian leader in Jordan.
The bungled plot demonstrated that the Mossad does engage in assassination attempts on foreign soil.
Yet, as the international press repeatedly reported, most Israelis were not particularly disturbed by the fact that the Mossad was engaged in such activities.
Largely, it seems, Israelis were disturbed by the fact that their intelligence agency had bungled the job with the consequence that Israel was subjected to international condemnation.
The Post reported, frankly, that ""In the national mortification over a failed assassination attempt in Jordan, Israelis are dissecting every tactical, technical and procedural flaw in the affair.
Rather than debating the morality of political assassination, according to the Post, ""what Israelis are debating instead are the mechanics of the assassination attempt and the calibration of political risk.
Although the pro-Israel lobby in America has reacted quite hysterically to the allegations made in Final Judgment, we have seen that not only do many Israelis actually believe it's possible that their own domestic intelligence agency played a hand in the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin, but also that many Israelis endorsed that assassination, perceiving their own prime minister as a threat to Israel's survival.
Israelis, in general, do believe in the use of assassination as a force for political change and as a means whereby which to ensure the survival of their beloved country.
The Continuing Cover-Up Today, millions of Americans—and people from around the globe—are convinced that there was indeed a conspiracy behind the assassination of the thirty-fifth president of the United States and that the United States government was a willing participant in the cover-up.
In the wake of the renewed public interest—much of it stimulated by Oliver Stone's controversial film, JFK—growing demands for release of the secret JFK files held by the government reached a fever pitch.
Ultimately, there was indeed a bill passed by Congress calling for the release of the documents and many documents—though not all of them—were released.
As far as the legislation to open the files was concerned, there were more than a few people who believed the legislation itself was suspect.
First of all, the individual called in to lend his expertise as the primary architect of the legislation was the controversial G Robert Blakey, the former director of the House Assassinations Committee.
In Chapter 10, of course, we reviewed Blakey's spurious findings which essentially suggested that ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" and also examined Blakey's close relationship with the CIA which led his critics to suspect that perhaps the House investigation was being scuttled from within.
What's more, we also explored Blakey's enigmatic relationship with Morris Dalitz, one of Meyer Lansky's closest long-term associates and a major backer of the Israeli lobby in this country.
With all of this baggage—little known to the general public at least— Blakey was an unusual choice, unless, of course, Congress didn't really want to get to the truth.
However, the legislation that Blakey drafted was equally controversial.
Under Blakey's proposal, the United States District Court of Appeals in Washington would appoint a five member citizen board to review and decide on the release of the assassination investigation documents.
The legislation did specify that any persons previously involved in any investigation of the JFK assassination would not be eligible for appointment to the board.
Why Congress and Blakey decided upon the federal appeals court in Washington, D.C. as the body which should select the ""blue ribbon"" document review panel is not so much of a mystery—that is, if one believes that the Establishment is still trying to keep the truth about the assassination hidden and buried forever.
Under Blakey's legislation, one of the very judges on that appeals court which would select the panel was former Sen.
James L Buckley—brother of ex-CIA man William F Buckley, Jr., agency protégé and longtime friend of E Howard Hunt, himself implicated in the JFK murder.
The Novo brothers, of course, were named by ex-CIA operative Marita Lorenz as among those who traveled in a two-car caravan from Miami to Dallas, arriving on November 21, 1963.
Upon arrival in Dallas the CIA hirelings were met by their CIA paymaster, E Howard Hunt.
They were also visited in their Dallas quarters by Dallas nightclub keeper Jack Ruby.
As it was, the Congress did act, after much debate, and approved a bill requiring government-wide disclosure of documents relating to the assassination.
The disclosure law set up a five-member review board with the power to obtain assassination records from any government office, the CIA and FBI and committees of Congress.
The board, in fact, began releasing many documents—some interesting, of course, but nothing so inflammatory as to require a new investigation.
The newly released documents only give the JFK assassination ""buffs"" something to salivate over.
Those documents that have been released only seem to have confirmed everything that has already been a part of the JFK lore.
David Marwell, the first head of the review board, is a former historian for the Justice Department's controversial Office of Special Investigations , the socalled ""Nazi"" hunting unit of the Justice Department.
Thus, if indeed the KGB did indeed play a part in the JFK murder, in any way, shape or form, Marwell's previous association with the OSI creates some concern about Marwell's willingness to bring out all of the sensitive information within the JFK files.
Now the KGB matter, troubling though it may be, is eclipsed even more so by Marwell's inevitable dealings with Israel's Mossad.
The Mossad has had a long-standing close relationship with the OSI, so there's no reason to doubt that the Mossad, like the KGB, has used its talents to compromise this American agency.
There's a second reason why we might find Marwell's presence at the JFK documents review board troubling.
Posner's book was an account of the efforts by Marwell and the OSI to track down the infamous Auschwitz doctor.
The very fact that two individuals with close ties to the world of intelligence, and with a special interest and expertise in an area of immense interest to the Mossad should show up as two of the primary players in the current controversy over the JFK assassination is interesting indeed, particularly in light of my own thesis of Israeli involvement in the JFK affair.
Obviously, in light of all of this, I do not consider Marwell—or his records review board—credible.
In fact, there are those who contend that the Mossad knew for years— long before the officially announced ""discovery"" that Mengele had died—that Mengele was indeed dead and that there was no reason to continue hunting the good doctor.
But the Mossad kept this under wraps and allowed Nazi hunters and Jewish fund-raisers to continue churning up memories of Mengele coupled with the specter that the German physician was still alive experimenting on Jewish babies in the jungles of South America.
Incriminating documents buried in the JFK assassination files would have been shredded long ago, and the most incriminating materials would never have been committed to paper in the first place.
Don't count on something truly enlightening to have been uncovered, especially since Mr Posner's friend Marwell, was in charge of the release of the documents.
Marwell, and his assistant at the review board, one Douglas Home, have gone on to greener and more lucrative pastures.
They are now working for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, which is— needless to say—very closely cooperating with the Israeli government (and the Mossad) in a variety of ventures of interest to the worldwide Jewish community.
So once again we find Mr Marwell involved in affairs that are intimately linked to the state of Israel.
The activities of the review board provided an interesting distraction and were, in fact, all part and parcel of the continuing cover-up.
PUBLISHING DISTORTIONS There are many aspects to the continuing cover-up as I learned when first trying to get this book published.
Shortly, we received a handwritten postcard from Isaac Mozeson, Shapolsky's editorial director.
The ferocity and hysteria in Mozeson's response was unlike anything I had ever seen.
He described the theory outlined in Final Judgment as being ""infantile"" and wrote of the ""powerlessness"" of Israel's Mossad.
Scheim, as we noted in Chapter 10, would have us believe that Meyer Lansky was a little fish in a very big pond—hardly an influence at all.
He also scoffs at Jim Garrison's prosecution of Clay Shaw—an innocent bystander who was guilty only of restoring lovely old buildings in the French Quarter of New Orleans.
This volume, an elaboration of Morrow's previous work, Betrayal, contains much useful information, beyond question, and obviously was written by someone who was privy to much of what was happening in the CIA at the time of the assassination.
However, what is notable about the volume is that Morrow specifically portrays the CIA's Mossad liaison, James J Angleton, as somehow being out of the loop as far as the assassination and the cover-up was concerned.
Morrow even suggested elsewhere that Angleton and Robert F Kennedy were famous friends, without documenting this unlikely scenario.
Morrow's contention is that Shaw headed a ""rogue"" element based in New Orleans operating outside the control of the CIA headquarters at Langley where Angleton's influence was then supreme.
Interestingly—for whatever it's worth—when Morrow was arrested for his participation in a CIA-orchestrated plan to counterfeit Cuban currency, the lawyer who handled his defense, Fred Weisgal, immigrated to Israel within a year after the JFK assassination and quickly became Israel's Deputy Minister of Justice, a high honor indeed.
Perhaps Morrow hasn't told us everything he really knows and perhaps Weisgal's high post was a reward for assisting in some fashion in the JFK assassination cover-up.
THE ISRAELI LOBBY RESPONDS The response of the Israeli lobby to the release of the first edition of Final Judgment was quite interesting, to say the least.
Washington Jewish Week , the leading newspaper of the pro-Israel lobby in the nation's capital, published a vituperative broadside blast at Final Judgment in a prominently placed full-page attack in its April 28, 1994 issue.
WJW said that the thesis presented in Final Judgment is ""speculative ""bizarre,""'°** but, of course, never showed how or why it was.
In fact, among those who read the book prior to publication were Jewish authors, attorney Mark Lane, himself the nation's foremost authority on the JFK assassination, and Dr.
In seeking to discredit the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy, WJW slipped up and, effectively, confirmed the explosive nature of the facts about the Israeli connection to the JFK murder.
Then WJW added that Stone's film ""never claims to be factual,"" '° thus suggesting that Clay Shaw's Permindex connection was one of the instances of artistic license admittedly utilized by Stone in the making of the film.
In short, WJW critiqued the film by a combination of name-calling, innuendo and playing fast and loose with the facts, an indirect admission that, clearly, Final Judgment hits perhaps too close to home.
Then, in 1995, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, the American intelligence and propaganda conduit for the Mossad, weighed in with some false and defamatory smears of Final Judgment.
A View from the 'Defense' Agencies""—was the work of the ADL's national director, Abe Foxman.
Of course, Liberty Lobby's chief counsel, Mark Lane, had already written a JFK conspiracy book titled Plausible Denial; the organization's mania for conspiracies, however, appears to be inclusive enough to assimilate both theses.
I would also note that the ADL's spokesman calls the American interest in the JFK assassination a ""craze,"" reflecting the ADL's lack of appreciation for the concerns of many Americans about a possible conspiracy behind the assassination of an American president.
Obviously, however, the books do not actually present two different theses at all, but it's not in the interests of the ADL to accurately report the specific details that appear in either of the volumes.
The ADL dismisses these ""outlandish ideas"" but it is interesting that the ADL felt compelled to take a slam at Final Judgment in the pages of this assembly of essays.
Clearly, two years after the release of the first edition of Final Judgment, the book was making its impact felt—and the ADL knew it.
There were enough people beginning to take the book seriously, so much so that the ADL felt it necessary to respond.
However, if the suit had reached trial—as did E Howard Hunt's libel suit against The Spotlight, relating to the JFK assassination (described in Chapter 16)—it might have brought forth some interesting revelations.
Thus, it is no surprise than when—in the fall of 1997—I was invited to address the topic of the book at a community college seminar in Orange County, California, that all Hell broke loose.
In my foreword to this fourth edition of Final Judgment I've described that controversy in detail.
But needless to say, as I said earlier, the ADL has not heard the last of Final Judgment.
Although Uri Palti, an Israeli diplomat in Los Angeles, told the press that the thesis presented in Final Judgment is ""nonsense,"" the big problem for the ADL and for Israel is that—obviously—a lot of people don't agree.
In light of all this frenzy stimulated by the ADL in its attempt to silence me, I cannot help but echo the words of an ADL ally, super-lawyer Alan Dershowitz, who loudly proclaimed himself a defender of academic freedom and came to the defense of another controversial researcher who came under fire for his studies of purported alien abductions.
And the fact that no one, thus far, has been able to refute Final Judgment is very telling indeed.
What is interesting is that, evidently, the allegations made in Final Judgment don't seem to be anything new to people in the Arab world.
In retrospect it may well be that Oliver Stone's stunning success with the film JFK may have done research into the JFK assassination controversy more harm than good.
As we noted in Chapter 17, Stone's film focused new public interest on the controversy and gave millions of Americans and people worldwide a new perspective on the affair.
The impact of the film was probably more significant, in the end, than a dozen best-selling books on the assassination combined.
However, because of Stone's apparent determination to avoid the socalled ""French connection"" , and because of the multiple ties to the Israeli-Lansky combination on the part of Stone's corporate backers, we must indeed question the real motivation behind the decision to publicize an edited and factually skewed representation of the facts surrounding the JFK assassination controversy.
They are in an unpleasant position in which they will look rather bad if they choose to criticize Stone.
In his well-written volume, which was nothing less than a paean to Jim Garrison, DiEugenio compiled a compelling vindication of Garrison's case against Permindex board member Clay Shaw and his role in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Yet, DiEugenio was quite circumspect in his dissection of Shaw's Permindex connection.
And although DiEugenio even went so far as to note Clay Shaw's relationship with the powerful Stern family of New Orleans, the owners of WDSU radio and television that played so central a part in portraying Lee Harvey Oswald as a ""pro-Castro extremist,"" DiEugenio was circumspect, to say the least, in his treatment of the Stern-Shaw connection.
As we have seen, however, it is not an extraordinary leap of the imagination to conjecture that Lee Harvey Oswald's assignment working for Guy Banister—resulting in Oswald's public image as a ""pro-Castro extremist""—may indeed have been part of an ADL-sponsored ""factfinding"" operation carried out through Banister's detective agency.
DiEugenio actually had good reason to be so reticent in pulling his punches.
The prime movers behind Sheridan Square are Ellen Ray and William Schapp, founders of the so-called Institute for Media Analysis which (as noted earlier in Final Judgment) includes among its financial backers the Stern Family Fund, established by Clay Shaw's friends, the powerful Stern family of New Orleans.
Although I requested the opportunity to address the 1994 symposium of the JFK Assassination Information Center in Dallas and the 1996 conference of the Committee on Political Assassinations in Washington, the ruling cliques refused to allow me to speak.
If my thesis is foolish or misguided or off the beam, one would think that it would be a simple process to discredit this book.
In these areas, among others, Scott has clearly done his research, but one cannot read his book without thinking that Scott has likewise tip-toed up to the Israeli connection, but refused to draw the obvious conclusions for his readers.
Scott says a lot about many things, but says nothing when it comes to the Israeli links to the JFK assassination that have been thoroughly documented in Final Judgment.
And despite his in-depth research in a wide variety of subjects relating to the JFK controversy, Scott has absolutely nothing to say whatsoever about Clay Shaw's Permindex connection.
As noted in Chapter 17, the ADL's long-suspected Mossad link was brought to public light in a broad-ranging investigation by the San Francisco Police Department of the ADL's covert domestic spying operations aimed at a wide variety of both ""right wing"" and ""left wing"" political groups in the United States.
Scott's other source, Michael Lerner, a prominent liberal philosopher, also happens to be the publisher of Tikkun magazine, a Jewish-oriented journal which has emerged as a major voice for the Israeli lobby.
That these sources played a part in shaping Scott's final judgment (if it can be described as such) perhaps explains in part Scott's clear and repeated effort to avoid broaching the Israeli connection to the assassination of President Kennedy.
I understand their reasoning, of course, but, at the same time, I am compelled to question their integrity.
I will not name them here and thereby burden them with the possibility of being tarred as ""anti-Semites""—the favorite term reserved for those who dare to criticize the actions of Israel—but they know who they are and their support has been appreciated.
SIMILAR CONCLUSIONS Just before Final Judgment was first published, I was delighted to learn that one long-time JFK assassination researcher, Philip Ten Brink, working entirely independently of this author, not so surprisingly reached essentially the same conclusions reached in Final Judgment, even up to and including a number of fine points that some might find somewhat esoteric.
I am compelled to repeat the old saw that ""great minds think alike,"" but I would be overstating the case in so doing.
It is simply that the facts are there for those who wish to recognize them for what they are.
Ten Brink discovered on his own that pointing the finger in the direction of Israel and the Mossad is not good public relations.
Hats off to Ten Brink for having the guts to call the shots at he saw it.
After the fourth edition of Final Judgment was published, I learned of another JFK researcher, Dave Sharp, who had been active on Internet news groups for some time, making the allegation that Jewish political interests— particularly the Bronfman family of Canada—were behind the JFK assassination.
At that point, not having yet read Final Judgment, Sharp apparently had no idea of the conflict between JFK and Ben-Gurion over Israel's nuclear bomb, so it would seem that Final Judgment did indeed fill in a missing piece of the puzzle for Sharp.
However, Sharp himself has since then been critical of Final Judgment, suggesting that I fell down on the job in failing to discuss the Holocaust and the way that it has been used as a political tool by the Israeli lobby.
That's Sharp's opinion, of course, but—as I have said time and again—Final Judgment is about the JFK assassination, not about the Holocaust.
Unfortunately, most of those who purport to be seeking the truth about the JFK assassination are only willing to go so far.
To answer that question one cannot avoid the until-now secret fact of JFK's battle to prevent Israel from building the nuclear bomb, for Israel— like its allies in both organized crime and the CIA—did have a strong motive to move against JFK and did.
In the end, it was Israel—not JFK— that had the last word on the matter.
So much, then, for JFK's strenuous efforts to put a stop to nuclear expansion in the Middle East.
Many readers of Final Judgment have asked if the Kennedy family has responded to the allegations made in this volume.
But we can be confident that the Kennedy family—above all—does indeed know the truth about the JFK assassination.
But don't expect the family to ever go public with any knowledge they might have of Mossad involvement in the affair.
Shortly after the first edition of Final Judgment came out, I received word that someone from Massachusetts who was close to the Kennedy family had purchased five copies of the book.
I'm sure that the editors had an interesting time reading the book and discussing it among themselves, but I don't frankly expect to see a story about it in George However, I do know for a fact that members of the Kennedy family have heard about Final Judgment.
First of all, a friend of mine who lives in Rhode Island met Congressman Patrick Kennedy (son of Sen.
There he showed a copy of Final Judgment to young Kennedy and pointed out that the book implicates the Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate in the assassination.
After all, no politician in America would want to be identified with a conspiracy theory critical of Israel—particularly, of course, after what happened to John F Kennedy when he went head-to-head with Israel.
And as I said, if anybody knows who really killed JFK, it's his family, so to hear that a book had actually been written on the subject must have come as a real surprise.
But, finally, on December 20, 1995 I had occasion to speak briefly, for the first time, with a member of the Kennedy family about this book.
I was at Union Station in Washington, D.C. and much to my_ surprise Congressman Joe Kennedy, son of the late Robert Kennedy, walked in my direction.
He was in the company of an attractive woman whom I later identified as his second wife.
He knew I recognized him and I suspect that he also knew I wanted to speak to him and I made up my mind that I would.
He shook his head in the negative as he was running the title through his mind.
I saw that he was uncomfortable with the nature of what I was suggesting—that is, Israeli involvement—and I didn't want him to think that I was one of those people who would continue to occupy his space.
In the end, of course, it doesn't really matter since only Congressman Kennedy knows for sure what he meant.
However, the fact is that I can now state with certainty that the Kennedy family does indeed know about Final Judgment.
I have no doubt that one way or another both of these young congressmen will someday discuss the allegations made in Final Judgment with their family.
If anything, the Kennedy family has been firmly co-opted by the Mossad itself.
The key to understanding this is Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis’ ten year relationship—prior to her death—with the enigmatic Belgian-born Jewish diamond merchant Maurice Tempelsman.
After positioning himself as a permanent fixture in the center of Jacqueline's life—and then ensconcing himself as her live-in companion in the Kennedy widow's elegant Manhattan penthouse—Tempelsman reportedly doubled Jacqueline's already substantial fortune.
So it was that during Jacqueline's final days, Israel's Mossad was represented in the most intimate circles of the Kennedy family.
However, it now seems—according to Edward Klein, writing in his new book, The Kennedy Curse, that after Jacqueline's death, young JFK Jr. ordered Templesman out of the apartment he shared with Mrs.
Evidently young John was not so enamored of the international intriguer who, it is said, had warned ""John John"" about the dangers of flying.
Two family members died violently and tragically, whoever was responsible.
The family's loss was all too personal, far beyond any other international geopolitical ramifications that were very much of interest to the conspirators responsible for the two assassinations.
Edward M Kennedy himself is probably lucky to still be alive, but he never achieved his dream of reclaiming the White House for the Kennedy dynasty.
The likelihood that any other future family member will once again occupy the Oval Office is scant, at best.
Congressman Joe Kennedy's plan to run for governor of Massachusetts was scuttled early on following a heavy-handed media campaign against him.
His personal problems, stemming from a conflict with his ex-wife who wrote a much-publicized book about their marriage, coupled with allegations of his younger brother having had extra-marital relations with a teen-aged girl, were bandied about by the media and Kennedy was forced to withdraw from the race.
If truth be told, the Kennedy family has, in its own fashion, benefited immensely from the double tragedy, securing a place in history and legend that might otherwise have been lost had JFK lived out his term.
But, as we have seen, the media has increasingly been coming down loud and hard on the heirs to the Kennedy legacy—and on JFK himself.
THE MEDIA'S 'FINAL JUDGMENT' Writing in the Washington Post on November 25, 1993, famed economist Robert Samuelson deviated from his area of expertise and delved into the subject of the Kennedy legacy.
His prominently placed column, appearing on the right-hand of the op-ed page was a full-tilt assault on the memory of John F Kennedy, coming in the wake of the 30th anniversary of what may well have been the most stunning public event in our nation's history.
It is not just that his life and his assassination have been over dramatized, transforming him from a political figure into an entertainment phenomenon with a place in pop culture closer to Elvis than Harry Truman.
All the subsequent speculation about whether he would or wouldn't have increased that commitment, as Johnson did, is really irrelevant.
And what he did was make a major military commitment to a country whose survival was not a vital national interest, and thereby, involves us in a conflict that politically we could not sustain.
Perhaps, then, it should be no surprise that on November 22, 1994—the 31st anniversary of the JFK assassination—the Washington Post, America's political newspaper of record, said not a single word in commemoration of that tragic day.
Clearly, the new media thrust is to say that John F Kennedy wasn't really such a great guy after all and that maybe, as Malcolm X said at the time of the JFK assassination, the chickens had come home to roost.
ASKING FOR A DEBATE Just prior to the release of the third edition of Final Judgment, I sent copies of the second edition to a number of individuals inviting them to debate the thesis of Final Judgment with me—on radio or in any public forum or in writing.
I gave them the opportunity to refute the book in the manner they wished.
Robert Dornan Then a GOP congressman from Orange County, California and a shrieking devotee of Israel, Dornan later joined his arch foe, Rep.
John Loftus Author of The Secret War Against the Jews, a new book which claims that anti-Israel partisans in the American intelligence community have sought to sabotage the state of Israel.
Roland Pritikin Retired Brigadier General and internationally-known physician and founder of the Center for Global Security, an ad hoc proIsrael lobby group which included among its advisors Luis Kutner, a former attorney for Jack Ruby, and General Julius Klein, the American military officer who played a major role in the establishment of the Mossad.
Rush Limbaugh The biggest name in ""conservative"" talk radio known for being an outrageous and audacious critic of everything but Israel's misdeeds.
Chuck Harder Host of the widely-heard ""For the People"" radio program, Harder refuses to mention the role of Israel in international misdeeds, although he is quick to find conspiracy and corruption of other sorts under almost every rock.
G Gordon Liddy The former CIA and FBI operative who was brave enough to stand up to a federal judge and go to prison for refusing to rat on his friends.
Once frequently accused of being a Nazi sympathizer, Liddy is now a popular radio broadcaster—but never a critic of Israel.
David Scheim Author of Contract on America, which claims that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" and ignores the integral role of Israeli loyalist and CIA collaborator Meyer Lansky in the international crime syndicate.
Issuing a call for a debate was not a search for publicity for Final Judgment—although any publicity would have been welcome and actually quite remarkable.
Of this vast array of individuals invited to debate only General Pritikin had responded as of January 1, 1998.
Former Undersecretary of State George Ball is guilty of the same crime.
A cynic might be so crass as to suggest that the memorial was nothing more than a tribute by the Israelis to one of their own more outrageous public executions and the skill with which it was conducted.
Lest, however, that some pro-Israel zealot claim that this is my contention, for the record I will say that it is not.
Perhaps the average man in the street in Tel Aviv did indeed admire John F Kennedy.
Be all of this as it may, I can only conclude that the refusal by these ""big names"" to either debate me publicly or to attempt to repudiate my work in any way, shape or form is precisely because they cannot.
Final Judgment is thus, in my view, for all intents and purposes, the final judgment on what really happened in Dallas.
I have indeed secured, as I've said, a default judgment simply because no one has stepped forth to answer my charges.
In fact, Chomsky has described the unending flow of letters he's received on the subject, pointing out that he's been forced to resort to a form letter outlining the reasons why he will not discuss the subject.
But Chomsky, as a critic of Israel, recognizes how public debate over controversial issues has been impacted by the media and the academic community.
History, particularly recent history, is characteristically presented to the general public within the framework of a doctrinal system based on certain fundamental dogmas.
In the case of the totalitarian societies, the point is too obvious to require comment.
The situation is more intriguing in societies that lack cruder forms of repression and ideological control.
The United States, for example, is surely one of the least repressive societies of past or present history with respect to freedom of inquiry and expression.
That is precisely the argument put forth in the ""mainstream"" media following that tragedy.
Don't believe in conspiracy theories—and that includes the theory that there was a conspiracy behind the JFK assassination.
And if you believe in them, you're the kind of person who might consider blowing up a federal building in Oklahoma City or elsewhere.
Within the scholarly professions and the media, the intelligentsia can generally be counted on to close ranks; they will refuse to submit to critical analysis the doctrines of the faith, prune the historical and documentary record so as to insulate these doctrines from examination, and proceed to present a version of history that is safely free from institutional critique or analysis.
Although the book has now received some publicity as a result of the ADL's effort to prevent me from speaking at the community college seminar in Orange County, the media reports that did appear were intertwined with the allegation that I was some sort of ""Holocaust denier"" and therefore not credible.
Likewise, so-called ""scholars"" such as Professor Roy Bauer at the Irvine Valley College refused to give me the opportunity to present my case.
Bauer would not allow the doctrines of the faith to be submitted to critical analysis.
However, because Final Judgment had suddenly had the opportunity to be heard by an academic audience—rather than among a Select list of book buyers who had access to the volume—the defenders of the doctrines of the faith erupted into a frenzy.
If you do, they'll call you an ""anti-Semite""—or maybe even a ""Holocaust denier,"" which is evidently now the latest gimmick in the ongoing effort to silence those who have dared publicly pinpoint the role of Israel in the crime of the century.
In other words, the real truth about who killed John F Kennedy—and why—be damned.
Morley, in fact, is not so much concerned with finding out who was responsible for the assassination of the American president, but, instead, is more concerned with restoring the faith of the American people in the very government whose intelligence agency—the ClA—played a central role in the assassination and its cover-up.
According to Morley, ""The Kennedy assassination is a factor in the crisis of legitimacy that now undermines the United States government's ability to address a wide variety of public ills.
The inability of the government to present a credible explanation of how Kennedy was killed is not the only nor the most important reason for the decline.
Adding, that ""we need to respect the complexity of history,""'''’ Morley says that ""the grounds for consensus are now emerging,"" and that ""the story of the Kennedy assassination and the mystery that surrounded it is not a saga of an immense and monolithic conspiracy.
Rather it is a chapter in the history of the Cold War, a cautionary tale for the next generations about the perils of secrecy in a democracy.
In Morley's skewed perception, it seems, it really doesn't matter in the end why John F Kennedy was assassinated or who was responsible.
The gravest matter of concern is restoring the faith of Americans in their government.
I don't agree with Jefferson Morley and the Washington Post—nor do most Americans.
And it is this kind of new approach to the JFK assassination that we must ponder as we consider the way that the truth about the assassination is treated by the media and about the way the facts and the so-called facts will be released to the public.
Those who are ostensibly seeking the truth about the murder of President Kennedy but who continue to ignore the very clear role played by Israel and its Mossad in the assassination are perhaps, in the end, the greatest enemies of the truth.
If I am wrong about Mossad involvement, I ask my critics to show me where I'm wrong.
If even JFK's admirers are unable to face the truth and expose it to the light of day, then America and the world face a very grave crisis indeed.
Frankly, I do find it frustrating—but I understand why—that others have steered clear of that one controversial area of research that is so central to divining the truth about the murder of President Kennedy.
I have no regrets whatsoever about having made the decision to write the book.
A few people have suggested I should have appended a nom de plume upon the volume so I would be protected from the inevitable cries of outrage that followed.
However, had I done so, I would not have been able to publicly defend my own work if I chose to hide behind a pen name.
In the end, I believe that I have put together a volume that does make sense and one that most open-minded people, once they have read the book, will agree puts forth a thesis that does make sense.
Most of those—probably all—who have attacked the book have not read it.
They have preferred to stand on the sidelines and attack the thesis, but not the evidence that backs it up.
It is my hope that Final Judgment will, in some way, contribute to a full understanding of not only the death of John F Kennedy, but also of all of the world-shaking events that followed—events that changed history.
More importantly, though, I hope we have all learned some lessons as a result and that the American people will take whatever action is necessary to right this great wrong. —MICHAEL COLLINS PIPER Postscript A senior French diplomat, Bernard Ledun, died in Paris on February 1, 1994.
His sudden death at age 50—ostensibly from a heart attack—may be another of the ""convenient"" deaths that have occurred in the wake of the JFK assassination and its cover-up and a direct consequence of the announcement, on November 22, 1993, of the impending release of the first edition of Final Judgment.
Ledun had been privy to ""inside"" information which confirmed the high-level intelligence status of the French source—quoted in Chapter 16 of Final Judgment—who provided this author information which establishes that the much-discussed ""French connection"" to the Kennedy assassination is, in fact, misnamed and is, instead, the Israeli connection.
Just prior to his sudden death, Ledun, a career officer in the French diplomatic corps, was scheduled to become Consul General for France in Johannesburg, South Africa.
From October 1989 to December 1993 he served as Consul General for his native country in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
While posted in Vancouver, Ledun committed a grievous—albeit honest— mistake that may have sealed his own fate.
His unwitting action proved the high-level French intelligence status of the source, quoted in Final Judgment.
The source—Pierre Neuville—asserted (based on his own inside knowledge) that Israel's secret service, the Mossad, utilized connections in French intelligence, in arranging the hiring of an assassin or assassins who were involved in the execution of President Kennedy.
In 1976, while serving in the French consulate in Vancouver, Canada, Ledun released copies of internal French intelligence documents to Pierre confirming that Pierre had indeed been a French intelligence officer privy to explosive state secrets.
Because of the incendiary nature of the information to which Pierre had been privy, French intelligence had denied for years that Pierre was engaged in intelligence work for his native country.
The release of the documents by Ledun, however, provided hard evidence to the contrary.
Not only had Pierre learned specific details about how French intelligence had been manipulated by the Mossad in the JFK assassination conspiracy—information provided by his own allies in French intelligence—but Pierre himself had been brought into a previous assassination conspiracy conducted jointly by the Mossad and French intelligence.
The Mossad had contracted—through its key contact in French intelligence, Colonel Georges deLannurien—to arrange for Pierre to unwittingly play the role of ""patsy"" in a Mossad plot to kill Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser during the last week of October, 1956, just prior to the invasion at Port Said during the Suez Crisis.
When Pierre realized that he, in fact, was the intended patsy in the Nasser assassination plot, he surrendered to Egyptian intelligence at Cairo International Airport.
For refusing to give up his life in a Mossad-sponsored conspiracy, Pierre—the scion of a distinguished family and son of the renowned French diplomat, Rene Neuville, head of the Consulate General of France in Jerusalem until his death in 1952—became a man without a country.
After fleeing to South America and then to Canada, Pierre was tried in absentia by a French military court and convicted of ""treason"" and ""breach of external security of the state"" and condemned to 24 years of forced labor.
When, in 1976, still in exile, Pierre sought clemency by approaching the French consul general's office in Vancouver, Canada, where he was then living, his request was rejected.
At that time, in a document dated ""5 OCT 1976"" the French Ministry of Defense advised the French Consul General in Vancouver that Pierre's request had been denied.
It was Bernard Ledun at the French Consul General's office who released this letter of denial to Pierre, not realizing the explosive nature of the document.
As Pierre says, French intelligence was ""furious with this gaffe of Mr Ledun, an act very treasonable, that of giving to outsiders a letter of the minister of Defense giving credit to my allegations that I had been a diplomat and intelligence officer serving France in Libya and Italy.
You see, the first public announcement of the allegations appearing in Final Judgment came in a special full-page advertisement published on November 22, 1993 in Dallas, Texas in the program of the annual symposium conducted by the JFK Assassination Information Center.
The announcement revealed that Final Judgment had relied, in part, upon a French source for information detailing the Israeli Mossad connection to the JFK assassination and the French intelligence role therein.
Pierre believes that this announcement tipped off the Mossad and French intelligence that he was the source referenced in Final Judgment.
As a consequence, Ledun's murder was an act of retribution against Ledun for his mistake of many years earlier—that is, confirming that Pierre had indeed been involved in a sensitive and high-level joint collaborative effort between the Mossad and French intelligence.
Had Pierre not courageously spoken out, filling in the missing link in the JFK assassination conspiracy, Bernard Ledun might indeed have lived out the rest of his natural life in peace . . . but the truth about the Kennedy assassination might never have been told.
New Benjamin Franklin House, First edition, 1978; second edition, 1986.
Fensterwald, Bernard, and the Committee to Investigation Assassinations.
House Select Committee on Assassinations, The Final Assassinations Report.
A Reconstruction of Certain Clandestine Events from the Bay of Pigs to the Assassination of John F Kennedy.
From the Shah to the Secret Arms Deal—An Insider's Account of United States Involvement in Iran.
The Rise of the Southern Rim and its Challenge to the Eastern Establishment.
Winter-Berger, Robert N The Washington Pay-off An Insider's View of Corruption in Government.
Reference Notes Chapter One The Tie That Binds ' Entertainment Weekly, January 17, 1992.
Chapter Two Off With His Head * Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, February 1992.
Chapter Eight Thick as Thieves °°8 Andrew Cockburn and Leslie Cockburn.
Chapter Nine A Little Unpleasantness °° Washington Observer, April 15, 1972.
The Murder of Robert F Kennedy. , 59. ae Rappleye and Becker, Ibid. a Yipster Times *™ Peter Dale Scott.
The Death in Arizona of the Kemper Marley Machine,"" by Brian Downing Quig, appearing on the Internet.
Carroll & Graf Publishers, 1992), 785. eee Stephen J Rivele, ""The CIA, Assassination, and Nixon,” published in Nixon: An Oliver Stone Film, edited by Eric Hamburg.
An Account of the Clay Shaw-Jim Garrison Affair in New Orleans. , P’ 47.
My Investigation & Prosecution of the Murder of President Kennedy. , 168.
See also Touchstone's Councilor for 1964, as well as June 1, 1967, Sept.-Oct., 1973, Sept., 1968, Jan., 1974, etc.
Hopsicker also had a then-unpublished manuscript Barry and the Boys, dealing with the career of Barry Seal which Hopsicker made available to Michael Collins Piper in early 2000.
The Continuing Cover-Up '076 Wayne Madsen, ""Intelligence Agency Threats to Computer Security,"" International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence.
In light of outrageous and malicious efforts to refute previous editions of Final Judgment—in particular the egregious smears and misrepresentations and distortions by an agenda-driven clique at the Schaumburg, Illinois Library, a pathetic ""team"" led by an Israeli, Uri Toch—I feel compelled to make notations such as this.
In addition, in the question and answer section—entitled ""Default Judgment""—I address a number of specific allegations by a handful of critics who have alleged that my thesis is founded on having relied upon ""biased"" or ""extremist"" or ""anti-Israel"" sources.
As any honest reader can see, by simply referring to the reference notes and the bibliography, there is absolutely no way that my critics can contend that Final Judgment is founded on sources ""outside the mainstream,"" claims by my critics notwithstanding.
And as I note in the ""Challenge to the Readers"" that appears in the final pages of Final Judgment, I am eagerly inviting my critics to show where I have misrepresented or misinterpreted or misquoted the writings of others.
However, as you will see, my agenda-driven critics at the Schaumburg Library managed not only to misquote not just me but also other writers, as well as distort what others had written.
Vile trickery such as this, common to most all of my critics, leads me to believe that my thesis is very much on the right track.
When critics must resort to lies and misrepresentations, their motives must be questioned.
Because of the controversial nature of my thesis, I am probably one of a handful of writers who must be so precise in defending their work.
I have no apologies. —MCP DEFAULT JUDGMENT Questions, Answers & Reflections About the Crime of the Century A compendium of pertinent questions addressed to Michael Collins Piper, the author of Final Judgment, and Piper's responses thereto.
This brave French patriot, who risked his life to expose Israel's scheme to assassinate Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser, provided me critical information and insights that brought the thesis put forth in Final Judgment full circle.
AN INTRODUCTORY NOTE BY MICHAEL COLLINS PIPER The title of this series of questions and answers on the JFK assassination has a double meaning.
On the one hand, it's a play on the title of Final Judgment, with all due credit to Mark Lane whose Rush to Judgment, was the first major work to explode the Warren Commission Report.
A default judgment is what is issued in one's favor in a court of law when the opposition fails to appear in court to defend itself against your allegations.
I believe that I have essentially won a default judgment in the JFK assassination conspiracy case.
In Final Judgment 1 believe that I painted a complete picture which essentially tied all of the most commonly accepted JFK assassination conspiracy theories together in a tightly knit format that explained how and why the conspiracy to kill John F Kennedy evolved and precisely who was behind it.
More than 25,000 copies of Final Judgment are now in circulation throughout the United States yet not one person has yet come forward to refute in any way any single fact relating to my theory as it appears in Final Judgment.
So I do feel that I've won an un-contested ""default judgment"" in the JFK case and that the basic thesis of the book has been confirmed, not only because no one has been able to refute it, but, more importantly, because the several lame attempts to refute the book have failed.
Now I'm trying to answer many of the questions and comments and a few criticisms that have come to me from many, many readers.
But he didn't have any substantive criticism of the contents of the book itself.
One other individual, the very well known newspaper columnist Sam Francis told somebody that although Final Judgment contained what he called ""much valuable information,"" that he still believed that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the JFK assassination.
All in all, I was pleased by the number of intriguing and thought-provoking questions that were addressed to me by my readers.
Often they had very pointed questions, asking why I didn't make reference to some matter or another or why I passed by some subject that they felt deserved further discussion.
In Default Judgment, now being published in an updated and revised format as a supplement to Final Judgment, many of the questions addressed are just as they came directly to me from readers of Final Judgment.
And it is interesting to point out that many, many people had precisely the same interests addressed in their questions.
Although there is no particular order in which the questions and answers appear in these pages, we've tried to categorize the questions in a free-flowing fashion that leads logically from one subject to another.
The questions cover a broad range of subject matter and are arranged in such a fashion that even someone who has not actually read Final Judgment will be able to understand the subject matter without having first read Final Judgment, although needless to say I do suggest that before reading this material that the reader first refer to Final Judgment.
I think that people will find the material enlightening and that it gives the readers new insights into various aspects of the JFK assassination controversy.
If I've missed anything, I hope people will feel free to write me and ask me to address those questions that they might have.
I believe that Final Judgment does stand on its own as, at least for now, the last word on the JFK assassination but I also believe that Default Judgment helps bring into focus some of the gray areas that people may have questions about.
The questions focus on both a wide variety of matters discussed or subjects otherwise not mentioned—in the pages of Final Judgment.
That's a highly controversial allegation considering all of the other theories that have been presented.
That's not a simple question to answer for the reason that the process of developing the idea for the book was something that I suppose, ranged from the very beginning of the time that I began reading about the JFK assassination as a grade school student in the late 1960's.
I've touched on various aspects of the answer to this question in the pages of Final Judgment, but since so many people have still asked this question, I will elaborate further and perhaps provide some new insights to readers.
As anyone who is even vaguely familiar with the subject is well aware, there have been literally thousands of books written on the subject.
I do have an extensive personal library on the subject (and on many other matters as well, in particular, I might note, United States Middle East policy) and I've read many of the JFK books many, many times over the years and, in the process, absorbed the primary details.
At any rate, it was essentially, however, around the time of 1992 that my interest in the assassination was beginning to develop more extensively, largely because of the fact that The Spotlight, the newspaper by which I had been employed for a decade, had been involved in the E Howard Hunt libel trial.
In 1991 Mark Lane's book, Plausible Denial, had been released and that was the book that outlined the circumstances of the Hunt libel case involving The Spotlight and this was also the time that Oliver Stone's film, JFK, was in the process of being made and released.
Consequently there was a newly revived and reinvigorated interest in the JFK assassination.
Angleton was not only the number three man in the CIA and one of its veterans, but he was, more importantly, in our context, very close to the Israeli Mossad as a consequence of his role as the very jealous guardian of the CIA's Mossad desk.
He is mentioned in some of the books on the subject, but generally only in passing.
However, as Lane showed in Plausible Denial and as 1 think I firmly amplified upon in Final Judgment, these CIA figures were working institutionally.
They weren't ""rogue elements"" but were working on behalf of the CIA itself, in collaboration with the Israeli Mossad and elements of organized crime, to both of which they had long been intimately tied.
Now during this same time frame there were other things that started me looking further in the direction of the Mossad.
The Lyndon LaRouche organization's journal, Executive Intelligence Review, had issued a thoroughly documented book entitled Dope, Inc. in the mid-1980's and in that volume they did focus on the role of the Permindex corporation on whose board of directors Clay Shaw served.
Shaw was the New Orleans trade executive whom New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison charged with involvement in the assassination conspiracy.
The Shaw-Garrison trial was, needless to say, the focus of Oliver Stone's JFK film.
In Dope, Inc., the editors highlighted the fact that two of the prime movers behind this secretive corporation, Permindex, were Major Louis M Bloomfield and Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum.
I don't agree with this assessment, but this is not to suggest that the LaRouche organization is not a reliable source.
In fact many different people have acknowledged the outstanding and extensive research done by the LaRouche people, even if the critics don't necessarily agree with the LaRouche organization's particular conclusions.
As far as the material relating to Permindex is concerned, the LaRouche organization relied largely on materials already published in the European press, so the material was not anything out of the ordinary by any means.
However, Dope, Inc. never examines JFK's Middle East policy which, of course, would be the primary interest of the Israelis in their national context, and which, at the same time, would explain the interest of Bloomfield and Rosenbaum in being involved in the conspiracy to assist the financing and orchestration of the JFK assassination.
Coleman claimed in his report that, as he put it, ""Zionism"" was behind the JFK assassination and he essentially echoed the Permindex connections between Bloomfield, Shaw, Permindex, etc that had already been documented.
Coleman was actually incorrect in some of his ""facts"" regarding the JFK assassination.
So I was familiar with his work, but I hasten to point out that he never explained why, as he puts it, ""Zionism,"" would have reason to remove JFK from the White House.
So, you see, there has been some literary basis for the allegations that I put forth in Final Judgment (and, I think, tied together in a nice neat package that makes sense) but these allegations have been buried in a hodge-podge of other material.
Frankly, I am surprised that no one prior to myself had picked up on this other research.
There was another item I came across that intrigued me for a long time.
It appeared in Paris Flammonde's The Kennedy Conspiracy, a highly sympathetic and thoroughly fascinating account of Jim Garrison's investigation of Clay Shaw.
In that book, Flammonde points out that the primary individual involved in the liquidation of Permindex and its relocation from Rome, Italy to South Africa was Dr.
So here's another key figure in the Israeli network who was a key figure in the Permindex operation.
They point out that former CIA officer Philip Agee has described the National Committee for Labor Israel as some sort of CIA proprietary.
In reference to Weberman and Canfield, it's probably worth noting (as I point out in Final Judgment) that they were the source of perhaps the thing that I found the most intriguing of all—and indeed, the first real reference to any suggestion that somehow there was a ""Jewish connection,"" so to speak, to the JFK assassination.
This was the first time ever that I had seen anything suggesting that ""the Jews"" were involved in the JFK assassination.
I read this particular book and this quotation for the first time in 1978 (well before I ever heard of the research appearing in Dope, Inc. or any of the allegations by Dr.
Then, time and again, over the subsequent years, as I leafed through and re-read Coup d'etat in America, the meaning and impact of this unusual reference began to come into focus as I explored all of the different facets of not only the JFK assassination but all of the different forces that were aligned against the American president at the time of his murder.
Obviously it wasn't a ""Jewish plot"" to assassinate JFK, but I did, of course, ultimately come to realize that there was indeed an Israeli connection to the murder involving highly-placed individuals who happened to be Jewish and who were interested in furthering the conspiracy to advance the interests of the Jewish state.
John Coleman's charge that ""Zionism"" was behind the JFK assassination, I never found any motive put forth.
I've always been told that any murder investigation must inquire into possible motives.
Well, lo and behold, as my own research continued, I did indeed begin to find motives for Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination.
Andrew and Leslie Cockburn's Dangerous Liaison: The Inside Story of the U.S.-Israeli Covert Relationship.
This book explored the conflict between JFK and Israel in similar detail and, like Hersh's book, began to shed an interesting new light on a little known facet of JFK's foreign policy and I began to see how it all did tie directly to some of the very forces that had an interest in his assassination.
Then I began considering the aspects of Organized Crime's involvement in the JFK assassination and how there might indeed be a connection between Israel and Organized Crime.
I started looking at the connections between organized crime and the CIA and thence to the Israeli Mossad.
I knew that Meyer Lansky, the organized crime figure, had actually settled in Israel but I never realized, until I began my research, how intimately connected he was to the Jewish state.
Nor did I realize how inaccurate the term ""the Mafia"" really is when describing the Organized Crime syndicate.
Ultimately, if one seriously wishes to examine the history of organized crime you absolutely cannot take a realistic look at that history without considering the role of Meyer Lansky.
It is critical because when one turns over Lansky's tombstone you find the worms of the CIA and the Israeli Mossad crawling around there, perhaps even feeding upon one another.
So I began to find that there were very close ties between the CIA and the Mossad and organized crime and that not only were all three working together in a number of spheres of influence over a long period of time, but that all of them had a distinct motive in wanting to remove JFK from the American presidency.
As it is, of course, over the years, many of those who suggested that the CIA had some sort of role in the assassination are fearful of suggesting that it was an institutional role, and instead say that they were ""rogue"" CIA elements.
To the best of my knowledge the one and only author (other than myself, of course) to say that the CIA had an institutional role in the affair was Mark Lane, writing in Plausible Denial.
Now I would be remiss in not giving credit to former Los Angeles police detective Gary Wean whose book, There's a Fish in the Courthouse, provided me many valuable nuggets of information suggesting Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination.
Ironically, however, Gary has since suggested that Final Judgment is off the mark because my book focuses on the Mossad and does not blame the Jewish community in general for the JFK assassination.
At that juncture I began pulling a number of books off the shelf and began researching, then and there, the suspicions that were evolving no longer in the back of my mind but right there up front at long last.
America's Secret Relations With a Militant Israel off the shelf and discovered what a goldmine it was.
This hit me like a sledgehammer since I hadn't even turned to Green's book until after my basic thesis for Final Judgment had begun to evolve.
This set me on a road of research that, frankly, as I moved forward, I was amazed by the amount of factual detail pointing toward an Israeli connection that I was uncovering in so-called ""mainstream"" sources.
I found also, quite ironically, that in my course of research I was not necessarily relying heavily on JFK assassination-related books for many of the details that ultimately appeared in Final Judgment.
However, of course, I myself had overlooked it in reading Green's book.
Needless to say, there's all this literature about ""The Mafia"" being behind the JFK assassination, etc etc, but as we'll see further (and as I've pointed out in Final Judgment), you can't stop your research into Organized Crime involvement when you come to Carlos Marcello, the Mafia boss of New Orleans, and Santo Trafficante, the Mafia boss of Tampa.
Looking at Lansky brings you back to both American and Israeli intelligence.
The actual writing of the book involved setting up various sections which ultimately became chapters in the book and I organized the research material into those chapters.
During that time I realized that there was indeed a great deal of material available and much of it I found in my own extensive personal library.
It was very much like putting a jigsaw puzzle together and it was falling into place.
The initial research time and the assembly of the material for inclusion in the book probably took roughly two months.
The actual writing was another process altogether, but I have to say that as I was writing I was continually researching what I was writing about and looking into other areas.
Although I kept thinking until the very end of the writing process that I was going to find some fact or detail that would contradict my thesis, never once did I actually find anything that did.
There were times when I thought perhaps I might be overstating the case and when I double and triplechecked facts or details as much as I possibly could, I never found anything contradictory whatsoever.
I was surprised when Findley said that, ""It is interesting—but not surprising—to note that in all the words written and uttered about the Kennedy assassination, Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad, has never been mentioned.
Needless to say as I was already some four months into the writing of the book, I was amazed and delighted to see that Findley had taken the effort to write such a controversial column, but it certainly received no publicity outside the pages of that limited-circulation magazine.
So while Findley presented no firm evidence, I got the distinct impression that perhaps somebody had been talking to Findley and that there were some people ""in the know"" who were talking about the possibility of Mossad involvement and I found this quite heartening.
I told very few people that I was writing the book, to be honest, because I realized that the thesis was quite sensational.
However, I became absolutely convinced as I was writing the book that I was truly digging into an area of JFK assassination that had never been seriously mined before.
In a sense, I suppose, it was a gold mine that had never yet been discovered.
People were relying upon others' research and re-writing and re-hashing the information to the point that no real new ground was being broken.
As an aside, I have to say that after Mark Lane came out with Rush to Judgment, most of the books on the JFK assassination (with a few notable exceptions) have essentially rehashed the initial material that Mark uncovered.
Suffice it to say that Rush to Judgment laid the groundwork for all future efforts.
As it stands, that wasn't the case and the whole controversial project had to land in my lap.
Most of the material that I used in the preparation of Final Judgment was essentially in the public domain insofar as it was all published—all material that had appeared in popular magazines, books distributed by eminent publishing houses that are household names, etc.
Now, of course, this fourth edition is substantially expanded and even more thoroughly documented.
Frankly, the only ""non-Establishment"" source used in the writing of Final Judgment was the material put together by the LaRouche organization's Executive Intelligence Review.
Even those sources that were critical of Israel could hardly be called ""anti-Semitic,"" particularly the works by Stephen Green and Seymour Hersh who are both respected authors who do happen themselves to be Jewish.
All the primary material on all the key points in Final Judgment came from ""respectable"" and ""mainstream"" and ""responsible"" sources.
The one ""secret source"" that I did rely upon was a former French intelligence officer, Pierre Neuville, whose name I had kept under wraps until this, the fifth edition of Final Judgment.
And when Pierre came along I was ultimately satisfied that the thesis put forth in Final Judgment was complete and on the mark and that I had exhausted all resources available.
I was in for a very intriguing surprise, however, when Pierre Neuville finally came along.
The circumstances as to how I came across this source are interesting in themselves.
Upon the completion of the first draft of Final Judgment I made a telephone call to highly regarded former longtime Congressman Paul Findley very well known as a ""liberal,"" who had been somewhat critical of Israel and of its lobby in the United States.
I was surprised when he acknowledged receipt of the book by saying that, as he put it in his letter, ""I will mention that over the past four years I have had lengthy correspondence with a retired diplomat from a western European nation whose family has had disastrous experiences with Israel and the Mossad.
As you can imagine I'd spent all this time writing the book and trying to get it published and here was a former congressman of great repute (and certainly no ""extremist"" by any means) telling me that a retired diplomat had been urging him to write a book that contained the very thesis put forth in Final Judgment.
I was subsequently surprised when I got a letter from Findley saying that while he thought it was a good book that it was inconclusive and that I had not proved my thesis.
He simply doesn't want to be accused of being a ""conspiracy theorist"" on top of the frequent accusation that he is somehow an ""anti-Semite"" for being critical of Israel.
In any case, I must say, in retrospect, knowing what was in that first draft that the final draft—what was ultimately published—was far superior and far more complete.
Nonetheless, I did also receive a letter from the intelligence officer who was now living in Canada.
On the one hand the Frenchman suggested that I was aiming in the right direction, but he was emphatic in pointing out that I was, I suppose, using the wrong ammunition.
I was trying to bring down an elephant with a cap gun or using a shotgun when a rifle would be better.
In any event, the Frenchman supplied me what I needed to bring my theory on target.
He specifically stated to me that information to which he was privy did confirm my contention in the first draft of the book that James J Angleton, Israel's man at the Mossad desk at the CIA, had been directly involved in the assassination plot.
He also specifically named Colonel Georges deLannurien, a highranking figure of the French intelligence service, the SDECE, as having been involved in the conspiracy in a critical way.
He also singled out Yitzhak Shamir as a conspirator and in my own first draft of Final Judgment I had pointed out that Shamir had been the Mossad's European station chief, based in Paris, and, more importantly, had been head of the Mossad's special assassinations team that had been publicized by an Israeli newspaper at the time I was writing Final Judgment.
The Frenchman told me that Shamir had arranged, through the assistance of deLannurien, a French assassination team that had been involved in the JFK murder.
This material pointed toward a new angle, so to speak, in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
It added an additional element of the conspiracy that, frankly, I didn't at the time fully understand myself.
That is, to reiterate, the ‘French Connection,"" which one might also call the ""Algerian Connection,"" is most definitely the Israeli connection.
So having been alerted, I began to review all of the material I could find relating to the relationship between France, its long-time colony, Arab Algeria, Israel and the United States and all of the key players involved.
For those who are not immediately familiar with this aspect, I would refer them to the famous novel by Frederick Forsyth and the film based on the novel, The Day of the Jackal.
This is a novel, based on fact, explaining the story of a conspiracy by former high-ranking French military officials and diplomats to kill French President Charles DeGaulle.
They were upset with him, to put it lightly, because of his decision to grant independence to the long-time French colony of Algeria, a major Arab state in North Africa.
These French nationalists considered Algeria as a distinct part of France itself and viewed DeGaulle's surrender of Algeria to the native Algerian nationalist rebels as a betrayal of France.
The OAS was operating in opposition to DeGaulle both in France and in Algeria, indeed worldwide.
Although DeGaulle, in fact, had a long and friendly relationship with Israel, supplying the Jewish state vital material used in its nuclear development, not to mention other support, the fact is that Algerian independence was not something that the Israelis wanted since this, obviously, would create a giant new Arab state in opposition to Israel.
As a consequence the Israelis began to develop a strong and distinct alliance with elements in the French military and in French intelligence who were opposed to Degaulle's decision to grant independence to Algeria.
This is interesting in itself because you find the Corsicans in a strange triangle.
On the one hand you had the Corsicans tied up with the Lansky Crime Syndicate which, in turn, was close to Israel's Mossad.
In turn, however, the OAS was working with the Israeli Mossad and, interestingly, a Jewish anti-communist group known as the Jewish AntiCommunist League , all fighting DeGaulle over the issue of Algeria.
So, in short, what you had were diverse French elements interacting with those who were working both for and against Israel's interests.
It was the same OAS group working to bring down DeGaulle that also happened to be tied to Guy Banister in New Orleans.
Banister, of course, is the former FBI agent who had gone to work as a CIA contract agent financing and supplying anti-Castro Cuban exiles during the period prior to the JFK assassination.
And it was Banister who had a very close and peculiar relationship with none other than Lee Harvey Oswald during the time of Oswald's unusual period in New Orleans.
The bottom line is that this ""French Connection"" or ""Algerian Connection"" is really the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination, any way you cut it.
It required an immense amount of additional research on my part to understand the history of French Algeria, DeGaulle's conflicts with the OAS, DeGaulle's alliance with the Corsican Mafia who fought the OAS on his behalf, and, of course, the conflicts within DeGaulle's own intelligence agencies where there were immensely conflicting loyalties over the Algerian controversy.
Henry Hurt, writing in Reasonable Doubt and Dick Russell, writing in The Man Who Knew Too Much, had written about the French angle, but neither of them attempted to analyze the entirety of the dynamics at work in the French Connection.
So if there is anyone who wants to try to pin the JFK assassination on the OAS, they cannot honestly do that without fingering the Israeli connection.
The Israeli and OAS connection ties back to Clay Shaw in New Orleans and, of course, to Guy Banister as well.
You cannot ignore the Israeli connection to Permindex vis-a-vis the JFK assassination any more than you can ignore the critical Israeli connection to Permindex vis-a-vis OAS attempts to assassinate Charles DeGaulle.
The reason why Permindex would be interested in killing Charles DeGaulle was because Permindex was an Israeli front and DeGaulle's policies on Algeria were inimical to the interests of Israel, just as, in turn, JFK's policies were inimical to Israel.
Therefore anyone who prefers to be ignore all of this is being disingenuous, at the very least.
In any case, in light of all these French connections, I substantially revised Final Judgment's first draft and this proved somewhat startling to me inasmuch as I had not expected that I would have to do this, having been highly satisfied with the first draft itself.
However, having pursued the French Connection, I did indeed realize that there was a French Connection which, of course, was ultimately the Israeli connection.
Upon publication of the first edition, I sent Final Judgment to the French diplomat who wrote me back saying ""good work"" and added that JFK would have been proud of me.
However, everything that I know about him (based upon the information that he provided about himself, plus the endorsement he received from exCongressman Paul Findley who put me in touch with him) leads me to believe that my French source is not only sincere, but totally reliable.
In other words, what appear to be ""friendly"" sources from the ""suspicion business"" might, in fact, by enemies providing you disinformation and misinformation.
At any rate, the bottom line is that Final Judgment can stand or fall on its own merits, without the specific input of this French source.
In addition, as I noted earlier, I could have easily published the book without delving into the French Connection and still, I believe, provided the readers a very strong case for Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination.
What I believe I have done, though, in Final Judgment is to draw a very fine and significant line between the French Connection to the JFK assassination and the New Orleans Connection that involves the two CIA assets, Guy Banister and Clay Shaw, right to the Israel Connection.
There has not been anything that I have received, other than the communications from my French source who ultimately identified himself by name and gave me his complete history, including some rather striking details about his own interesting family and its background.
In the postscript to Final Judgment I've provided background on Pierre's own experiences with the Mossad.
However, since the book was published, no one has come forward with any new information which is of an ""inside"" nature.
I myself have discovered further published information confirming other details that appeared in the original edition of Final Judgment and in the revised editions, including this most recent edition.
From the time the idea actually began to formulate in my mind when I began the serious research to the time the first draft was completed was roughly seven months.
After I began researching the French Connection after my French source read the first draft and pointed me in that direction, it took an additional three months to fine tune my manuscript and add the new findings that I'd uncovered.
I cannot help but recall that literally one day before the book was scheduled to go to the printer for the first time and I felt that I had put everything that I could possibly put in the pages of the book and was content that the volume was complete (including all of the additional information regarding the so-called French Connection), I happened to be sitting on my living room floor flipping through a bound volume of a nowdefunct newsletter.
I had discovered something else that unquestionably had to be added to the manuscript.
What I discovered were details about a gentleman who had come to visit New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison when he was still in the earliest stages of his investigation into the assassination.
Bear in mind that at this point Garrison had not yet come across the name of Clay Shaw.
It was at this time that Garrison received a visit from a businessman named John King.
King had very close connections to Clay Shaw, the Permindex board member, whom Garrison hadn't even yet identified as a suspect in the conspiracy.
I was surprised myself to learn of King's Israeli connection, inasmuch as I already knew about King.
But, as I say, I didn't know about his ties to Permindex until just a day before I was getting ready to send Final Judgment to the printer.
This is just one example, but a significant one, of the un-ending process of researching into the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Perhaps some day in the distant future there will indeed be a final judgment, the title of my own book notwithstanding, if someone has before them everything that I've written and everything else that will be written and which can all be compiled together into the final judgment.
Involvement by the Mossad in the JFK assassination was ordered at the highest levels.
Based upon what I've learned about the structure of the Mossad, I firmly believe that Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion was the individual who ordered Mossad collaboration in the assassination conspiracy and that it was probably his last act before resigning his post in disgust with JFK's stand toward Israel.
However, in the case of the involvement of the French SDECE's Colonel Georges deLannurien—as I point out in Final Judgment—this was a classic case of a ""rogue"" operator.
This French conspirator was most definitely not doing the bidding of French President Charles DeGaulle, but he was assisting his Mossad ally, Yitzhak Shamir, and his CIA ally, James Angleton, with whom deLannurien spent the day at CIA headquarters in Langley on November 22, 1963.
And you can bet the family silver that deLannurien and Angleton were not together on that particular day for the purpose of discussing the weather.
I did not indicate to Mark during the writing of Final Judgment that I was writing the book.
I didn't want Mark—or anybody else—to judge the book prior to its completion based on a sketchy overview.
He said that the book did make a ""strong case"" for Mossad involvement and he did not believe that the book conflicted in any way with his own book, Plausible Denial, which pinpointed the CIA's role in the assassination of President Kennedy.
So in the JFK assassination the CIA and the Mossad were essentially two sides of one coin.
As far as Mark Lane's opinion of Final Judgment is concerned, it was suggested to me prior to publication that I ask him to write an introduction to the book.
Not that it wouldn't have been an honor and a privilege to have Mark write the introduction.
However, the fact is that Mark has stirred up a hornet's nest with his own books on the JFK assassination and on other subjects for that matter.
Mark had not researched the Mossad aspect as I had, so I didn't feel it would be appropriate to expect him to put his name in defense or endorsement of a thesis—quite a revolutionary one, I suppose—that he himself had not originated.
Additionally, because of the very fact that Final Judgment tied Israel to the JFK assassination I did not think it would be appropriate for Mark to have his name appended to an introduction to the book, precisely because of the fact that Mark himself had become involved in the Middle East controversy and had been a critic of Israel.
I recognized that the thesis of Final Judgment was inflammatory on its own and I didn't want to put Mark in the position of having to defend my work.
He's been busy enough as it is fighting off the efforts of the CIA and the FBI and the media to ignore or suppress or distort his own efforts.
Plausible Denial is first and foremost an account of Mark Lane's defense of The Spotlight newspaper against E Howard Hunt's libel suit.
Final Judgment, in my view, amplifies many of the findings in Plausible Denial and further confirms the conclusions of Plausible Denial and adds further details that prove that the CIA was indeed involved in the assassination.
The greatest strength of Mark's book, I believe, is that it demolishes the myth that there were ""rogue elements"" of the CIA involved in the president's murder.
But you can't make a serious study of the JFK assassination without having read Plausible Denial.
The first review appeared in my own national weekly newspaper, The Spotlight, and it probably won't surprise anyone to learn that the review was quite laudatory.
The second review of Final Judgment appeared in the Washington Jewish Week on April 28, 1994 and is discussed in Final Judgment in the afterword.
The third review appeared in the aforementioned Steamshovel Press in its undated issue Number 11.
Other than this cautious commentary, Steamshovel has been remarkably reticent about mentioning the book or providing me the opportunity in its pages to debate, for example, one Dave Emory, who actually contends that there is a ""Nazi"" connection to the JFK assassination.
I personally presented Michael Isikoff of Newsweek a copy of the book, but I've yet to hear even a whimper from him.
Following the release of earlier editions of Final Judgment there were several attempts to suggest that the book relied upon less-than-reliable sources—that my sources were biased, that they were ""anti-Israel"" or otherwise perhaps ""too right wing"" in nature.
What's more, as I have noted in Final Judgment, my primary sources on JFK's struggle with Israel come from sources such as Seymour Hersh, Stephen Green and Andrew and Leslie Cockburn, none of whom can be described as extremists in any way.
The Rockwell book was referenced in the bibliography only for the record and is not provided as ""proof or ""evidence"" of Israel's involvement in the JFK assassination.
By so doing you will only demonstrate how determined you are to try to discredit my theory in any way possible.
One effort to discredit my research falls flat if you look at the facts.
And for the record, here's an analysis of the LaRouche citations. e Eight of the 30 notes citing LaRouche publications were passing references to the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith and its connections to a number of bankers with ties to the Lansky syndicate, etc.
Botnick. e Four of the LaRouche citation footnotes appeared in two appendices which were supplemental in nature and not central to the basic thesis of the book.
In fact, this is the only LaRouche citation on the subject of the JFK assassination per se.
I'll note additionally that much of the above-referenced material taken from LaRouche sources also appears in other works on the JFK assassination and the history of organized crime, among other places.
When I contacted the aforementioned Morrock—who admitted to me that he considered himself ""a Zionist""—and confronted him about the misinformation, he advised me in no uncertain terms that he wouldn't believe ""anything"" that I had to say.
He also admitted that he had never done any substantive investigation of the JFK assassination—a fact which suggests that his real motivation in trying to discredit me was stimulated largely by the fact that I had dared to bring Israel into the picture.
Morrow also made the outlandish claim that it was clear that my employer, Willis Carto, was essentially the real author of the book and that Carto had ""dictated"" the book, which, of course, is just simply not true.
As I mentioned earlier, I relied on many, many sources and an overwhelming majority of those sources are ""mainstream"" sources, even among those in the lore of the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Not on any major point in any area of the book did I find anything that didn't seem to be backed up by other sources.
However, I did make a serious effort to try to continually have (especially where I had any doubts) a number of sources that confirmed the basic facts of the particular area that I happened to be writing about.
Marrs is the author of the mammoth volume, Crossfire, examining virtually all of the JFK assassination conspiracies.
This book came out before Final Judgment and Marrs' book does, to its credit, get into the Permindex connection and quotes the LaRouche organization's Executive Intelligence Review in regard to Permindex.
However, Marrs only goes so far as to mention the possibility—although he never necessarily acknowledges it as fact—that Permindex had ties to the international drug trade.
And, of course, Marrs never ever gets into the Israeli Connection, even though, as I've pointed out earlier, Marrs' own source, Executive Intelligence Review, focuses on Mossad figure Tibor Rosenbaum's role in Permindex.
Be all of this as it may, I sent Marrs a copy of Final Judgment after it was first released.
However, I do have to admit that in my letter to Marrs I did point out some things about Oliver Stone that led me to be suspicious of Stone's motives in bringing JF‘K to the screen in the fashion that he did.
I pointed out to Marrs that I had been told (although I've never actually confirmed it, to be completely honest) that Stone was a major contributor to AIPAC, the registered lobby for Israel.
Now at this juncture I will mention that Oliver Stone paid some $200,000 or more to Jim Marrs at the time Stone was putting JFK together.
So I understand why Marrs would be hesitant to criticize or to acknowledge criticism of a man who had obviously made him rich overnight.
However, more recently, Marrs has said some friendly things about Final Judgment, although he's not endorsed it altogether.
I likewise sent a copy of the book to William Turner, who has been an assassination investigator and the co-author of Deadly Secrets (formerly titled The Fish is Red) which is about the joint CIA-Organized Crime plots against Fidel Castro that seem to intersect with the JFK assassination conspiracy.
I also sent a copy of Final Judgment to Gaeton Fonzi, author of The Last Investigation, who was an investigator for the House Assassinations Committee inquiry into the JFK murder.
I even pointed out to Fonzi that he and I had at least one mutual acquaintance.
However, I never received an acknowledgment from either Turner or Fonzi.
Newfield's most recent claim to fame is his story that Teamsters Union boss Jimmy Hoffa was behind the JFK murder—a theory that got wide play.
Newfield's ""Hoffa Killed JFK"" story stemmed from his relationship with Frank Ragano, a former lawyer for Hoffa and Santo Trafficante, the Tampa Mafia boss.
I even challenged Newfield to debate me on the subject on a national radio talk show, Radio Free America, hosted by my colleague at The Spotlight, Tom Valentine.
Scheim's book, in my opinion as an author and editor with an eye for these things, is nothing more than an enriched, expanded re-write of the book The Plot to Kill the President by G Robert Blakey who was director of the House Assassinations Committee investigation and who, in that capacity, was determined not to find any CIA or FBI or intelligence community involvement in the murder of the president.
As I pointed out in Final Judgment, Scheim tended to portray Meyer Lansky as an insignificant figure who was a low-level mob figure, a flunky to the Mafia, when, in fact, obviously, he was much bigger than that.
Scheim— dare I say it?—is Jewish and it could well be that this may have been some element in his bias.
Nonetheless, whatever his bias, Scheim does have some credibility in some circles.
Still, he has never acknowledged receipt of the book nor has he agreed to debate me as I asked.
If my theory is so obviously ridiculous, I would think that Scheim would relish the opportunity to demolish the theory, not only because he believes that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" but because, as a Jewish American , he would have the chance to refute the claim that the Jewish state had a hand in the assassination.
I would think that he would take this golden opportunity to demolish me publicly.
A good friend of mine, Donald L Kimball, has written three books on the JFK assassination.
He's a prolific writer and a dedicated American, but to the best of my knowledge he has never even read Final Judgment.
Anybody who denies that there is a strong pro-Israel bias in the American media is again, either a liar or a fool or both.
So I understand why the authors of books on the JFK assassination don't want to cross the media.
To be sure, there was a lot of hostility toward my particular approach, but I was pleasantly surprised to find more than a few people who were willing to give me friendly input and who were not prepared to dismiss my theory outright.
At the same time, though, I did find that even some of the most able critics of my theory were, in fact, unable to refute my theory and that was actually a relief to me, for I was frankly concerned that perhaps I had missed some detail somewhere that would bring the thesis of Final Judgment come crashing down.
Until the center recently went out of business, they held an annual confab in which JFK ""buffs"" and ""fanatics"" came to Dallas to talk about their favorite subject—to ponder every possible theory about whether the fatal shot was fired from a storm drain or from a flying saucer.
However, when I asked to come to Dallas to speak about Final Judgment which had already sold 8,000 copies all over America, I never even received an acknowledgment from these people who are ostensibly dedicated to finding out the truth.
Now either I am a total crank or I am right on the mark and they don't want to discuss it.
I leave it up to the readers of Final Judgment to make their own determination.
I don't believe that anybody who has read Final Judgment with an open, honest approach considers me a crank.
They wouldn't get good publicity if they started talking about possible Israeli involvement in the assassination.
But, more importantly, the minor errors of fact that appeared in previous editions have been corrected and in my special ""challenge to the readers"" I have outlined those errors for the record and point out that they have nothing to do with the thesis of the book Other than those corrections, I have not revised the original thesis as it was put forth in the first edition.
I have tightened up the book here and there but I have not deleted any substantive material relative to the thesis itself.
The book thus stands essentially as it was first written but is now much stronger and far more comprehensive than ever, covering areas related to the assassination and the cover-up that were not discussed in the previous editions, particularly the new findings that I've unearthed regarding longtime CIA operative Frank Sturgis’ little-known work for the Mossad—an explosive detail indeed.
Stone's defenders have pointed out that Stone had a very complicated subject to deal with in the film and that he couldn't include everything and that's absolutely true.
That is, in effect, what the film has done, and it has done it in a fashion such that the ""solution"" is far from anything but that.
Mark Lane was one of the prime movers behind this film, but Lane himself ultimately was unhappy with the final version of the film in that it did not, in his view, adequately address the role of the CIA in the assassination of President Kennedy.
All in all, however, Executive Action is a good film and very well constructed and there's no doubt that Stone relied heavily on the foundation laid by Executive Action in structuring his own film.
Like Stone's film, Executive Action, does not name any high-level conspirators per se.
The film, like Stone's film, does betray a certain ""liberal"" bias, if you will.
I always find watching the film very instructive, however, in that it does outline a theory, in a very concise fashion, of how a small group of conspirators could have carried off the JFK assassination.
I would urge anyone who wants a capsule overview of the basic JFK assassination conspiracy to see Executive Action.
There have been Arab-Americans who have read the book and have said it's a great book.
But the book hasn't been subsidized by the Arabs and it isn't Arab propaganda.
It wasn't until even after the publication of the fourth edition that a single Arab publishing house finally decided to publish an Arabic translation of the book.
So Arab money was never a factor behind the publication and distribution of the initial publication of the book and the truth is that even the Arabic-language publisher of the book has not provided the book the kind of distribution that I would have expected.
Unfortunately, because of restrictions against travel to Libya (imposed upon Americans by the pressure of the Israeli lobby), I was unable to attend.
However, the organizers asked me to submit a written statement which was read aloud to the participants who had come from all corners of the globe.
In the aftermath I received wonderful letters from people as far away as Malta, Ghana, Guyana and New Zealand who were, it seems, profoundly surprised to learn there are a few Americans unafraid to raise questions about the United States relationship with Israel.
I am grateful to those people from the so-called ""Third World"" who took the time to write and am thankful that there are a few places where freedom of speech still exists.
I might mention, additionally, that when my publisher attempted to purchase a full-page advertisement for Final Judgment in the pages of an ""Arabist"" publication, The Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, the editors rejected the advertisement.
Yet the influence of the ADL is felt even among those who are inclined to the ""Arabist"" point of view.
Clearly the editors at The Washington Report are not going to lend themselves to publicizing Final Judgment, despite the fact that many of their readers have obviously read Final Judgment or otherwise heard about the book.
In March of 2003 I did have the unique opportunity to lecture at a leading Arab think tank in the Middle East, the Zayed International Centre for Coordination and Follow-Up—much to the dismay of the AntiDefamation League, which raised a major ruckus about my appearance there— but the subject of Final Judgment was only mentioned in passing in the course of my lecture about United States media bias in favor of Israel.
A self-described ""Zionist"" who says he is ""committed to the strength and survival of Israel,"" Chamish has helped stir a tempest in Israel recently by documenting to the satisfaction of many that Israeli intelligence was involved in the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
In his review of Final Judgment, he says that he accepts my contention that the Permindex corporation was indeed a Mossad front for covert operations.
Chamish did have several criticisms, but none of which were damaging to the basic thesis which Chamish has essentially endorsed.
He said that while, in his view, ""Piper gets lots right and lots wrong . . . what is bothersome is it doesn't take much of what he gets right to make a case for Israeli involvement"" in the JFK assassination.
However, Chamish does concur that my suggestion that Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion (angry at JFK for trying to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb) may have thus decided, in Chamish's words, ""to contribute Mossad expertise to assassination"" is reasonable speculation.
Noting that I was a correspondent for The Spotlight (about which Chamish probably heard a few choice rumors) Chamish said that this ""is not really thrilling to me"" but he points out that ""about half of Piper's sources are Jewish"" and that ""all in all, Piper doesn't sound like an anti-Semite and I can spot one.
Chamish has also gone so far as to make a connection between Final Judgment and the death of JFK, Jr., son of the late president.
From an Israeli, needless to say, this is a very powerful endorsement and an honest one.
Shamir—not to be confused with Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir—has been hotly critical of Israel's continuing violence and international intrigue against its enemies.
In Final Judgment you charge that long-time Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was directly involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Shamir headed the Mossad's official hit team at the time of the JFK assassination, so he is not very likely to want to bring attention to that fact by bringing a libel suit against me.
It would open up an unpleasant can of worms that the Israelis would simply prefer to keep sealed.
You never actually say whom you believe the actual assassins were who killed President Kennedy in Dallas.
I do point out in the book that there have been several names put forth as the possible ""French"" assassin in Dallas, most notably one Michael Mertz.
There is strong evidence that anti-Castro Cuban exiles were involved in some way in the events in Dealey Plaza.
We have the Novo brothers whom former CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz says accompanied her to Dallas arriving the day before the assassination.
We must not forget that the individual who was the ""handler"" for Miss Lorenz and the Novos was Frank Sturgis who worked for years for both the CIA and the Mossad and Sturgis himself later told Lorenz that his team was involved in the assassination, although he never said that they were the shooters, per se.
Miss Lorenz testified that she had been told by Sturgis that she would be acting as a ""decoy"" in the operation and it wasn't until after the assassination that she realized her activities had brought her into the sphere of the assassination conspiracy.
There were probably many people brought to Dallas as part of potential or possible assassination teams and who were never in fact utilized or who may have played some part, one way or another, either before or after the crime took place.
Mark Lane proved in Rush to Judgment that there was much more to the story and subsequent books such as, notably, Josiah Thompson's Six Seconds in Dallas, analyzed the forensic aspects in a convincing fashion.
However the question of conspiracy and cover-up was no longer in doubt after such volumes appeared.
Therefore we've known for thirty years that there was a conspiracy, that multiple assassins were involved.
It doesn't matter how they carried out the crime, in the end, since the crime was a success.
The weapons used in the crime have never been found and much of the autopsy and ballistic evidence that does exist may itself be forgeries.
We are not likely to ever find a ""smoking gun"" that was bought by a known Mossad assassin either.
Clay Shaw, David Ferrie, Guy Banister, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, the French assassins and many others.
When we look into the connections of these well-known names, as I did in Final Judgment, you cannot help but keep tripping over the Israeli Connection.
So most people wouldn't even know to look in the Israeli direction in the first place.
When liberal author Richard Reeves appeared on the Pat Buchanan radio program touting his new history of the Kennedy administration, I phoned in and asked about JFK's Middle East policy in the context of possible Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination.
Reeves briefly acknowledged that JFK was engaged in a lessthan-friendly state of affairs with Ben-Gurion but before I could pursue the matter further, Buchanan's co-host, Ben Wattenberg, a devotee of Israel, broke in—cutting me off the air, I might add—and switched the discussion to the subject of JFK's health.
I think this comes back to the fact that Garrison himself was evidently not initially cognizant of the Israeli connection here, nor did he actually have any reason to suspect Israeli involvement, inasmuch as—at that time in the late 1960' s—JFK' s conflict with Israel was truly a deep, dark secret.
Weberman, Garrison himself evidently later did come to the conclusion that there was a Mossad connection evidenced by his circulation of a manuscript for a novel in which he pinpointed the Mossad as the driving force behind the assassination conspiracy.
As I have pointed out in Final Judgment, Garrison did not (at least at first) actually consider Shaw's ties to Permindex to be central to the events in Dallas.
That suggests that Garrison missed the boat in a very big way since he had stumbled on the key to Clay Shaw's intelligence connections and evidently did not understand them.
One of my biggest regrets is that Jim Garrison didn't live long enough to read Final Judgment.
As I mentioned earlier, those who did pinpoint the Permindex Connection such as Dr.
They did not examine JFK's Middle East policy and how that policy was reversed upon JFK's death, not to mention the fact that JFK was trying to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb, which, ultimately, was almost certainly the driving force behind Israel's involvement in the assassination conspiracy.
Actually, after I finished writing Final Judgment I did come across two very old and relatively obscure published articles that actually pinpointed the role of the Mossad and the Lansky Crime Syndicate in the conspiracy.
James K Warner of the Christian Defense League about this and told him that I had to give credit where credit was due.
But it's interesting that this short article covered the subject quite well.
I also have to give credit to the late Ned Touchstone, also of Louisiana, who was the publisher of a journal called The Councilor.
Touchstone had actually done some investigating into the JFK assassination and I have now learned that it was Touchstone who was one of the first people to stumble across CIA contract operative David Ferrie and this is discussed in some detail in Appendix Three.
To Touchstone's credit, he did actually point out the high-level Israeli lobby connections of the powerful Stern family of New Orleans who were the owners of WDSU radio and television in New Orleans and close friends of Clay Shaw.
It was Touchstone who suggested that somehow the Sterns might have been a key to the JFK assassination puzzle, but, obviously, he didn't have any firm evidence, perhaps again because no one actually knew how much of a problem had developed between JFK and the Israelis prior to the assassination.
Touchstone first discovered the picture of Clay Shaw at a party sponsored by the Stern family's WDSU network in New Orleans.
Recently, serious doubts have been raised as to whether Ferrie is actually the person shown in the photo with Shaw, but there have been other sources who have said that Shaw and Ferrie did know each other.
So whether it was Ferrie in the picture or not is largely irrelevant at this point in time.
It wasn't until just recently, in 1995 in fact,—after the publication of Final Judgment—that the State Department released a massive volume of previously-unpublished documents relating to United States relations with Israel during the Kennedy administration.
And these are documents that verify that JFK and Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion were engaged in very bitter behind-the-scenes conflict over Israel's drive to build a nuclear weapon.
In addition, of course, Avner Cohen's new book, Israel and the Bomb, has provided a vast wealth of new information about JFK's behind-the625 Questions & Answers scenes war with Israel.
Cohen has told people that he rejects my theory of Israeli involvement in the JFK conspiracy, there is no question but that his book gives credibility to my thesis—whether Cohen likes it or not.
In many instances you told us what you would be telling us about in later chapters or referred to in previous chapters.
Of my immediate circle of acquaintances who read the book either before publication or afterward, the repetition is something that they have almost all invariably commented upon when I asked them what they did like—or not like—about the book.
As it was, actually, roughly seven out of ten of them said that they liked the repetition saying that it tied all of the complex subject matter together.
So in the process of writing the book I made the conscious decision to try to tie all of these things together as often as possible.
It would shorten the book if these repetitive references were edited, but for someone who was not familiar with a lot of the details of the JFK assassination, details about the history of JFK's relations with Israel, details about Organized Crime, it may have been more difficult for them to understand the whole thesis were it not tied together in the repetitive fashion that I utilized.
In any case, I do appreciate the critical comments from readers because it is always interesting to see how others view my work.
Still, even in retrospect, despite some criticism from a number of people I know well and whose opinions I respect, I believe my judgment in this matter was correct.
In Final Judgment you never precisely state whether it was the CIA or the Mossad that was the prime mover behind the JFK assassination.
I don't know whether it was the CIA or the Mossad which was the prime mover behind the conspiracy.
I would note that in the realm of United States policy in the Middle East the CIA and the Mossad were, as I've mentioned earlier, virtually two sides of the same coin.
James J Angleton, the Mossad's ally at the CIA, turned many CIA agents essentially into Mossad agents, working on behalf of Israel's interests, not only in the Middle East but throughout the world.
I do think the assassination conspiracy was largely a cooperative effort but I do believe that the Mossad connection was central to the conspiracy and actively endorsed and carried out with Angleton's prodding at the CIA in Washington.
The assassination most likely would never have been carried out without the active collaboration of the CIA and obviously those in the CIA who were actively involved in the assassination conspiracy (Angleton in particular) were close to the Mossad or functioning in its sphere of influence in a number of areas.
For example, CIA man E Howard Hunt, who was working closely with the anti-Castro Cubans and Guy Banister in New Orleans, was also a CIA liaison to the French OAS which, in turn, was working closely with the Israelis.
Then, of course, there's Frank Sturgis, who worked for both the CIA and the Mossad and who admitted to involvement in the assassination.
Not to mention long-time CIA asset Clay Shaw who was connected to the Israelis through the Mossad-sponsored Permindex operation.
In this particular realm of intelligence intrigue—the JFK assassination—when you are looking at the CIA you are also looking at the Mossad.
And if LBJ comes into office, we have it on good authority that he's going to begin a major highly profitable process of arming Israel.
This is highly simplistic, of course—but nonetheless instructive—way of looking at how the process of the assassination conspiracy began developing.
All in all you had a very tightly knit group of people—both outright conspirators and powerful sympathizers—all dealing with one another on a regular and intimate and highly secretive basis.
I've said time and again that while the JFK assassination conspiracy appears on its face to be many different circles intersecting with one another, a more appropriate way of looking at the conspiracy would be to view it as a very wide circle that continues spiraling inward to a very tight vortex.
You don't have ""one big happy family"" but, instead, ""one very small happy family"" collaborating in the JFK conspiracy.
With just a few contacts, these people were capable of setting in motion, financing and orchestrating this conspiracy that obviously crossed several continents.
It would be presumptuous for me to try to make any comment on that and obviously no records on this conspiracy were kept.
Yet everybody in the loop knew what was going to happen—that JFK was going to be assassinated.
According to Pierre Neuville, my French source, Yitzhak Shamir, the Mossad's assassination chief, did contract out at least one assassin or an assassination team through Colonel Georges deLannurien in French intelligence.
And because deLannurien was with Angleton at CIA headquarters at Langley the day of the assassination, it seems likely that deLannurien knew precisely who those contract assassins were gunning for.
So, in my judgment, there was an affirmative move on the part of the Mossad toward the goal of killing John F Kennedy.
There's no doubt that it was JFK's strained relationship with Israel that was one of the prime motivations behind the ultimate conspiracy in light of the role of Israel's CIA collaborator, James Angleton, in the conspiracy.
Angleton had several motivations in launching CIA participation in the conspiracy and one of the primary motivations certainly was his position as Israel's chief and devoted advocate at the CIA in Washington.
I think my bottom line in Final Judgment is that you absolutely cannot look at the JFK assassination conspiracy without factoring in the role of the Mossad—all other factors, no matter how important, notwithstanding.
In Final Judgment you say very little about the role of the militaryindustrial complex and its allies in the Pentagon in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
When you blame the military-industrial complex you are blaming faceless industrialists, faceless military men, faceless financiers.
However, if you wish to resort to the terminology of talking about the ""military-industrial complex"" that still does encompass quite an expanse of various power groups but they are all inter-related.
The fact is that the Israeli lobby is a key component of the military-industrial complex, today in particular.
So the military-industrial complex did not only benefit immensely from the war in Vietnam.
These faceless industrialists also had a great stake in the arming of Israel, any way you cut it.
Those who want to point the finger of blame at ""the military-industrial complex"" for the death of JFK had better start pointing out the fact that Israel and its American lobby are very much a part of that very popular bogeyman in the lore of the JFK assassination conspiracy.
I don't think that the terms ""right wing"" and ""left wing"" have very much meaning anymore and J don't think that you can use this terminology in reference to the JFK assassination whatsoever.
So you found the right-wingers in the CIA working with the left-wingers in Israel.
You also had the Lansky-dominated ""Mafia"" elements who were concerned about the Kennedy administration's war on organized crime and who were also helping finance the anti-Castro Cuban exiles on a variety of fronts.
And as many people know even ""the Mafia"" financed Castro himself in the beginning, hoping to be in his good graces if and when he came to power.
In fact, a lot of veterans of the anti-Castro wars of the early 1960's even perceived ""right winger"" E Howard Hunt to be sympathetic to the left wing elements among the anti-Castro Cubans.
The liberal-oriented among those in the JFK assassination research community do not understand this, but it is definitely a factor to be considered.
So you can't even really pinpoint the CIA itself as being ""right wing"" or ""left wing"" when you really begin analyzing the situation.
There are many old CIA hands who are bitter even today about the influence of the ""liberals"" in the CIA's factional squabbles involving the war against Fidel Castro.
Let's get away from these terms such as ""left wing"" and ""right wing"" and view the JFK assassination conspiracy as an alliance among diverse interests but all of whom stood to benefit from the assassination of President Kennedy.
It's highly unlikely that they would have preferred LBJ over his predecessor.
I've never seen anyone put forth anything even bearing a semblance of credibility that would prove this.
It's possible that there may have been somebody somewhere in the midst of the JFK assassination conspiracy who was somehow a KGB double agent, but obviously there was so much over-lapping of the various intelligence agencies in this conspiracy that it's possible that there was even an Irish secret agent mixed up in the conspiracy, wittingly or unwittingly.
As Mark Lane pointed out in Plausible Denial, the effort to blame the assassination on the KGB was one of the many cover stories laid down by the real conspirators.
And you will recall that it was James Angleton who was the CIA official who was the loudest advocate of the theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was, at the very least, a ""pro-Castro agitator"" who was busy meeting in Mexico with a KGB assassinations expert.
In his book, The Man Who Knew Too Much, author Dick Russell paints a very plausible case that a long-time United States intelligence operative, Richard Case Nagell, may have been under the direction of the KGB in an attempt to infiltrate the assassination conspiracy.
Nagell does appear to have been enmeshed in various aspects of the conspiracy, but that doesn't mean that the KGB was manipulating the conspiracy but was instead monitoring a conspiracy or conspiracies—and they may not have even initially known that it was an assassination conspiracy.
I don't think there's any doubt that Castro himself would have realized what a drastic, drastic mistake it would have been for himself to even be implicated in any aspect of any conspiracy even vaguely associated with the assassination or attempted assassination of John F Kennedy.
Were it ever pinned on Castro, there undoubtedly would have been a national and international demand for Castro's head.
So Castro obviously had no interest in driving a stake through John F Kennedy's heart.
We know now, many years later, that JFK was moving toward a form of detente with Castro, but at the same time, it seems, JFK was no doubt keeping his options open vis-a-vis the Cuban leader.
If Castro were behind the conspiracy, he certainly wouldn't have manipulated Oswald in such a fashion.
If Castro had any inkling that there had been an assassination conspiracy afoot, it would have been in Castro's interests to call it to JFK's attention.
No, it is not possible that the JFK assassination was orchestrated by ""rogue elements"" of the CIA and the Mossad.
Although Hunt was certainly lower on the CIA totem pole than Phillips or Angleton, he was still very much a long-time CIA figure who had played a major role in the CIA's clandestine affairs.
There is no evidence that John McCone—a longtime Kennedy family friend—who was JFK's appointee as CIA director (replacing Allen Dulles, who had been fired by JFK), had anything to do with the conspiracy.
In fact, as noted in Final Judgment, McCone himself was a bitter critic of Israel's nuclear bomb program and earlier, at the close of the Eisenhower administration where he was a member of the Atomic Energy Commission, it was McCone who first leaked the truth about Israel's nuclear intentions.
It's interesting to note that when the Kennedy administration ordered the CIA to begin spying on Israel's secret nuclear development program, the spying was being done out of McCone's office.
In other words, JFK did not trust the spying operation to be conducted by Angleton, whom everyone knew was a co-opted agent of Israel in the CIA, but JFK did trust McCone.
So although McCone had nothing to do with JFK's assassination, those who surrounded him at the highest levels certainly did.
Nor should one forget that many of the people in the CIA at the time of the JFK murder remained loyal to long-time director Allen Dulles who had been sacked by Kennedy.
The CIA's involvement in the assassination was very much an institutional response to JFK who had threatened to splinter the CIA and cast it to the winds.
All of this is not to suggest that there was a general staff meeting at the CIA one day when John McCone was out with a head cold where Angleton announced, ""We're going to kill the president.
The actual conspirators in the loop were a tightly-knit group with vast resources at their command, including not just the CIA bureaucracy and its infamous black budget, but they also had the skills of the Mossad network on call.
What's more, with the CIA's inter-action with peripheral groups such as the anti-Castro Cuban exiles, not to mention contacts in organized crime, there were enough people who could be manipulated in enough ways that they wouldn't even necessarily know that they were being manipulated—and implicated.
And once those people were implicated, it was in their interests to not only shut up, but help cover up.
As far as the Mossad is concerned, Mossad operatives could not have acted without the direct orders of Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion and Mossad assassinations chief Yitzhak Shamir.
The Mossad is actually a very small organization institutionally, as former Mossad operative Victor Ostrovsky has pointed out.
Israel's position was highly precarious in 1963 and for the Mossad—or even so-called ""rogue elements"" of the Mossad—to attempt the assassination of the American president without the assurance that it had the support of the CIA, for example, would have been a rash move indeed.
At this juncture, I suppose, it's appropriate to comment further on James Jesus Angleton.
Although there is no question that, by personal choice , Angleton was a devout friend of Zionism and the state of Israel and that he used all resources at his command to influence CIA decision-making on Israel's behalf.
He was a powerful, secretive man who was also a key player in much of the CIA's worldwide intrigue in a variety of areas where he dealt on a close and sustained basis with figures tied, in turn, to the Mossad and to the Lansky Crime Syndicate.
He was the CIA's most influential—if controversial—spymaster and one of the most remarkable characters in the bizarre and fascinating history of that agency.
And he was also one of those individuals most directly responsible for initiating and orchestrating the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
Former CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz (who went to Dallas with a caravan of Cubans arriving just prior to the assassination) has pointed out that she was told by her CIA handler in Dallas that she was supposed to function as a ""decoy"" and it seems likely to me that many of the Cubans who were enmeshed in the assassination scenario were acting as such.
As I point out in Final Judgment, long-time CIA contract operative Jerry Patrick Hemming who was close to the anti-Castro Cubans has said that the Cubans were being manipulated themselves and that they have come to realize that.
It's worth noting, also, that French intelligence was intimately involved in the Cuban situation during that period, although this is not well known.
So it's conceivable that the Mossad was also using its allies in French intelligence to manipulate the Cuban underground during this time frame.
This is a subject that some JFK assassination researcher might wish to explore further.
If somebody came up with such ""evidence"" I would say that it was forged.
Be that as it may, however, no one will ever come up with such evidence.
However, granting the argument that Oswald, for example, was the only gunman that would not, by any means, discount my basic theory.
Bear in mind that there is no question that Lee Harvey Oswald was associating with people who had links to both the CIA and the Mossad.
At any rate, even if Oswald had been the ""lone gunman"" and managed to have carried off the assassination on his own, the fact is that Oswald was then a lone gunman who was successfully utilized by his manipulators at a higher level who were acting on behalf of the CIA and the Mossad.
This is not an area that I have explored in any real detail, nor is it any area that I expect to pursue.
Nor do I think it is ultimately vital to resolving the mystery of who killed JFK and why.
The bottom line is that, however it came about, Oswald was ultimately the ""patsy"" as he himself described his situation when in police custody.
I think, at this juncture, it is important to note that the CIA's mind control programs which were being utilized at the time of the JFK assassination were, in fact, under the direct control of James J Angleton's counterintelligence division.
Sidney Gottlieb, who was the chief technician in the CIA's mind control programs, has gotten all the public exposure, Gottlieb himself was working directly under Angleton.
If Oswald was a Manchurian Candidate, he was Angleton's Manchurian Candidate.
It's always been my opinion, however, that there were probably other people in Dallas on November 22, 1963 who were possible alternative patsies—others who had already been ""sheep-dipped"" as had been done with Oswald.
The people responsible for setting up these other patsies may have been those who had set up Oswald—or perhaps not.
I don't believe that Oswald fired a loaded round at either John F Kennedy or John Connally, if indeed he fired any weapon that day.
My general feeling is that Oswald may have been roped into the conspiracy by being told that it was a ""dummy"" assassination attempt to scare the American people into thinking that action was needed against Fidel Castro.
Whether it was his own rifle or another rifle or whether that weapon was actually used to fire any of the shots we will probably never know.
It seems likely to me that Oswald knew that there was something going on in Dealey Plaza that day that may have involved, at the very least, the firing of rifles.
I doubt that Oswald actually thought that the rifles would be trained on either JFK or John Connally.
I strongly suspect Oswald was a little bit surprised, to put it lightly, when he learned that the president had been hit by gunfire.
As I've already suggested, I don't think that he was aware of such a conspiracy.
Instead, he probably believed he was part of some ""set up"" that had been orchestrated by JFK himself.
Or, as I've suggested, he may have thought it was being arranged by the CIA to make JFK have second thoughts about Castro.
A new book by Professor John Newman, Oswald and the CIA, tells us very much about Oswald and the CIA, citing many intelligence documents, but it also tells us very little.
All it really tells us is that the CIA and other government agencies had an interest in Lee Harvey Oswald for some time.
However, as Newman does make very clear, it was Angleton's division at the CIA that was ever-present, it seems, when the CIA was assembling information on Oswald.
In short, Angleton knew who Lee Harvey Oswald was—long before the assassination.
So obviously the CIA would have had an interest in Oswald—whether he was a genuine defector at the time or not.
And if Oswald's defection was genuine, it is entirely conceivable that he did a turn-about and then went to work for the CIA rather than against it.
So as much as I am sorry to say, I don't think that John Newman has contributed anything substantial in his new book.
And there are those who say that he was not actually recruited as a phony ""defector"" by the CIA but instead by the Office of Naval Intelligence.
Because of Oswald's profile as a ""defector""—whether genuine or not—it is no surprise that the FBI would have an interest in Oswald.
If Oswald was a CIAsponsored ""defector"" the FBI might not necessarily have known that and may have believed that Oswald was ""the real thing,” so to speak, and upon his return may have put him under surveillance for that very reason.
And if Oswald had been a genuine defector who ultimately recanted upon his return to the United States, it is possible that he volunteered his services to the FBI or was actually recruited by the bureau.
Shortly after the assassination a story circulated that Oswald may have been on the FBI's payroll as an informant, but there's a good deal of evidence to suggest that this story simply isn't true at all.
However, if the story isn't true it has still taken on a life of its own and frequently pops up in literature about the JFK assassination.
The very fact that Oswald was working for Guy Banister in New Orleans does put him in the FBI's sphere of influence, inasmuch as Banister was a long-time high-ranking FBI official.
There have been those who have suggested that perhaps Oswald was even working as a Treasury Department informant, investigating the interstate sales of firearms.
There have been some who have devoted a great deal of research to this topic.
My own inclination is that the CIA connection is the area that we need to focus on and I will discuss that further in a moment.
However, it is likely that if Oswald's work for Banister was being coordinated by the CIA, Oswald himself didn't know it.
Ultimately what we find is that Oswald was operating in many spheres of influence and for that reason alone he was an ideal patsy since he could be pinned to any or all of the different groups which then, in turn, would have reason to want to cover-up their association with an alleged presidential assassin.
However, it seems unlikely that those imposters knew that they were doing so for the purpose of furthering an aspect of the assassination conspiracy.
The assassination conspiracy would be far too compartmentalized for every participant in some aspect of the conspiracy to know precisely how he was being manipulated or utilized in the framing of Oswald.
Some of those imposters probably never laid their eyes on Oswald and probably didn't know who he was until after the real Oswald was picked up by the Dallas police.
Botnick of the New Orleans office of the ADL, we have to seriously ponder the question of whether or not Banister's use of Oswald had been arranged by the ADL which frequently contracted out ""fact finding"" work through private detective agencies such as that of Banister's in New Orleans.
Botnick was an ""anti-communist extremist"" with a known hostility toward the Black civil rights movement, the ADL's public posturing as a ""civil rights"" group notwithstanding.
My own feeling about Oswald's ""sheep-dipping"" by Banister is that Banister's ADL associates were looking into left-wing groups such as the Fair Play for Cuba Committee and upon this basis they could have deployed Oswald into the pro-Castro movement, part of a deliberate attempt to portray Oswald as a Castroite.
Banister himself may have been told that the ADL wanted ""facts"" about the pro-Castro movement and that Oswald was the man for the job.
Banister himself may not have even known that Oswald was being sheep-dipped for his ultimate role in the Kennedy assassination.
So it may have come as a surprise to Banister himself when Oswald was named as the assassin.
In retrospect I don't think that Banister himself was as central to the actual assassination conspiracy, in this regard, as many have believed over the years.
Banister himself was, in that sense, a ""useful idiot"" in the employ of the ADL and the Mossad and its CIA allies.
I would even go so far as to say that it seems likely that even Banister's friends at the ADL had no idea that Oswald was being slated for the role of patsy in the assassination.
However, Scott himself acknowledges that this whole interplay between these interest groups through the Banister connection is part of a ""gray"" area representing the underbelly of finance and politics and international intrigue in New Orleans at the time.
The bottom line is that Lee Harvey Oswald himself probably didn't know precisely who he was working for and that is the way the assassination planners wanted it.
Oswald is probably one of the mostdiscussed and most-analyzed individuals in history, but we will never know who he really was or what his motivations were.
It is conceivable that Oswald thought he was playing a double or triple game and fooling everybody and was even more of a patsy than we realize.
There is an interesting parallel, in this context, that should be noted as an aside.
Now in light of the fact that Bullock was infiltrating both ""left wing"" and ""right wing"" groups over the years, Bullock himself would have been an ideal patsy.
In The Man Who Knew Too Much, Dick Russell has exposed the possibility that there were a number of people who were being groomed as possible JFK assassination patsies due to their association with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, of which Oswald was ostensibly the New Orleans chapter head.
This is interesting, too, in that Brown himself has long-time connections to Israeli intelligence.
This matter of ""defectors"" and ""infiltrators"" and ""undercover agents"" is very complex and one can't always determine the motivations of someone operating in this unusual netherworld.
It's a combination of personal psychology coupled with the ability of the handlers to manipulate a person's activities without letting them know who they are working for or why.
The colorful DeMohrenschildt is probably one of the most interesting characters to cross the stage in the drama known as the JFK assassination controversy.
I'm not convinced that DeMohrenschildt was a conscious player in any assassination conspiracy.
It's apparent that DeMohrenschildt did have quite a bit of contact and interplay with the CIA and other intelligence agencies over the years and he evidently did speak with a CIA official who asked him to keep an eye on Oswald when the latter came to Dallas after returning from the Soviet Union.
In this particular instance, however, it could have been a routine matter of no great consequence that, in the end, had absolutely nothing to do with the assassination itself.
As we've noted, because of Oswald's ""defector"" status—whether genuine or not—the intelligence agencies had an obvious interest in Oswald.
I have seen no evidence to suggest that DeMohrenschildt had any foreknowledge of any conspiracy to ""sheep dip"" Lee Harvey Oswald for the purposes of the assassination conspiracy per se.
However, it is probable that DeMohrenschildt did indeed function in some capacity as one of those who were part of the conspiracy to manipulate Oswald into the role of patsy.
So in that sense, he was ""baby-sitting"" Oswald, but there were others who also had that same responsibility.
Remember that Oswald had left Dallas for New Orleans in the summer of 1963 and the actual contact between Oswald and DeMohrenschildt ended even earlier when DeMohrenschildt left the country, ostensibly for business in Haiti.
Some have suggested that DeMohrenschildt's activities in Haiti may have had something to do with the JFK assassination, but I have yet to see any firm evidence of that.
Obviously, however, when DeMohrenschildt went to Haiti his immediate control and/or supervision of Oswald came to an end.
So in light of the French Connection that I document in Final Judgment, this, in fact, could have brought DeMohrenschildt into the Mossad sphere of influence.
Another thing worth mentioning is that I've actually seen some JFK ""authorities"" portray DeMohrenschildt as some sort of ""anti-communist extremist"" because, I presume, of his White Russian background.
On the contrary, despite his background, it seems that DeMohrenschildt was evidently not much interested in communism or anti-communism one way or another and was actually a bit of an outcast in the White Russian community.
So those who want to make him part of some ""right wing anticommunist conspiracy"" are actually way off the mark.
DeMohrenschildt wore many hats, but there's no real evidence of any complicity by DeMohrenschildt in the JFK assassination.
He may have known something—or perhaps discovered it by accident, either before or after the assassination or perhaps realized in retrospect that he did indeed know something he wasn't supposed to know.
It is apparent, based upon the historical record compiled by those who had contact with DeMohrenschildt that after the assassination DeMohrenschildt realized that he, too, had been used in some fashion to ""control"" or ""handle"" Oswald.
And I do have to point out that the last person who was supposed to have seen DeMohrenschildt before his death was none other than Edward Jay Epstein, a student-turned-journalist who was close to the Mossad's man at the CIA, James Jesus Angleton.
Now rest assured that I'm not suggesting Epstein pulled the trigger on DeMohrenschildt.
But I do find it interesting that he was the last person who has publicly admitted to having seen DeMohrenschildt.
An author of spy fiction could spin a fascinating yarn out of that scenario.
I tend to think that the Paine story is a story that does need further exploration and I would encourage some energetic young researcher to follow through on it.
Paine, supplied by Priscilla Johnson McMillan in her book Marina and Lee, has documented Mrs.
Paine's involvement at one time in the activities of a Jewish community center, so this non-Jewish Quaker woman—Mrs.
Walker's ""role"" in the affair stems from the fact that the Warren Report claimed that Oswald had taken a shot at Walker shortly before the assassination and this, the report claimed, was ""evidence"" of Oswald's felonious tendencies.
In his book, The Man Who Knew Too Much, Dick Russell has traced some strange activities to people surrounding General Walker and, in fact, these people may have had some connection to Oswald.
It appears as though General Walker himself may have been being set up as some sort of ""right wing patsy"" in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
I almost hate to bring this fact up, but the clique of young military men who placed themselves around Walker—proclaiming themselves an outfit called ""Conservativism USA""—were some five Jewish boys who came out of the United States Army in Europe.
This is according to Dick Russell, writing in his mammoth study, The Man Who Knew Too Much.
As I've noted, there were probably a number of patsies being set up in Dallas and the people setting them up probably didn't know the JFK assassination was in the offing.
It appears, at least based upon what Dick Russell has written, that this clique around Walker may have been manipulating Oswald in some way.
So here's another ""Jewish connection"" that seems to have been lost in the shuffle.
Leave it to me to bring up this fact in the context of what I've uncovered.
Oswald himself was evidently moving in circles that were connected to Walker but only those who want to portray the crime as being a ""right wing conspiracy"" believe that Walker had a hand in the assassination.
Milteer was not one of the masterminds of the JFK assassination conspiracy nor was he a player in the actual plot to kill JFK that ultimately succeeded.
It is conceivable Milteer did have some knowledge about an alleged plot to kill JFK in Miami.
Information may have been leaked to Milteer by one of the low-level conspirators about some plot and he may have wanted to think, being a Kennedy hater, that he was ""on the inside"" of some conspiracy, but you can be certain that he was not.
Milteer bragged of his ""knowledge"" to a police informant and that ""knowledge,"" actually, may have been disinformation leaked to Milteer in order to distract attention from the real conspiracy.
Milteer may have been brought to Dallas at the time of the JFK assassination for some other reason under some other pretense, for example, thinking that he was part of some ""dummy"" assassination attempt to provoke a backlash against Fidel Castro.
Personally, I'm not convinced that photographs which purport to show Milteer in Dallas on November 22 actually are photographs of Milteer.
As I note in Appendix Two of Final Judgment, one long-time government informant in the Minutemen and other ""right wing"" groups was Roy Frankhauser who himself claims to have come in contact with Oswald when he was infiltrating a left wing group that Oswald was purportedly associating with.
Although Burros’ name appeared in Oswald's address book, not one single JFK assassination researcher has delved into this unusual possible connection between Oswald and a long-time undercover informant for the federal intelligence agencies.
So the bottom line is that if indeed there was some ""right wing"" connection to the JFK assassination it is always a very distinct possibility that these right wingers were actually ""patsies"" being manipulated by the Mossad's ADL network which has very definitely had a hand in manipulating the right wing in America.
Hunt had anything to do with the JFK assassination conspiracy, nor is there any evidence that Hunt put up any money to help further the conspiracy.
He, like many others, was a critic of JFK but Hunt is simply a convenient bogeyman.
Those who point to the ""Texas oil barons"" such as Hunt as being behind the JFK conspiracy fail to point out that even with Hunt there is a very significant Israeli connection to Hunt which is analyzed in some detail in Appendix Two of Final Judgment.
Hunt did put up money for pay-offs that were involved in some aspect of the JFK assassination and didn't himself know what the real purpose of the money was for.
He may have even been deliberately and unwittingly dragged into the conspiracy in that fashion precisely for the reason that it would give the real conspirators an edge over Hunt who was influential in Dallas and who could be relied upon to help in the cover-up or use his influence to assist in the cover-up if necessary.
Hunt was involved in any aspect of the JFK assassination—knowingly or not—the fact is that there is a very strong Israeli connection to the Hunt empire in the very realm—nuclear development—that was so critical a factor in the conflict between JFK and Israel.
Whether he knew it was going to take place or actually played a part in setting up the assassination is another matter altogether.
The fact he was the beneficiary of the assassination, however, is not enough evidence to convict him.
Craig Zirbel's book The Texas Connection that pinned the JFK assassination solely on LBJ was off base.
Barr McClellan's 2003 book, Blood, Money & Power, has received far more attention that Zirbel's.
McClellan's book is no more than an extended hodgepodge of LBJ's Texas antics with a highly speculative—that's putting it lightly—scenario involving a plot to kill JFK entirely Texas-based.
In truth, the Mossad and the CIA would have been smart to implicate one of Johnson's Texas hands in the assassination including either Wallace or Clark in order to ensure a cover-up by LBJ after the fact.
But I seem to be the only McClellan critic who has bothered to mention that possibility.
McClellan even creates alleged conversations—in extensive detail— between LBJ and the conspirators, said conversations designed to ""prove"" his theory.
Littered with amazing qualifiers, noting that conversations and events ""undoubtedly"" or ""almost certainly"" took place, the book is pretty bad, despite all the friendly publicity it has received in the ""mainstream"" media.
Evidently the controllers of the media have concluded that ""the lowest common denominator""—the idea a vice-president would be behind the killing of a president—is the one theory that satisfies everybody.
Final Judgment seems to hinge largely on the fact that Clay Shaw, prosecuted by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison for involvement in the JFK assassination, had ties to the Mossad through the Permindex company.
In fact, Final Judgment could stand entirely on its own with the thesis intact even if Clay Shaw had never lived.
And I don't believe that the book does hinge on the Shaw connection, although it is certainly significant.
Because of the fact that Garrison was potentially going to unearth the Israeli connection it was necessary that Garrison's inquiry be quashed.
I noted earlier that the actual attempts to stop Garrison actually began before he had even come across Shaw.
The man who actually tried to bribe Garrison into stopping the investigation, international oilman John King, was intimately tied to the Mossad and the Permindex network.
The Permindex Connection is important, though, but I don't pretend to know precisely what role Shaw actually played in the conspiracy.
The whole Garrison investigation was flawed in many ways, of course, and perhaps that is even partly Garrison's own fault.
However, it's very clear that Garrison was a man with a mission and he may have gone astray in some of his assumptions and allegations.
Shaw knew CIA contract operative David Ferrie and lied on the stand during the trial, claiming that he didn't know Ferrie.
Some have come to Shaw's defense, saying he may have lied because he didn't want to be associated with a known and rather flamboyant homosexual such as Ferrie but this is a limp-wristed excuse, no pun intended.
But more importantly, Shaw did have a long-time association with the CIA as we know now, but Garrison was never able to prove that connection at the time.
However, the jury concluded that there wasn't enough evidence to tie Shaw to any conspiracy.
This was significant in that it was a ""Clay Bertrand"" who had called New Orleans attorney Dean Andrews and asked Andrews to represent Oswald after he was arrested in Dallas.
Andrews said that he had dealt with ""Clay Bertrand"" in the past so when he received the call after the assassination, the name of Clay Bertrand was not unfamiliar.
Had the jury heard the testimony by the police officer, of course, it would have probably sealed Shaw's fate during the trial in New Orleans.
So I believe very firmly that the thesis in Final Judgment would stand without or without the matter of the Clay Shaw investigation.
The Shaw investigation, I suppose, might be the icing on a very big cake, so to speak.
I realize that's going out on a limb, but I have never completely discounted this.
After all, Shaw was not exactly a household name in America yet here he was selected to serve on the board of the Mossad-dominated Permindex company based in Europe.
G Robert Blakey, the former director of the House Assassinations Committee, and David Scheim, author of Contract on America, both say that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" and suggest that New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello was the mastermind of the assassination.
Marcello, of course, was an Organized Crime protégé and underling of Meyer Lansky and existed as Mafia boss of New Orleans precisely because Lansky put him there.
Although Marcello, on his own, was one of the most powerful ""Mafia bosses"" in the country, he owed his status to Lansky's patronage, and Marcello's rackets in New Orleans and extending apparently into Texas were among some of the most lucrative in the Lansky syndicate.
So Marcello would not have single-handedly orchestrated the murder of the President of the United States without the approval of Meyer Lansky.
And considering the documented fact that Marcellos' own international business connections were quite far flung on their own, it's inevitable that he would have actually had Mossad connections of his own.
But Carlos Marcello was not the mastermind and prime mover behind the JFK assassination.
Marcello is a colorful figure and an easy target for students of the JFK assassination conspiracy, but despite the fact that Marcello was a very powerful figure on his own, the conspiracy was far too broad-ranging for it to have simply been a product of the Marcello organization.
The theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK"" is enticing, but factually way off the mark.
Over the years there has been a great concern in the Jewish community about representations about Jewish influence in Organized Crime, but one cannot seriously look at the role of Marcello in the assassination without acknowledging that he was a protégé of Lansky.
I can understand Scheim's concerns about stirring up anti-Semitism by revealing Lansky's preeminent role in Organized Crime, but if he is a serious researcher as he purports to be he would be willing to face the facts and not shade them as he does.
There's no doubt in my mind that Ruby did know Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination.
However, there are too many stories of likely personal connections between the two to discount that the two knew one another and were working together in some form of intrigue.
There are convincing stories that Ruby had some contacts with the CIA through his activities in running guns to both Fidel Castro (prior to Castro's seizure of power) and, later, to the anti-Castro exiles.
Former CIA contract operative Marita Lorenz, of course, has testified that Ruby showed up the day before the assassination at the motel in Dallas where she and Mossadconnected CIA man Frank Sturgis and a group of Cuban exiles were staying.
Her story is just one of many of many that tie Ruby in some form or another not only to the CIA, but in events leading up to the assassination.
Ruby was instead a part of the Lansky/Jewish element in the crime syndicate.
The big problem here is that these so-called ""Mafia"" figures that Ruby was in touch with were largely Jewish.
In Final Judgment 1 have firmly pinpointed a Ruby connection to Israel and the Mossad through attorney Luis Kutner (Ruby's long-time friend from Chicago) and I have also outlined other previously ignored Ruby connections to arms smuggling to Israel and Ruby's involvement with so647 Questions & Answers called ""reporters"" from Israeli newspapers in Dallas.
The Israeli connections are there for those who wish to find them—and for those who don't.
As far as Ruby's killing of Oswald, it appears to me that it was something that Ruby ""had"" to do—something he was ordered to do.
In Final Judgment you actually suggest that Jack Ruby did not actually die when he is reported to have died and that he actually later went to Israel.
This story seems outlandish and puts the overall credibility of the book in doubt.
The story was told by a woman who knew Jack Ruby and worked with him many years ago in San Francisco.
The woman who told the story, Grace Pratt, by all accounts was a reliable woman not known to making up such stories and she was so afraid of what she thought she knew—that Ruby was still alive—that she asked that the story never be repeated while she was alive.
I was frankly hesitant to publish this story, recognizing how sensational the story is, and I went back and forth before biting the bullet and deciding to put the story in the book.
Pratt's story should be told since it definitely brought in yet another possible Israeli connection that brought the thesis of Final Judgment full circle.
The very fact that the story has never been reported anywhere else— despite many other bizarre JFK assassination legends that have been given widespread circulation—actually gives Mrs.
Bear in mind that if Ruby did not die when he purportedly died—and if I am entirely wrong and Israel had nothing to do with the JFK assassination—it is entirely possible that Jack Ruby was secreted out of the United States if only for humanitarian reasons.
There may have been Jews in the United States and Israel who were sympathetic to Ruby and said that he had committed a ""patriotic"" act—killing the president's assassin—and that he should be given the opportunity to start a new life.
There have been many who have asked that convicted American Jewish traitor Jonathan Pollard, who spied for Israel, be released from prison and allowed to take up life in Israel.
I do know that Grace Pratt did believe that she saw Jack Ruby photographed boarding a plane for Israel and I do know that she never told the story publicly or sought recognition.
Her story is that ""Ruby"" claimed to have been subjected to surgical masking and some form of hypnosis and she presents this story as though she gives it credibility.
Now this story sounds as possibly outlandish as Grace Pratt's story to some people, but I don't discount this possibility, nor do I think it actually conflicts with Mrs.
Ruby could have gone to Israel and he could have undergone plastic surgery.
So there is another story out there circulating that suggests there was more to Ruby's death than meets the eye.
I would strongly urge some JFK assassination researcher to tackle this controversy and get to the bottom of it.
In any case I will conclude by pointing out that whether Jack Ruby died at the time he is supposed to have died—or not— is immaterial to the thesis of Final Judgment.
Anyone who seeks to discredit Final Judgment by citing the Grace Pratt story and suggesting that it reflects the tone or the overall thesis of the book is being dishonest.
Anybody could have actually killed JFK, even including as the Warren Commission claimed, one lone nut.
The Mafia didn't have that power, despite its wide-ranging connections nationally and internationally.
And it was not the Mafia that convened the Warren Commission and dictated its actions from top to bottom.
But the Mafia did not have the power to be manipulating the CIA's strange activities in Mexico City that were designed to link Lee Harvey Oswald to a purported Soviet KGB assassinations expert.
In the pages of Final Judgment, I think, I firmly demolish any suggestion that the Mafia was ultimately responsible for the JFK assassination.
Now with the revelation that Mossad-connected Hyman Lamer was the real ""boss"" of Sam Giancana, the famed ""Mafia"" chief in Chicago, the old legend that ""the Mafia Killed JFK"" finds itself entangled with a very significant Mossad connection that casts new light on the secret history of organized crime.
I would add that he probably allowed the assassination to take place and did nothing to interfere with the conspiracy's progress.
I find it highly unlikely that Hoover had any part in planning the assassination and no one has ever been able to find any evidence that he did.
Hoover's actual participation was not, of course, critical to actually carrying out the deed.
Frankly, it would have been better (from the standpoint of the conspirators) that Hoover not have any advance knowledge or actually be given any such knowledge.
That would have only given Hoover more leverage and the less people who were in the know, the better.
I've heard that Hoover was supposedly at a party in Dallas at the ranch of his good friend Clint Murchison, the Texas oil baron, the night before the assassination, reveling in the company of LBJ and even reportedly Richard Nixon but this appears to me to be just another one of those exciting rumors that take on a life of their own.
People love stories such as this, but even if Hoover was in Dallas that day before the assassination (and I've never really seen it confirmed that he was, and frankly I doubt it), it doesn't mean he had anything to do with the assassination.
The question of whether Hoover was involved in the cover-up is another story, inasmuch as it was the FBI that was providing information to the Warren Commission's investigation.
Hoover is an outstanding villain but his sole crime vis-a-vis the JFK assassination, I suppose, is that he was J Edgar Hoover.
Richard Nixon has become another bogeyman among JFK assassination theorists, but there's no more evidence to link Nixon to the assassination any more than there is any evidence to link Hoover.
It's an exciting theory, but that's all it is and let's keep that in mind.
George Bush's name is also linked time and again to the assassination and in Final Judgment I explored this in some detail, but again, it seems highly unlikely that Bush was part of any assassination planning, but apparently as part of his work for the ClA—although he denies he was working for the CIA in 1963—Bush did have ties to the anti-Castro Cuban exiles and it's likely that Bush, at one time or another, may have crossed paths with people who may have had some direct hand in manipulating a portion of the overall conspiracy.
The full story of George Bush and his record of CIA intrigue has yet to be told—and, unfortunately, will probably never be told—but I felt that, for the record, it would be appropriate to explore Bush's possible ties to the assassination in the pages of Final Judgment.
And just for the record, I'd like to throw out my own little theory about Bush's connection to the JFK affair.
This is sure to be controversial and I don't have any evidence to prove it, but I'll put it on the table for others to think about.
And if you compare photos of Bush and Phillips, it's conceivable that some might find the two to have a similar appearance.
As I say, this is all pure speculation and I'm not suggesting that there's any evidence to prove it.
Long before the publication of Mark Lane's book, Plausible Denial (not to mention the story in The Spotlight that sparked the libel suit by former CIA man E Howard Hunt that is described in Lane's book), there was a lot of speculation that Hunt was involved in the JFK assassination and that he may have been one of the famous ''tramps"" photographed in Dealey Plaza shortly after the president's murder.
However, I am not convinced that E Howard Hunt was one of those tramps.
I have even seen another picture, published in one of the tabloids, that purports to show Hunt picking up a bullet in Dealey Plaza immediately after the assassination.
Hunt is a suspicious character and he was mixed up in the intrigue surrounding the assassination as Plausible Denial and Final Judgment together prove.
Weberman and Michael Canfield alleges that Hunt was one of the tramps, but, as I say, I don't believe it.
One of the more recent stories that's came out is the story told by Chauncey Holt who claims that it was he who was the ""tramp"" that everybody says is E Howard Hunt and it turns out that Holt is not one of the tramps whose names appear in the Dallas police records.
If these men were somehow involved in the assassination, it's not likely they were the actual triggermen.
JFK assassination researcher Robert Groden has published enhanced photographs of what is likely a gunman firing from the grassy knoll and this assassin seems to be wearing a policeman's uniform.
I really don't think the so-called tramps are of any real consequence in the end, but it's a nice diversion.
The men who were photographed in Dealey Plaza probably were just what they appeared to be.
I addressed this subject in Chapter 16 of Final Judgment but I'd like to comment further here.
We don't know precisely where Hunt was at the time of the JFK assassination.
This is something that was never firmly established even during the Hunt libel trial and Hunt's answers, while under sharp cross-examination by Mark Lane were inconclusive at best.
Hunt insisted that he was in the Washington, D.C. area (whether at home in the suburbs or at the office or downtown shopping at one or more points during the day) on November 22, the day of the assassination.
However, he never did address the allegation made under oath during the second trial by his former CIA associate, contract operative Marita Lorenz, that she and CIA operative Frank Sturgis and a group of Cuban exiles met up with Hunt in Dallas on November 21—the day before the assassination.
What's more, as we noted earlier, Miss Lorenz said that Jack Ruby, who killed Lee Harvey Oswald several days later, also visited them at that motel.
So there is no question but that there was some intrigue involving Hunt in Dallas tying him to intrigue involving CIA-connected individuals that were linked in some way to the assassination conspiracy.
I'm not suggesting—and neither has Mark Lane, for that matter—that Hunt fired a gun at John F Kennedy or even in his general direction on November 22.
I do believe that Hunt was in Dallas at least just prior to the assassination.
What he was doing there is the interesting story about which we know so very little.
In the opinion of investigative reporter Joe Trento (who, by the way, is a sworn enemy of The Spotlight newspaper, once having been forced to settle a libel suit against him by The Spotlight's publisher, Willis Carto) it is likely not only that Hunt was indeed in Dallas and that it was Angleton who sent him there.
It appears to me that Hunt was functioning as a facilitator, so to speak, in the JFK assassination conspiracy, engaged in Dallas with some of the other people who were circling around Lee Harvey Oswald.
It's very conceivable that Hunt had no idea that his mission in Dallas involved an actual assassination plot—perhaps he was only involved in a ""dummy"" assassination plot that was manipulated and overtaken by outside forces and turned into the real thing—and I explored this possibility in Chapter 16.
Although Hunt met up with Miss Lorenz and Frank Sturgis and money passed from Hunt to Sturgis, this doesn't necessarily indicate that—even though Sturgis himself later told Lorenz that his team had been involved in killing the president—that Hunt knew an actual assassination was in the offing.
However, he put himself in the position where, after the fact, he looked guilty as Hell, considering the later testimony by Lorenz.
However, we must consider the fact that—whatever happened in Dallas—Hunt nonetheless later once again teamed up with Frank Sturgis during the Watergate fiasco that led to the ""assassination"" of another president, and in Watergate, too, as we have seen, there was a distinct Israeli connection, also involving Angleton.
Crank into that the fact—as we now know—that Frank Sturgis was not only a CIA asset, but had also long been involved in Mossad intrigue, and we find a very interesting set of wheels within wheels, so to speak.
But Hunt was—and is—a loyal CIA man and he's not admitting to anything one way or another.
And when Hunt needed a witness from the CIA in his libel trial, it was Angleton's long-time deputy, Newton ""Scotty"" Miler, who came to Hunt's rescue.
So although it appears that in 1978 the CIA was initially planning to throw Hunt to the wolves and frame him for involvement in the assassination—painted as a ""rogue"" operative—by his former CIA superiors, by the time his libel trial against The Spotlight came to pass that he and the CIA reached an accord and they provided him assistance.
It appears that precisely because The Spotlight article unveiled the intended ""limited hangout"" aimed against Hunt that the operation was shelved.
Recall that a ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter, ostensibly from Lee Harvey Oswald, popped up at the time that this ""limited hangout"" operation was in its opening stages as the House Assassinations Committee was beginning its inquiry.
All in all, if there's anybody who's alive today who knows what really happened in Dallas, it's undoubtedly Hunt.
However, if Hunt should ever find the need or a reason to ""go public"" with ""what he knows,"" I do believe we might want to take what he says with a grain of salt.
Hunt is a very skilled spy novelist and a prolific one at that, and if some publisher offered him a few million dollars to ""tell all,"" it's conceivable that Hunt—in collaboration with the CIA, or maybe just on his own—will come up with some fantastic story that will satisfy the public craving and that he will, thus, set himself—and his story—as the final judgment as to what happened in Dallas.
I'm afraid too many people will be ready to believe anything Hunt says simply because he is who he is.
This could be the final linchpin for a last-ditch attack on Castro and since the Soviet Union has gone out of business, it won't really matter very much whether Hunt blames them or not.
Crossfire is a wonderful book and provides a comprehensive overview of all of the JFK assassination lore that was available at the time it went to press.
I am hopeful that if Marrs re-issues Crossfire in an up-dated edition that he will mention the theory that appears in Final Judgment, if only to try to tear it apart.
If he is capable of so doing, I hope that he will attempt to do it in a responsible fashion.
All in all, I don't think that Marrs comes to any real conclusions one way or another.
He hints that perhaps LBJ may have been responsible for the assassination and he also points a finger at the ""military-industrial complex"" but that's about it.
I would suggest that people read Crossfire before they even read Final Judgment because it is an outstanding compendium of the basic theories and findings regarding the assassination and once you understand the gist of those theories you will see how Final Judgment does indeed tie them together in a relatively simple theory that does make ultimate sense.
Many people have told me that they had read virtually all of the other books on the assassination but that mine was the one that truly did tie it all together and which provided the most comprehensive explanation of what really happened.
I don't believe that the theory presented in Final Judgment essentially conflicts with the basic thesis that it was a combination of CIA and Mafia elements who were behind the president's murder.
On the contrary, the basic thesis there fits neatly into the scenario presented in Final Judgment.
My book, however, draws in the Israeli Connection that no one has ever addressed before and explains that the so-called ""French Connection"" that others have sought to show was somehow evidence of CIA or even ""Mafia"" involvement points more distinctly to the Israeli Connection.
It's very clear to me that the other theorists don't frankly understand the meaning of the French Connection—that it is the Israeli Connection.
The French Connection additionally, of course, relates directly to both the CIA and the Mafia and even directly to the office of CIA contract operative Guy Banister in New Orleans.
So Final Judgment is quite unique in that it explains how all of these seemingly diverse elements are tied together by the Israeli Connection.
Anyone who has read any book suggesting that it was some sort of CIA-Mafia conspiracy and accepts that thesis can now read Final Judgment and realize that there is nothing in Final Judgment that conflicts with that basic thesis.
I would add that Final Judgment is also instructive in that it presents a more accurate view of the reality of the true nature of the Organized Crime Syndicate and the primary role that Meyer Lansky played in the underworld.
Final Judgment, in that sense, is the first book ever to explore Lansky's connection to the crime of the century.
I firmly believe that Final Judgment presents an argument that no one who believes in the basic ""CIA-Mafia"" conspiracy can reject out of hand.
Those who do reject it, I tend to suspect, are those who are afraid of the big picture.
The book shows that Israel had not only the means and the motive, but also the opportunity—all of the components a good lawyer will need to win a successful murder conviction.
One reader, in fact, suggested that Final Judgment read like nothing less than a legal indictment.
After all, thanks to my French source I was able to pin down the secret roles of Israeli Mossad figure Yitzhak Shamir and French SDECE officer Georges deLannurien in the conspiracy.
But what I've said many, many times in answer to inquiries is that what I believe is unique—among many things, I suppose—about Final Judgment is that it does present a conspiracy that actually only involves a small number of people.
That is, only a handful of people involved would have actually known that the president was going to be killed.
All of the other people who somehow were brought into the conspiracy would not have even known the parts that they were playing in furthering such a conspiracy.
That, I think, is one important aspect of the theory that I present in Final Judgment.
The number of those involved in the conspiracy who actually knew that JFK was going to be assassinated was probably very limited indeed—yet those who were ""in the know"" had vast resources at their command to influence substantially larger numbers of people who would never necessarily know that they were indeed participating in an assassination conspiracy aimed at President Kennedy.
As far as the the actual initiation of the conspiracy, as I've said, it appears evident that this took place through interaction between the Israeli Mossad and the top levels of the CIA as a consequence of their own reaction to JFK's policies.
Not to mention, of course, CIA and Mossad interaction with other power groups that were under the gun during the Kennedy administration—most notably, organized crime.
I've already squarely placed the blame for initiating the conspiracy on James Angleton of the CIA and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion but there were others who may have been on ""the inside"" as well.
Someone had to be responsible for recruiting the assassins, for laying the overall groundwork, determining where the assassination would take place and how it would be financed.
This, I tend to believe, was probably carried out by Yitzhak Shamir who was head of the Mossad's assassinations team.
He, of course, would have worked closely with Angleton and we do know that he contracted out at least one assassin or team of assassins through his ally in French intelligence, Colonel Georges deLannurien.
The financing for all of this could have come from a wide variety of sources.
An easily accessible source of quick, big, untraceable cash would certainly be the CIA and Mossad allies in the Lansky Crime Syndicate.
Lansky himself, not to mention his mob associates, along with the Mossad's Permindex front, all kept bank accounts at Rabbi Tibor Rosenbaum's Banque de Credit Internationale in Geneva.
It's possible that Rosenbaum transferred money through Permindex board member Clay Shaw who in turn was a paymaster of sorts in New Orleans, handing out money to Guy Banister and even Lee Harvey Oswald who was being set up as the patsy through Banister's office.
And it has been revealed in official court documents that the ADL actually uses middle-men to pay their ""fact finders,"" such as Banister and company, to disguise the source of the funds.
So this illustrates how a wide variety of seemingly separate entities could have been used to finance the operation with no trace back directly to the CIA or the Mossad.
Although the ADL, for example, does report to the Mossad, it is unlikely that any Mossad money, per se, has even been transferred into the ADL's bank account.
Funds for some or another part of the assassination set-up could have come from other sources.
Perhaps Hunt did put up money that was used by Ruby in whatever function Ruby was carrying out prior to the assassination.
Hunt may have been assured that the money was for an ""anticommunist"" demonstration the day of the assassination.
Ruby may have even told Hunt that a group of anti-Castro Cubans, disguised as pro-Castro Cubans, were going to stage some sort of ""incident"" to discredit Castro while JFK was in Dallas.
Now all of this is pure speculation, of course, but I don't think it's far off the mark.
We've talked about initiation and we've talked about planning and coordination and about financing.
That would specifically be those areas such as the activities in New Orleans and Dallas where Lee Harvey Oswald was being set up and/or was inadvertently setting himself up as the case may be.
There were also, of course, anti-Castro Cuban exiles being utilized at this level.
It's also likely, as I've pointed out, that a number of potential patsies were being set up in various cities around the country.
The facilitators, in these cities, would have no idea that they were being utilized in an assassination plot setting up the patsy.
It seems unlikely that the conspirators were prepared to transport Lee Harvey Oswald back and forth around the country trailing JFK waiting for the right moment to strike.
No, instead, there were other ""Oswalds""—other patsies—in place in those cities.
And since the assassination did not take place in those locations the facilitators would not necessarily ever realize the real motivation behind the things that they had been instructed to do.
For all of this, it's also entirely possible, as I've said, that there were even several other patsies being set up in Dallas or in other places in Texas.
However, there were not just ""facilitators"" operating around Lee Harvey Oswald and at his level.
There were also facilitators working around the impending victim of the assassination plot.
In the circles around John F Kennedy there were those who were reporting back, most definitely to the CIA, about what JFK's plans were, both in regard to critical high-level international matters immediately affecting the CIA and the Mossad, but also in regard to such specific matters as to where JFK was planning to visit during his trip to Texas.
This would have been routine, of course, since the CIA has long had its operatives planted throughout the executive branch and they have co-opted people not directly on the CIA payroll.
These people reporting back to the CIA, obviously, would have no idea that they were being used to further the assassination conspiracy.
Ultimately, I'm certain, it was Angleton at the CIA who was getting the ""need to know"" intelligence on JFK's activities.
I use this just as a simple example of really how simple the process would be.
And the person or persons who were utilized would never necessarily know they were being manipulated, nor even in retrospect would they necessarily even realize that they had been manipulated.
We might add that there was another critical element at the facilitation level.
This was the CIA team, headed by David Atlee Phillips, head of the CIA's Western Hemisphere desk, that was responsible—the month prior to the assassination—for laying the ""evidence"" that Lee Harvey Oswald was meeting with a Soviet assassinations expert in Mexico City.
This was another important brick in the foundation of the conspiracy—the framing of the patsy at a particularly high level.
But all of their actions could have been carried out without these people even suspecting what was in the works.
These assassins may not have even known the location of the other gunmen.
The assassination coordination may have been so totally compartmentalized that the operations of the various teams may have been conducted strictly on a need-to-know basis.
There may have even been other assassination teams brought to Dallas and set in place in the event that the strike in Dealey Plaza had to be called off.
The fact that CIA man Frank Sturgis later told Marita Lorenz that his team was involved in the assassination is also of interest.
Sturgis never apparently claimed to have been one of the actual shooters, but Cuban intelligence, as we have seen, has said that he was involved in arranging communications between the hit teams.
The people at the facilitation level could also have been utilized in helping the actual assassins escape.
Jack Ruby would have been an ideal facilitator used in manipulating members of the Dallas police force.
Tippit was probably one involved and it seems to me that Tippit was killed when he refused to do his job.
And then, again, perhaps Tippit was actually slated for execution for the purpose of pinning the crime on Oswald.
This certainly involved people in both the CIA and the FBI, not to mention other government agencies including even the Dallas police.
Most of those involved might not even have realized that they were engaged in actions designed to cover-up the truth.
We do know that James Angleton had an interesting guest in his office at Langley on the day of the assassination.
It's obvious that they were together for hands-on, face-to-face damage control.
This was a major operation and it was vital that these two key high-level conspirators be together in the event anything went awry.
Obviously at this critical time communication by telephone or by carrier pigeon was not ideal.
In the end, of course, had it not been for the powerful corrupt (and corrupting) force of the American media—itself so heavily influenced by the pro-Israel lobby and the CIA —the cover-up would not have been so pervasive and lasted so long as it did.
I truly do believe that the way the media reacted to Warren Commission critics is a telltale sign that Israel did have a hand in the assassination conspiracy.
Yet, nobody ever mentions the influence of the Israeli lobby on the American media.
You can't look at the JFK assassination without seriously examining the role of the media in the cover-up.
It's paramount—and it does point to the Israeli connection, whether people want to admit it or not.
First of all, frankly, I believe that I have found the solution—and, as I've said, it incorporates all of the major thinking about what really happened in Dallas.
I have brought in the un-mentioned Israeli Connection, but that is indeed what ties all of the other theories together.
However, the fact is that because there are so many people with so many pet areas of interest and expertise they inevitably end up in conflict with one another.
Essentially, I would have to say, the mystery has been solved as far as it is ever going to be solved.
It's ironic but there are several JFK assassination study groups and they essentially operate, in one form or another, as ""rivals"" to one another, feuding and bickering with each other.
I do have a wide-ranging background in a number of areas but I would not tout myself as an expert in any of that subject matter.
I have a good working knowledge of not only the history of the CIA and the Israeli Mossad, but also the history of Organized Crime.
I am familiar with United States Middle East policy and of the foreign policy conflicts of the JFK administration.
And in the course of writing Final Judgment 1 availed myself of the available published research on the French conflict over Algeria which, as I've noted, ultimately played a critical role in the evolution of the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Frankly, I would say that it's a sure bet that you will not find even another writer in the arena of the JFK assassination who has studied all of these areas as I have.
That is precisely why I was able to pull Final Judgment together in the fashion that I did.
They have focused, instead, on Vietnam and on the Cuban conflict and, as a consequence, missed the big picture.
It would be ideal if everybody could work together, but it will never happen.
However, the irony of the situation is that one of the pet liberal causes—support for the state of Israel and its demands on the American taxpayers—was not something that JFK was promoting during his presidency.
The JFK assassination has spawned a thriving mini-industry and the authors and publishers are at war with each other in the struggle for recognition and respectability.
Film-maker Oliver Stone now plays a major role in this mini-industry, as I've pointed out.
JFK writers trip over one another trying to get Stone's endorsement for their books and Stone is not about to promote anything that would even dare hint at Israeli involvement in light of the facts that we know about Stone and his Israeli associates.
One firm that has issued several JFK assassination books, Shapolsky Publishers , was an affiliate of an Israeli publishing company.
People hoping to get their books published don't want to express any opinions that might prevent their works from being shelved.
There was one firm, Carroll & Graf, that I twice attempted to interest in Final Judgment, both before the initial publication and after the publication of the second edition.
The second time I wrote them I did get a letter back from Mr Carroll himself after I pointed out that I had not even gotten a formal letter of rejection.
His note was very curt saying, ""We can't use your manuscript at this time,” although since then he has issued a number of JFK assassination books.
They've also issued books by one rather unusual JFK writer named Harrison Livingstone and those books have been bestsellers.
And I'm certain that it wasn't because the book was an illiterate piece of trash.
So, in the end, there are 1) personality conflicts 2) political conflicts and 3) financial concerns that prevent all of the various JFK assassination theorists from either working together or, in my own area of interest, working to explore the thesis laid forth in Final Judgment.
There are many people who believe that the story of JFK having an affair with actress Marilyn Monroe is a myth.
The chapter on the Cohen-Monroe-JFK connection was not critical to the thesis expressed in Final Judgment.
The book could have been published without this chapter and it would not have detracted in any way from the overall thesis.
Cohen did have a long-standing connection with Marilyn Monroe and it's interesting that his own memoirs which are rife with namedropping never once mention her.
Cohen and Jack Ruby were very close and did have many mutual associates, including one Al Gruber.
It was Gruber whom Ruby was in contact with for the first time in about ten years just after the JFK assassination.
Gary Wean believes that Gruber is the one who gave Ruby the order to ""hit"" Oswald.
I was frankly surprised by the number of people who did tell me that they didn't believe the stories about Marilyn Monroe and John Kennedy, inasmuch as I always believed the stories myself.
However, I do know Gary Wean and I consider him a reliable source and felt it would be appropriate to include his information in the book.
I have been told that Jim Marrs, the author of Crossfire, has disputed the reliability of Gary Wean and suggested that his allegations are not credible.
My own suspicion is that Marrs is hesitant to give credence to Gary's allegations because Gary himself has pulled no punches in suggesting that there was Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination.
It is interesting that the media has continually used the Monroe affair and other alleged affairs to downgrade JFK's reputation.
Even Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was trashed by the media in the wake of her husband's death and her re-marriage to Aristotle Onassis.
On the other hand, although Jacqueline had a ten-year live-in adulterous relationship with a married man, Belgian-born Jewish diamond merchant Maurice Tempelsman, that was quietly and carefully kept under wraps during that decade.
Only after her death was it generally mentioned that the two had been living together and Tempelsman was painted as nothing less than a saint.
This might have something to do with the fact that Tempelsman had long-standing ties to the CIA and the Mossad as a result of his ventures in Africa where both intelligence agencies have played a major role in recent years.
So the media didn't raise too many eyebrows about the Widow's affair with Tempelsman.
However, some, notably Michael A Hoffman II, a very brilliant researcher, have demonstrated quite a bit of Masonic imagery in events surrounding the assassination.
It's likely there was high-level Masonic support for the assassination, particularly since JFK was a Catholic.
Zionism and Freemasonry are both heartily anti-Catholic and do overlap in many areas of intrigue.
The loudest advocate of the proposition that I should blame the Masons was a character who viciously attacked one of my sources, Gary Wean, and after attacking Wean, later launched an Internet campaign to defame me as well.
This character, among other things, says that my ""real"" name is ""Bernard"" Piper—not true—and that JFK never had any extramarital affairs.
Well, considering all of this, it's interesting to note that this character revealed to me in a letter that he was related to Ferenc Nagy, the Hungarian who was involved in Israel's Permindex operation which was most definitively an element in the JFK conspiracy.
So this perhaps explains, at least in part, this character's ventilations.
They've issued a report entitled Why the British Kill United States Presidents and in that work, along with Dope, Inc. (which I did cite in Final Judgment) they outline the British intelligence connections of people such as, for example, Colonel Louis M Bloomfield, the chief executive officer of the Permindex company, along with New Orleans trade executive Clay Shaw, an Anglophile of long-standing.
However, as much respect as I have for the work of the LaRouche people , I do not believe that they have pursued the Israeli connection far enough.
The LaRouche group suggests that the Mossad is an arm of the British Crown.
I don't buy that argument, but at the same time I don't feel I have enough information to dispute it.
However, I do believe there are firm grounds to say that the Mossad, on its own, as an arm of the Israeli government, had good reason to participate in the JFK assassination conspiracy precisely because of JFK's behind-the-scenes conflict with Israel.
So if the British did indeed want JFK out of the White House and if they did utilize elements in the CIA and the Mossad and Organized Crime to carry out the crime, they certainly had willing participants who had reason on their own to participate, whether or not the order came from Queen Elizabeth.
I don't always agree with the interpretations of the LaRouche organization, but their research is always worth examining on a wide variety of matters.
Jim Marrs cites the LaRouche efforts in Crossfire, James DiEugenio cites them in Destiny Betrayed and even Oliver Stone himself in his published script of the film JFK cites the LaRouche organization for some of the material relating to Permindex.
There's no doubt about the fact that the CFR is an important arm of the Establishment.
It's financed largely by the Rockefeller interests and their corporate allies.
It's an exclusive foreign policy pressure group that has staffed virtually every key post in every presidential administration since Herbert Hoover—even including the JFK administration.
I have written extensively about the CFR over the years in other contexts.
For example, I seriously doubt that David Rockefeller, head of the Rockefeller empire and a leading CFR figure, was not aware that Kennedy was slated for assassination.
The plot to kill JFK was an Establishment plot and Rockefeller is a part of that Establishment.
I myself have ever referred to the CIA as ""the enforcement arm"" of the Rockefeller empire.
The high level financial forces that are behind the CFR are tied very closely to the European family Rothschild which has been a prime force behind the state of Israel.
Likewise with the Canadian Bronfman family which was an outgrowth of the Lansky Crime Syndicate.
Today the Bronfman family is expanding its influence in the American media and that couldn't happen without the approval of the Rockefeller empire.
There are those who have suggested that the Rockefeller family considered the potential Kennedy Dynasty a rival to their influence and that is another factor to be considered.
So, in that sense, there's no doubt that the Rockefellers and their associates in the CFR would not stand in the way of a scheme to assassinate John F Kennedy.
In the end the Mossad and the CIA, if truth be told, are nothing more than the enforcement arms of these powerful financial interests that also stand behind the Council on Foreign Relations.
However I don't find the suggestion that the CFR was behind the JFK assassination to be as precisely provable in the way that you can document CIA and Mossad ties to the intimate players involved in the conspiracy.
Why don't you ever report on the findings of former British intelligence operative Dr.
Coleman says that Permindex, which you talk about in Final Judgment, was the assassinations arm of the Committee of 300.
After that, all references I have seen have been in books written by those who have reported on Coleman's writings on the Committee of 300.
So essentially Coleman is the only primary source on the existence of this group.
I don't dispute the possibility that there is such a committee in existence.
I've written extensively on both groups, including a widely circulated report on the Trilateral Commission.
So it's conceivable that this secret committee that Coleman discusses does exist.
Coleman has never exhibited any documentation that such a committee exists, although there is documentation about the Bilderberg Group.
These are all interests that are apparent—that can be documented—and which people do readily understand.
However, I do have to state specifically that in his report on the JFK assassination, which I acknowledged earlier, I am sorry to say that Coleman made some misstatements of fact that detract from his credibility.
For example, he states that if one of New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison's key witnesses against Clay Shaw, one Perry Raymond Russo, had been permitted to testify before the grand jury that this would have blown the JFK case wide open.
In fact, Russo did testify and it was his testimony that led to Shaw's indictment.
Coleman suggests that Garrison's prosecution of Shaw was halted before it ever reached a grand jury indictment.
This just is not true and this is an error that could cause people to doubt his credibility, considering that this is a basic fact that is very well known.
In addition, Coleman says that Russo left for California before his testimony was ever heard.
Final Judgment never once mentions evidence that on the famous Zapruder film of the assassination there is visible proof that President Kennedy's Secret Service chauffer, William Greer, turned around and fired the fatal head shot at JFK using a pistol.
This pistol is clearly visible on the Zapruder film and has been widely shown around the world.
I'm told that Greer was absolutely devastated by the president's assassination and blamed himself for not getting the president's limousine out of line in time to prevent JFK from being killed.
In fact, Greer was probably somewhat to blame for the death of the president since his reaction time was slow, to say the very least, and there would have been perhaps enough time to get the car out of the line of fire.
Be that as it may, what one sees on the Zapruder film (which I have seen in various renditions) is not—I repeat NOT—William Greer or his fellow Secret Service agent, Roy Kellerman (who was riding in the right-front passenger seat of the Kennedy limousine) turning around and firing a pistol at the president.
Secondly, Greer was being photographed by more than a handful of people at the time.
It's inevitable that at least one of the witnesses on the scene would have indeed witnessed Greer doing this.
If Greer had done this, he would also have been witnessed so doing by Governor and Mrs.
John Connally who were less than two feet from him and literally looking into his face.
They would have practically been in the line of fire if Greer had fired the fatal head shot.
And they most definitely were not looking at the president at the time his head exploded.
I have seen the rendition of the Zapruder film by the promoter of this theory.
I have seen the flash of light that appears to be a pistol and I can understand how somebody viewing the film would believe that they are seeing what they are told they are seeing.
It is evident that Mr Greer is turning and looking at the president just before the fatal shot, but you are most definitely not seeing him shoot the president.
Bear in mind that the Zapruder film is not a good quality film to begin with.
It's shot at an oblique angle; it's shot hurriedly with a very shaky hand and there's a lot of motion on the film itself.
I saw the film years ago and I've seen substantially enhanced versions, both with and without the narration and graphics that have been added by the person promoting this theory.
And it's very clear that what you are really seeing is a flash of light.
It is the sun reflecting on the crewcut hair of the Secret Service agent, Mr Kellerman.
Both before Final Judgment was published—and after—I received a surprising number of inquiries about this matter and I am amazed that the rumor has such currency.
However, I should point out that one person who had initially promoted this theory, one Lars Hansen, initially believed the story to be true.
But he himself publicly repudiated his own previous stand on this matter and said he didn't believe it after investigating further.
Hansen, who has disappeared, is angry at the individual who is best known for promoting this theory, William Cooper, who continues to promote the theory and who has distributed a copy of the Zapruder film without advising people that Hansen had repudiated the theory himself.
So it is indeed William Cooper who is promoting this theory that Hansen has repudiated.
Cooper says that he is a former intelligence officer and that he was privy to inside information about the assassination.
That may well be true, but if his ""inside information"" is the story that William Greer fired the fatal shot, then that's misinformation and disinformation supplied by somebody else, perhaps even the real conspirators.
For people to get distracted and bogged down in this matter and researching it is a waste of time.
I've devoted a great deal of time to discussing this ridiculous story if only for the reason that there are still many people who believe it, much to my surprise.
I might add that even if the story were true , the story would not discount the basic theory in Final Judgment for it could have been that Greer was part of the conspiracy that I outlined.
All of this is not to suggest that there wasn't some sort of Secret Service complicity or that some Secret Service agents were compromised, either before or after the assassination.
I have no firm evidence one way or the other, but I do know that the president's public exposure was such that as even JFK himself said that if somebody really wanted to kill him, they could.
All in all, the conspirators really didn't need Secret Service complicity to accomplish their goal.
There's a great deal of evidence that the government has been keeping this a secret for years and that JFK was going to blow the lid off this high-level coverup, resulting in his assassination.
I hasten to add that I have never disputed that there is much more to be learned about UFOs and other strange phenomenon that is not of our world or of this earth.
What's more, I've done a great deal of reading in this area and I do know that there has been government research in this field.
And it is this story that is the basis of the claim that JFK was about to reveal the existence of alien visits from other worlds and that it was for this reason that he was shot.
Despite this, many sincere people have never learned that the story has been generally repudiated as a hoax and, as a consequence, many sincere people continue to give it credibility.
Obviously, as I've suggested, I think there are more down-to-earth reasons which sparked the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Now I will say for the record that I think it is possible that if JFK did, in fact, have access to some sort of secret government information on this subject that he may have had the intention of revealing it to the American people.
There was enough trouble convincing people that JFK had been a victim of a conspiracy and there's been enough trouble trying to determine who was behind the conspiracy.
As it so happens, it is the aforementioned William Cooper (who is the primary promoter of the theory that ""The Chauffer Killed JFK"") who has also been a prime force behind promoting the theory that JFK was killed because he was about to reveal the existence of alien life forces visiting this planet.
Cooper has said that his ""inside"" sources from his years as an intelligence officer say that this is the reason that JFK was killed and that the Secret Service chauffer, William Greer, was recruited by the conspirators who wanted to keep JFK quiet about the alien visitors.
I frankly regret that Mr Cooper has received such widespread publicity.
After Cooper was gunned down following a confrontation with police officers in his home town, a lot of people took this as ""proof"" that Cooper was right all along, but it was anything but that.
The only thing Cooper accomplished was adding confusion to the lore of the JFK assassination.
I have seen this quote appear in dozens—if not hundreds—of newsletters over the last 20 years.
Frankly, this type of rhetoric doesn't even sound like JFK and if JFK did intend to reveal any such plot and inform the citizens of their plight, it seems logical to me that JFK would have waited until he got into his second term before undertaking any such effort to stop this plot.
What's more, if JFK did indeed say this , it seems unlikely that the conspirators would have been able to rush into action within ten days to dispatch JFK to the great beyond simply because he made this ambiguous remark.
No one ever quotes anything else other than that particular sentence from that purported speech.
The bottom line is that I don't believe that the statement was ever made in any public speech by President Kennedy.
And this quote does nothing— absolutely nothing—to advance research into the JFK assassination and I wish people would drop it altogether.
There are probably more people who are aware of this quote than there are who are aware of the allegations I make in the pages of Final Judgment.
The son of Roscoe White, a now-deceased former Dallas policeman, has come up with evidence suggesting that his father was one of the assassins on the grassy knoll.
If Mr White's father was involved in the assassination conspiracy, it has no immediate bearing on the thesis in Final Judgment.
Roscoe White could very well have been a CIA operative, as his son contends, and he could have been one of the assassins and I have no evidence contradicting either claim.
If White was working for the CIA, though, it would indeed suggest CIA complicity.
After all, a CIA operative could have been recruited by Icelandic intelligence to carry out the crime, if I can be so facetious as to suggest that.
In the long run, however, the Roscoe White puzzle is only a very small piece of the bigger puzzle.
In your analysis of the JFK assassination, you contend that there was a French assassin involved in the crime.
First of all, I must say that the French Connection to the JFK assassination conspiracy is very complex indeed.
As I pointed out earlier, I did not fully understand the French Connection until after I had actually finished the first draft of the book in which I had made passing reference to the allegations of such a connection.
To analyze the facts that are important, in order to clear away any confusion, it's important to analyze what the French Connection really is.
In the early 1960's French President Charles DeGaulle decided to grant independence to the French colony across the Mediterranean in Arab Algeria.
Many French colonials in Algeria (not to mention Frenchmen at home) objected to DeGaulle's decision and considered it a betrayal.
They were fearful that the indigenous Moslem Arab population would oppress the French Algerians and considered DeGaulle's measure a blow to French national dignity.
Although DeGaulle was head of the French government, his own intelligence agency, the SDECE, was heavily divided over the issue of Algeria.
In the ranks of the SDECE there were many who had close ties to Israel's Mossad, in light of the long-standing close relationship between the SDECE and the Mossad, stemming from DeGaulle’s own early close relationship with Israel.
In turn, the Corsicans were heavily tied up in the international drug racket out of Southeast Asia and were key players in cementing the drug network set up by Meyer Lansky who personally visited the Corsican mob figures to make the necessary arrangements.
These French Corsicans were then later used by DeGaulle’s intelligence forces to fight against the OAS rebels.
What's more, these French Corsicans were also used by the CIA to fight French communist influence in the post-war era in Europe.
And it was none other than the Mossad's man at the CIA, James Angleton, whose Mossad desk was responsible for coordinating the CIA's relations with these Corsican Mafia figures.
The OAS was composed of loyal Frenchmen who were, however, disloyal to Charles DeGaulle.
This inevitably ties back to James Angleton who himself maintained long-standing close ties in French intelligence.
So you had an unusual configuration in which Israel had ties to both the anti-DeGaulle OAS and to the Corsican Mafia which was working to fight the OAS on behalf of DeGaulle.
So you had both the OAS and the Corsicans engaged in business deals with CIA-and Mossad-connected drug smugglers in the Lansky syndicate.
In the end there was a truce between DeGaulle and the OAS and DeGaulle's own intelligence agency actually arranged work in international covert action for OAS men who were then in exile.
Some of them were even deployed into the CIA's operations in the Caribbean involving the Cuban anti-Castro efforts.
However, you do find the fingerprints of not only the CIA and the Mossad and the Lansky syndicate in the activities of the OAS (both before and after the conflict with DeGaulle) but also in the activities of the French Corsican Mafia.
It's an inter-connecting series of events and personalities that stem directly from the internal French conflict over Algeria.
As a consequence, it's anybody's guess as to whether it was an OAS assassin or a French Corsican assassin who was ultimately deployed into Dallas.
There are so many French connections that go to Dallas, including, of course, an American gun-runner, Thomas Eli Davis I1I—who not only had ties to the OAS, but also to Jack Ruby.
I do believe that in the pages of Final Judgment, however, that I have assembled a more complete overview of the reality of what the French intrigue was truly all about and how it was indeed linked to the JFK assassination.
We will probably never know the exact specifics, but absolutely no other JFK researcher has examined the French Connection in the detail I have.
But to fully examine the French Connection is to divine the Israeli Connection.
At one point during the writing of Final Judgment I was so frustrated by trying to make all of this complex material understandable that I pondered the possibility of not mentioning it at all.
However, I realized that I would be doing a disservice not only to the readers, but also to myself.
If anything, as many readers have suggested, the detailing of the ""French Connection"" is the icing on the cake.
It is ""The Skeleton Key"" most people have seen and which most talk about—not the files themselves.
The so-called ""Skeleton Key"" is a fanciful compendium of a wide variety of inter-related conspiracy theories centered around the JFK assassination and rife with things that are either so obviously in error or so outlandish that they are not worth commenting upon.
There may be grains of truth in ""The Skeleton Key’ but they are nothing so highly significant that they even deserve the attention I am giving them here.
What is interesting about the Skeleton Key is that one version I obtained actually made mention of a Mossad connection to the JFK assassination.
Who put it there—or laundered other to delete the Mossad references is a good question.
However, some panty-waist ""conspiracy theorists"" who dreaded mentioning the Mossad for fear of accusations of anti-Semitism may have been responsible for deleting the reference.
I first became aware of ""The Skeleton Key"" when I saw a xerox of a xerox of a xerox of it when it appeared in my office many years ago.
It's a single-spaced typewritten document of about twenty pages, a narrative that suggests that the real head of the world-wide crime syndicate was Aristotle Onassis and that the Kennedy family worked with the crime syndicate.
As I mentioned, ""The Skeleton Key"" has been subsequently reprinted in a number of editions containing extensive ""documentation,"" supplementary newspaper articles making reference to material in the Skelton Key, assorted analyses and commentary, etc.
One such volume which appeared several years ago takes the Skeleton Key apart line by line and provides reprints of magazine and newspaper articles that refer to the material in the Key.
For example if there is a reference to one of Aristotle Onassis’ business dealings, there may be an article relating to that subject.
And it proves absolutely nothing other than to reprint a raft of old news articles.
Yet, as I say, there is this incredible infatuation with the Skeleton Key.
I would challenge those who have spent such time devoted to this subject to do likewise with Final Judgment.
I've seen theorists debating the Gemstone material virtually ad nauseum in the pages of conspiracy-oriented publications.
The much-touted Grande Dame of Conspiracy Theorists, Mae Brussell, helped popularize the Skeleton Key and she had a type of cult following.
Brussell seemed to find a Nazi under every rock and that has an appeal in some circles.
This false claim about Lane (since withdrawn and repudiated by the publisher) was based on disinformation (much of it generated by the CIA itself) that has been deliberately circulated over the years to muddy the waters into JFK assassination research further.
But, additionally, because so many reasonably intelligent people have put so much time and energy into the matter (and even made a little money in the process), it has indeed taken on a life of its own.
Purportedly written by a Texas attorney with connections to high-level political figures, this document has indeed been read by many people.
It's an informative document that does touch on Clay Shaw's connections to Permindex—although it never mentions the Israeli connection even once.
However, I have to say that the document contains just enough untruthful information (or otherwise leaves out pertinent information) to lead me to believe that a) the person who prepared it was sloppy in his research or didn't go far enough; or b) it was prepared as deliberate disinformation.
It has been said that the document came into the hands of Jim Garrison at the time of his investigation of Clay Shaw and it may have indeed have been part of the reason why at times the Garrison investigation seemed to go off in many different directions—one of the most frequent criticisms leveled at Garrison by his critics in the Establishment media.
The document also suggests Permindex may have been a ""Nazi"" operation, but obviously nothing could be further from the truth.
One primary example of how off-base at least one item in the document really is—and because of this alone I have to be amazed at how widespread the devotion to the document is—happens to be the contention that Jack Ruby was of White Russian descent, hinting that the anti-communist White Russians were behind the assassination and the killing of Lee Harvey Oswald.
There is another even more significant error in the document (and I think it's probably deliberate) that essentially has the effect of whitewashing the Israeli connection altogether.
Well, first of all, Ed Reid's book does not refer to ""Credit Suisse"" at all.
Neither was a subsidiary of the other, nor does Reid ever suggest as much.
And because it's one of these ""underground"" documents, it unfortunately seems to have a greater credibility among some people than things that are more aboveboard.
In his book, Called to Serve, Colonel Bo Gritz relies on this document and as a consequence many of those who have read the book or heard Gritz speak have had their views shaped by this document of unknown origin.
The fact that the document has such widespread devotion continues to amaze and puzzle me at the same time.
That's one reason why I never once referenced it in the pages of Final Judgment.
King's accused assassin, James Earl Ray, in several of his legal battles and Gregory, like Mark, has investigated both the JFK and King assassinations; 2) Orders To Kill by William Pepper, an attorney who has been representing Ray in recent years.
I had some correspondence with Ray over the years and once had the opportunity to speak with him over a radio show.
It's one of the most dramatic books I've ever read, because it's written in Ray's own words.
As far as any connections between the King assassination and the murder of JFK, there do seem to be connections between people tied to Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans Mafia boss, to the King assassination.
And needless to say there are also indications of American intelligence involvement on many, many levels.
When one considers the fact that the Israeli Mossad's American conduit, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith spied extensively on Dr.
King, one cannot help but think that there was intense hostility to Dr.
King over to the FBI, so frankly much of the hype that we hear about the FBI's persecution of Dr.
We should not discount the idea that the Israelis likewise had a hand in King's assassination in light of the ADL's complicity in waging war against the Black leader.
King was most assuredly not a victim of a Ku Klux Klan or ""hate group"" conspiracy.
He was a victim of an Establishment conspiracy and probably for the very reason that he was rocking the Establishment's boat.
King (along with another Black leader, Malcolm X, also slain, like King, under mysterious circumstances) threatened to bring the Black community out from under the heel of powerful forces within the Establishment who preferred to keep Blacks under control—in the slave pen, so to speak.
There are more than a few who suspect that organized crime, too, may have played a role in the King assassination conspiracy, for the criminal underworld, best personified by international mob kingpin Meyer Lansky, was making billions off the Black community through drugs, gambling, prostitution, labor racketeering and other money-making enterprises.
King's push for Black self-assertion was a threat to Lansky and his cronies, as well as to their partners-in-crime in the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency, both entities we now know have been rife with mob-influenced corruption.
What's more, King's growing respect among Third World leaders was a distinct threat to the CIA's international intrigues.
All of this needs to be kept in mind by those who are inclined to take a negative view of Martin Luther King.
I would add, though, that I have, in fact, discovered some interesting items in William Pepper's books that do suggest, perhaps, that there is some sort of Israeli connection, or, at the least, that there are some leads that haven't been followed through (which do point, again, to an Israeli connection of some sort or another.
I will say, up front, that I realize that this statement is going to cause a lot of people to say, ""Oh come on now.
Piper's not satisfied with finding an Israeli connection to the JFK assassination.
First of all, as we already noted in the chapter on Jack Ruby, William Pepper has noted, in his book, An Act of State, connections between Jack Ruby and James Earl Ray's ubiquitous handler, ""Raul,"" to a Mossad-linked arms smuggling operation that was active at the time of the JFK assassination.
In his first book Orders to Kill, on page 435, William Pepper describes his inquiries into the background of Canadian Eric S Galt whose identity James Earl Ray adopted during part of his wide-ranging travels.
The warehouse he ran housed an extremely top secret munitions project funded by the CIA, the United States Naval Surface Weapons Center, and the Army Electronics Research and Development Command.
However, according to Russell, the FBI later determined that this was not Oswald's signature.
Somehow James Earl Ray was steered into the use of the identity of a real life individual who did indeed have ties to Israel and its ""scientific and technical"" research—which, of course, points in the direction of nuclear development.
Note, likewise, that the real-life Galt was linked to the ""scientific and technical division"" in Israel.
And note also that Galt's company was indeed linked to Union Carbide's nuclear division.
Thus, we again find not only an Israeli connection to the King assassination , but also an Israeli nuclear connection.
And that, of course, is very interesting in light of what we know about JFK's conflict with Israel over nuclear weapons development.
And believe it or not, there's even a ""French connection""—again involving the Israelis—that Pepper describes.
Pepper reports that he met with Pierre Marion, the former head of the French SDECE to seek out French assistance in uncovering information about the King assassination.
Upon this basis Pepper concluded that the French officer had concluded that some part of the United States intelligence community had been involved in the King assassination—although Pepper apparently never considered the possibility, instead, that perhaps French and Israeli intelligence, in fact, had some connection to the assassination (which, of course, is precisely the case with the JFK assassination.
In any event, according to Pepper, ""Sometime afterward France went through a turbulent change of government.
Marion's inside sources became very nervous about discussing anything sensitive.
Frankly, Pepper might have gotten more information about the King assassination if he would have asked his friends in French intelligence to ask their friends in Israeli intelligence to ask their agents in the AntiDefamation League to turn over their files on Dr.
Ray addresses his suspicion that his mysterious handler ""Raul"" may have been traveling in the company of a figure that Ray believes may have been financier David Graiver.
Having done his own research, and as a regular reader of The Spotlight , Ray knew that the looting of ABT by Graiver was determined to have been a classic mob-style ""bust out"" in which the funds stolen from ABT were used to finance Israel's secret nuclear arms program.
In fact, if truth be told, according to sources such as J Orlin Grabbe and others, many of the savings and loans debacles of the 1980s were, in fact, covert operations designed to provide looted funds to Israel's nuclear and national defense programs.
In any event, that's a subject for others to pursue, but it is interesting in light of Ray's having linked David Graiver to the Martin Luther King assassination conspiracy.
One of the numbers, in New Orleans, Ray definitely remembered to end with the numbers ""8757"" and vaguely remembered to begin with ""866,"" but he wasn't certain.
Again, Ray was obviously talking about King taking a stand that would upset the ADL, although he was talking around the subject without stating it directly.
Weberman himself went to efforts to discredit Ray's findings, saying that he determined that another ""3757"" number in the New Orleans area, beginning with ""833""—rather than the ""866"" that Ray vaguely remembered—was traceable to a motel where New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello maintained an office.
However, the motel number had been called by David Ferrie, linked to the circumstances surrounding the JFK assassination, so that does indeed make, at the very least, an unusual connection between the two assassinations that seems to have gone largely un-noticed.
And in light of the Mossad connections to the JFK assassination which did swirl around the activities of David Ferrie, Guy Banister and Clay Shaw in New Orleans, it does suggest yet another ""Mossad link"" to the Martin Luther King affair.
We do know that the King family has been under heavy media attack for having dared to come to the defense of James Earl Ray and this in itself is unusual, considering the previous favorable coverage of that family.
We need not rehash the extensive influence of the Israeli lobby on the American media, but in the context of the information outlined here regarding possible Israeli connections to the King assassination, we might logically conclude that these media attacks on the King family may relate to precisely that.
The circumstances surrounding death of John F Kennedy, Jr. in a bizarre plane crash on July 16, 1999 added fuel to the fire started by Final Judgment implicating the Mossad in the death of young Kennedy's father.
For my own part, I was quite frankly surprised when a very real ""Mossad connection"" to the JFK Jr. tragedy emerged quite openly in the press.
Thus, the immediate suspicion on the part of some conspiracy theorists—but not me, I might add—was that the Mossad had ordered Kennedy's assassination in order to stop the article from being published.
Many publications (even in the mainstream media) have published critical articles about the Mossad.
In fact, however, there's another aspect to the Mossad angle that's far more provocative and one which most have missed.
It was for this reason that Kennedy had approached Heymann about doing a story for George on the Mossad—according to Heymann.
That the widely-publicized claims of this Mossad figure were the primary media foundation for the insistence Kennedy's death was an accident—either his fault or, effectively, that of his wife Carolyn's—and one that was waiting to happen.
Feared Flying Into Vineyard"" and included Heymann's own detailed transcription of their conversation.
USA Today reported that Heymann claimed he took extensive notes on his conversations with Kennedy for use in possible future books.
According to Heymann, JFK Jr. didn't feel secure about the Martha's Vineyard airport; he didn't want to fly there; and he felt he had to do it because his wife insisted he drop off her sister there before going on to Hyannis airport.
In fact, it appears that Kennedy hadn't even finalized his flight plans at the time that Heymann claims he spoke to Kennedy.
So the bottom line is that Heymann's story was disinformation in the first place.
Neither, Adams nor Goldman, however, dared to suggest that Heymann's claims may have been Mossad-sponsored disinformation.
In fact, the Israeli chauffeur's version of events dovetails quite nicely with Mossad man David Heymann's tale.
As we've noted, Chamish has suggested that John Jr. may indeed have heard about Final Judgment and that this is what stimulated his interest in the Mossad.
We'll probably never know for certain, although, as we've seen, Chamish himself has written a highly complimentary review of Final Judgment perhaps unsettling a lot of JFK conspiracy theorists who spent a great deal of energy attacking my theory only to have an Israeli journalist come aboard to say that the theory makes sense.
In the meantime, perhaps, it was not so surprising that in its July 16 issue that was on the stands when JFK Jr. died, Forward—one of the most influential Jewish newspapers in America—was featuring an item bellyaching about the activities of young Kennedy's grandfather, the late United States Ambassador to Britain, Joseph P Kennedy.
Heymann also alleged that RFK's wife, Ethel, now the reigning matriarch of the surviving Kennedy clan, once told a Jewish publicist, that ""You know, it's your people who are giving us all the trouble; it's your people who are giving us all the trouble,"" when her husband was running for the Senate in 1964.
Considering the venomous hostility toward the Kennedy family in some influential quarters, it is interesting to note that on July 21, 1999 John (587] Questions & Answers Podhoretz's essay, which is very hard to find—having been pulled in response to public outrage at Podhoretz's visceral venom after the first You be the judge.
This essay by Podhoretz does indeed say what many defenders of Israel really do the first place) penned a column entitled ""A Conversation in Hell,"" putting forth think about the Kennedy family.
After all, the eighth circle is for the fraudulent and the ninth for the treacherous.
And you were pretty treacherous most of your life, what with your compulsive philandering and double-dealing.
I can’t tell you how it filled me with pride just to know you back when you were America’s ambassador to England, saying all those nice things about Hitler, doing everything you could to prevent Jewish emigration from Nazi Germany.
It did my ancient heart a bit of good to hear just how ruthless you could be.
And you were such a tough negotiator it was fun doing business with you.
You wanted access to power and for you that meant marrying the daughter of the mayor of Boston.
You wanted to remain attractive and alluring to the world’s most glamorous women.
Done; you became a motion picture executive and had affairs with Gloria Swanson and many other stars and starlets.
You wanted wealth beyond the wildest dreams of any other Irish Bostonian.
Done; you were a millionaire many times over, and lost none of it when the Great Depression hit.
Done; you were given the most glamorous job in government at the time — Ambassador to the Court of St.
Done as well You dotted the “1’s, you crossed the ‘t’s, you did everything in your power to maximize your part of the deal and minimize mine.
Like all mortals whose most distinictive quality is their unbounded sense of self, you believed your soul was so valuable that it was worth the exchange.
But when aI make a deal for a soul like yours — so unyielding in it sense of entitlement, so sure that the world should bow before it, so damned. tough — its raw to me, like uncooked meat.
I need to season it, to pound on it a bit so that it becomes tender, brown it a bit on the fire before I am ready to put it in the infernal oven.
You said so little about your daughters in contract that I felt free to toy with them a little.
And you seemed to be getting over young Joe’s death so well that I felt I needed to remind you of it by sending your daughter Kathleen down in another plane crash a few years later.
I reminded you there was Jack, beautiful Jack, the one you rode so hard.
You were so triumphant with Jack’s victory and all that I tried to let you know that things weren’t going to work out like you planned again.
And you didn’t listen, you just wouldn’t listen, you were still intent on the idea that Teddy might do it — Teddy, the least of your boys.
So every time you think the deal is done, every time you think your family is on it s way back to glory, I just have to do something.
Reflecting on the Past, Present and Future of Final Judgment and its Controversial Thesis This book began with an extended essay about the controversy over Final Judgment, so it is perhaps fitting that it should conclude with an extended essay on the same topic.
Like the opening essay, this ""final word"" is admittedly more about what has happened to Michael Collins Piper as a result of writing Final Judgment than it is about what happened to John F Kennedy.
Still, though, I think the readers will find it enlightening, for it all really does demonstrate that there are limitations on what one may—or may not—say in the debate over controversial issues such as the JFK assassination.
The bottom line, though, is that Final Judgment is not going to go away.
As much as the Israeli lobby may hate to admit it, the genie is out of the bottle.
The future of Final Judgment will largely be a series of efforts to repudiate its thesis, but based on the efforts thus far, it doesn't seem likely that there is anybody out there who will be able to do it—and the reason may well be because the book is so very much on target.
Final Judgment is, by no means, a demolition of the Warren Commission Report.
Final Judgment is simply filling in the missing pieces of the puzzle—providing the missing link in the chain—demonstrating what's hidden on the other side of the jigsaw puzzle.
We've known for a long time now that there was a conspiracy in the JFK assassination—a big one—and that it reached some very high levels.
And, frankly, in looking at the big picture, I'm afraid Salandria may be right.
They just simply refuse to address the cold, hard fact that there is indeed strong evidence that ""tiny Israel"" and its intelligence service, utilizing its own resources, and collaborating with its allies in the CIA, played a major role in the crime of the century.
However, the author of the censored article (a reader of Final Judgment) responded to his editor with a very interesting letter, a portion of which I am sharing with the readers of Final Judgment, just as the author of the letter shared it with me.
Anyone who has spent much time studying the assassination of John F Kennedy knows three things for certain: Oswald did not do it; there are Jewish fingerprints all over the crime; and the Jews involved could not and did not act alone, but were part of a much broader conspiracy involving elements of the Secret service, CIA, FBI, Justice Department, Dallas Police, Texas establishment, and Cuban exile community.
The result has been a widespread and continuing denial of Jewish involvement in the assassination that has grown now to include vicious attacks on the Kennedy family.
There is also a hidden terrain beneath the assassination that no one is talking about—the secret terrain, the obscure, unacknowledged landscape underlying the Kennedy assassinations.
The myopic fear of mentioning Ruby's Jewishness, and following his connections outward to Israel and international business and _ criminal syndicates, and inward to the Dallas Police and to judges and politicians, has bedeviled and divided the research community from the beginning.
And, if anything, this letter probably puts the matter in perhaps even better perspective than Final Judgment itself.
On September 7, 1997 she posted a message on a JFK discussion group on the Internet bragging of her efforts to stop me from speaking.
I wrote a letter to the editor of the Times, with copies to the college president and board, but it was not published.
I live in Orange County, California and I have also pledged to picket with the college professors and the Anti-Jewish Defense League against the seminar.
Knowing that President Kennedy lead us in such turbulent times, there are many groups, countries, and persons who could be blamed for his assassination.
It wasn't until Final Judgment put all of the data together that people actually started thinking that Israeli involvement was a real possibility.
So it's interesting that, in a way, Miss Conway admits, indirectly, that there could indeed be an Israeli motive in the sense, as she herself said, that there were ""many groups, countries and persons"" who could be blamed.
I do have the satisfaction, however, of knowing for a fact that numerous followers of Conway's JFK-Lancer operation did contact her and give her Hell for taking this stand and I am grateful to those who were kind enough to let me know that they did.
In the end, however, there were some heartening aspects of that otherwise ugly controversy in Orange County—Debra Conway's meanspirited demagoguing notwithstanding.
During the midst of the ADL's effort to silence me and to destroy Steve Frogue, many good citizens stood up in our defense.
I had heard that a certain couple, ""Joe"" and Ethel Hunt, had been forceful critics of the ADL's antics, appearing at the college board's open meetings to speak out in defense of the First Amendment and against censorship.
The ADL is more than welcome to have the likes of Debra Conway on their side.
But Americans owe a lot to people like Joe Hunt and his lovely wife who really do fight for freedom.
In any case, the aforementioned efforts by Debra Conway were just the tip of the iceberg as far as efforts by self-styled JFK assassination ""truth seekers"" to attempt to discredit me.
SHIFTING THE FOCUS OF DISCUSSION Perhaps my most dedicated critic was one Robert Harris who operates his own JFK assassination web site on the Internet.
Although Harris had a reputation for being ""hard-headed,"" even his critics would agree that, by and large, Harris was quite sincere in his dedication to finding out the truth about the president's murder.
But when it came to the subject of possible Mossad involvement, Harris lost all objectivity.
Harris repeatedly made the false and malicious accusation that Final Judgment blamed ""the Jews"" for the Kennedy assassination when, in fact, as any reader knows full well, the book actually rejects that thesis altogether.
At one point he even asked ""I wonder exactly how many black and Jewish friends Mr Piper has in total"" and actually expressed outrage that I refused to list them by name, as though I should expose them to his defamations.
Finally, though, I got so frustrated that I broke down and told Harris that one of my two godsons just happens to be an African-American child.
At one juncture, which just happened to be immediately after the Columbine shooting, Harris attempted to link me to that tragedy, suggesting the two disturbed young men had been inspired by evil ""anti-Semites"" like me, not knowing at that point that the one shooter happened to be Jewish.
The constant and quite frenzied name-calling by Harris reached that point that even one Jewish news group participant, Dave Reitzes—who was no supporter of mine, by any means—even challenged Harris by pointing out that criticism of Israel is not anti-Semitism.
Another news group participant, Keith Bruner, came to my defense in defiance of Harris saying, ""Piper does not claim to have indisputable proof that the Mossad was involved, but he has drawn conclusions from certain facts that certainly paint a believable picture of involvement by the Mossad"" and went on to say, ""whether or not Piper is an he is pushing his book and his conclusions and should be challenged from that perspective,"" rather than by reckless name-calling.
In another posting, Bruner said, ""Read his book, then attack him about his conclusions and evidence he presents.
The fact is that I sent Harris a complimentary copy of the book— despite all his attacks on me—and yet he still never once posted any item attempting to refute anything that I said in the book.
Even if Israel had wanted JFK dead, there was no need for them to take the risk of actively participating .. if there was a slip-up and their participation was exposed, Israel would have been virtually doomed.
It is not out of the question that we could have even declared war against them.
Clearly, this argument against Mossad involvement in the conspiracy simply does not wash.
As I have pointed out, time and again in Final Judgment, the Mossad was insulated from exposure not only through its widespread contacts in the media, but also through its collaboration with the CIA, not to mention the very apparent effort by the Johnson administration and by the Warren Commission to keep the truth under wraps.
What's more, under LBJ, Israel had a dedicated long-time ally in the White House, one who had benefited directly from JFK's assassination.
So there was never any question that—if I am correct that the Mossad was involved, as I believe it was—the truth about Mossad complicity would never be exposed by any official United States investigation.
For all his trouble, Harris ended up making history by getting sued for his attacks on other targets of his wrath.
He'll probably be delighted to know that he's been mentioned in this new edition of Final Judgment.
Another of my critics, Clint Bradford—who operates what is actually a very good web site of JFK-related material—formally declared that ""it is my personal opinion that your book is ‘anti-Jewish hate prose’ on a posting on March 16, 1999.
Bradford preferred to call me a bigot rather than to address any of the specific allegations made in Final Judgment.
The last I heard was that the world was told that one lone nut—and a pro-Castro communist to boot—was responsible for the crime.
The fact is that if Morris was indeed ""Maurice Bishop"" this would point— once again—to a possible Mossad role in the JFK assassination for during his career Morris was viewed by many in ""conservative"" circles as a water-carrier for Israeli interests and as an agent inside the ""right wing"" for the AntiDefamation League of B'nai B'rith.
Morris’ primary patrons were well-known characters known for their affinity for the interests of Israel including—but not limited to—such figures as ""mob lawyer"" Roy Cohn (co-owner of the Lionel Corporation which, in turn, held shares in the Mossad-controlled Permindex operation), Alfred Kohlberg a founder of the American Jewish League Against Communism, columnist George Sokolsky, and Marvin Liebman, a former gun-runner for Israel who was later the mentor of Israel's cheerleader, William F Buckley, Jr.
So maybe there's something there after all—yet Bevilaqua probably just doesn't get it.
In any case, while it is true that the Italian newspaper that surfaced some of the first data about Permindex was indeed a communist journal, that alone, of course, does not preclude the truthfulness of the details about Permindex and its controversial connections.
Yet, the very article that McAdams posted made the factually incorrect statement that the origins of Permindex were actually connected to Clay Shaw himself and went as far back as 1948.
Despite this, McAdams and his cheerleaders promoted this article to be the ultimate refutation of the theory that Permindex was engaged in international intelligence intrigue, whether connected to the JFK assassination or not.
Evica makes a good point that there has been quite a bit of disinformation relating to the JFK assassination in circulation over the years, but he is obviously unwilling to concede the possibility that those wonderful intelligence operatives at the Mossad had anything to do with it.
Evidently, in Evica's view, the Mossad is the only intelligence agency in the world that kept its hands clean as far as the JFK assassination is concerned.
But McCullough has yet to refute anything that appears in Final Judgment.
That's an uncomfortable little fact of history, to say the very least— especially for Israel and its supporters—but it does exemplify many of the uncomfortable facts about Israel that continually emerge in a study of the administration of President Kennedy, his relations with Israel, and the circumstances surrounding his assassination.
If anything, I believe that Final Judgment makes it all quite clear and I think that most readers would agree.
THE BIG GUN MISFIRES Perhaps my biggest disappointment, in a certain sense, was when the one critic whom I felt was probably best poised and best capable of refuting Final Judgment failed to do it.
Of all of those I've encountered who have been killed in marshaling facts and information in refuting at least certain aspects of a number of JFK assassination conspiracy theories, there is no question in my mind that Dave Reitzes is by far the most intelligent and articulate.
Clay Shaw from Garrison's allegations that the New Orleans trade executive was involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
There are those who have called Reitzes a mouthpiece for the CIA— among other choice things—but whether he is or not, the fact is that Reitzes, more so than anyone else has been a thoughtful and careful critic of Garrison.
I've commented myself that Garrison's investigation was flawed in many ways and I will be the first to admit it.
So I felt from my first encounter with Reitzes on an Internet news group that if anybody could raise questions in my own mind about my own thesis it would be Reitzes.
I sent Reitzes a copy of Final Judgment and eagerly (if not a bit nervously) awaited his public review of the book.
Dave had previously defended me from allegations of anti-Semitism (based, at least, on what he had seen of my writings as posted on the Internet news group) and reserved a ""final judgment"" until he had actually read the book.
However, once Reitzes reviewed the book, I breathed a sigh of relief that the one person I thought might be able to give me reason to reconsider my conclusions in Final Judgment had failed to do so.
Calling the book ""a morass of irrelevance,"" Reitzes surprised me when he took issue with my contention that what I called ""the controlled media"" had played a major part in covering up the truth about the JFK assassination conspiracy.
He said that was ""sheer fantasy"" —evidently dismissing the very thought that the media had played a part in promoting the ""lone assassin"" theory and defending the Warren Commission Report.
The fact that Reitzes would even repeat Shaw's claim that he ""never had any connection with the CIA"" is remarkable, if only because of the fact that it is thoroughly documented in de-classified CIA files that Shaw did indeed—at the very least— provide some thirty reports to the CIA over at least an eight year period, supposedly ending in approximately 1956.
But Shaw was obviously lying to Penthouse, although, of course, the facts about Shaw's CIA connection didn't come out until some years after Shaw's death.
In any case, Reitzes clearly has taken the position that anything Shaw said has to be believed—the evidence notwithstanding.
Shaw told Penthouse that he knew nothing about Permindex's activities and Reitzes believes him, but as I sarcastically told Reitzes, ""Sure.
Reitzes then proceeded to engage in a remarkable exercise in prevarication in which he then blinded his readers with a detailed exposition in which he summarized a number of varying reports about international financial transactions involving Permindex.
While the microanalysis undertaken by Reitzes may have proved one thing, that somebody somewhere typed the ""1"" key on their typewriter when he or she should have typed the ""2"" key when writing about the money transfers, Reitzes failed to refute the fact that Permindex was indeed part of the global arms and money laundering operations of the Mossad.
Dave actually got a little desperate at one point when he took issue with my suggestion that it was ""well known"" that the Bank Hapoalim (referenced in Final Judgment) was associated with Israel's labor bund, the Histadrut.
Perhaps it is not ""well known"" to the man of the street, but Reitzes knows full well that anyone with even a modicum of research skills can easily document that quite innocent fact—although the fact loses its innocence when one starts examining the multiple Israeli Mossad connections to the circles surrounding Lee Harvey Oswald in New Orleans the summer prior to the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Reitzes is adamant in defending not only Clay Shaw, but also Guy Banister and David Ferrie of any role whatsoever in the JFK affair, despite a wealth of information that these three were indeed connected not only to each other but to the web of intrigue surrounding Lee Harvey Oswald that fateful summer.
The big payoff came when Reitzes really dropped the ball, in the same fashion that the aforementioned Robert Harris had done earlier.
At another juncture Reitzes said, ""This is complete and utter nonsense.
You don't kill the progressive leader of a world superpower that is one of your greatest political allies.
Prior to that Reitzes had not actually attempted to refute Israeli involvement.
His approach had simply been to vindicate Clay Shaw and to suggest that Shaw's association with Permindex had nothing to do with either the JFK assassination of any kind of intelligence intrigue.
Remarkably, Reitzes even made the assertion that ""Angleton, meanwhile, could hardly be less relevant to Piper's scenario.
This, of course, would sound quite damning to most Internet readers of the Reitzes review who had not read Final Judgment, but the fact is that in Final Judgment I refuted four of those theories, and in the case of Marilyn Monroe I only reported the allegation that Israeli-linked Los Angeles gangster Mickey Cohen had orchestrated her death.
In the end, although he had managed to restrain himself quite admirably, Dave finally couldn't resist himself.
After having engaged in some serious debate—at first—he finally started posting a variety of material attacking the political views of my employer, rather than addressing the specifics in my book.
I would be remiss in not mentioning the extended review of Final Judgment posted in several parts on the Internet by Clark Wilkins.
Wilkins apparently views the JFK assassination conspiracy as a scenario dictated more by money than politics, evidenced by his comment that ""Muddying up the waters even further, and a point avoided entirely by Piper, is that this powerful movement is not powered by politics.
Piper has grabbed the tiger by the tail and I can see why he's been bit.
In terms of our understanding he's like Benjamin Franklin when Franklin went to France in search of military support against the British.
The moment the subject of his book came up, charges of anti-Semitism followed along with the argument/claim/whatever that he is some kind of Holocaust revisionist.
Clark Wilkins never came around to endorsing my thesis of Mossad involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy, but, at the very least, he acknowledged that the ever-controversial Permindex entity was indeed linked to the operations of the Mossad and Israel's international intrigue— and that's much further than many people will go.
In that context, addressing one of my critics, James Olmstead, who has said that Final Judgment was based solely on what Olmstead described as my ""hate for the state of Israel,"" Wilkins commented ""You'll find Piper has it right.
Thanks to Clark Wilkins for an honest, sincere effort to find out the truth, wherever it may lead.
All of the foregoing is not to suggest that the reviews of Final Judgment have been uniformly suspicious or hostile.
We've already noted the very positive review from Israeli journalist Barry Chamish.
In fact, in addition, there have been several friendly reviews that have appeared in a number of places, and they're worth noting.
Michael Piper's thesis is that Israel—specifically its intelligence agency, the Mossad—orchestrated Kennedy's assassination.
Piper is a longtime employee of the Liberty Lobby, a very conservative, populist organization which publishes the weekly newspaper, The Spotlight.
Its critics say that Liberty Lobby is anti-Semitic, but it says that it is simply highly critical of Israel.
I mention this as background information, not to take sides on the issue.
Daniel Brandt, a veteran and well-known figure of the so-called ""New Left"" movement of the 1960s.
Just as our two-year subscription to Liberty Lobby's Spotlight newspaper was winding down, along comes this book by Spotlight writer Michael Collins Piper.
We clipped a fair number of their investigative articles for NameBase during that period, and no longer felt defensive when our leftist critics condemned Spotlight as anti-Semitic.
The rare instances of excessive anti-Zionist zeal in Spotlight are more than offset by their consistently credible reporting on other issues.
When we saw the advance publicity for Final Judgment, which claimed that this book would offer ""astounding proof"" that Mossad had a hand in the JFK assassination, we were a bit nervous.
As it turns out, the Mossad links presented by Piper are circumstantial rather than conclusive, but definitely worth considering.
Other aspects of the JFK morass that Piper discusses, such as the Mafia-CIA-Israeli connection (starring Meyer Lansky and James Angleton), Charles DeGaulle and his problems with the OAS, and the spooky business of Permindex, are rarely treated in other JFK literature.
So we were happy to include this book in NameBase, particularly since it doesn't have an index of its own.
This book offers even the most grizzled devotees of mayhem and mystery more than enough meat to chew on.
The author walks the reader straight into the domain of Meyer Lansky, Mickey Cohen, and the Mossad, maintaining that Israel and its secret service had a reason to be opposed to JFK; and that Israel's allies in the mob and the CIA were, in turn, interacting with one another and opposed to JFK; thus these forces were allied together in the JFK conspiracy.
So although there are those who will continue to smear me and to attack Final Judgment for their own purposes, there are a few brave souls out there who are willing to say that the book has more merits than some of my critics might be willing to admit.
Since the release of Oliver Stone's JFK (which gave new life to widespread public interest in JFK assassination conspiracy theories), there has been a renewed effort to discredit all JFK assassination conspiracies which point toward involvement by the CIA—and Jim Garrison's investigation in particular.
The most notable book-length effort to discredit Garrison came with the publication in 1998 of Patricia Lambert's False Witness which is largely dedicated to the proposition that Jim Garrison was a reckless madman and that Clay Shaw was just an innocent socialite who fell prey to a dangerous demagogue.
It would take another book to deal with many of Miss Lambert's prevarications, but her most memorable is worth citing here.
The CIA apparently approved Shaw (perhaps without his knowledge) for this project, which, by one unofficial account, was nothing more than a program for routine debriefing of individuals involved in international trade.
At this point, what QK/ENCHANT actually was, whether or not it ever came to fruition, and what, if anything, Shaw knew about it, also remain unknown.
Then Lambert tells us that since Garrison failed to connect Shaw to the assassination, Shaw's CIA link meant nothing anyway.
Lambert herself unwittingly reveals that Shaw wasn't simply just another American businessman who had a brief association with the CIA as part of his international travels.
Lambert expects us to assume that all of the CIA documents that she cites are the only CIA documents relative to the work that Shaw performed for the agency—a leap of faith indeed.
Despite all this, Miss Lambert does not address the possibility that Shaw was also, during the same time frame, working in concert with Israel's Mossad.
Miss Lambert cites no Mossad documents one way or the other in that regard.
But the fact is that we do know that Shaw was indeed closely associated with the Mossad through Permindex.
This, of course, presupposes, first of all, that Shaw knew in 1962 that Permindex would play a part in the JFK assassination in 1963 and that, in fact, Permindex would be linked to the crime.
Not surprisingly, Lambert also goes to extraordinary efforts to refute the idea that Lee Harvey Oswald had any association with CIA contract operative David Ferrie.
On page 61 of her book she describes a photo of Oswald and Ferrie together at a Civil Air Patrol cookout as something that ""established only an overlap of association with that organization""—another remarkable linguistic prevarication indeed.
However, as a consequence of a wide variety of long-standing research, coupled with new findings by independent film producer Daniel Hopsicker (referenced in Appendix Three), we know for a fact that Oswald and Ferrie were closely associated.
Lambert also claims that there is no ""credible"" testimony placing Oswald in association with CIA contract agent Guy Banister.
Her use of the term ""credible"" is just another way of saying those—including Banister's own mistress, Delphine Roberts, and her daughter, among others—who did testify to Oswald's association with Banister just simply can't be believed.
ALL NEW DISINFORMATION, CIA-MOSSAD STYLE The worldwide media has given great play to the release of a new book that purported to ""prove"" that it was the Soviet KGB that concocted the story that the CIA was behind the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The book purported to be the inside history of the KGB's secret intelligence operations in the United States and Europe The Sword and the Shield by Professor Christopher Andrew of Cambridge—described as ""one of the world's leading authorities on intelligence history,""—is said to be based on what are said to be extensive notes and transcriptions (secretly compiled over a 12 year period) of vast numbers of files from the KGB archives.
The notes themselves were supposedly smuggled out of KGB headquarters and then to Britain.
According to Andrew, his book is an annotated and supplemented summary of the files as they were provided by former KGB archivist Vasili Mitrokhin who retired from the KGB in 1984 and who then defected to Britain in 1992 after the CIA had rejected Mitrokhin.
Mitrokhin reportedly smuggled his notes drawn from the KGB files out of the KGB office in his shoes and pockets and then buried them—until his defection—under the floorboards of his country home.
In that sense, then, while the book is quite skillfully written in such a way that it appears to present the information presented as having come from the KGB's supposedly purloined file, that is not always necessarily the case.
Thus, Andrew's book is effectively an attempt to counter allegations of high-level Zionist intrigue that has been documented by the official post-KGB Russian intelligence services.
Likewise, in the same vein, there are only two indexed references to the CIA's longtime counterintelligence chief, James Jesus Angleton.
This is interesting—very interesting—since Angleton, who is best remembered for his strident anti-Soviet stance, having spent decades looking for a ""KGB mole"" in the upper echelons of the CIA and for KGB moles in allied Western intelligence agencies—was also a devoted Israeli loyalist who jealously guarded his role as the CIA's liaison to the Mossad.
Yet, despite all this, Andrew's passing references to Angleton refer to subject matter that has appeared in dozens, if not hundreds, of other books on the subject of intelligence intrigue.
In fact, when the news of Andrew's book was first announced in the major media, most reports focused—sometimes exclusively—on the purported revelation that it was actually the KGB that was behind the theory that the CIA was involved in the president's murder.
Most people who read news accounts of the release of the book would probably have gleaned little more than that, based on the nature of the news reports in question.
Andrew's book claimed that KGB data purloined by Mitrokhin revealed that a letter—supposedly written prior to the assassination by JFK's accused assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, and addressed to a ""Mr Hunt"" —was actually a KGB forgery.
As part of this effort to vindicate the CIA, hinging on the story of the purported KGB forgery, Andrew spends a great deal of energy spinning a literary web around the charge that pioneer JFK assassination investigator Mark Lane was either a witting or unwitting tool of the KGB in his writing of Rush to Judgment, Lane's ground-breaking critique of the Warren Commission Report on the assassination of President Kennedy.
Andrew connects Lane to the theory that ""the CIA killed JFK"" but fails to advise his readers that never once in Rush to Judgment did Lane ever allege that the CIA was involved in the president's assassination.
While Lane's thesis about CIA involvement was outlined in his much later-written 1993 book, Plausible Denial, based in part on the information that came out during Lane's defense in 1985 of The Spotlight newspaper against a libel suit filed by E Howard Hunt, he ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter played no part in the scenario outlined in Plausible Denial either.
In addition, in Plausible Denial, Lane develops solid evidence demonstrating that the CIA itself fabricated a scenario linking Oswald to a KGB officer in Mexico.
Since this CIA operation actually took place more than a month before President Kennedy was killed, this evidence—standing alone— demonstrates behind question that the CIA was involved not just in the postassassination cover-up, but in the planning of the crime itself and in the framing of the patsy.
In fact, the ""Dear Mr Hunt"" letter was indeed most likely a forgery but the question remains as to ""who"" concocted the forgery, Christopher Andrew's claims notwithstanding.
All of this perhaps explains why Andrew is so determined to suppress the facts by targeting Mark Lane who singularly did so much to bring out the truth about the CIA's complicity.
Andrew actually makes the flat-out allegation that Lane received funding from the KGB at the time he was writing Rush to Judgment, thereby leaving readers to conclude that Lane's own work was essentially part of a KGB disinformation effort.
In fact, Lane never once received any substantial contribution of this size from anyone at any time in relation to his work on the JFK assassination.
His largest contribution at the time was a one-time donation of $50 from famed comic Woody Allen.
Andrew claims that ""the same intermediary"" paid $500 for a trip that Lane made to Europe in 1964.
In addition, Andrew claims that while in Europe Lane made an attempt to visit Moscow to discuss his JFK findings.
During that trip Lane actually took an outspoken stand against Soviet censorship and human rights violations during a visit to Bulgaria, where he had been invited to speak at an international conference of attorneys.
What is most telling about the obvious disinformation campaign against Lane by Andrew is the very fact that not a single one of Lane's books was ever translated and published under Soviet sponsorship.
Literally dozens of American authors have received vast profits from Soviet-sponsored publications of their books behind the former Iron Curtain—but not Mark Lane.
If the Soviets had genuinely been interested in advancing Lane's efforts they could have openly published any of Lane's seven books just as they have published other books, without even an eyebrow raised.
The allegations are a deliberate attempt to sully Lane's reputation and an attempt to refute evidence of CIA complicity in the assassination of President Kennedy.
As such, it is not unfair to note that Andrew's own teaching and lecturing has, in fact, been subsidized in part by the CIA, a fact that Andrew's biography on his book's dust jacket fails to note, but which is mentioned in glowing terms in promotional materials that have been distributed by his publisher.
The motivations of Andrew (and his ties to the intelligence community) must certainly raise eyebrows considering just the items that we've considered here.
Shortly thereafter, however, the CCC won national headlines because several Republican members of Congress had addressed the group as well and the group was called ""racist"" by its critics.
The truth is that the CCC, in my estimation, is obsessed with racial issues, but that wasn't the topic of my speech to the CCC, any more than I had planned to talk about ""the Holocaust"" when the ADL used that issue to scuttle my proposed speaking engagement in California in the fall of 1997.
Next up is Michael Collins Piper, a correspondent for the anti-Semitic Spotlight tabloid who explains that Israel was actually behind the Kennedy assassination.
Piper is accompanied by a black bodyguard, a member of the black supremacist Nation of Islam, who sits quietly in the back, his eyes and identity shielded by dark sunglasses.
Piper instructs his audience that he is not anti-black, gesturing towards his bodyguard, who obligingly smiles and nods at the appropriate moment.
Piper ends with a comment on how sick he is of hearing about the Holocaust and how he just doesn't care how many Jews died.
First of all, my bodyguard—my African-American friend—was not and never was a member of the Nation of Islam and neither I nor he ever said he was.
In fact, my bodyguard was the father of a little boy who just happens to be my godson.
Secondly, although my bodyguard did wear sunglasses, it was because he happens to have a chronic sleep which has made his eyes vulnerable to bright lights.
In fact, it was another person at the meeting who used those words and gestured to my bodyguard.
However, the SPLC led its readers to believe my bodyguard was some sort of ""StepN-Fetchit"" who leered to the audience like a simple-minded Uncle Tom.
However, when a member of the audience did make a comment about Jewish influence in Hollywood, I passed by the comment, remarking with a laugh, ""You said that.
However, the SPLC report was later posted on the Internet—for the entire world to see—not only by the SPLC, but also by other parties who had an interest in defaming me.
What is interesting is that once I dared to challenge the SPLC with the facts they quickly amended their allegations.
Quite rightly, the SPLC feared what would have been the obvious circus that would have erupted had my bodyguard taken them to court in Washington, D.C. where this self-styled ""anti-racist"" group would be forced to explain to what would almost certainly be a majority Black jury why they had maliciously abused an innocent African-American whose sole crime was to act as a bodyguard for his friend who had previously been threatened by the Jewish Defense League.
What is particularly intriguing about this CCC event so falsely memorialized by the SPLC is that one of the CCC's national leaders, Jared Taylor, actually boycotted the event, evidently offended by my suggestions that Israel and the CIA had done something unpleasant.
The average CCC member should wonder why Taylor was receiving calls at his home from the ADL, which otherwise trashes the average CCC member.
Perhaps the ADL (which also opposes affirmative action, just like the CCC) has a bigger agenda at work.
After all, it's been known for years that the FBI permitted its Ku Klux Klan informants to engage in anti-Black behavior, but there was, at the same time, a long-standing order that they could not criticize Jews or Israel.
Anyway, when the CCC's newspaper published a very brief review of Final Judgment, the newspaper never once mentioned the fact that the book links the Mossad to the JFK assassination, only hinting darkly about ""other agencies"" aside from the Lansky syndicate that may have been involved.
I've since learned that the CCC organizer who set up the meeting where I spoke was almost certainly some sort of intelligence operative—probably working for British intelligence— so that raises questions about why I was invited to speak in the first place.
THE CURRENT MEDIA TWIST The way the media has reported on the JFK case in recent years is illustrated well by two similar reports published in the ""conservative"" Washington Times on June 5, 1998 and the next day in the Times’ ""liberal"" counterpart in the nation's capital, the Washington Post.
The Times story, entitled ""Garrison idea on accomplice was rejected by Oswald widow,"" was written by longtime Warren Commission enthusiast Hugh Aynesworth, now working for the Times.
Oswald accepted the Warren Commission's claim that her husband was indeed JFK's assassin and that he acted alone.
Of the two newspaper accounts, however, the Post report was technically the more honest.
During that same time frame, Parade magazine piped in with the old saw that organized crime was responsible for the JFK assassination.
A press release dated June 4, 1998 from Parade announced that ""Bobby Kennedy Believed the Mob Killed JFK,"" citing longtime RFK associate Jack Newfield as the source.
An inquiry into the assassination of Bobby Kennedy was curiously sidetracked by the Newhouse empire.
In The Assassination of Robert F Kennedy, the authors present convincing evidence of a conspiracy.
More recently, Random House published Case Closed, which supports the Warren Commission's theory that Oswald acted alone.
Given author Gerald Posner's reliance on ""confidential intelligence sources,'' some have suggested that Case Closed is typical CIA-friendly propaganda.
According to Newhouse biographer Thomas Maier, the man who initially introduced Mailer to Newhouse and Random House was Roy Cohn.
In fact, Newhouse's ""devotion to Kennedy cover-ups"" may have been stimulated by his lifelong friendship with the aforementioned Roy Cohn, whom, as we noted earlier, was a corporate investor in the Mossad's Permindex operation.
So that the Newhouse press would rush to put forth Jack Newfield’s latest spin on the theory that ""The Mafia Killed JFK,"" suggesting that this was Robert Kennedy's view, is no surprise.
Newfield has also emerged as one of the voices promoting the idea that the Kennedy brothers were enamored with Israel.
Self-described former Mossad operative David Heymann, in his critical biography of RFK, had a different spin, reporting that ""A number of people accused RFK of using terminology when privately discussing Jews.
What all of this suggests, in any event, is that there is now a concerted media effort—since the release of Final Judgment and growing knowledge of its revelations concerning the difficult relationship between JFK and Israel— to portray the Kennedy brothers as devout Zionists, when nothing could be further from the truth.
One is tempted to laugh at the chutzpah and the revisionist history at work here, but it is clear that the facts about the Kennedy family and Israel are most uncomfortable for Israel indeed.
At the same time, the media is promoting a new twist on the Kennedy assassination itself, suggesting that Jack and Bobby Kennedy were basically responsible for their own assassinations for having dared to engage in CIA intrigue against Castro and others during the JFK administration.
The cover-up, Posner says, was of the misdeeds of the Kennedy brothers prior to JFK's assassination.
The foremost book length work putting forth the theory that the manipulation of the CIA by the Kennedy brothers was ultimately responsible for the JFK assassination tragedy appeared in Gus Russo's 1998 volume, Live by The Sword.
Essentially, in Russo's view, Jack Kennedy lived by the sword and therefore died by the sword, thus the title of Russo's tangled fantasy.
So, in the end, JFK got precisely what he deserved—or so Russo would like us to believe.
And that is the ongoing propaganda line about JFK (and Bobby, too) to which we are now being treated in the rest of the ""mainstream media"" which so relishes the misdeeds of the Kennedy family.
What is telling, though, about Russo's book, is that Russo seems to have been able to dredge up long-secret ""witnesses"" (particularly CIA officers and agents whose names remain anonymous) that somehow seem to have never been reached by any author before.
And that, in itself, is reminiscent of that other esteemed Warren Commission defender, Gerald Posner.
So we do have to wonder if Russo's book isn't really some carefully crafted CIA disinformation of the grandest sort.
The one thing that Russo never addressed is the possibility that Bobby Kennedy himself may have orchestrated a provocation against Castro in the form of a ""dummy"" assassination attempt (ostensibly by ""pro-Castro agitator"" Lee Harvey Oswald) against his own brother (utilizing CIA assets that Russo says were working for Bobby) and that this ""dummy"" attempt may have been usurped by others—and I am referring to Mossad allies in the CIA such as James Angleton and Frank Sturgis—and in the end that ""dummy"" assassination may have been turned into the real thing.
Considering everything that we have uncovered in the pages of Final Judgment that frightening scenario is not so very far out of the realm of possibility.
So, in that sense, Bobby Kennedy may have had a real surprise on November 22, 1963.
THE OFFICIAL LINE In any event, the war to defend the Warren Commission Report has not yet come to an end.
The opening gun in defense of this fraud was fired on November 22, 1964 when The Washington Post published a glowing review of The Warren Commission Report accompanied by negative reviews of several books critical of the report.
It has the high polish of legal writing at its best, carefully composed, terse, restrained and meticulous.
As noted previously, Rostow and the Post were able to get away with this fraud at the time, at least, for Rostow's pivotal role in the creation of the Warren Commission was not detailed in any substance until many years after the JFK assassination.
But it does say a lot about the way the press does promote the ""official"" line on the JFK assassination, particularly when we consider Rostow's high-level role in the Israeli lobby in America which does have such considerable influence on the American media.
This is relevant here, for as we've pointed out, there has been a concerted effort by the Israeli lobby to suppress Final Judgment at the same time the major media in America have been determined—as far as is possible—not to give the thesis of this book any more airing than necessary.
In fact, a recent controversy surrounding Final Judgment brought the book's thesis back into the mainstream, and it also bared a strenuous effort to refute the theory of the book itself.
La AFFAIRE SCHAUMBURG For the first five months of the year 2000 the otherwise quiet Chicago suburb of Schaumburg was wracked by a stormy debate over censorship and freedom of speech and centered on Final Judgment, recalling the row that raged for over a year in Orange County, California (described in the foreword) after I was invited to speak about my book at a college seminar on he JFK assassination.
In addition, his late mother was one of the library's founders, his wife was a volunteer at the library, and Bollyn himself had actually worked at the library as a young man Still, the library rejected he donation, saying it could find no ""professional"" reviews of the book.
I daresay, however, that if the librarians had checked for a review of the Warren Commission Report, they would have found the one by Eugene Rostow in the Washington Post.
But my book hasn't gotten those kind of favorable reviews—nor that any real surprise.
THE ADL, YET AGAIN In any event, at a hearing of the library board of directors, a furor erupted when Bollyn pointed out that several directors were partisans of Israel, suggesting the book was rejected because of the Israeli lobby's fervent objections to the book.
Already involved behind the scenes, the Chicago office of the ADL publicly stepped into the picture, with ADL spokesman Richard Hirschhaut declaring, ""We believe this is a cynical ploy, an attempt to create a First Amendment issue as subterfuge for an effort to exploit the goodwill and fair-mindedness of the public library system.
Previously based in the ADL's San Francisco office, Hirschhaut did not mention to the press that he had a personal axe to grind with me and with my then-employer, The Spotlight.
Hirschhaut, in fact, had been one of the ADL officials under criminal investigation by the FBI and the San Francisco Police Department in 1993 for illegal domestic spying.
At the time, top ADL spy Roy Bullock revealed that a June 30, 1986 Spotlight article that I had written had set in motion the events that led to the ADL scandal.
Hirschhaut was transferred to Chicago by the ADL when the spy agency was busy trying to clean up the mess caused by the affair.
In any case, the resulting brouhaha attracted the attention of the media and no less than five area newspapers and the PBS radio affiliate reported on the controversy as it dragged on over the next five months.
Bollyn tried to get the self-styled ""Office of Intellectual Freedom"" of the American Library Association to take a stand, but the OIF's director, Judith Krug, refused to condemn the censorship.
Seven years previously, Krug sided with the ADL when the Israeli lobby raised a fuss after a Chicago librarian sponsored a resolution—endorsed by the ALA national convention—condemning Israeli censorship.
While smaller local papers contacted me, Carri Karuhn, the reporter for the ""big"" Chicago Tribune, refused to return my calls.
The Tribune also refused to publish a letter to the editor from me, responding to its coverage.
Toch concocted a highly inflammatory five-page smear of Final Judgment.
This ""review"" was leaked to the press along with the seemingly contradictory announcement the library was still going to put the book on the shelves, despite the negative review.
They charged that Piper quoted sources out of context said that he selectively quoted sources that fit his thesis and ignored others that did not.
The trio endorsed the Warren Commission's ""lone nut thesis, saying only ""buffs"" believe here was a conspiracy in the JFK assassination.
Although I was amused at the allegation the book was “poorly written,"" the other charges were far more serious and in response I compiled a thoroughly documented 88-page response, eviscerating the malicious review.
In the title of my response, I dubbed the library critique ""The Star Chamber Judgment,"" harkening back to the 17th century English tribunals that met in secret, delving out severe aid arbitrary punishments 1p those who dared challenge the power of the British crown.
What is interesting is that the Israeli language translator and his team had gone to great lengths to try to refute the thesis of the book.
POLICE STATE TACTICS Meanwhile, the pro-Israel partisans on the library board issued a statement saying the librarians had been ""professional"" and ""graceful"" in their malevolent attack on me and on the book.
Then, at one point, the Israeli translator tried to get Bollyn arrested.
Speaking to Toch on he telephone, Bollyn asked Toch were Toch had lived in Israel.
Notably absent were the three librarians—but they did have at least one vocal supporter who did show up.
As Christopher Bollyn opened the meeting, there was a minor ruckus as a person identified as a member of the local Jewish community attempted to disrupt the event, shouting angrily that ""Gerald Posner's Case Closed tells the truth about the JFK assassination.
It turns out that the ADL had already contacted the Schaumburg Police Department to ""brief"" them about me.
In response to the ADL briefing, Schaumburg's police chief, Richard Casler, sent out word that one of the top Nazis in America was coming to town and that this Nazi bigwig had invited ""his followers"" to come to his rally.
To preserve the peace, Chief Casler ordered five extra police officers on duty to prevent me from disrupting little Schaumburg and perhaps instigating another Holocaust.
When I learned of this tough cop's toadying to the ADL, I called his office and asked to speak to him, but Casler wouldn't come to the phone.
I also pointed out that—despite my refutation of the librarian's review—that you can be sure the ADL will cite this malicious review in the future as ""evidence"" that ""responsible librarians"" at one of the nation's most prestigious libraries found the book to be ""questionable,"" ""misleading"" and ""distasteful"" and ""of little merit""—some of the choice terms used.
For the uninitiated—which includes most of those who read the library review, without having read Final Judgment —this might sound like quite a damning indictment.
But the truth is that while other factors played a part in Ben-Gurion's resignation, the final showdown with JFK over the nuclear bomb was the proverbial ""straw that broke the camel's back"" and, clearly, the ""primary reason"" behind Ben-Gurion's resignation.
As all ""responsible"" and ""mainstream"" accounts of the Israeli nuclear bomb program affirm, the drive to build a nuclear bomb was not only a major aim of Israel's defense policy but also a particular special interest of Ben-Gurion.
The fact is that Seymour Hersh's revelations about JFK and Ben-Gurion have been easily eclipsed by a more recent volume on the same subject— this one written by an Israeli scholar, Avner Cohen.
At this juncture, before going into what Cohen has to say, it is incumbent upon me to advise the readers that Cohen privately told an interviewer that he had been shocked to learn about Final Judgment when he was doing an Internet search for information about his own book.
That having been said, let's take a look at what Cohen does say about Ben-Gurion and his most difficult relationship with JFK over the issue of Israel's nuclear bomb.
In the opening pages of his book, Cohen writes at length about Ben-Gurion's special interest in the construction of an Israeli nuclear bomb and the reasoning behind it.
What follows are relevant quotations from pages 10 through 14 in Cohen's book, although please note that I have re-arranged the quotes in order that these quotations are more free-flowing in the context of what Cohen has written.
In his public speeches and writings as prime minister Ben-Gurion rarely discussed the Holocaust.
In private conversations and communications with foreign leaders, however, he returned to the lessons of the Holocaust time and again.
Anxiety about the Holocaust reached beyond BenGurion to infuse Israeli military thinking.
The destruction of Israel defined the ultimate horizon of the threat against Israel.
Israeli military planners have always considered a scenario in which a united Arab military coalition launched a war against Israel with the aim of liberating Palestine and destroying the Jewish state.
This kind of planning was unique to Israel, as few nations have military contingency plans aimed at preventing apocalypse.
Ben-Gurion's pessimism . . . influenced Israel's foreign and defense policy for years.
Ben-Gurion's determination to launch a_ nuclear project was the result of strategic intuition and obsessive fears, not of a well-thought out plan.
He believed Israel needed nuclear weapons as insurance if it could no longer compete with the Arabs in an arms race, and as a weapon of last resort in case of an extreme military emergency.
Nuclear weapons might also persuade the Arabs to accept Israel's existence, leading to peace in the region.
We must have no illusions that what is declared every day in Cairo, Damascus, Iraq are just words.
The ""nuclear option"" was not only at the very core of Ben-Gurion's personal world view, but the very foundation of Israel's national security policy.
The Israelis were essentially willing, if necessary, to ""blow up the world""—including themselves—if they had to do so in order to destroy the Arab neighbors they hate so much.
This is what Seymour Hersh notes Israeli nuclear planners considered ""the Samson Option""—that, as Samson of the Bible, after being captured by the Philistines, brought down Dagon's Temple in Gaza and killed himself along with his enemies.
So along came the STDL librarians who wanted to debate whether JFK's pressure on Israel over nuclear weapons was ""the"" primary reason or ""a"" primary reason or ""one"" reasons for Ben-Gurion's resignation.
They were suggesting that I quoted Hersh out of context (and did so deliberately) because they realized, full well, that all of the evidence, taken together in the big picture, clearly demonstrates that it was indeed JFK's determined effort to defuse ""The Samson Option"" that was very much so the primary cause of Ben-Gurion's resignation.
The bottom line is that—in 1963—the issue of JFK's conflict with BenGurion was a secret to both the Israeli public and the American public and it remained so for more than 20 years at least and still largely remains so, despite the release of Hersh's book, followed by Final Judgment and then the book by Avner Cohen.
Now that the truth is emerging, there are others who are reaching essentially the same interpretation that I have.
The librarians would have people believe that I am alone in this interpretation.
Can the Special Relationship Survive the New Strategic Environment"" was published in the December 1998 issue of The Middle East Review of International Affairs published at Bar-Ilan.
Between 1951 and 1963, the Kennedy administration placed a great deal of pressure on BenGurion in the effort to press for acceptance of international inspection of Dimona and _Israeli abdication of the nuclear weapons option.
This pressure apparently did not alter Israeli policy, but it was a contributing factor to Ben-Gurion's resignation in 1963.
However, to repeat myself, JFK's ""great deal of pressure on Ben-Gurion"" (Steinberg's words) was not known in general to the public at large (either in Israel or the United States) until the release of Seymour Hersh's book which focused on the conflict quite extensively.
Avner Cohen's very powerful new book essentially confirmed everything that Hersh had written, in one sense or another, but went even further and we will be reviewing what Cohen has to say in detail later.
But for the present, let's continue to dissect what the STDL librarians did to distort the words of Seymour Hersh.
In fact Hersh states that domestic factors .. . appeared to be more than enough to convince BenGurion to leave public life . . . and Ben-Gurion's health . . . were as, or more important.
The way the librarians structured this sentence in their review—was to put a different twist on what Hersh really did say.
A 'THREAT' FROM JFK TO ISRAEL Here's what Avner Cohen in Israel and the Bomb, adds to the story of Ben-Gurion's resignation.
The purpose of the letter was to solidify the terms of the American visits in a way that would accord with these minimum conditions on which the intelligence community insisted.
It was cabled to [ United States Ambassador to Israel Walworth Barbour] on Saturday, 15 June, with instructions to deliver it by hand to Ben-Gurion the next day, but on that Sunday, Ben-Gurion announced his resignation.
This is interesting, in itself, because—if Cohen's account is correct— Ben-Gurion himself never even specified any particular reason, foreign or domestic.
Ben-Gurion's biographer suggested that there was no one specific political reason, but that it was his general mental state—manifested by a series of panicky, even paranoid, actions—of the previous ten weeks that led the seventy-six year-old leader to resign.
The very fact that Cohen writes—as I did in Final Judgment—of BenGurion's apparent paranoia is interesting.
We should note, at this juncture, that (based upon what we have just considered) Avner Cohen made it quite clear that the construction of a nuclear bomb for Israel was, actually, a very personal issue with David Ben-Gurion for many years.
Ben-Gurion believed that Israel's access to atomic weapons was critical to Israel's survival—and Ben-Gurion was the ""Grand Old Man"" of Israel.
Cohen notes that several in Ben-Gurion's inner circle felt that the resignation had nothing to do with the nuclear issue.
Others, however, including ministers in BenGurion's cabinet . . . believed that Ben-Gurion's decision was, in part, connected to Kennedy's pressure on Dimona.
Israel Galili, the leader of Achdut HaAvodah , was convinced that Ben-Gurion's sense of failure and frustration in dealings with Kennedy on the matter of Dimona was among the reasons that led to his resignation.
This is also the view of [top Israeli nuclear scientist] Yuval Ne'eman, who, in 1963, was . involved in the consultations involving the replies to Kennedy's demands.
Ambassador Barbour also hints that Kennedy's letters and Ben-Gurion's resignation might have been linked.
However, unfortunately, our STDL librarian friends were not finished on this point just yet.
Hersh also points out that ''Kennedy's persistent pressure on Israel stemmed from his belief that Israel had not yet developed any nuclear weapons.
The STDL librarians were engaging in some historical interpretation of their own at this juncture, quoting one brief passage of Hersh's book out of context.
There is no question, based on all of the massive amount of material appearing in Hersh's book (and the aforementioned more recent study by Avner Cohen) that JFK was determined to stop Israel, in particular, from building a nuclear bomb.
Here the STDL librarians were trying to predict what JFK would have done had he lived.
In Final Judgment 1 pointed out that JFK had adopted a new policy toward the French drive for nuclear weapons that was being outlined in a then-""top secret"" memo dated November 22, 1963.
But there is no way that the librarians can suggest that just because JFK changed his policy toward France that he would also change his policy toward Israel's nuclear ambitions.
Perhaps JFK would have been ""pragmatic"" but that doesn't mean that he was not trying to stop Israel from building a nuclear bomb—and that's what his trouble with Ben-Gurion and Israel was all about in the first place.
The fact is that any dealings that JFK had with France over the nuclear issue were insignificant compared to the bitterness between JFK and Israel over the same issue.
By bringing in this matter of the French, the STDL librarians were trying to cloud the issue.
The fact is that Israel was a special target of JFK insofar as nuclear proliferation was concerned.
No American president was more concerned with the danger of nuclear proliferation than John Fitzgerald Kennedy.
He was convinced that the spread of nuclear weapons would make the world more dangerous and undermine United States interests.
Kennedy reminded his advisers that more was at stake than a piece of paper—without an agreement, the arms race would continue and nuclear weapons would proliferate to other countries.
Cohen's book also makes it quite clear that the French—who had previously been the primary foreign enablers of Israel's secret nuclear arms program—had withdrawn their support after former French President Charles DeGaulle returned to power in 1958.
By June DeGaulle had become aware of what he later termed ""the improper military collaboration established between Tel Aviv and Paris after the Suez Expedition, which permanently placed Israelis at all levels of French services,'' and he was determined to end it.
It took almost two years to translate DeGaulle's determination into a new French nuclear policy vis-a-vis Israel.
Cohen points out, however, that Israel's friend in France, atomic energy minister Jacques Soustelle, resigned, and at that point DeGaulle learned that the French assistance to Israel had continued, despite his orders.
The end of French assistance would put the entire Dimona project at Risk.
DeGaulle recognized how unprecedented the deal was, and for this reason refused to go along with it, reluctant to provide Israel with a nuclear option.
Israel formally announced ""peaceful intentions"" (although clearly Israel still intended to build a nuclear bomb) and DeGaulle allowed the French companies to continue working with the Israelis, but the French government withdrew its direct support.
Of course, DeGaulle's reversal on the issue of what was clearly critical French support for Israel's nuclear ambitions is quite significant indeed, particularly in light of what is documented in Final Judgment regarding the Mossad-sponsored Permindex operation that came to the fore during Jim Garrison's JFK assassination inquiry and which had been publicly connected to at least one assassination attempt on DeGaulle prior to the assassination of President Kennedy.
However, Ben-Gurion's resignation didn't end the conflict between JFK and Israel.
What happened between JFK and the new Israeli prime minister, Levi Eshkol, is perhaps even more interesting.
Immediately upon Eshkol's succession, JFK wrote a letter to the new prime minister that was evidently even more strident (at least from the Israeli perspective) than even JFK's previous communications with BenGurion.
Not since Eisenhower's message to Ben-Gurion in the midst of the Suez crisis in November 1956 had an American president been so blunt with an Israeli prime minister.
From perspective, Kennedy's demands seemed diplomatically inappropriate; they were inconsistent with national sovereignty.
So Kennedy's pressure on Israel did not end with the resignation of Ben-Gurion.
Yet, Cohen notes, on page 173, ""Dimona itself was never mentioned in those talks.
In short, the nuclear issue was so sensitive that during face-to-face secret meetings between United States and Israeli officials when they were discussing other issues between the two nations, the subject of Israel's nuclear bomb was not discussed.
It was left on the table—actually never placed on the table—for future discussion.
But JFK was assassinated eight days later, and the dynamics of the U.S.-Israeli relationship changed dramatically as a consequence.
In any case, in late 1963 Israel and the United States, Kennedy and Eshkol, stumbled further down the path of nuclear opacity.
Neither Avner Cohen nor Michael Collins Piper nor the STDL librarians can answer these questions with certainty.
But the reaction in Israel to Cohen's revelations about JFK's secret war with Israel over the nuclear question was interesting indeed.
The murder of American President John F Kennedy brought to an abrupt end the massive pressure being applied by the United States administration on the government of Israel to discontinue the nuclear program.
Cohen demonstrates at length the pressures applied by Kennedy on Ben-Gurion.
The book implied that, had Kennedy remained alive, it is doubtful whether Israel would today have a nuclear option.
Cohen also concludes that BenGurion's decision to resign in 1963 was taken to a large extent against the background of the tremendous pressure that Kennedy was applying on him concerning the nuclear issue.
Israeli journalist Reuven Pedatzur has summarized well the explosive revelations that appear in Avner Cohen's book.
President Kennedy's stand against Israeli nuclear weapons was only one of numerous policy positions that were perceived by Israel to be contrary to its interests and this is documented in Final Judgment.
There was much more to the Kennedy policy on the Middle East than Israel's nuclear bomb program and Final Judgment makes that perfectly clear, the STDL reviewers notwithstanding.
This is also verified by the fact that during the secret meeting in midNovember, described earlier, the nuclear issue was not even discussed.
The reviewers also tried to suggest that Lyndon Johnson put as much pressure on the Israelis to curtail their nuclear bomb program, quoting a reference from Seymour Hersh.
President Johnson and his advisers would pretend that the American inspections [of the Dimona nuclear arms plant in Israel] amounted to proof that Israel was not building the bomb, leaving unblemished America's newly reaffirmed support for nuclear nonproliferation.
Hersh describes how CIA analyst Carl Duckett had concluded that Israel had finally constructed a nuclear bomb and brought this fact to the attention of CIA Director Richard Helms who told Duckett that he would personally deliver the information to President Johnson.
Helms walked the Duckett information into the Oval Office and gave it to the President.
By 1968, the President had no intention of doing anything to stop the Israeli bomb, as Helms, Duckett . . . and a very few others in the United States government came to understand.
President Johnson obviously knew how inflammatory the subject of Israel's nuclear bomb program was—and he did not want to be forced into taking any action that would put himself in the same position that his predecessor, JFK, had placed himself.
According to Hersh, Johnson ""exploded"" over the subject and demanded that it be kept secret from even two top cabinet members.
LBJ was the ultimate political dealmaker, the politician's politician, but he was clearly afraid of the issue of confronting Israel over the nuclear bomb.
While Israel's nuclear bomb program was a major concern (as it should have been) the United States administration under Johnson never took any substantive action to block Israel from pursuing its longtime goal of creating a weapon of mass destruction.
Based upon what we know that has been presented in Final Judgment, we can certainly understand why.
Maybe the Israeli nuclear issue was—dare I say it—""another factor"" (maybe even the ""primary"" reason) that LBJ decided to step down.
Maybe ""domestic factors"" such as unrest over the Vietnam War were just the public issues that we heard about in the press—for we certainly never heard about Israel and the bomb.
This is speculation, of course, but quite reasonable speculation indeed.
President Johnson was also more flexible than Kennedy on the rules of the Dimona inspections.
The Israelis were able to determine the rules of the visits, and the Johnson administration chose not to confront Israel on the issue, fearing that Israel would end the arrangement.
Culler recalls that his assumption at the time was that the restrictions were agreed on at the highest level in both countries.
As we have seen above, what Hersh said does not conflict with the thesis of Final Judgment.
Other material appearing in Hersh's book certainly coincides with facts unearthed by Israeli historian Avner Cohen and does not conflict with what the librarians called my ""conspiracy theories"" in any way.
JFK was adamantly determined to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb.
JFK's death did indeed prove beneficial to Israel's nuclear ambitions and the evidence proves it.
SO MUCH THEN for the efforts by the librarians to refute what they rightly perceived to be the foundation of the thesis of Final Judgment—that JFK’s refusal to countenance Israel's drive for the atomic bomb resulted in Mossad participation in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Although one of the STDL reviewers, Tom Holmberg, later posted an anonymous vicious smear of this author on amazon.com, he finally had the guts to put his name on the review.
However, the favorable reviews of Final Judgment far outweigh the ravings of Holmberg, Uri Toch and friends.
UN-CORRUPTED MINDS WEIGH IN With all of this in mind, we can see why the Israeli lobby is so determined to suppress Final Judgment.
The Israeli lobby is concerned that people just might believe that the theory presented in Final Judgment does make sense.
The fact is that when I have been able to present my thesis unhindered, to those who haven't actually read the book, people do say that the theory makes sense.
A good example came when in the spring of 1999 (a year before the Schaumburg affair) I was invited to speak before an accelerated seniors honor course in political science at the Thomas Worthington High School near Columbus, Ohio.
Although the teacher who invited me, Tom Molnar, was aware of the previous frenzy that had erupted in Southern California, Molnar, to his credit, was unfazed.
Despite all of this controversy—or perhaps because of it—Molnar still invited me to speak.
In previous years, the ADL had objected to other speakers Mr Molnar had invited.
However, when Molnar offered the ADL the opportunity to appear in debate with those speakers, they refused to debate.
The students’ written reviews of my presentation were in stark contrast to the anti-intellectual rantings and ravings of the ADL and their shills at the Schaumburg Township District Library.
Mr Piper seems to be a nice person and he does not seem to harbor any ill will toward Jews or foreigners.
Many of his ideas seem to make sense but I think that some of his connections seem too complicated to be true.
He also admits that no truly hard evidence exists, and that we may never know the real truth behind the most famous American conspiracy.
Michael was obviously well-educated to create such a thorough, comprehensive and believable compilation of events in his book.
Just the thought that his story may be real left me doubting all other versions I have heard.
I appreciated his attempt to expose the truth without hurting people's reputations unreasonably.
Mr Piper was very honest and did say that his whole theory is just a theory and that we will probably never know the entire truth.
I actually did feel that there might be a possibility there that the Mossad could be blamed, since they are so well connected to everyone that apparently had some involvement with the assassination.
At first it was hard for me to understand his reasoning for accusing the Mossad, but I soon began to see the possibility of his interpretation of the JFK shooting. he explained how many people had interpreted the event and how his version was more valid, and I basically agreed.
He was very intelligent and his theory was quite possible and understandable.
It is precisely because of friendly reviews from intelligent students such as this that the ADL has been so determined to silence me.
And I'm pleased to say that, according to Mr Molnar, several of the students did indeed read the book—despite the ADL's objections.
In the end, this most uncomfortable issue of Israel's nuclear weapons is an issue that just won't go away.
On May 2, 2000, the Chicago Tribune's foreign correspondent, Hugh Dellios reported that ""tired of guessing at the extent of Israel's nuclear weapons capacity, Egypt and other Arab nations have launched a determined campaign to unmask Israel's secret nuclear program once and for all.
Now, however, ""this ultimate Zionist project"" (that played such a clearly critical factor in the JFK assassination conspiracy) is facing the attention of the world.
BILL CLINTON WEIGHS IN—JFK-STYLE For his own part, JFK's longtime admirer, President Bill Clinton, dared to incur the wrath of the Israeli lobby in the spring of 1999 by publicly addressing Israel's ""secret"" bomb.
The article pointed out that some 35 members of the United States Congress had written a letter to Clinton expressing concerns about imprisoned Israeli nuclear engineer Mordechai Vanunu who was the first to publicly expose—firsthand— Israel's nuclear bomb production program.
Lynn Rivers (DMich.), President Clinton did more than just express his own concerns about Vanunu's plight.
Clinton also said that ""I. . . share your concerns about the Israeli nuclear program.
For taking a similar private stand, Clinton's hero, John F Kennedy, paid with his life.
THE LEWINSKY AFFAIR Ironically, the fact is that Bill Clinton himself may have found himself the victim of Mossad intrigue during the vaunted Lewinsky affair that led to his impeachment.
Newsweek itself enlisted longtime Clinton confidant George Stephanapolous to write of Clinton's ""betrayal"" and young Stephanapolous, now a well-paid ABC commentator, even went on the air to bring up the possibilities of resignation and impeachment.
And nobody had ever accused any of those major media voices of being a voice for the ""right wing""—or the ""right wing"" in America, at least.
However, the first lady may have put her finger on something when she claimed that a ""right wing conspiracy"" was energizing the then-ongoing ""Monaco-gate"" scandal.
But the First Lady didn't dare to raise the suspicion that it was more than just certain elements in the American right wing who have helped bring the scandal to the public eye.
Here were some basic facts that somehow got buried in the midst of all the frenzy over the allegations that were bandied about.
It apparently wasn't apparently until after this that lawyers for Paula Jones contacted Miss Lewinsky, tipping off the president that his relationship with Lewinsky had been exposed.
We may assume that neither the aforementioned Tripp nor Goldberg were the sources, inasmuch as they had other interests to exploit in the Clinton-Lewinsky caper.
In fact, Tripp instead went directly to Special Prosecutor Kenneth Starr.
Monica Lewinsky was a Clinton loyalist and it was evidently not Miss Lewinsky who leaked the story to the lawyers.
So someone close to—or spying on—the president's inner circle had to have leaked the word about the president's relationship with Miss Lewinsky to Jones's attorneys.
Although Michael Isikoff of Newsweek (published by the MeyerGraham empire, which also owns the Washington Post) was the first journalist officially ""digging into"" the story, it now turns out that, according to the Post, reporting in passing on January 28, that one William Kristol— described generally as ""editor of the conservative Weekly Standard""—was one of the first to ""publicly mention” the allegations.
Kristol's role as being one of the ""first"" to float the story publicly, you see, is critical to understanding the big picture.
Young Kristol is, like his parents, a ""Likudnik"" and has been a harsh critic of President Clinton's decision to ""turn his back"" on Israel.
Also significant is that Kristol, like Clinton, has been initiated into the Bilderberg Group, the high-level elite foreign policy conclave dominated by the Rockefeller and Rothschild families, although Kristol is identified with Bilderberg's ""Republican"" wing.
Then, in light of the Kristol-Murdoch connection, it is interesting to note that Murdoch's Fox television was essentially who is leading the charge in the Establishment media forcing the other networks to compete.
The Fox News Channel carried the story almost non-stop around the clock.
Even when other features were telecast, they were subject to interruption for any breaking developments in the Clinton scandal, regardless of how mundane they might have been.
But the fact is that it wasn't just the socalled ""tabloid press"" that was putting on the heat.
In the meantime, in her effort to once again ""stand by her man,"" the first lady named television preacher Jerry Falwell and his friend, Sen.
Jesse Helms as among those who were part of the ""right wing conspiracy"" that was out to get her president.
Clinton was not a backer of Likud's Binjamin Netanyahu in the Israeli elections that brought the Likud extremist coalition to power and was thus embarrassed politically when Netanyahu won by defeating the liberals led by the ostensibly more moderate Shimon Peres.
In fact, even prior to his official meeting with President Clinton, the Israeli prime minister had already met with (and appeared at a pro-Likud rally in the company of) Rev.
In fact, the scandal forced the president into retreat as far as pushing Israel was concerned.
On January 27, 1998 the Washington Post again let the cat out of the bag when it reported that ""last week, Clinton demonstrated he could not compel the Israelis to meet their responsibilities for a further military pullback.
The story, which appeared in Thomas' book, claimed that the Mossad had gained access to tape-recorded phone sex sessions between the president and Miss Lewinsky and had used the information to force Clinton to call off a high-priority FBI investigation of a Mossad mole at the top levels of the national security establishment.
True or not, the publication of the story was used by Clinton's critics to justify the allegation that Clinton's personal peccadilloes were a potential threat to national security and yet another reason for his impeachment.
It was almost as if Hillary was flipping out a switchblade in a very ugly alley fight.
In the end, of course, Bill Clinton survived the impeachment trial, but there is no question whatsoever that there was very clearly the fine hand of Israeli intrigue behind the circumstances leading up to the impeachment.
So we have indeed seen yet another American president, in this case Bill Clinton, facing yet another form of ""assassination"" at the hands of Israel.
This is by no means a defense of Clinton, but it is a summary of relevant facts that do lend an interesting insight into the way of power politics in Washington where the influence of Israel is concerned.
J William Fulbright of Arkansas, and this, in itself, may tell us a little bit about Clinton.
The Senate is subservient, much too much; we should be more concerned about United States interests, rather than doing the bidding of Israel.
The great majority of the Senate of the U.S.—somewhere around 80 percent—are completely in support of Israel; anything Israel wants, Israel gets.
This has been demonstrated time and again, and this has made difficult for our government.
After a major media hulabaloo over the senator's remarks, vast amounts of Jewish money poured into Arkansas and Fulbright was defeated for renomination.
And it's probably no coincidence—all things considered— that 1) top Jewish fundraisers helped finance Hillary Clinton's Republican opponent in her 2000 Senate race, and that 2) Hillary just barely won the Jewish vote at the same time her Democratic ticket mate, Al Gore, was carrying the Jewish vote by an overwhelming 80% over George W Bush.
Yet, at the same time, growing realization of the power of Israel by grass roots Americans who are not afraid to discuss the subject is a reality that Israel and its American lobby must face.
The fact that Final Judgment is now ""out there"" and reaching growing numbers of such Americans—and many others—is an additional ingredient in the mix.
The rabbi demanded that the Syrians provide official clarification ""as to whether or not these views expressed by one of Syria's most powerful figures reflect Syria's official view of American history,"" although as of this time, the Syrians have not yet rushed forward to apologize.
In any case, a Syrian friend of mine has advised me that General Tlas told him that he (the general) had read Final Judgment and concurred with its conclusions.
Earlier, the aforementioned Rabbi Cooper had attacked those who had come to my defense when I was under attack by the Anti-Defamation League in Southern California.
Final Judgment has planted the seed of suspicion, but only because the facts assembled in this book paint a plausible scenario that is just as believable as other theses put forth about this most controversial subject.
So that's why Rabbi Cooper and the ADL and others are so uncomfortable.
Just as the fifth edition of Final Judgment was being readied for the printer, an odd thing happened.
I was actually working on the final draft, and late on the night of June 14, 2000 , I received a call from a friend who told me that Sen.
Edward M Kennedy and a group of people were ""cutting up"" at the outside tables at the Hawk & Dove, a popular nightspot near my office on Capitol Hill in Washington.
I inscribed the book to Senator Kennedy and handed it to my friend who then proceeded to gingerly approach the senator.
My friend handed Kennedy the book saying, ""A friend of mine asked me to give you this book.
After a moment, handing the book back to my friend, Kennedy said, ""Thank you, but no thank you.
My friend accepted the book, saying, ""God bless you, to,"" and departed.
That sad little story says so very much I feel somewhat guilty that I subjected the senator to that experience, for—after all—it was the murder of his own big brother we're talking about here.
If there's anyone who knows how plausible the scenario is, that's certainly Ted Kennedy.
He simply can't tell us he was unaware of his brother's efforts to stop Israel from building the nuclear bomb or that he was unaware of the bitterness that arose.
No matter how hard Ted Kennedy proclaims that he and his family have been devout supporters of Israel, the facts demonstrate otherwise.
We understand why Senator Kennedy feels compelled to say and do these things, but we also hope the senator understands why we really don't believe that he is sincere when he says the things he does.
My own particular hope is that Final Judgment will receive the recognition that I believe it deserves and that there will be more efforts on the part of people who have read the book to explore the allegations that are made.
I hope that people will be able to provide documents or other information that will confirm things that I could only speculate upon.
Perhaps, in the end, the release of Final Judgment will bring forth new witnesses who can tell us things that we never knew before.
I don't pretend to set myself up as the final arbiter on the JFK assassination (despite the perhaps presumptuous title of my book) but I do believe that it comes closer than anything yet written in summarizing the entirety of the conspiracy.
I do look forward to seeing how future efforts at inquiry into the subject will be affected by what I have outlined in Final Judgment.
On the puzzle you see before you all of the various groups and individuals that have been implicated in the JFK assassination conspiracy—an immensely confusing picture.
But, more importantly, in the end, Final Judgment encapsulates a thesis that they can't discredit.
The page numbers below from the soft cover version correspond to page numbers listed inside brackets in this e-book.
An explosive new book charges Israel's intelligence agency, the Mossad, collaborated with the CIA and the mob in the assassination of John F Kennedy because JFK stood in the way of Israel's efforts to build a nuclear arsenal.
When New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison charged businessman Clay Shaw with participation in the JFK assassination conspiracy, Garrison stumbled upon the Mossad connection to the murder of President Kennedy.
In ""Final Judgment"" the Israeli connection to the JFK assassination is exposed in frightening—and fully documented—detail.
It turns out the chief financial backer of Stone's film was longtime Mossad figure, Arnon Milchan, Israel's biggest arms dealer.
At the same time the book is very easy to follow and understand as Piper methodically builds up his damning case against showing the depth of Israeli involvement in the JFK assassination.
I thoroughly recommend this book as a way to expand one's mind beyond the confines of the modern day media which has severely suppressed this book making it almost a taboo for mainstream booksellers to stock it.
This book is especially topical today as the search for peace in the Middle East continues.
As Israelis as well international Jews who care about our country I believe it right and proper to engage in an informed and vigorous debate about the undoubted wrongdoings of our government in an open and informed way.
This is the only way in which the worst excesses of Zionism can be curbed.
In the case of the John F Kennedy assassination, the conspiracy-minded believed that the shots directed at JFK occurred too quickly together to have been fired by one person.
In short, in a few sentences, the ADL is dismissing 40 years of hard work by perhaps hundreds—maybe thousands —who have dared to take issue with the Warren Commission-ADL line regarding the JFK affair.
However, for the average person exposed to the ADL's lies—including vast numbers of news people, high school teachers, civic leaders and others— the ADL's misrepresentation of the very real evidence in the JFK assassination could be quite misleading indeed.
And that, of course, raises the question as to why the ADL is so determined to lend its support to the JFK assassination cover-up in the first place.
It turns out Jack Ruby's rabbi, Hillel Silverman, was the key ""source"" for the Warren Commission's final judgment that Jack Ruby was a simple nightclub keeper—just a bit crazy—who killed Lee Oswald out of sympathy for JFK's family.
And we now know why the Warren Commission took Silverman's assurances to heart.
The story of the Silverman-Warren Commission connection is told by Dave Reitzes who was hailed by the prestigious Jewish Forward, on Nov. 28, 2003, for helping put down what Forward called ""zany"" theories on the JFK assassination, describing Final Judgment's theory—although not mentioning this book by name—as being ""more sinister"" than any other.
Rabbi Silverman was one of Ruby's closet confidantes following his arrest, first meeting with him on November 25, then roughly once or twice a week thereafter until Silverman moved to Los Angeles in July 1964.
Silverman happened also to be friendly with Warren Commission junior counsel David W Belin.
The two had met during the summer of 1963, during a study mission to Israel.
On one of Belin's first trips to Dallas on behalf of the commission, he asked Silverman his opinion as to whether Ruby was part of a conspiracy.
Critics will say that raising this question is ""anti-Semitic,"" but the fact is that nobody has ever even dared (because of the fear of being called ""anti-Semitic"") to point out the obvious conflict of interest for David Belin due to his pre-assassination religious relationship with the personal religious counselor of one of the key figures in the JFK controversy.
Chesterton provided a means of understanding the Mossad role in the JFK conspiracy in the story of his fictional detective, Father Brown, thwarting a crime during a dinner party at an elegant hotel.
In The Queer Feet, the villain infiltrated the party and made off with the silverware in the presence of a small handful of waiters and distinguished guests.
Because both the waiters and the diners were attired in evening clothes, the thief dressed likewise.
His ability to act and posture accordingly, despite his singular costume, made his crime possible.
In the dining room, the criminal assumed the pose of a skilled waiter, moving swiftly, with precision—an ""obsequious attendant""—keeping his distance, his eyes averted.
Moving about elsewhere, the thief adopted the easy gestures, casual manners—the ""absent-minded insolence""—of a society plutocrat, ignoring the hired help as he moved among them.
Every work of art, divine or diabolic, has one indispensable mark—the center of it is simple, however much the fulfillment may be complicated.
Every clever crime is founded ultimately on some one quite simple fact—some fact that is not itself mysterious.
Because of its ability to infiltrate and/or manipulate or otherwise collaborate with such diverse groups as the CIA, organized crime, certain American ""right wing"" persons and organizations, the anti-Castro Cuban exiles, posturing accordingly, echoing concerns about JFK that these elements harbored, the Mossad assumed a protective coloration, operating behind the other conspirators and yet effectively acted in the open, hiding—as they say—in plain sight.
As such, the role of the Mossad and its motive in moving against JEK— his effort to block Israel from building nuclear weapons—became lost in the multiple, seemingly disconnected and seemingly competing conspiracy theories that emerged in the wake of the assassination.
Call it the ""missing link"" or ""the hidden picture on the other side of the jigsaw puzzle"" or the one ""indispensable mark"" pointing to the perpetrator of the crime, the bottom line, however uncomfortable it may be to some, is that, in the JFK assassination, the Mossad connection is inescapable.
Sierra said ""Las Vegas and Cleveland gambling interests"" were financing him and, indeed, a ""considerable"" amount of money was funneled through Sierra's Chicago employer, the Union Tank Car Company, although Union disavowed knowledge of the actual source of the funds.
While the FBI showed little interest in the well-funded Sierra, the CIA noted two days before the JFK assassination that Sierra ""remains somewhat of a mystery man in terms of his means of support, and indeed, his long range objectives.
In fact, Sierra and his ""mysterious backers"" funded the New Orleans-based Cuban exile training camp run by longtime Mossad asset Frank Sturgis where JFK assassination figures Guy Banister, David Ferrie and Lee Oswald and/or his ""double"" were seen in 1963.
Now—as pointed out in Final Judgment—most JFK writers have carefully delete the phrase ""the Jews"" when describing this incident, and/or change the word ""they"" to ""we"" or fudge by noting it was unclear as to whether it was ""we"" or ""they"" who were going to ""take care"" of Kennedy, the totality of the mysteries surrounding Sierra—coupled with what Final Judgment documents—points again toward a likely Mossad role in the JFK conspiracy.
Since Sierra was funded by ""Las Vegas and Cleveland gambling interests,"" that unquestionably points toward Meyer Lansky's chief Las Vegas point man, Morris Dalitz , who was a shareholder in Mossad operative Tibor Rosenbaum's Permindex entity which, as we have seen, played such a central role in the JFK conspiracy.
In other words, if—as we contend here—Sierra's short-lived organization was a Mossad ""front"" designed to finance and manipulate the New Orleans-based operations used to orchestrate the JFK assassination —through the activities of Frank Sturgis, Guy Banister and David Ferrie, not to mention Permindex board member Clay Shaw—the money was provided by the Lansky syndicate's gambling ventures, which, as noted, were intertwined with the Mossad's Permindex operation.
Peter Dale Scott seems particularly concerned about the circumstances surrounding the ""our new backers are the Jews"" story and claims that this was concocted as part of a scheme by the real conspirators behind the assassination to launch a public relations campaign blaming ""the Jews"" for the JFK assassination.
The theory that ""the Jews"" were behind the assassination had no public relevance at all.
Needless to say, Scott— and others who make this claim—ignore that quite relevant fact.
Scott contends further that the story suggesting Sierra's group—allegedly funded by ""Jews""—was involved in the assassination was part of a more subtle plot by the real conspirators to force Robert Kennedy into blocking any serious inquiries into his brother's murder.
In this regard, Scott asserts that Sierra was actually a facilitator of anti-Castro operations being carried out by Robert Kennedy on a ""second track"" even as JFK was making other quiet, friendly overtures to Castro.
In fact, Sierra's operation may have been part of the effort—one Enrique Ruiz Williams allegedly being the contact point between RFK and Sierra.
The bottom line, in Scott's scenario, is that the possibility of involvement by Sierra's group in the assassination forced RFK into backing off from investigating JFK's murder because it could backfire, exposing Kennedy family plots against Castro.
However, as even Scott points out, Sierra met in April of 1963—the time he established his suspicious ""Junta""—with former CIA Director Allen Dulles, Lucius Clay, a senior partner of Lehman Brothers, the famed Jewish ""Our Crowd"" banking firm, and attorney Morris Liebman.
What Scott doesn't mention is that Liebman was a major player in several high-level intelligence-connected institutions integral to what is known today as the ""neo-conservative"" network known for its determination to place Israel's security as the central concern of all United States foreign policy making.
What Scott strenuously wishes to avoid is the likelihood that either the Mossad was Sierra's actual handler or that the Mossad co-opted lower-level operatives in a covert Kennedy-sponsored assassination plot against Castro and utilized them for the Mossad's own purpose, namely, the assassination of John F Kennedy.
The Mossad would certainly have seen the brilliance in using a top-secret (and potentially scandalous) Kennedy family venture as the ""cover"" for its own scheme to remove JFK from the White House.
Peter Dale Scott has reportedly been fiercely hostile to those who have dared mention Final Judgment in his presence.
Final Judgment fills in the missing pieces of the JFK puzzle—those aspects that Scott (and others like him) prefer to avoid or to suppress for reasons known only to them.
In retrospect, O'Sullivan's testimony and statements to the FBI and the Warren Commission and subsequent investigators for the House Assassinations Committee seem to somewhat vague in some respects, as far as the precise links between Ferrie and Oswald are concerned.
Now here's where it all gets interesting—at least as far as the likelihood of a Mossad connection to the JFK assassination and its cover-up is concerned.
Obviously, ex-New Orleans intelligence squad chief Fred O'Sullivan went to work for Israel's Mossad.
And today the son of this trusted American Irish Catholic cop who converted to Judaism and moved to Israel and worked for its intelligence agency is now the military correspondent—no obscure position, by any means—for the nation's most prestigious newspaper.
The question is how far back O'Sullivan was sympathetic to and/or recruited by the Mossad and what, if anything, he did as a high-ranking police intelligence officer to hinder, for example, Jim Garrison's inquiries into David Ferrie and the Mossad-linked Clay Shaw.
The fact that the very individual who recruited Lee Harvey Oswald into the Civil Air Patrol (where Oswald met David Ferric, his first major contact in the intelligence community) went to work for Israeli intelligence is provocative indeed.
This is something those who admire Jones—but who fear mentioning ""the Mossad"" in relation to the JFK assassination—will find difficult to acknowledge, for it may suggest after all, that Final Judgment may be on target.
Jack Ruby was a close intimate of the members of the Dallas Police force and other United States law enforcement agencies, as well as the Israeli counter intelligence organization.
His onetime employee, Nancy Zeigman Perrin Rich was also close to these same forces.
Identifying Ruby and Nancy as_ being involved with the Israeli intelligence opens up a completely overlooked area concerning the assassination of President Kennedy.
There are many indications in the Warren Hearings and other places that Ruby, and ""Honest Joe"" Goldstein were intelligence operatives in a small way for someone.
And Abe Weinstein's Colony Club seems to have been used at times as a ""safe house"" for operatives.
And considering what we now know of multiple Israeli connections in Dallas and in Texas , it is quite likely that these three Jewish entrepreneurs may indeed have been working for the Mossad, as certainly Jones suggested that Ruby was.
We owe a great deal to the late Penn Jones for—fearless researcher that he was—not hesitating to dare to mention ""Israel"" in a less-than-flattering context, in this case, involvement in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
And this harkens back to the fact that even New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison also stumbled on the Mossad connection, but even Garrison's admirers don't like to acknowledge that.
If it seems that we are ""harping"" on the Israeli connection, it's because we are.
It's because nobody else will do it, despite all of the evidence that's there.
After all the clues had been scattered in front of the readers, the authors of the Ellery Queen mystery novels would issue ""a challenge to the reader"" to come up with the solution to the crime before the detective gathered all of the suspects together in the drawing room to unveil the murderer.
Now that you've read the book and heard my presentation in its entirely, I'm challenging the readers to show me any factual errors or any twisted reasoning or quotes taken out of context or any misrepresentations which would disprove the theory laid forth in this volume.
As of this time, I am aware of the fifteen following factual errors or misstatements that appeared in previous editions of Final Judgment and which have been corrected.
This error was corrected in the third edition, at which time I noted that the error was brought to my attention by a friend whose aunt was visiting Paris at the time of the Mossad crime and who escaped being a victim herself.
Although the lady's companion did go into the deli and died in the bombing, my friend's aunt went elsewhere and thus survived.
So that error was corrected, although it had nothing to do with the thesis of Final Judgment or even with the JFK assassination itself.
In fact, Dalitz did not die in the colorful way Roemer's book described.
By way of explanation, it appears that although Roemer has written some ""non-fiction"" relating to the history of organized crime, his book which contained this description of Dalitz's death also includes some literary license on Roemer's part.
I apologize for my reliance on Roemer's reputation as an authority on the mob.
However, my error was corrected as of the fourth edition of Final Judgment.
I nonetheless hasten to add, however, that this error had nothing to do with the thesis of Final Judgment or with the JFK assassination itself.
In fact, according to new research published in 1996 in Oswald Talked by Ray and Mary LaFontaine, it turns out that the reference to ""Oswald"" in Davis's possession was a letter of introduction to Madrid-based arms dealer Victor Oswald.
It also appears that Davis was held in a Moroccan jail, rather than an Algerian jail, as I stated.
My source for the incorrect data regarding Davis's travails was Jim Marrs, writing in Crossfire.
The two errors notwithstanding, the fact is that Davis was connected with Jack Ruby and was indeed involved in the Israeli-connected affairs of the French OAS in North Africa.
I knew, of course, it was his brother, Allen Dulles, who was the CIA director in question.
In the first printing of the fourth edition I said that John Connally, the former governor of Texas, died in 1995.
In both printings of the fourth edition I said that a scandal forced Sen.
Gary Hart to withdraw from the race for the 1984 Democratic presidential nomination.
Botnick of the New Orleans office of the Anti-Defamation League , I was unaware Botnick had left New Orleans to take a position in the ADL's Atlanta office and did not return to the New Orleans ADL office until 1964.
However, I over-stated the matter when I went on to assert that ""Shaw, in fact, was one of Angleton's operatives.
I am pleased to make this clarification, after JFK researcher Clark Wilkins brought this over-statement to my attention.
In the 4th edition I referred to a photograph (widely discussed in JFK research) that purported to show Clay Shaw with David Ferrie.
The accused gentleman has unquestionably proved his innocence, but this does not disprove Morrow's basic thesis that the Iranian SAVAK (a creation of the CIA and the Mossad) carried out the RFK assassination.
Yet, this fact, of course, does not impact on the basic thesis of Final Judgment.
However, this error—again—has nothing whatsoever to do with the thesis of Final Judgment itself.
Instead, as new material in the second printing of the 6th edition demonstrates, Dallas was, in 1963, a major outpost of Jewish power, a critical point firming up the thesis of Final Judgment and diminishing other theories surrounding the JFK assassination.
Others call it ""outrageous"" and one woman—Marcia Milchiker—went so far as to say that my theory was ""scientifically unprovable"" as though I had suggested it was scientifically provable in the first place.
Help spread the word about who really killed JFK and why e Order extra copies of Final Judgment and distribute them among friends and family, church and civic groups, senior centers.
EXTRA COPIES of Final Judgment are $25 each; 3 copies for $60; 5 copies for $75.
Additional extra-reduced bulk rate prices for a carton of 16 copies are available.
Keep up with the news you need on a wideranging array of national and international affairs.
Take advantage of the special introductory price of 16 weeks of American Free Press for only $17.76.
PIPERM@LYCOS.COM Dear Reader: The word about Final Judgment is getting out there, much to the dismay of the Israeli lobby.
Worldwide attention is now focused on Israel's nuclear weapons, and Final Judgment has played a part in helping make that happen.
Although there have been numerous public efforts to silence me or denounce me, rest assured my enemies have also worked quite maliciously and skillfully against me behind the scenes.
Considering what's happened, I cannot help but conclude I have accomplished something important with Final Judgment since such corrupt, perverse and evil forces have been so determined to hurt me and to attempt to scuttle further distribution of this book.
So you can understand why I appreciate the continuing expressions of support from good people.
I always look forward to letters and constructive criticism from my readers.
There's no doubt about it—Michael Collins Piper, the author of Final Judgment, is one of the Israeli lobby's primary targets today.
Repeatedly and bitterly attacked by propagandists for Israel, Piper is undaunted, despite the fact his life was publicly threatened by Irv Rubin, violent leader of the terrorist Jewish Defense League.
In the style of his combative, colorful great-great-grandfather, famed bridge builder ""Colonel"" John Piper—surrogate father and early business partner of industrial giant Andrew Carnegie—the outspoken author relishes any opportunity to confront his many critics head-on, although generally they refuse to debate him.
In recent years, he has lectured across the globe in places as diverse as Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates; Moscow, Russia; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Tokyo, Japan and across Canada.
Police-state-minded advocates of war and imperialism have been disturbed at Piper's energetic efforts to forge links of common understanding among peoples of all creeds and colors.
Widely known as a lover of dogs, cats and all animals and an unapologetic old-style American progressive in the LaFollette-Wheeler tradition, Piper considers the labels of ""liberal"" and ""conservative"" archaic, artificial and divisive, manipulative media buzzwords designed to suppress popular dissent and free inquiry.
Twenty years before the major media discovered the ""neo-conservative"" cabal that pushed America into the Iraq war, Piper was reporting on their intrigues.
In 2004, in The High Priests of War, he assembled a fascinating overview of their insidious record, the first book ever published on the subject.
In his provocative 2005 work, The New Jerusalem, Piper confronted the controversial issue of Zionist power in America, a detailed exposition unlike any ever assembled by any modern author.
Piper's authoritative lecture to the Zayed Centre, the Arab League think tank, on the topic of American media bias, has been distributed worldwide.
Sourcing much of his work from his own massive library of some 10,000 volumes, Piper writes for American Free Press, the Washington-based national weekly, and in the historical journal, The Barnes Review.
One media critic hailed Piper as one of the top 25 best writers on the Internet today.
In 1987, he was the first to expose the Justice Department frame-up of Pennsylvania State Treasurer Budd Dwyer that led to Dwyer's shocking public suicide.
The ADL will never forgive Piper far his pivotal front-line role in unmasking Bullock.
Piper was the only journalist to assert-—based on hard evidence—that the Oklahoma bombing was a Mossad ""false flag"" operation designed to implicate Saddam Hussein—a scheme derailed by United States investigators who rejected Israel's machinations, opting for a ""lone nut"" cover-up.
Today, Piper's pioneering work on Israeli links to the 9-11 tragedy is echoed by truth seekers and, predictably, damned by defenders of Israel for its accuracy.
However, on August 21, 1997, newspapers across the United States—echoing a report that first appeared in The Lost Angeles Times—told the story of an uproar over a scheduled lecture at a small California college by Michael Collins Piper, the author of Final Judgment.
Pro-Israel pressure groups were working overtime to prevent Piper from being heard.
They feared college students would be “too impressionable” and might actually take Piper’s thesis seriously.
Piper was being attacked for daring to speak the truth—the little-known fact that JFK had been embroiled in a bitter conflict with Israel over its drive to build a nuclear arsenal, weapons of mass destruction.
What made this so objectionable to the Israeli lobby was that in Final Judgment Piper had documented that there were multiple connections of Israel’s intelligence service, the Mossad, to many key players often linked (in other widely-known books on the subject) to the JFK conspiracy—a point missed by others who had studied the assassination over the years.
Whether the CIA or “the Mafia” or “the right wing” or “the military industrial complex”—you name it—Piper demonstrates that the Mossad connection is there.
If you initially have any doubts about the thesis, the author himself suggests you first take a look at the comprehensive photo section which summarizes the book... and then, take it from there, if you dare.
In recent years, as word about the explosive revelations appearing in Final Judgment began to circulate worldwide, demand for the book became so immense that second-hand copies were selling on the Internet for as much as $185 per copy, demonstrating the drastic need for re-publication of a new, easily accessible edition of this important work.
While the major media continues to ignore Final Judgment—as much as is possible—a number of individuals whose expertise cannot be ignored have begun to publicly lend their support to the thesis, one which becomes all the more significant in light of growing global concern about the proliferations of weapons of mass destruction in Middle East.
The author continues to ask other JFK assassination theorist to debate him publicly about the thesis of Final Judgment and begs for his critics to demonstrate where he has misinterpreted facts or distorted the writings of others who have delved into the subject—but thus far no one has come forth to do so.
The following reflect minor spelling, “typo,” and punctuation changes in this ebook compared to the 6"" edition soft cover version.
Soft cover pages are in brackets, and the soft cover edition “typo” that has undergone revision is in quotation marks.
The ebook revision is enclosed in parentheses, and ebook pages are reflected as plain numbers.
Manages to weave together some of the key threads in a tapestry that many say is unique [be Los Angeles Times November 25, 1996 “ADDS A NEW DIMENSION to the question of just WHO DUNNIT?"" —Robert Cutler Veteran JFK assassination researcher “VICIOUS intellectual licentiousness —George F Will Vetesatvek, Sep.
It would have been casy for Michacl Collins Piper to ignore the complete story, as others have done, and be rewarded with great reviews.
Asa French citizen and as a Jew, | found the French-Isracii connection fascinating and a logical conclusion.
