The Presidency of John F Kennedy spanned the period in United States history that encompasses the events of the Cold War Era and the age of the Space Race and the Cold War Arms Race.
The Women’s Rights Movement and Feminism emerges and the 1963 Equal Pay Act was passed.
The Civil Rights Movement gains momentum with the Freedom Riders and the March on Washington. was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, aged 46.
Lee Harvey Oswald was apprehended in connection with the John F Kennedy Assassination but was killed two days later by Jack Ruby.
The meaning of the nickname ""King of Camelot"" refers to the old Arthurian legend and the chivalric King Arthur's, who lived in his castle at Camelot.
JFK shared King Arthur's idealistic view of the future which was illustrated in the popular 1960 Broadway production of the musical called Camelot.
Character and Personality Type of John F KennedyThe character traits of President John F Kennedy can be described as outgoing, charming, gallant, sensitive, controlling, witty and gregarious.
It has been speculated that the Myers-Briggs personality type for John F Kennedy is an ESFP with the temperament of an idealist.
An outgoing, fun, unconventional and attentive character who excels in interpersonal interactions.
The crisis began when an American U-2 spy plane captured photographs indicating that the Soviet Union began was installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
John F Kennedy launched a naval blockade, effectively placing Cuba under ""quarantine"" which Khrushchev warned would be viewed as an act of war.
The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom took place in Washington, D.C. on August 28, 1963.
The rally attracted 250,000 people who listened to speakers such as Dr.
Lee Harvey Oswald was interrogated in connection with the JFK Assassination but was shot and killed by Jack Ruby whilst being led through the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters on November 24, 1963.
Lyndon B Johnson was sworn in as the thirty-sixth President of the United States, 98 minutes after the assassination of John F Kennedy.President John F Kennedy Video for Kids The article on the accomplishments of John F Kennedy provides an overview and summary of some of the most important events during his presidency.
