Cuba was only Prague Spring. between 1945 and 1960 as the West had a better standard 90 miles off coast of America – they didn’t want a socialist • Dubček embarked on a of living.
USA programme of reform that included amendments to the educated men and women left to make new lives in the tried to ruin Cuba by refusing to buy their main export – constitution of Czechoslovakia that would have brought West. sugar.
Facing financial collapse, Castro did a deal with the back a degree of political democracy and greater personal • Khrushchev’s Berlin ultimatum – Khrushchev gave USSR – they would buy Cuba’s sugar crop.
This was a humiliation for the USA, and just o End of censorship for the press.
USSR o The right of Czech citizens to criticise the continue negotiations.
However, during the discussions an started shipping weapons and equipment to Cuba. government.
American U-2 spy plane got shot over the USSR and the • Missile bases – American U-2 spy planes o Trade unions were given increased rights to pilot, Gary Powers was captured and Khrushchev walked photographed Soviet missile sites on Cuba and Soviet ships bargain for their members. out of the talks. on their way to Cuba with missiles on board.
This was initially a barbed wire fence, • Kennedy ordered a naval blockade and threatened in the Warsaw Pact and that they had nothing to worry which was gradually replaced with concrete. retaliation if any missile was fired. about with regards to the reforms.
Between • Khrushchev seemed to have failed – he had backed down in • The Warsaw Pact remained strong – the USSR thought this 1961 and 1989 , only 5000 the face of American pressure. was vital to the survival of communism in Europe. people managed to escape across it.
This was a • Western nations were given a propaganda victory, as it did not know that Kennedy had secretly agreed to remove Soviet foreign policy which called for the use of Warsaw Consequences seemed that communist states needed to build a wall to United States missiles from Turkey.
Pact forces to intervene in any Eastern Bloc nation which stop their citizens leaving.
This domination, either by trying to leave the Soviet sphere of than a war”. was to try and head off any future crises before they influence or even moderate its policies International • The wall became a symbol of the division of East and West. became serious. reaction to Soviet measures in Czechoslovakia.
Limited Test Ban • The Western World was once again shocked by the Soviet’s Treaty 1963; the Outer Space Treaty 1967; and the Nuclear use of force against people wanting democracy.
