A reasonable stance might be to try to look at the human species from the outside.
For the first time in the history of the human species, we have clearly developed the capacity to destroy ourselves.
It's now being finally recognized that there are more long-term processes like environmental destruction leading in the same direction, maybe not to total destruction, but at least to the destruction of the capacity for a decent existence.
And there are other dangers like pandemics, which have to do with globalization and interaction.
So there are processes underway and institutions right in place, like nuclear weapons systems, which could lead to a serious blow to, or maybe the termination of, an organized existence.
There are those who are trying hard to do something about these threats, and others who are acting to escalate them.
If you look at who they are, this future historian or extraterrestrial observer would see something strange indeed.
Trying to mitigate or overcome these threats are the least developed societies, the indigenous populations, or the remnants of them, tribal societies and first nations in Canada.
They're not talking about nuclear war but environmental disaster, and they're really trying to do something about it.
In fact, all over the world – Australia, India, South America – there are battles going on, sometimes wars.
In India, it's a major war over direct environmental destruction, with tribal societies trying to resist resource extraction operations that are extremely harmful locally, but also in their general consequences.
In societies where indigenous populations have an influence, many are taking a strong stand.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, who died recently and was the object of mockery, insult, and hatred throughout the Western world, attended a session of the United Nations General Assembly a few years ago where he elicited all sorts of ridicule for calling George W Bush a devil.
In that speech, he warned of the dangers of the overuse of fossil fuels and urged producer and consumer countries to get together and try to work out ways to reduce fossil fuel use.
Unlike the funny things he did, this aspect of his actions at the United Nations was never even reported.
So, at one extreme you have indigenous, tribal societies trying to stem the race to disaster.
At the other extreme, the richest, most powerful societies in world history, like the United States and Canada, are racing full-speed ahead to destroy the environment as quickly as possible.
Unlike Ecuador, and indigenous societies throughout the world, they want to extract every drop of hydrocarbons from the ground with all possible speed.
Both political parties, President Obama, the media, and the international press seem to be looking forward with great enthusiasm to what they call ""a century of energy independence"" for the United States.
Energy independence is an almost meaningless concept, but put that aside.
Admittedly, when it comes to alternative energy development, Europe is doing something.
Americans are pretty close to the international norm in their concern about global warming.
Business interests don't want it and they're overwhelmingly powerful in determining policy, so you get a big gap between opinion and policy on lots of issues, including this one.
Just about every one you open has a more dire prediction than the last.
It's been known for a long time that if there were to be a first strike by a major power, even with no retaliation, it would probably destroy civilization just because of the nuclear-winter consequences that would follow.
In some ways, however, the worst aspect of these grim events is that the lessons haven't been learned.
What happened in the missile crisis in October 1962 has been prettified to make it look as if acts of courage and thoughtfulness abounded.
There was a point, as the missile crisis was reaching its peak, when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy offering to settle it by a public announcement of a withdrawal of Russian missiles from Cuba and United States missiles from Turkey.
Actually, Kennedy hadn't even known that the United States had 2 missiles in Turkey at the time.
They were being withdrawn anyway, because they were being replaced by more lethal Polaris nuclear submarines, which were invulnerable.
At the time, Kennedy himself was estimating the likelihood of nuclear war at a third to a half.
So Kennedy was willing to accept a very high risk of massive destruction in order to establish the principle that we – and only we – have the right to offensive missiles beyond our borders, in fact anywhere we like, no matter what the risk to others – and to ourselves, if matters fall out of control.
Kennedy did, however, accept a secret agreement to withdraw the missiles the United States was already withdrawing, as long as it was never made public.
Khrushchev, in other words, had to openly withdraw the Russian missiles while the United States secretly withdrew its obsolete ones; that is, Khrushchev had to be humiliated and Kennedy had to maintain his macho image.
The horror of his decisions is not even mentioned – try to find it on the record.
And to add a little more, a couple of months before the crisis blew up the United States had sent missiles with nuclear warheads to Okinawa.
Ten years after that, in 1973, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger called a high-level nuclear alert.
It was his way of warning the Russians not to interfere in the ongoing Israel-Arab war and, in particular, not to interfere after he had informed the Israelis that they could violate a ceasefire the United States and Russia had just agreed upon.
Soon after he entered the White House, he and his advisors had the Air Force start penetrating Russian air space to try to elicit information about Russian warning systems, Operation Able Archer.
The Russians were uncertain, some high-level officials fearing that this was a step towards a real first strike.
At the moment, the nuclear issue is regularly on front pages in the cases of North Korea and Iran.
Take the case of Iran, which is considered in the West – not in the Arab world, not in Asia – the gravest threat to world peace.
It's a Western obsession, and it's interesting to look into the reasons for it, but I'll put that aside here.
One way, a pretty sensible one, was proposed a couple of months ago at a meeting of the non-aligned countries in Tehran.
In fact, they were just reiterating a proposal that's been around for decades, pressed particularly by Egypt, and has been approved by the United Nations General Assembly.
The proposal is to move toward establishing a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the region.
That wouldn't be the answer to everything, but it would be a pretty significant step forward.
Under United Nations auspices, there was to be an international conference in Finland last December to try to implement plans to move toward this.
You won't read about it in the newspapers because it wasn't reported – only in specialist journals.
A couple of days later Obama cancelled the 3 meeting, saying the time wasn't right.
The European Parliament issued a statement calling for it to continue, as did the Arab states.
So we'll move toward ever-harsher sanctions against the Iranian population – it doesn't hurt the regime – and maybe war.
But it does make sense to try to figure out what's in the minds of people when they're acting in crazy ways.
Imagine what it meant in the Korean War years of the early 1950s for your country to be totally leveled, everything destroyed by a huge superpower, which furthermore was gloating about what it was doing.
Bear in mind that the North Korean leadership is likely to have read the public military journals of this superpower at that time explaining that, since everything else in North Korea had been destroyed, the air force was sent to destroy North Korea's dams, huge dams that controlled the water supply – a war crime, by the way, for which people were hanged in Nuremberg.
And these official journals were talking excitedly about how wonderful it was to see the water pouring down, digging out the valleys, and the Asians scurrying around trying to survive.
The journals were exulting in what this meant to those ""Asians,"" horrors beyond our imagination.
It meant the destruction of their rice crop, which in turn meant starvation and death.
In 1993, Israel and North Korea were moving towards an agreement in which North Korea would stop sending any missiles or military technology to the Middle East and Israel would recognize that country.
Shortly after that, in retaliation, North Korea carried out a minor missile test.
The U.S. and North Korea did then reach a framework agreement in 1994 that halted its nuclear work and was more or less honored by both sides.
When George W Bush came into office, North Korea had maybe one nuclear weapon and verifiably wasn't producing any more.
Bush immediately launched his aggressive militarism, threatening North Korea – ""axis of evil"" and all that – so North Korea got back to work on its nuclear program.
By the time Bush left office, they had eight to 10 nuclear weapons and a missile system, another great neocon achievement.
In 2005, the United States and North Korea actually reached an agreement in which North Korea was to end all nuclear weapons and missile development.
In return, the West, but mainly the United States, was to provide a light-water reactor for its medical needs and end aggressive statements.
They would then form a nonaggression pact and move toward accommodation.
He withdrew the offer of the light-water reactor and initiated programs to compel banks to stop handling any North Korean transactions, even perfectly legal ones.
You make a hostile gesture and we'll respond with some crazy gesture of our own.
Lately, for instance, there have been South KoreanUnited States military exercises on the Korean peninsula which, from the North's point of view, have got to look threatening.
We'd think they were threatening if they were going on in Canada and aimed at us.
In the course of these, the most advanced bombers in history, Stealth B-2s and B-52s, are carrying out simulated nuclear bombing attacks right on North Korea's borders.
They remember that past, so they're reacting in a very aggressive, extreme way.
Well, what comes to the West from all this is how crazy and how awful the North Korean leaders are.
But that's hardly the whole story, and this is the way the world is going.
So if you ask what the world is going to look like, it's not a pretty picture.
