Limited Test Ban Treaty Treaty that In this section, you will read how John F Kennedy became barred nuclear testing in the atmosphere president and how he handled a period of intense foreign affairs.
AS YOU READ Use this diagram to take notes on the major foreign crises that the Kennedy administration faced.
During a televised debate, Kennedy impressed viewers with his strong, forceful personality.
The second factor was Kennedy’s response to In 1960, President Eisenhower’s term came to a the arrest of Dr.
The economy was in a recession. thy and persuaded the judge to release King from In addition, the Soviet Union was gaining strength. jail.
His actions won him the support of AfricanAs a result, some wondered whether the United American voters.
President Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline John F Kennedy and Richard M Nixon faced charmed many Americans with their elegance and off in the 1960 presidential election.
Jacqueline Kennedy influenced fashion and a Democratic senator from Massachusetts.
People talked of the Kennedy Administrawas Eisenhower’s vice-president.
These critics believed that Kennedy should have invaded Cuba and ousted Castro.
Name the two Cuban crises that the Kennedy A New Military Policy; administration faced.
Upon entering the White House, Kennedy focused Crisis Over Berlin on foreign affairs.
He also supported a policy called How did the United States and flexible response.
Conventional weapons includCuba was not Kennedy’s only foreign policy probed jets, tanks, missiles, and guns.
In 1961, the president faced a growing probmore conventional weapons, Kennedy increased lem in Berlin.
West Berlin was Kennedy’s first foreign policy test came from under the control of Great Britain, France, and the Cuba.
Soon after that, he declared Germans had fled into West Berlin. himself a Communist.
He then formed ties with the Khrushchev threatened to block all air and land Soviet Union. routes into West Berlin.
Kennedy warned the Kennedy approved a plan to remove Castro Soviet leader against such action.
The United States govcrete barrier along the border between East and ernment would supply air support for the exiles.
Many exiles were captured. prevented any more East Germans from fleeing to © McDougal Littell Inc.
It left the Kennedy administration greatly Despite their battles, Kennedy and Khrushchev embarrassed. did attempt to reach agreements.
They established a A year later, the United States and Cuba clashed hot line between their two nations.
Pictures from United States spy planes revealed that phone hookup connected Kennedy and Khruschchev. the Soviets were building nuclear missile bases in It allowed them to talk directly when a crisis arose.
Some bases already contained missiles ready The two leaders also agreed to a Limited Test Ban to launch.
Name two ways the United States and Soviet Union worked remove the missiles.
In October 1962, he surto ease tensions between them. rounded Cuba with United States Navy ships.
