It is published as part of our mission to showcase peer-leading papers written by students during their studies.
The fact that nuclear weapons were not used to resolve the crisis has attracted scholarly attention.
In this essay, I contend that while the peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis provides some evidence that nuclear weapons have a deterrent effect with respect to great power wars, this is substantially negated by the possibility of their accidental or inadvertent use and the dire consequences this would entail.
In the first section, I present a brief overview of the crisis and outline the difficulties involved in, but the necessity of, drawing conclusions from the missile crisis.
Next, I examine arguments about the deterrence value of nuclear weapons with regard to great power wars, concluding that they are of moderate value, though for reasons not commonly advanced in the literature.
In the final section, I aver that, notwithstanding this deterrent effect, the clear potential for miscalculation, misperception and accident with regard to the use of nuclear weapons undermines faith in their capacity to keep the peace.
In the week following, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council met in the White House, in secret, to craft a response.
In subsequent days, despite the USSR largely respecting the quarantine, numerous provocative events occurred.
In recent decades, the opening of United States and USSR archives and a series of conferences with scholars and participants of the crisis have dramatically increased the amount of information available.
Furthermore, in conducting such analyses one must be wary that a single historical event can provide only limited foundation for generalised conclusions.
An analysis of the Cuban missile crisis, therefore, cannot justify all-encompassing statements as to the deterrent value of nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, given the gravity of the consequences of nuclear war and the common belief that the Cuban missile crisis is the closest the world has come to the use of nuclear weapons since 1945 , one must seek to arrive at some tenable conclusions about what the enduring lessons of this event may be.
Arguments that nuclear weapons are very valuable rely to an unwarranted degree on the capacity of rational deterrence theory to explain the crisis.
On the other hand, arguments that nuclear weapons have no deterrent value are not reflected in the actions of the participants in the crisis.
An argument that nuclear weapons were probably of some deterrent value, however, is able to account for the actions of participants in peacefully concluding the crisis while at the same time avoiding the pitfalls of rational deterrence theory.
In this section, I address each argument in turn, dealing with them at a length reflective of their prominence in the literature.
In doing so, I demonstrate why the best conclusion is that nuclear weapons have some deterrent value.
The corollary of this with respect to nuclear weapons is that “a country cannot sensibly attack unless it believes that success is assured.
As regards the Cuban missile crisis, this is prima facie convincing given the simple fact that nuclear weapons were not used.
Indeed, the validity of the rational deterrence theory explanation has been recently asserted in passing, and uncritically, by Jervis , a prominent realist and cold war scholar.
This is evident in the assumption that nuclear conflict is the worst possible outcome for all sides.
The logical consequence of this is that “deterrence cannot ever be successful.
That there was a crisis precisely because Kennedy did not decide to quickly capitulate – in fact he originally favoured a military response – is a fundamental refutation, if any was needed, of this claim.
It is from this that rational deterrent theorists infer that there is a very low likelihood of nuclear war, given it is not in any actors’ interests.
Put differently, it is at root an idealisation upon which a theory has been built.
It is an idealisation because, firstly, statesmen operate at the helm of vast and complex organisations, which act as intermediaries between them and the implementation of policy.
The subordinate Soviet commander’s shooting down of the American U-2 flying over Cuba , and Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay’s determination, in response, to launch a massive reprisal attack against Cuba such that presidential orders were required for him to stand down , are but two examples of the complicating effect of organisations.
Secondly, psychological considerations support a more pessimistic view of leaders’ ability to rationally determine costs and benefits.
Such steadfast beliefs contributed to the transmutation of the missile placement into a ‘crisis’, in turn increasing the tensions and thus the risk of nuclear war.
For these reasons, rational deterrence theory provides an unsatisfactory explanation of the resolution of the Cuban missile crisis.
Concomitant arguments regarding the high value of nuclear weapons in deterring great power wars are thus unfounded.
Nuclear Weapons have No Value The argument that nuclear weapons played virtually no part in the resolution of the Cuban missile crisis starts from the assumption that the possession of operational nuclear forces by the United States and the USSR meant that both participants in the conflict were capable of inflicting intolerable damage upon one another.
Asserting that nuclear weapons played no part in the peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis is untenable given the extent of the attention the participants gave to the risk of nuclear war.
For this reason, notwithstanding the irrelevance of United States nuclear superiority at the time given Kennedy’s unwillingness to countenance any nuclear strike on America , nuclear weapons played a deterrent role in promoting the crisis’s speedy resolution.
Broader arguments as to the essential irrelevance of nuclear weapons are also unconvincing.
Admittedly, this is not a catch-all explanation of why the crisis unfolded the way it did as no such explanation is possible.
First, it avoids the theoretical deficiencies inherent in the rational actor model of deterrence.
Rather than simplistically assuming statesmen to be predictable utility-maximising entities , the crystal ball approach recognises their psychological complexity as human beings.
At the same time, leaders are not assumed to be hostage to their psychological and cognitive limitations such that they are irrational; these are instead seen as motivations explaining their actions to avoid nuclear war.
Though it is important to refrain from vesting too much confidence in conclusions about the specific psychological state of participants based purely on the historical record , this approach is realistic and largely commonsensical.
Leaders seek to avoid nuclear war not purely on the basis of a zero-sum calculation of interests, but out of a broader appreciation of the unmitigated horror of such an event, and their involvement in it.
Consequently, they attempted, and managed, to bring the crisis to a swift conclusion.
Thus, nuclear weapons probably exercised a deterrent effect during the missile crisis, but not in the way commonly assumed by the literature with its focus on rational deterrence models.
The Dangers of Inadvertent Use Though one must strive to arrive at justifiable conclusions as to why the Cuban missile crisis ended peacefully, it would be significantly misleading to assume that a peaceful end was inevitable.
The role of contingency and, indeed, ‘luck’ in this event is important insofar as it undermines claims that nuclear crises can always be safely managed and in turn, that nuclear weapons are necessarily peace-inducing given their deterrent value.
Numerous points at which the crisis could have escalated and ended differently exist.
Though they are incapable of being extensively catalogued here, two examples were mentioned previously in the historical overview section, and another in the organisation theory critique of rational deterrence.
One further issue, however, concerns the extent to which command and control systems adequately performed their functions of safeguarding nuclear weapons from accidental use.
For reasons such as these, the role of the crystal ball effect needs to be kept in perspective.
The crystal ball argument is not that leaders’ fears will mean the possibility of inadvertent nuclear war is nil due to those leaders acting quickly to resolve crises.
Such a general hypothesis could not be justified on the basis of the limited case example that is the missile crisis.
The crystal ball argument’s relevance is confined to the missile crisis, where events occurred such that it was possible, when they realised the nature of the perverse situation being created, for leaders to untie the metaphorical knot and avoid nuclear war.
Given the possibility for a combination of technical mishaps, misperceptions and personnel breakdowns to lead to disaster , the situation could have been different.
As such, the Cuban missile crisis’s peaceful resolution is not ipso facto justification for a view that the risk of inadvertent nuclear warfare is low given the deterrent effect of nuclear weapons.
Conclusion I have argued that the Cuban missile crisis, while not supporting the traditional concept of rational deterrence, provides some evidence of the value of nuclear weapons in deterring war between the great powers.
This evidence comes chiefly in the form of leaders resolving the crisis peacefully and quickly for fear that the situation could escalate such that nuclear weapons could be used.
However, the significant possibility that errors, misperceptions and miscalculations could have led to a different outcome cautions against drawing a strong conclusion, from this one event, that nuclear weapons are peace-inducing deterrents.
E-IR is an independent non-profit publisher run by an all volunteer team.
Your donations allow us to invest in new open access titles and pay our bandwidth bills to ensure we keep our existing titles free to view.
Donations are voluntary and not required to download the e-book your link to download is below.
