Review the aftermath to understand how the crisis affected the U.S., as well as the USSR, and recognize how communication between the two nations changed.
It was clear that the missiles on the launchers were Soviet-made medium range ballistic missiles that could be launched without warning and strike targets in the United States, as far away as the Pacific Northwest, before America could respond.
The United States responded to this perceived threat, and the ensuing 13-day standoff between the United States and Cuba became what is known as the Cuban missile Crisis.
Log in or Sign up Timeline Autoplay Autoplay Speed Speed 18K views Video Quiz Course 18K views Background InformationLet's go into some background of this event.
Soon after World War II, the communist Soviet Union and the capitalist United States became rivals.
In other words, since each side had the ability to destroy the other completely, it practically guaranteed peace, since if both sides acted rationally, neither would fire first, knowing the other side would respond in kind and extinguish their opponents.
The much-hated dictator, Fulgencio Batista, was overthrown and was replaced by Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
Batista had been a strong American ally, and the United States was pretty certain that Castro was a communist.
This suspicion was confirmed in 1960 when Castro openly aligned with the Soviet Union.
Well, the president at the time, John F Kennedy, promised in 1961 not to intervene militarily to overthrow Castro.
Later that same month, around 1,400 Cuban exiles, anti-Communists who had fled the country when Castro took over, landed on the coast of Cuba at a place called the Bay of Pigs.
Trained and equipped by the United States Central Intelligence Agency , the goal of the exiles was to lead the popular uprising against Castro that they were sure would follow their arrival.
What happened instead was a fiasco and a major embarrassment for the Kennedy administration.
The Cuban military stopped the exiles cold and sent them back to the United States Castro became a folk hero in Cuba and throughout Latin America, and Kennedy had to accept responsibility for the entire mess.
If he did what many in the United States military wanted, which was to invade Cuba outright, it would certainly mean war and the Soviets would retaliate with their nuclear weapons.
Let's go over the timeline describing the two weeks in which the United States came as close as it ever has to nuclear war.
American spy planes take photographs of Soviet-made missile launchers in Cuba.
President Kennedy and his advisors call for a quarantine of Cuba, in which the United States Navy would block the coast and prevent any ship from reaching port.
Kennedy sends a letter to Khrushchev in which he claims the U.S.S.R. is responsible for the current crisis.
The President's advisors come up with a possible way out of the standoff—the United States would remove nuclear missiles from Turkey, an ally nation, which were ''due for replacement,'' in exchange for Soviet removal of the missiles in Cuba.
These missiles in Turkey had been seen by the U.S.S.R. as a threatening presence, similar, in their view, to the Cuba missiles.
However, Kennedy is concerned that if the United States removes the missiles, the Soviets might believe that they could try similar attempts at blackmail in the future.
The CIA reports that the Soviets seem to be accelerating their construction of missile sites in Cuba and are now trying to camouflage the missile launchers.
At the same time, a letter arrives from Khrushchev in which the Soviets pledge to dismantle the missiles in exchange for an American pledge never to invade Cuba.
A second letter from Khrushchev arrives, now insisting on a trade for missiles—the United States missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy's advisors worry that Khrushchev may have been overthrown by elements in his own government.
The same day, an American U-2 plane, flown by Major Rudolf Anderson, is shot down over Cuban airspace by a Soviet missile.
At the same time, another U-2 accidentally violates Soviet airspace near Alaska.
Robert Kennedy, the Attorney-General and the President's brother, meets with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the United States He tells Dobrynin that the United States government will pledge not to invade Cuba and that the missiles in Turkey will be removed within six months.
Also, if any information about this pledge leaked prior to the six-month deadline, the Kennedy administration would deny the deal.
Khrushchev announces that he has agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
The AftermathThe Cuban missile crisis was a diplomatic triumph for the Kennedy administration and an embarrassment for the Soviet leadership.
The only major concession by both sides after the crisis was the creation of a hotline phone link between the two capitals to ensure direct communication between the two nations' leaders in the future.
After United States planes discovered missiles in Cuba, President John Kennedy instituted a quarantine of the Cuban coast to prevent the shipment of new missiles.
Ultimately, the United States pledged not to invade Cuba and to remove its own missiles in Turkey in exchange for the removal of the missiles from Cuba.
The deal ended the standoff and reduced the possibility of nuclear annihilation.
October 14 American spy planes take photographs of Soviet missile launchers in Cuba.
October 22 Kennedy announces the quarantine of Cuba beginning the standoff and negotiations.
October 27 Attorney General Robert Kennedy meets with the ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to cut a deal to end the crisis.
October 28 Khrushchev announces the removal of missiles from Cuba, and the crisis ends.
