Explain what Stalin’s Soviet “sphere of influence” in Eastern Europe meant.
The problem is that these countries are communist, don’t have free elections, and go against our values 2.
The U S. should provide that loser, aid to all European nations Mr Booth, that need it.
This move the United States will buy its is not against any country or doctrine, but againstfriends hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos.
Harry Truman --Foreign Policy Berlin Airlift •Soviets block access to west Berlin.
Defined Warsaw Pact, 1950Defensive alliance between Soviet Union and Eastern European Countries.
Jiang Jieshi in Mandarin or Chiang Kai-shek (stronghold in southwestern China..5 million man army – Who did we support? – Nationalists – • Pledged $2B 1.
Said he would return land to the Chinese peasants and the economy collapsed 2.
United Nations troops (made up of 90% Americans) defend South Korea Led by Douglas MacArthur • Also, 300,000 Communist Chinese troops come into war on side of North Korea 2.
Korea – Korean War • Truman was convinced that the North Korea aggressors were repeating what Hitler, Mussolini and the Japanese had done in the 30’s.
Stalemate at 38th parallel 54,000 Americans die Billions of Dollars spent 2.
Korea – Korean War MacArthur and Truman • MacArthur asks Truman for authority to invade China for a full-scale nuclear war • Truman says No! – MacArthur goes over Truman’s head by talking to the press and making Truman look weak • Truman fired MacArthur on April 11, 1951 • DMZ established at 38th parallel which creates a cease-fire.
Communist leader Ho Chi Minh forced French leaders to surrender in 1954.
In South Vietnam, The United States and France set up an anticommunist government under the leadership of Ngo Dinh Diem.
Dictator – Fulgencio Batista • Overthrown by a young lawyer – Fidel Castro, he improved the economy and brought about social reforms, but suspended elections, executed opponents, and controlled the media.
Gorbachev’s perestroika and glasnost – Fall of Berlin Wall and Communism 4.
Teenage militia unit formed by young Chinese people in 1966 in response to Mao’s call for a social and cultural revolution.
They beat or killed anybody who resisted communism. – Purpose is to indoctrinate and conform people and next generation of people.
A 1966 uprising in China led by the Red Guards, with the goal of establishing a society of peasants and workers in which all were equal. – The purpose was to put down resistance to communism.
Called for collective farms, or communes – Peasants worked land together, ate in communal dining rooms, slept in dorms, raised children in communal nurseries. – Owned nothing – No incentive to work hard when only the state profited from their labor • GLF was a giant leap backward.
Crop failures caused a famine that killed 20 million – Stories of people eating each other Massacre in Tiananmen Square • Mao died in 1976 • New leader named Deng Xiaoping • Supported modernization, westernization, and private businesses – Incomes increased, youth wore stylish clothes, listened to American music, people buying appliances and TV's and new hotels opened.
It was a protest for democracy • TANK MAN • No one knows what happened to him or who he was – defining picture of history Tank Man • Instead of considering political reform, Deng ordered 100,000 troops to surround Beijing • Many protestors left, 5,000 stayed – Started hunger protest and displayed a 33 foot statue named the goddess of democracy – June 4, 1989, tanks smashed through barricades and smashed the goddess of democracy. – Soldiers sprayed gunfire into the crowds of students and it killed hundreds and wounded thousands.
In late 70’s, a Muslim revolt threatened to topple Afghanistan’s communist regime.
This war had striking resemblance to the Americans fighting a war in Vietnam.
Roots of Arab-Israeli Conflict • After WWII, Jewish people of Europe hoped for their own country along the coast of the Mediterranean or the roots of their biblical heritage in the Middle East. – Jews were forced out of Palestine in the second century.
Palestine was controlled by the British after WWI and promoted the idea of making a Jewish state within Palestine called the Balfour Declaration. – However, Palestinians did not like this idea.
Jerusalem was to be an international city owned by neither side. – The terms of the partition gave the Jews 55% of the area even though they made up only 34% of the population.
All Islamic countries voted against the partition because it was their land and they were the majority population in Palestine. – After WWII many Europeans and Americans felt sympathy for Jews.
Roots of Arab-Israeli Conflict • As a result of the wars, the UN set aside land for Arabs for a Palestinian state, but it has not happened to this day which is known as a possible two-state solution.
Apartheid and Nelson Mandela • In South Africa, racial conflict was the result of colonial rule by the Dutch and British and was racially divided.
It instituted a policy of apartheid, or complete separation of the races in regards to schools, hospitals, neighborhoods, etc.
He was released from prison in 1990 • Ran for president in first free election in 1994 and racial discrimination finally ended.
