The selection that follows, edited by Dave Frankel, includes articles that appeared in the October 19 and 26 and the November 2 and 9, 1973, issues of The Militant In addition to explaining the issues at stake in the Mideast war, these articles help to counter the anti-Arab campaign being waged in the United States news media.
Dave Frankel, a staff writer for The Militant has given lectures on the Mideast at over forty universities.
Dick Roberts, the author of Mideast Oil and United States Imperialism, is currently at work on a book entitled The Economics of United States Imperialism.
Tony Thomas is a contributor to Black Scholar and author of In Defense of Black Nationalism.
Printed in November 1973 Manufactured in the United States of America Pathfinder Press, Inc.
This land includes the territory occupied by Israel in its 1967 expansionist war against the Arab states, as well as Palestine itself, whose inhabitants were driven from their homeland with the establishment of Israel in 1948.
The United States government, which has militarily, economically, and politically backed Israel since the beginning, must be held responsible for this denial of the right of self-determination to the Palestinian people.
Without the backing of United States imperialism, the Zionist settler-state could not exist.
The cornerstone of United States policy in the Mideast is to maintain Israel as the dominant military power in the region, and to use Israel as a foothold for imperialism against the Arab peoples.
During the current fighting, Nixon would prefer to avoid direct United States military intervention, which could have explosive repercussions inside the United States and around the world.
But if Israel suffers major reversals in the struggle, Washington is fully prepared to intervene directly —just as it did in Vietnam.
To demonstrate this determination, the United States Sixth Fleet has already moved to waters off Crete, only several hundred miles from the war zone.
And the helicopter carrier Guadalcanal, with thousands of marines, has been moved into the eastern Mediterranean.
It is against Israeli aggression and its imperialist backers that the current Arab war is directed.
All. who support the struggle for self-determination, democracy, and peace in the From The Militant, October 19, 1973 3 1H Middle East should be on the side of the Arab states in this war.
But the question of which side moved first on the military front is irrelevant in determining where responsibility for the war lies.
The very existence of the Israeli state is based on permanent aggression against the Palestinian and other Arab peoples, and has been since 1948.
There is ample evidence that the Israelis have long desired a new war as an excuse to further their expansionist designs against the Arab states.
Moreover, statements by Israeli leaders since the beginning of the current conflict make clear that their aim in the war is not only to hold on to the territories occupied in 1967, but to grab even more territory.
The Wall Street Journal doesn't mention that ""Israel itself"" is also ""occupied Arab territory"" seized in the same way as the Sinai and the Golan Heights.
The partition of Palestine The origins of the current war go back to the establishment of Israel, with the backing of imperialism, in 1948.
The Zionist state was created by a United Nations ""partition"" of Palestine.
The land was divided between its Arab majority and the minority of Zionist settlers, with the latter receiving the choicest parts of the country.
This partition was carried out over the opposition of the overwhelming majority of Palestinians.
During and after the 1948 war, the Israelis attempted to drive Palestinians out of Israel.
Massacres and bombings were carried out against unarmed and defenseless Arab villages.
Arab refugees, who fled to avoid the battle zones, were not allowed to return to their homes.
Property and land of the refugees were seized by the Israeli government.
Law of return While the Zionist ""law of return"" opened Palestine to massive colonization by Jews from around the world, Zionist laws forbid Palestinians who fled to other Arab countries to return to the land where they were born.
Those Palestinians who remain within Israel are treated as second-class citizens under repressive laws that restrict their political rights and control where they can live and work.
In short, Israel is a settler-state built on a foundation of oppression and discrimination of the Arab peoples.
In that regard it is similar to the South African or Rhodesian settlerstates.
Israeli domination of Palestine is based on the fact that Israel, thanks to aid from the United States and other imperialist powers, is an advanced industrial nation with an imperialist economy.
The Arab states remain oppressed and semicolonial countries, and the goal of unifying the Arab peoples is still to be reached.
Despite limited anti-imperialist measures taken in countries such as Egypt, Libya, Iraq, and Syria, United States and European imperialism dominates the economic life of these countries, thwarting their development.
The Arab states, like the other capitalist countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, remain underdeveloped countries.
Israel, as a military and economic bastion of world imperialism in the Mideast, stands as a major obstacle in the path of economic and social progress for the Arab peoples.
Scores of fortunes were made out of war-inspired projects, exploitation of Arab workers in the seized lands, and captured Egyptian oil and other Arab resources.
Campaign of aggression since ’67 Since the 1967 war, the Israelis have continued their military terrorism against the Arab states.
Between 1967 and 1970, Israel launched scores of naval, air, artillery, and commando attacks on Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Egypt.
These attacks 6 included major bombing of Cairo and Egyptian population centers and several ""retaliation"" raids in Jordan in which entire villages were destroyed.
In 1970, when Jordan's King Hussein massacred tens of thousands of Palestinian and other opponents of his regime, he received complete support from Israel and the U.S., both of which made preparations to intervene if the Jordanian regime was endangered by the popular revolt.
In 1972 and 1973, Israeli terrorism increased, centering on Syria and Lebanon, where the Palestinian resistance movement was strongest.
Supposedly in retaliation for the death of eleven Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, Israel launched bombings and shellings that killed hundreds of Arab villagers.
Several commando raids, air attacks, and a full-scale invasion have been launched this year against Lebanon, because that country grants asylum to Palestinian militants.
This record makes it clear that Israel's permanent mission in the Middle East is to maintain the suppression of the Arab national liberation struggle through military aggression and terrorism.
However, statements by Israeli military experts attempting to explain defeats in the current war expose these claims as lies.
United States responsibility The United States shares the aims of the Israelis in keeping the Arab peoples demoralized and blocking the Arab national liberation struggle.
United States control over the bulk of the Arab world's oil depends on these results of Israel's aggressive policy.
United States military aid has been refused to all the Arab states, except for Jordan and Saudi Arabia, which have used their military power not against Israel but against the Arab masses.
Of all the countries in the world, Israel has the largest percentage of its budget devoted to military expenditures, the highest per capita military expenditure, and the biggest ratio 7 of regular armed forces to population.
The United States gave $300-million in arms aid in 1967 alone, and in one of several arms deals in 1970 the United States gave Israel $500-million in military equipment.
In times of Israeli military action, such as during the current war and in 1967, United States armed forces have stood by to intervene if needed to protect the Zionist state.
The imperialist rulers of this country will not hesitate to risk a world nuclear holocaust to protect their interests.
The savage inhumanity of the United States warmakers was demonstrated for all to see in the horror inflicted on Vietnam.
They are quite capable of doing the same thing — or worse— in the Mideast.
The only road to peace in the Mideast is to end the Zionist occupation of Arab territories and to grant the demands of the Palestinian people to return to their homeland, with equal social, political, and religious rights with the Jewish population.
Why the Arab Peoples Fight Israel by Dave Frankel Supporters of Israel claim it is committed to peace and de mocracy.
They portray the Arab peoples struggling against the Zionist state as anti-Jewish fanatics motivated by hatred and racism.
Just over a year ago the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith declared, ""Arab extremists do not seek merely to eradicate Israel; they want to destroy world Jewry which stands behind Israel.
But an examination of the actual history of the Middle East shows that the opposition of the Arab masses to Zionism has nothing to do with irrational hatred.
It grew out of the struggle From The Militant, October 26, 1973 8 of the Arab peoples against colonial domination and for control of their own land.
In 1917, when the British Lord Balfour announced, ""His Majesty's Government view with favor the establishment in Palestine of a National home for the Jewish people,"" only 11 percent of the population of Palestine was Jewish.
The British saw the Zionist community as a bulwark against Arab nationalist aspirations.
The Zionist settlers were bound to support British rule, since the establishment and maintenance of the Zionist state could only be achieved with the backing of imperialism.
Today Israel plays the same role in relation to the United States Throughout the 1930s, Jews fleeing the terror of Nazism in Europe were forced to come to Palestine because of the refusal of the United States and Britain to allow them entry.
The hundreds of thousands of new immigrants were organized by the Zionist movement to confront the Palestinians as enemies.
Boycotts of Arab labor and agricultural products were organized to build up a separate Jewish economy.
Arab workers were barred from the Jewish trade-union federation, and when the Palestinian people rose up against British colonial rule in 1936-39, the Zionists sided with the British.
In November 1947 the United Nations voted to partition Palestine into two states.
This was a violation of the right 9 of the Palestinian people to determine their own future.
At that time there were 1,280,000 Arabs in Palestine out of a total population of 1,874,000.
The Palestinians demanded a single, independent Palestine, in which both Arabs and Jews could live.
What prevented this was not the ""hatred and irrationality"" of the Palestinians, but the determination of the Zionists to carve an exclusive Jewish state out of an Arab country.
Moshe Dayan explained this very well in the September 30, 1968, Jerusalem Post.
The Israeli state was founded on the expulsion of the majority of the Palestinians and on the suppression of those who remained.
The maintenance of the Israeli state requires the maintenance of this injustice, and this is the root of the ongoing conflict between Palestinians and Israelis.
Expulsion of the Palestinians Although apologists for the Israeli state often claim that the Palestinians became a nation of exiles voluntarily, the truth is well documented by the Israelis themselves.
Arabs throughout the country . were seized with limitless panic and started to flee for their lives.
The expulsion of the Palestinians is not merely a historical tragedy, something unrelated to the current conflict.
Israeli loudspeakers warned the inhabitants, 'You have two hours to leave.
The nature of the Israeli settler-state ensures that such atrocities will continue as long as Israel exists.
Along with the cover-up of Zionist crimes by backers of Israel goes the argument that Israel is needed to protect the Jewish people from extermination.
In the Middle East, however, the hostility to Jews came about as a result of the crimes of Zionism.
The hatred that the Arab masses feel for Zionism is a natural reaction to oppression.
The suffering of the Jews in Europe is no justification for the oppression of another people.
The aspiration of the Palestinians is not to oppress the Jews, but to cast off their own oppression.
Virtually all the major Palestinian organizations have re jected the idea of expelling the Israeli Jews from Palestine.
Talk about extermination of the Jews if the Palestinians were to regain their rights is on the same level as Nixon's claim in 11 1969 that there would be a ""bloodbath"" if the United States got out of Vietnam.
Similar arguments were used against the demands of the Mau Mau freedom fighters in Kenya and the Algerian revolution.
The real danger to the Jewish people and the real source of anti-Semitism is not the struggle of the Palestinian people for their rights, but the capitalist system.
Instead of recognizing this, Zionism pits the Jewish people against those who should be their natural allies.
Because the Israeli state was imposed and is maintained only by force of arms, it must rely on United States imperialism and oppose the right of the Arab peoples to control their own resources and modernize their countries.
The only way out of this vicious cycle of continual warfare is for the Israeli Jews to reject their role as oppressors of the Palestinians and as counterrevolutionary shock troops for the United States They must accept the idea of giving up their special privileges won at the expense of the Palestinians, and live together with them in a single state.
Finally, they must join with the Palestinians and the other Arab peoples in a common struggle for a socialist Middle East.
The 1967 war left Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, Syria's Golan Heights, the Jordanian-held West Bank of the Jordan River, and the Egyptian-administered Gaza area in Israeli hands.
Since that time, the rulers of Egypt, Syria, and Jordan have been under pressure from the Arab masses to regain those lost territories.
Instead of mobilizing this sentiment against Israel in a revoFrom The Militant, October 26, 1973 12 lutionary struggle, the Arab rulers sought to regain the occupied territories through diplomacy and by making concessions.
They feared that a mobilization of the Arab peoples to win victories against Israel and its imperialist backers could lead to a social revolution against the rulers of the Arab world as well.
Following this course, the Arab heads of state agreed to support the 1967 UN Security Council resolution on the Mideast.
This resolution, formally backed by Washington and Moscow, provides for the return of the Arab territories occupied in the six-day war in exchange for Arab recognition of the sovereignty of Israel.
These concessions offered to Israel represented a retreat for the Arab struggle.
Previously, the Arab states had refused to recognize Israel because of mass support to the right of the Palestinian people to regain their homeland.
However, acceptance of the UN resolution showed that the Arab rulers were willing to sell out the Palestinian struggle in exchange for a U.S.-Soviet endorsed deal with Israel.
Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and the other supposed ""progressive"" and pro-Palestinian Arab states refused to lift a finger while Jordan, Lebanon, and Israel carried out military campaigns against the Palestinians.
Tens of thousands of Palestinians were killed, and the resistance organizations were greatly weakened.
All this was seen as a concession to Washington and Tel Aviv and a move toward a settlement.
In 1972 and early 1973 massive demonstrations involving Egyptian students and workers took place in Cairoand Helwan.
These actions demanded nationalization of the holdings of United States imperialism, arming the Egyptian masses to fight Israel, ending the policies of negotiating through the United States and the UN, and seizing the wealth of war speculators and Egyptian capitalists, to finance the struggle against Zionist aggression.
The Sadat regime responded by attacking these demonstrators with the army and police.
Sadat announced he would pursue his plan to obtain a settlement under the auspices of Washington and Moscow.
The idea that Arab concessions would result in the United States making Israel back down has been disproven in the six years since the 1967 war.
Israel, as a colonialist enterprise, depends on continued expansion against the Arab peoples.
A return of major portions of the territories occupied in 1967 —even in exchange for Arab recognition of Israel—would put into question Zionist control over the lands occupied in 1947, 1948, and 1949 — that is, Israel itself.
United States imperialism has stood behind Israel since the Zionist state was established.
The ""survival"" of Israel has been dependent on billions of dollars worth of United States arms, United States economic assistance and loans, and other support.
Israel serves the interests of the United States ruling class, especially the oil magnates with holdings in the Mideast, by keeping the Arab revolution weak and imperialism strong.
A return of the Arab territories would be a setback to the imperialists as well as to the Zionists.
Washington may press Israel to make minor concessions for the sake of a settlement, but the Zionists have nothing to fear.
The United States will never abandon Israel for fear of an anti-imperialist victory.
Thus Washington backed Israeli aggression in 1967 and the numerous bombings, shellings, commando raids, and military invasions of Arab territories launched since that time.
While this relationship sometimes allows a division of labor in which Tel Aviv appears more ""hawkish"" and Washington , more ""dovish,""” it is the interests of imperialism that are at the heart of Israeli aggression and war in the Mideast.
The illusions of the Arab rulers that a proUnited States ""tilt"" could win them concessions should have been dispelled by the case history of Jordan, the most blatantly proimperialist country bordering Israel.
Jordan served as the instrument for the ""liquidation"" of the Palestinian resistance in 1970 and 1971.
Despite United States backing, Jordan is the Arab country that has the most significant portion of its pre-1967 population and territory occupied by Israel.
Detente The Arab states also relied on a diplomatic and military alliance with Moscow as a means of pressuring the United States and 14 Israel to return the occupied territories.
As the detente was inaugurated with Nixon's visit to the Soviet Union in 1972, it became increasingly clear that Moscow was cutting down its support to the Arab states.
In 1972 Soviet military experts told Syrian journalists that the Soviet Union opposed the Arab policy of ""no war—no peace"" until the return of the occupied territories.
These experts made clear that Moscow demanded an immediate settlement— that is, on U.S.Israeli terms. , One of the fruits of the detente was Moscow's refusal to give Egypt weapons that could be used effectively to carry ,the war to Israel and put more pressure on the Zionists to withdraw.
In July 1972 the Sadat regime ordered the entire Soviet military assistance group — including 20,000 Soviet advisers concentrated in antiaircraft, missile, and tank units—to leave Kgypt.
This step greatly weakened Egypt's capacity to defend itself from Israeli aggression.
Egyptian attempts to get arms and military assistance from Western European countries in the fall of 1972 failed, and the Egyptians reestablished close relations with Moscow.
Observers in the capitalist press have reported that Sadat broke with Moscow on the advice of Saudi Arabian officials who predicted that this step would change United States policy, by showing that the Egyptians were willing to line up with the United States against the Soviet Union.
However, as usual, this Arab concession led to no change in United States or Israeli policy.
The detente became more and more clearly an attempt to impose solutions favorable to United States imperialism on the peoples of the world, as was clear in Vietnam.
In the Mideast, detente encouraged the Israelis to launch dozens of attacks on the Arab peoples and not to make any concessions in the direction of returning Arab lands.
In this atmosphere, the Zionists launched a campaign not only to retain Arab territories but to settle and integrate them into Israel.
The Golan Heights, taken from Syria in 1967, had been ""practically integrated"" into Israel.
Urbanization was taking place at Sharm el-Sheikh at the southern tip of Sinai and in the northern part also.
The detente has prevented the Arab states from gaining the limited goals of the 1967 UN resolution— despite their demonstrated willingness to suppress the Arab revolution in exchange for these goals.
Now they hope to compel United States imperialism and the Soviet bureaucrats to force the Israelis to grant concessions through war.
This is a demonstration that even from the point of view of the ruling classes of the Arab world, the detente and other ""peaceful solutions"" are only declarations of war against oppressed nations.
Rather than a force for peace, the detente and ""peaceful coexistence"" will be used to rationalize military aggression against peoples who resist aggression and oppression, as the Arab states currently are doing.
All those with a real interest in peace should support the Arab states in their struggle against Israeli aggression.
However, to end the Zionist occupation in the Mideast and win national liberation for the Arab peoples, the Arab countries must break from the restricting policies of the current Arab rulers.
The Arab capitalists must be replaced through the process of social revolution that will put power in the hands of the Arab workers and poor farmers.
This would unleash the massive anti-imperialist sentiment of the Arab peoples, who would institute the type of measures demanded by the Egyptian workers and students.
A massive shipment of United States military equipment to Israel is under way.
The need to mobilize international opposition to the U.S.Israeli aggression in the Mideast is urgent.
Washington's assertion that the airlift of weapons was begun only in response to Moscow's military aid is pure cynicism and hypocrisy.
Far from merely ""responding"" to Soviet aid to the Arabs, the United States maintains Israel as a military outpost of American imperialism in the Arab lands—and supplies arms for the Zionists' permanent aggression against the Arab peoples.
Washington's Middle East policy hinges on maintaining unchallengeable Israeli military superiority.
And only the United States can replace lost material fast enough to do Israel any good,"" the leading financial newspaper stated.
Nixon's ominous decision to intervene with United States military might heightens the ever-present danger of a nuclear holocaust that could engulf the entire world.
The likelihood that the Israeli regime possesses its own nuclear weapons—as reported by Western military analysts— underscores the danger of a third world war.
The American ruling class is virtually unanimous in its determination to punish the Arabs for fighting to regain their land.
Democratic and Republican politicians throughout the country are getting up one after the other to call for steppedup United States military support for Israel.
Vast quantities of ""guns, tanks, missiles, and planes"" are already en route to Israel.
An Associated Press dispatch from the Azores, site of the giant United States Air Force base in the MidAtlantic, reported an airlift of cargo and warplanes at fifteenminute intervals.
The planes included Galaxies, Boeing 707s, C-130 and C-141 cargo planes, and F-4 Phantom fighterbombers.
The Pentagon has ordered the attack carrier John F Kennedy, which was scheduled to return to the U.S., to remain in the eastern Atlantic.
There are already two attack carriers with the United States Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean.
But the American people are far less united than the capitalist politicians in support of this new war drive by the imperialists.
A Gallup poll published October 16 found that less than half of the American people supported Israel, in spite of the anti-Arab propaganda barrage.
Badillo declared on October 9 that ""it becomes clearer by the hour that the Holy Day attack on Israel by the armed forces of Egypt and Syria was totally without provocation.
The fact is there was no ""attack on Israel"" as Badillo and others on Capitol Hill claim.
The territory in dispute was violently seized from Arab governments in 1967, by Israel's unprovoked six-day blitzkrieg.
This is not to speak of the 18 whole history of Israel's bloody seizure of Palestinian land to establish the Zionist state to begin with.
Washington initially held back in hopes that the Israeli regime would repeat its crippling attack on the Arab armies of 1967.
From the imperialists' standpoint, a repeat of the 1967 Arab defeat would make the oil-rich Arab states more pliant.
Egyptian, Jordanian, and Syrian territory, and any new territory Israel seized from. the Arabs, and it would be one more blow to the Palestinian liberation movement.
But if Egypt or Syria regain some of the land occupied in the 1967 war, it would be a blow to imperialism.
It would demonstrate to the masses of the colonial and semicolonial lands that it pays to fight rather than rely on diplomatic maneuvering with Washington and Moscow.
It would encourage Arab militants to go much further than the limits imposed on the war by Egyptian President Sadat and the other misleaders of the bourgeois Arab regimes.
Even a partial Arab victory would encourage the Arab masses to demand the full liberation of Palestine and the overthrow of the Zionist state.
This is what brought the vast armada of United States tanks, missiles, and bombers into the rapidly expanding war.
Arab gains Whatever now happens, the Arabs have won a significant political victory.
The imperialists' shock and surprise—a reflection of their racist denigration of the Arabs and their typically imperialist underestimation of the capacity of the oppressed masses to fight back —is itself eloquent testimony to the gains that have been made.
It is revealing to compare the first assessments of the war 19 with those of a few days later.
The reaction of a young Arab in Brooklyn, N Y., the first night of the war—""I hope Egypt did attack first'—reflects a feeling that has swept Arab communities throughout the world and is manifested in the ranks of the armed forces in the Middle East.
The capitalist regimes in Cairo and Damascus are seeking a diplomatic edge through military maneuvers.
Their objective is to gain concessions from Israel to appease the Arab masses.
They oppose mobilizing the masses even for these limited ends, which are being sought mainly on the battlefield.
These bourgeois politicians fear the independent thrust of mass movements and look to behind-the-scenes deals with Washington and Moscow for a solution.
The only realistic long-term solution to the Middle East crisis is the overthrow of the Zionist state of Israel and the return of Palestine to the Palestinians, thus eliminating the cause of the aggression.
It is this mass pressure that has turned virtually the entire Arab, African, and “neutralist"" bloc in the United Nations against U S. policy in the Mideast.
There has been a shift in thinking among significant sectors of the United States population as well.
Millions of Black people, for example, identify with the Arab peoples as victims of oppression at the hands of the same forces that oppress them — the U S. government.
As the radicalization process of recent years has deepened, more and more people have learned to see through the lies spewed forth by the warmakers in Washington.
Millions of people, having just .gone through the experience of the United States military intervention in Vietnam, have no desire whatever to get dragged into yet another shooting war.
In this political atmosphere, opponents of United States intervention in the Mideast have a crucial role to play.
It is our job to expose the lies and phony justifications being churned out by the rulers of this country, and to mobilize opposition to the war moves now under way by Washington.
Some questioners reason that since both Israel and the Arab states are capitalist, we should not take sides.
Others say it is contradictory for us to favor the overthrow of the capitalist Arab regimes, yet support the Arab side in a war against Israel.
These questioners confuse our stand on the Arab-Israeli war with the position revolutionary Marxists take in regard to wars between two imperialist countries.
The question in imperialist wars in the division of spoils taken from the working class and colonial peoples by the different imperialist robbers.
The victory of neither side advances the struggles of the working class and oppressed peoples.
However, the basic issue in the current Mideast war is the struggle of a nationally oppressed people against colonial oppressors.
In that struggle socialists take the side of the oppressed despite our differences with their leadership.
A victory for the Arabs in the war against Israel would be an advance not only for the struggle of the Arab peoples but in the general colonial struggle against imperialism.
The Arab states have yet to overcome the legacy of colonial domination left them first by the Ottoman Empire and then by the European and United States imperialists.
Today, their econoFrom The Militant, November 2, 1973 21 mies— including oil resources—remain dominated by the imperialist powers.
Israel's colonial domination of Arab lands is based on the imperialist-imposed backwardness of the Arab states, as well as the massive United States aid the Zionist colony has received since 1948.
Backed by this imperialist power, Israel was established in 1948 with the seizure of the Arab lands in Palestine.
Seven hundred and fifty thousand Palestinians were driven from their homes.
Israel again expanded in 1967 with the seizure of the Golan Heights, the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank of the Jordan River.
Half a million Arabs were driven out of their homelands in this operation.
The dynamic of the Mideast war centers on the struggle of the Arab peoples to rid themselves of the Zionist colonialists and the struggle of the colonialists to weaken the Arab peoples.
In struggles against colonialism and national oppression, Marxists give unconditional support to the colonized peoples.
By the word ""unconditional,"" we mean we support the struggle against oppression regardless of our differences with the current leadership of the Arab states.
Revolutionary socialists do not think the Arab capitalist leaders have a program that can win the struggle against Zionist colonialism.
In the years since 1967, these leaders have opposed the revolutionary anti-Zionist, anti-imperialist sentiments of the Arab masses.
Instead of mobilizing the Arab masses against Israel, they chose to make concessions to Zionism and to Israel's imperialist backers.
They have repressed the attempts of the Arab masses to move against Israeli colonialism, such as the Palestinian resistance movement and the massive anti-Zionist, anti-Sadat actions carried out by Egyptian workers and students over the past few years.
The rulers of the Arab states feared that such mobilizations could lead to the overthrow of their own corrupt regimes.
Revolutionary socialists believe that only through the process of socialist revolution can the resources of the Arab world — and the full power of the Arab workers, students, and farmers—be mobilized against colonialism.
But in the current war with Israel, the difference Marxists have with the Arab rulers is over how and for what to wage 22 this struggle, not whether to wage it.
A refusal to support the Arabs in this struggle would be a refusal to support the active fight against Israel.
To use an analogy, we support the Black struggle against white racist oppression in this country, in spite of its inade quate leadership.
But it would do nothing to advance the Black struggle if revolutionists refused to support a specific struggle because it is being led by NAACPers, or by Black Republicans or Democrats.
In fact, a position of unconditional support of such struggles is a key condition for revolutionary socialists to win Black activists to a revolutionary socialist perspective.
At the same time, of course, revolutionary socialists would oppose any of the limitations such procapitalist leaders might try to place on the struggle.
Similarly, revolutionary socialists support the struggle of African liberation organizations that are fighting Portuguese, Rhodesian, and South African colonialism, even if their leadership is not explicitly in favor of socialism.
Such opposition would only play into the hands of Portugal, Rhodesia, and South Africa.
To fail to be at the side of the Arab masses in the struggle against Israel because this struggle is led by the Arab capitalists would be a refusal to take sides in a concrete struggle against Zionist racism and colonialism, and would only stand in the way of the efforts of Arab revolutionary socialists to win the leadership of the Arab workers and farmers in a struggle against both the Arab regimes and Israel.
Behind Nixon’s Threat of Nuclear War by Dave Frankel Richard Nixon brought the world to the brink of nuclear war with the Soviet Union on October 25, 1973.
Missiles were raised to firing positions, special battle staffs went on duty, bomber crews slept in their planes, leaves were canceled, and the entire United States military machine of 2. million men was placed on combat alert.
That crisis saw an ""eyeball to eyeball"" nuclear confrontation between President John Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev over Cuba's right to defend itself with Soviet missiles.
Robert Kennedy later admitted in his book about the crisis that his brother had been fully prepared to launch an all-out nuclear war if Khrushchev refused to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba.
At an earlier news conference, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger set a different tone.
However, since Nixon was the man with his finger on the nuclear button, his assessment carries some extra weight.
The first reaction of many people to the military alert was to assume that Nixon had engineered another foreign policy spectacular to divert attention from the latest Watergate scandal and the massive pressure for his impeachment.
Despite Kissinger's pained reply that ""it is a symptom of what is happening to our country that it could even be suggested that the United States would alert its forces for domestic reasons,"" the questions persisted.
Another factor contributing to the disbelief was the illusion that the Washington-Moscow detente ruled out the possibility of a real confrontation.
Nobody can deny that the widespread distrust of Nixon and cynicism about government pronouncements are well founded, and Nixon certainly tried to get all the mileage he could out of the Mideast crisis.
However, nothing could be more dangerous than to discount Nixon's nuclear saber-rattling as empty rhetoric, or to mistake the detente as a defense against nuclear war.
Ample evidence that the Middle East showdown was real is provided by the reactions of sections of the capitalist class unfriendly to Nixon.
Finally, on October 29, the Times gave its seal of approval to Nixon's threat to use the H-bomb.
The Israeli government had de clared its intention of inflicting the heaviest possible casualties on the Arab armies at the beginning of the latest war.
It made no secret of its distaste for the ceasefire agreement concluded by Washington and Moscow and passed by the UN Security Council October 22.
Although the Israelis accepted the ceasefire verbally, they continued to pump troops and supplies into their bridgehead on the west bank of the Suez Canal.
Whether the Israeli offensive was planned with Nixon's and Kissinger's agreement, or was carried out and later won their acceptance, may never be known.
But when the Security Council reaffirmed the original ceasefire resolution on October 23, the Egyptian III Corps was in an untenable position.
With the Israeli army intent on destroying the Egyptian force, President Sadat of Egypt called for an emergency meeting of the Security Council, demanded that the original cease fire lines be restored, and asked Moscow and Washington to send troops to police the agreement.
In the meantime, according to Nixon, the Kremlin began pre paring to send troops into Egypt.
The shroud of secrecy that veils U.S.-Soviet diplomacy keeps us from knowing exactly what Brezhnev intended to do.
But there can be no doubt that he said enough to convince Nixon that he wasn't about to tolerate the destruction of III Corps.
Nixon, however, chose to jump in behind Israel with the threat of the H-bomb.
Apparently the Kremlin backed down, and another agreement was reached before the confrontation went any further.
The Security Council passed a new ceasefire resolution October 25, this one with provisions for a UN force to oversee the cease-fire.
The Egyptian III Corps remained surrounded, but in no immediate danger of being forced to surrender, since the Israelis were permitting food and water to be supplied to it.
At that time The Militant warned that ""Brezhnev's summit policies of capitulating to Nixon and prettifying the imperialist warmakers will not lessen the danger of nuclear war; rather these policies will embolden Nixon and strengthen his hand.
The truth of this analysis has been proved once again by the events of the past week.
Brezhnev has been pleading all along for a deal that would protect the status quo in the Middle East in return for Israel's giving up some of the territories occupied during the 1967 war.
He has been more than willing to help suppress the struggle of the Palestinian Arabs to reclaim their homeland in order to make such a deal.
In his speech to the World Peace Congress in Moscow on October 26 Brezhnev again stressed his commitment to ""normalization"" of the imperialist status quo, with ""secure borders"" for the colonial-settler state of Israel.
They represent a capitalist system, a system that must expand to survive.
The result is constant attempts to enlarge their field of activity and to push back the struggles of the colonial masses for political and economic independence.
This dynamic was shown five days after the outbreak of the Middle East war, when House-Senate conferees restored most of the money that had been cut from the Pentagon budget in previous congressional action.
Similarly, whether or not Nixon knew of Israel's planned Suez offensive in advance, once it materialized he had no compunctions about trying to improve the position of the United States client state, even at the risk of nuclear war.
As for the Soviet bureaucrats, although they were willing to stand by and watch Nixon terror bomb the Vietnamese, and even talk about generations of peace while he was doing it, they took a different view when the capitalist regime in Egypt was threatened with a decisive defeat.
The Middle East lies just south of the Soviet Union, and the Kremlin has no desire to see its southern flank under exclusive United States domination.
The bureaucratic caste in Moscow is motivated by the most narrow and immediate considerations of national interest.
It saw those interests threatened in the Middle East, but not in Vietnam.
The Kremlin policy of seeking an accomodation with the United States by making concessions to it is doomed to failure because of the predatory nature of imperialism.
In addition, this policy increases the possibility of nuclear confrontation, because the bureaucrats refuse to take a firm stand except when they see their vital interests threatened.
Nixon's readiness to wipe out human civilization is such a palpable sign of insanity that some are tempted to blame the nuclear threat on his particular mental condition.
Unfortunately, Nixon's madness is wholly in keeping with the system he represents.
Thus, the Times supports the threat of blowing up the world as a tool of United States foreign policy —a position it also took when Kennedy used the same threat during the Cuban missile crisis.
Another aspect of imperialism revealed by the latest Middle East crisis was the sharpening competition between the major capitalist powers.
White House spokesman Robert McCloskey, Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger, Kissinger, and Nixon all berated their European allies for their attitude during the crisis.
Kissinger complained that he was ""disgusted"" with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and Nixon agreed that ""our European friends haven't been as cooperative as they might've been in attempting to help us work out the Middle East settlement. n They were complaining about the fact that all the NATO countries, with the exception of Portugal, refused permission to the United States to use bases on their territories for resupply of Israel.
West Germany, which had been allowing the United States to use its territory to supply military material to Israel, publicly demanded that this stop —it had been done too blatantly.
The European capitalist counties, which depend on the Middle East for about 75 percent of their oil, have no fundamental difference with the policy of maintaining Israel as an imperialist beachhead in the area against the Arab revolution.
But at the same time, in their diplomatic posture, they wanted to appear to take their distance from Washington in the latest conflict.
Europe's interests are ""rather different from the interests of the United States,"" said Lord Carrington, the British minister of defense.
The public rift in the NATO alliance was unprecedented, reflecting the growing power and independence of the European capitalists vis-a-vis Wall Street.
At the same time, American predominance was reaffirmed when Nixon took the world to the brink of nuclear war without even consulting his NATO allies.
But even without the growing ambitions of Washington's partners in NATO, the prospect in the Middle East is not for peace and stability.
Israel has made no secret of its dismay over United States pressure for even the most minimal concessions, and there is little possibility that the Arab states will regain all or even most of the land that was taken from them in 1967.
Added to these factors is the denial of the rights of the Palestinians by the U.S.-Soviet deal to recognize Israel as a permanent fixture in the Middle East.
The Zionist state, which acts as an imperialist spearhead in the Arab world, will continue its policies of aggression and expansion, and the Palestinians will continue to fight for their rights until they win.
There will be new crises in the Middle East as long as imperialism exists.
Until the socialist revolution in the United States disarms the Nixons and the Kissingers, the entire human race will be threatened with extinction again and again.
Nixon's promises of ""permanent peace"" notwithstanding, that is the real lesson of the events of the last week.
Anti-Arab Campaign Must Be Answered Editorial From The Militant The experience of the Vietnam war has led many people here in the United States to view with healthy suspicion the idea of a new military adventure.
Capitalist politicians, Zionist propagandists, and the mass media are working zealously to overcome this reluctance.
It is a campaign of racist slander and vilification directed against the Arab peoples.
The anti-Arab racism the Zionist regime breeds is the conquerors' contempt for their victims—a contempt that is used to justify oppression.
In Stein's view the Arabs are not civilized people— they are barbarians.
The Israeli oppressors and their imperialist backers, as is usual in such cases, believe their own propaganda.
That they could have taken such a myth seriously is a small indication of the imperial arrogance of the United States rulers.
But the difficulties of its client state in the Middle East have made the propagation of such racist poison more important than ever for the United States A recent television newscast was typical in this regard.
It showed Israeli troops dancing a hora, followed by Israeli wounded at a field hospital.
Israeli wounded were portrayed as human beings— Arab casualties were converted into statistics.
Involved here is conscious preparation for United States intervention in the fighting.
And there are clear indications that such an effort would be able to reach masses of Americans.
Not only is the attention of millions focused on the Middle East, but the latest Gallup poll shows that most Americans do not identify with Israel in this war.
Rallies, teach-ins, and information campaigns exposing the role of Israel in the Middle East have occurred on campuses and in communities across the country.
They serve as an example of what has to be done on a larger scale in the coming weeks.
A Socialist Answer to Zionism by George Novack ao Mideast Oil and U.S, Imperialism by Dick Roberts 70 Leon Trotsky On the Jewish Question .60 The Truth about Israel and Zionism by Nathan Weinstock and Jon Rothschild ao Roots of the Mideast War Anthology +9 Socialists and the Fight Against Anti-Semitism An Answer to the B'nai B'rith AntiDefamation League by Peter Seidman .60 Write for a free catalog of books and pamphlets.
