Visible on deck are crates containing the fuselages of Il-28 Beagle bombers being returned to the Soviet Union from Cuba.
United States Navy photo When the sun rose over the Eastern Time Zone on Oct., 1962, the events that would almost cause a nuclear war that day were already happening.
Rudolf Anderson, a U-2 pilot from the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing , was launching on an overflight mission over Cuba.
Chuck Maultsby, was headed to the North Pole to take air samples to monitor Soviet nuclear tests.
And in the Caribbean Sea, an Anti-Submarine Warfare group was hounding the submarines of the Soviet 69th Torpedo Submarine Brigade in a vicious “hold down” engagement designed to drive the boats to the surface.
Before the end of what became known as “Black Saturday,” they would combine to drive the Soviet Union and United States to within seconds of multiple nuclear weapons releases, and global nuclear war.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum photo When the EXCOM meeting convened that Saturday, the participants were shocked to find another settlement offer letter from Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, which had arrived overnight.
Worded more toughly than the “first note,” the “second note” had the added demand that the United States withdraw their SM-78 Jupiter ballistic missiles based in Turkey.
The EXCOM meeting discussion that morning went distinctly “sideways,” with the participants openly angry at the sudden additional Soviet demand to reach a settlement.
Some EXCOM members even suggested the possibility of an overnight coup by Kremlin hardliners against Khrushchev.
This confusion was swept aside at midday, when news about the U-2 missions of Majors Anderson and Maultsby came in.
Anderson’s U-2 mission had begun normally, as he coasted in from the north near the Port of Banes in eastern Cuba.
On the ground though, Soviet leaders were monitoring his flight, and believed it to be in preparation for the airstrikes they were expecting shortly.
They ordered the V-75/SA-2 Guideline Surface-to-Air Missile site at Banes to fire, and Anderson’s U-2 was destroyed, the major probably killed instantly.
Immediately, the United States military and intelligence leadership wanted to retaliate and destroy the Banes SAM site, though the president and other EXCOM members wanted to confirm the facts of what had happened.
At the same time, they were also assessing what had been reported to them about Chuck Maultsby’s U-2 air-sampling mission to the North Pole.
Navigation at extreme latitudes can go wrong easily, since every direction is south, and Maultsby accidently tracked west of his planned route home and into eastern Siberia.
However, the Soviet Far Eastern Military Command launched a pair of MG-19 Farmer interceptors to shoot down the intruding spy plane.
In response, the Alaska Air Defense Command launched a pair of F-102 Delta Dagger interceptors to protect Maultsby’s U-2.
Aboard each F-102 were 3 or 4 GAR-11/AIM-26 Falcon air-to-air missiles , at least one of which on each aircraft was armed with a W54 nuclear warhead.
The F-102s were within seconds of launching a salvo of the nuclear-tipped AAMs when word arrived that the U-2 had re-entered United States airspace, and the MiG-19s had turned for home.
United States Air Force photo When Kennedy received word of what had happened during Maultsby’s U-2 mission, he was both angry and worried.
Across the globe, from Siberia to Berlin to the Caribbean Sea, American and Soviet forces were “bumping” into each other, with deadly consequences.
Attorney General Robert F “Bobby” Kennedy was not only President Kennedy’s top law enforcement officer, but also his defacto consigliore, and in addition was running several back channel contacts with the Soviets.
One of these was Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin, with whom Bobby had developed a close friendship and more than a little trust.
With that in mind, President Kennedy decided to send Bobby to meet with Dobrynin for one last try at negotiating a peaceful end of the crisis.
As Kennedy and the White House staff prepared Bobby for his meeting that evening, the last and potentially worst events of “Black Saturday” were playing out in the tropical waters of the Sargasso Sea northeast of Cuba.
There, three Soviet Project 641/Foxtrot-class diesel-electric boats of the 69th Torpedo Submarine Brigade were being “held down” by destroyers and ASW aircraft.
This included use of so-called “practice depth charges” , and extremely aggressive ship handling by the United States destroyers.
Eventually, all three of the boats of the 69th were forced to surface, but one of them almost started World War III in the process.
The United States Navy shadows Soviet submarine B-59 commanded by Capt.
Valentin Grigorievitch Savitsky when it surfaced after being held down for many hours by American destroyers and aircraft, Oct., 1962.
National Archives photo The meeting between Bobby Kennedy and Dobrynin that evening took place in the attorney general’s office in the Justice Department Building.
Kennedy quickly laid out the situation to Dobrynin, including the fact that American airstrikes on Cuba, followed by an invasion, would begin in just over 36 hours if a settlement was not reached and agreed to by both sides.
Kennedy then indicated a United States willingness to settle the crisis based upon the various diplomatic notes and back-channel exchanges of the past few days.
When Dobrynin brought up the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, Kennedy indicated that those weapons could be removed in 4 to 5 months, as long as the Soviets did not link it to the Soviet missile withdrawal from Cuba.
Realizing that there was little time to act, Dobrynin cabled Kennedy’s offer directly to Khrushchev, who received it in the early hours of Sunday, Oct., Moscow time.
Soviet submarine B-59 close-up with its Soviet crew visible, taken by United States Navy photographers, circa Oct.-29, 1962.
National Archives photo Despite President Kennedy ordering a stand down of the air and invasion forces until the withdrawal of the Soviet ballistic missiles could be verified, the DEFCON-2 alert was continued until mid-November.
Meanwhile, the Soviets crated up their R-12/SS-4 Sandal ballistic missiles, loaded them as deck cargo and sailed home with American reconnaissance planes tracking them the entire way.
Overall, the withdrawal of the Anadyr force from Cuba proceeded with little public drama, though the United States had to press the USSR on removing the Il-28 Beagle bombers due to their capability to deliver nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev had his own “mini-crisis” Fidel Castro, when the Cuban leaded demanded that the Soviets leave behind their stockpile of tactical nuclear weapons, which they refused to do.
In the end, the Soviets left behind most of the conventionally armed weapons, like the V-75/SA-2 SAMs and MiG-21 interceptors, along with elements of one of the four Motor Rife Regiments they had deployed to Cuba.
From this failure came the first “hot line” in 1963, a secure teletype/text system, and an upgraded version that remains in place today.
Kennedy and Khrushchev met only once at the volatile Vienna Summit in 1961.
The Cold War saw long periods with little or no personal contact between United States and Soviet leaders, usually increasing tensions and causing a crisis.
A reconnaissance photo taken by an RF-101 of the 363rd Tactical Reconnaissance Wing over Port Casilda, Cuba, Nov., 1962.
The RF-101, whose shadow is visible, was verifying the departure of Soviet nuclear weapons from Cuba.
The two near-releases on Oct. badly shook leaders on both sides of the crisis, resulting in Permissive Action Links, known as PALS, along with better procedures to ensure such incidents never happened again.
The “bumping” by United States and Soviet armed forces on Oct. was a natural result of these conditions, even among members of Kennedy and Khrushchev’s senior advisors, and in the end drove the need for a quick settlement on “Black Saturday” before someone made a really big mistake.
Unfortunately, neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev were able to do much with the lessons of the crisis, because less than two years later both were gone from the world scene.
Tweet Facebook Comments Back to Top Sidebar googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); Popular Articles Lt.
The World Catches Jazz Fever, Compliments of the United States Army Veterans Health Administration 75 Years: A Legacy of Service.
Armed Services Blood Program Urges Donors to Step Up Advertise with us Get Our Newsletter Email Address Newsletter and Magazine Selection DefenseMediaNetwork.com Newsletter Coast Guard Outlook Research and Development Outlook SpecOps Outlook Veterans Affairs and Military Medicine Outlook Contact Us Terms & Conditions © 2022 Defense Media Network.
