Harrod, will explore the patterns of production affecting the life chances of the ""unprotecMuch has been written about the Cuban ted"" and the more ""established"" workers, missile crisis—too much, some might argue, for respectively. despite its role as a turning point in the evoluProduction, Power, and World Order is a tion of the U.S.-Soviet global rivalry, it was a work of vast learning, analytic rigor, and clarunique confrontation between the nuclear ity of purpose.
Moreover, there were many mentation and hyperspecialization, skillfully other severe and important crises since World crossing the boundaries of political economy, War II, some with the United States and the USSR as international relations, industrial relations, direct adversaries, notably the crises over Bercomparative politics, and social and political lin between 1948 and 1961 and others with thought.
Readers undoubtedly will find much more regional significance, such as the 1967 Six in the book that provokes critical reflection, D,ay War and the 1973 Yom Kippur War in the whether it be Cox's clearly presented sympathy Middle East, the 1962 Sino-Indian Border War, for the plight of labor and radical social change and the Angola crisis in 1975-76.
Affairs, marks the twenty-fifth anniversary For all the concern with the state and its relawith a thoughful analysis of the lessons of the tive autonomy, I discerned a persistent ambimissile crisis.
Although this slender volume guity and reductionism about the nature of contains much that is familiar to students of specifically political activity and institutions. ""the most intensive, dangerous and climactic Liberalism, we are told, had only ""a circumcrisis of the cold war"" , it is a valuable stantial connection with political pluralism and contribution at several levels. parliamentary government in the British case.
First, Garthoff offers fresh insights into the Regimes in other countries proved capable of Soviet decision process.
Second, by emphasizachieving the same balance between economy ing the ""disjunction in perceptions of reality . . . , and politics under authoritarian auspices.
These sources seem a flimsy basis for infer""offensive"" weapons other than the missiles, ring such far-reaching lessons.
Edited by Joseph amine the peak or most intense phase, the Richard Goldman.
There is much solve to agree on what became the nonproliferhere to learn and to argue about; for instance, ation and SALT agreements years later; no the comment by Holland and Hoover, 'The crisis over Berlin in more than two decades; myth that national security is crafted and apand the absence of a United States threat to invade plied in some uniquely and distinctly rational Cuba.
The variant assesssile crisis led to a basic shift in Soviet policy ments of the essential characteristics and retowards the West, apart from Khrushchev's quirements of United States national security, from downfall in 1964.
