The exhibition, coming on the 50th anniversary of that historic time, opens October 12, 2012, in the Lawrence F O’Brien Gallery of the National Archives Building and will run through February 3, 2013.
It then travels to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston, where it opens April 12 and runs through November 11, 2013.
It is made possible in part by the Foundation for the National Archives, the John F Kennedy Library Foundation, and the generous support of Lead Sponsor AT&T with special recognition to the Lawrence F O'Brien Family.
This video is in the public domain and not subject to any copyright restrictions.
Early in the Fall of 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of a nuclear strike force in Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States—with missiles that could reach most major United States cities in less than five minutes.
President Kennedy emphatically stated that the missiles would not be tolerated, and insisted on their removal.
The exhibit shows Kennedy and his advisers in the throes of deliberation during 13 agonizing days in October 1962, as the United States and the then-Soviet Union stood on the brink of nuclear war.
The peaceful resolution of the crisis with the Soviets is considered to be one of Kennedy’s greatest achievements.
Original documents, artifacts, and photographs from the National Archives and its Kennedy Library complement the tapes in a dramatic presentation that engages the visitor into this milestone 20th-century event.
With the President guiding the discussions, they argued heatedly—and passionately—over the best course of action.
Unbeknownst to almost all the participants, Kennedy had recorded those White House meetings.
The tapes comprise a valuable historical resource and a real-time glimpse back into the highest level of deliberations.
They are the raw stuff of history and capture not only the options under consideration, but also the tension, anxiety, drama, and, at times, fatigue, that permeated the talks.
Watch clips from Kennedy’s October 22, 1962, address to the nation, informing the American people of the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba.
Kennedy had a habit of jotting down words, notes, and doodles during meetings.
These papers are now official records and are preserved as part of the President’s papers.
Hear Kennedy and his advisers discuss and debate the crisis in “real time” as they view evidence of Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba and deliberate on how best to respond.
Examine satellite photographs of missile sites under construction, images that were shown to Kennedy on October 16, 1962.
Review CIA-prepared Personality Studies of Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro.
See the map of Cuba used and annotated by the President when he was first briefed by the CIA on the missiles.
The President’s annotations mark the locations where the Soviets were believed to have placed nuclear weapons.
See the original chairs used by Kennedy and Khrushchev during the 1961 Summit meeting in Vienna, Austria—the only occasion where the two leaders formally met face-to-face; they were photographed seated on these chairs at the United States Embassy in Vienna.
All Archives Shop proceeds support the National Archives Experience and educational programming at the National Archives.
