Kennedy’s Catholicism became an issue until he told a group of Protestant ministers that he accepted separation of church and state and Catholic leaders would not unduly influence him.
Debates First time debates shown on national television; determined fate of the election First debate most important Those listening on the radio gave the edge to Nixon. ii.
Only Catholic president in United States history; youngest to be elected at age 43.
Congress blocked plans for an income tax cut, federal aid to education, urban renewal, medical care the aged, and creation of Dept. of Urban Affairs 2.
Kennedy promoted $24 billion project to land an American on the moon. -In early 1960s, United States was behind the USSR in space technology 2.
RFK’s attempts at enfranchisement in the South was largely unsuccessful Only small percentage of blacks able to register due to literacy tests, poll taxes, white primaries, and grandfather clauses.
White segregationists wreaked terror on Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ; church bombings; assaults on blacks 4.
May 1961, Freedom Riders organized by CORE Rode interstate buses to verify segregation wasn’t happening.
In Alabama, Freedom Riders were arrested by police, state troopers, and National Guard; some were severely beaten.
Martin Luther King, Jr. chose Birmingham because it was the toughest challenge and a victory would break segregation throughout the South.
MLK and supporters arrested on Good Friday for marching without a permit and spent 2 weeks in jail.
Police commissioner Eugene ""Bull"" Connor used cattle prods and ordered police dogs on demonstrators and used fire hoses on children as world watched in horror.  influence of TV ii.
Local business leaders gave in and agreed to desegregate the big department stores. -King called off the demonstrations.
March on Washington, August 28, 1963 Largest protest in nation’s history thus far; 200,000 -Organized in part by A Philip Randolph (who had started March on Washington Movement during WWII) ii.
Protesters demanded support for Kennedy’s civil rights bill and for better and more jobs. iii.
Kennedy developed conventional military strategies to deal with difficult challenges around the world.
During presidential election of 1960, Kennedy had criticized Eisenhower for allowing a ""missile gap"" that favored the Soviets. -When JFK became president, he learned that the gap was actually in favor of the US; yet he continued the largest peace-time military buildup in history.
Set up Green Berets Built up nuclear arsenal for 2nd strike capability.
Early 1860, Eisenhower authorized CIA to organize, train, and arm in Central America a brigade of 1,400 Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba to overthrow Fidel Castro.
Invaders would presumably trigger a popular uprising in Cuba JFK continued the plan 2.
Kennedy publicly took full responsibility on national TV for the ill-conceived mission. -Privately Kennedy blamed the CIA for faulty information 4.
Established in 1961, sent young volunteers to third world countries for locally sponsored projects to improve economic stagnation, poor health and education.
Khrushchev delivered new ultimatum on Berlin; saw United States weakness in Bay of Pigs USSR would give Berlin to East Germany, stripping western access to Berlin.
USSR announced increase in defense; Kennedy asked for a $3. billion increase.
East Germans built wall separating West Berlin from the rest of Berlin and East Germany almost overnight. -Purpose: Stem the flow of 100,000 people leaving East Berlin 5.
Khrushchev began placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, just 90+ miles off Florida coast in October 1962.
Soviets intended to use weapons to force United States into backing down on Berlin, Cuba, and other troubled areas.
Oct., United States aerial photographs revealed Russians were secretly and speedily installing nuclear missiles.
Warning of missile attack would shrink from 30 to 2 minutes United States unaware that tactical nuclear missiles were also in Cuba. -Designed to destroy invading armies.
Soviets also had nuclear cruise missiles to destroy United States Navy 3.
Kennedy also stated any attack by Cuba on United States or any other Latin American country would result in a full retaliatory response on the Soviet Union. -Organization of American States gave Kennedy full support.
Kennedy rejected ""surgical"" bombing strikes against missile sites since no guarantee that all missiles would be hit.
Also rejected a United States invasion of Cuba Unbeknownst to Kennedy, Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba could have destroyed invading American army. ii.
Kennedy announcement on national TV; Americans shocked All United States forces put on full alert.
For a week, world watched as the Soviet ship carrying missiles steamed toward Cuba.
October 26, Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles if United States removed its missiles from Turkey and vowed not to attack Cuba.
Assassination of JFK A November 22, 1963, Kennedy assassinated in Dallas while on a southern tour to drum up support for his policies -Vice President Lyndon Johnson became president B Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin arrested shortly thereafter -Oswald killed a few days later by Jack Ruby, a Mafia member C Warren Commission, ordered by Johnson, report stated that Oswald was the lone assassin. -""Magic bullet theory"" stated that one single bullet went through Kennedy’s back, out his neck, and inflicted several wounds to Texas Governor Connolly.
D A congressional investigation in the 1970s opened the door to the possibility of a second gunman; this would mean a conspiracy  Conspiracy theorists questioned the magic bullet, Oswald’s alleged connections with Moscow, and mysteries surrounding Kennedy’s autopsy.
