October 2012<!-/* ----------------------------------------------Blogger Template Style Name: Rounders 3 Date: 27 Feb 2004 Updated by: Blogger Team ----------------------------------------------*/ body { background:#123; margin:0; text-align:center; line-height: 1.5em; font: x-small Trebuchet MS, Verdana, Arial, Sans-serif; color:#333333; font-size/* */:/**/small; font-size: /**/small; } /* Page Structure ----------------------------------------------*/ /* The images which help create rounded corners depend on the following widths and measurements.
Wednesday, October 31, 2012 Midnight and the Great Pumpkin Midnight will be celebrating his second Halloween with us this year.
He is eagerly awaiting the arrival of the neighborhood children, dressed as ghosts and goblins.
He’s not really sure what it’s all about; and I think all the commotion kind of scares him a bit; but he does take an active interest in the proceedings.
He will be found; I’m sure; waiting in the bushes, alternately leaping out to frighten someone, or just to check them out.
And, when all the tricksters have retreated from the street, you will find him patiently awaiting the arrival of the Great Pumpkin; who will undoubtedly treat him to a can of salmon as a reward for being so brave on a night when black cats generally make themselves scarce.
Labels: All Souls Day, Black Cats, Cats, Charlie Brown, Ghosts, Goblins, Halloween.
The Great Pumpkin, Midnight, Satan, Trick or Treat Tuesday, October 30, 2012 ""The Color of War"" by James Campbell By May of 1944 the war in the Pacific had gone from the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor; in December of 1941; to a chain of island invasions, which forced the Japanese to adopt a defensive posture in the face of an ever tightening noose as our Navy and Marines advanced towards Japan itself.
But, between that time, and our later victory, 2 events would occur; one, involving African-American sailors would be held up as an immediate example of the freedom lacking here at home, even as we fought for it overseas; while the other event, the explosion of several fully laden LST’s in the West Loch of Pearl Harbor, would be hushed up for 16 years.
On May 21st, 1944 an explosion occurred aboard LST-353, igniting all of its cargo of ammunition, bombs and fuel.
The burning shrapnel landed on other fully loaded LST’s causing them to explode as well.
Hundreds of lives were lost, along with thousands of tons of supplies bound for Saipan.
The continued spread of the disaster actually caused our Navy to sink some of the other vessels before those, too, caught fire.
The battle for Saipan, which would occur on July 18th, was the last major stepping stone in our conquest of the Pacific.
In fact, that battle was so decisive a victory for the United States that Tojo; and his entire cabinet; resigned the following day.
Against this backdrop, author James Campbell has juxtaposed the disaster which occurred at Port Chicago, located just 25 miles from San Francisco, as an example of how we were fighting not only Germany and Japan in this war; we were also fighting ourselves here at home.
That disaster; on the same day as the Marines were taking Saipan; was the direct result of an Armed Forces which was still racially segregated even as we fought for freedom abroad.
And, since the crews loading the ammunition ships were all African-American, someone was going to pay for the accident, even as the events in Hawaii just 8 weeks earlier were being hushed up.
The result of the Port Chicago disaster was the largest mutiny trial in the history of the Armed Forces, as the African-American sailors refused; rightfully so; to resume their work.
As would be shown at their trial, these men had been working without any of the specified safety measures outlined in any of the manuals concerning the loading of explosives.
Inert explosives are dangerous enough to handle; as are fuses; which are never to be stored in the same space as the explosives.
That is, unless you were working at Port Chicago, where the rules simply didn’t apply.
The author follows the lives of several of the men charged with Mutiny; a crime punishable by death; from the days prior to their enlistments, and on through the events at Port Chicago.
His coverage of the Court Martial; at which future Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall would act as their Chief Counsel, having been supplied by the NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund; is one of the most fascinating portions of the book.
Charged with Mutiny and facing the Death Penalty, these 50 men, along with their Defense Team, would break new ground in the courtroom, and that victory would ultimately be a part of a greater one, when President Truman finally desegregated the military in 1947.
The story of the Court of Inquiry is equally as fascinating, as its conclusions should have exonerated the men altogether.
All of this is played out against the Battle of Saipan, being fought by primarily white troops, who were winning the war by using the very supplies which were shipped to them via the men loading them at Port Chicago.
The vast difference in their experiences, while ostensibly fighting for the same cause, makes for a remarkable contrast.
It will stand as a true and accurate account of not only the Port Chicago Incident, but also as a reminder of a time when fighting for freedom didn’t always guarantee freedom here at home.
And, if the only thing new is the history you don’t know, then this book may also stand as a warning about repeating some of the mistakes of our past.
Through the magic of you tube I am able to go back and walk the streets, getting a bit of a feel for what is going on there.
I'm hoping power stays on for everyone, but pulling especially hard for zip code 11229 where this video was shot.
Located less than 1 mile from Sheepshead Bay and Brighton Beach, the area was on the lip of the mandatory evacuation zones.
The interaction between the musical artists; who can hear in their heads the sound they are attempting to create; and the producers/engineers, who are attempting to understand the artists creative concepts can sometimes be fraught with peril.
Witness Phil Spector’s famous shooting of a pistol while working; for the last time; with John Lennon, over some difference of opinion in the studio.
So, I was delighted to run across a piece of video, on You Tube of course, of Janis Joplin with Big Brother and the Holding Company, recording “Summertime” for their upcoming album “Cheap Thrills”, which would be released in the late summer of 1968.
The video; which was too large for the video player here, according to blogspot; runs a little over 10 minutes.
In the video, Janis is clearly in control, while at the same time displaying a unique quality to compromise with both the band and the engineer/producer John Simon.
Manager Albert Grossman was in agreement with Mr Simon, and pressured the band to change some of their arrangements on several songs.
Their reaction to this is evident in the video, as they attempt to talk music with a technician and businessman.
As the video begins, the band is rehearsing, sounding like the best garage band on earth, as Janis enters the studio dancing.
This would be their first album for Columbia, and the band is clearly excited.
The album would not be released until late that summer/ early fall, and so the band worked on the record on their off days.
The “Lenny” who Janis refers to in her story about the “bust” in Vancouver is Henry McCullough, who would later play with “Wings” and Paul McCartney.
Janis is clearly pissed about the whole incident, particularly the way in which “Lenny” was being used by his record company, as well as his band mates and manager.
The band is summoned into the control room to listen to the playback, and a very technical discussion begins between the band members and Mr Simon, who is clearly not in touch with the vision the group has for the song.
This is one of the most interesting parts of the video, as the band shifts, seamlessly, between the music and some gossip about a party the night before.
It seems that James Gurley, the group’s guitarist, had put on quite a load the night before, and his band mates just can’t resist ribbing him about it.
The cover for the album was supposed to be a black and white photo of Janis, alone.
His working motto was always to conquer and divide the artists with whom he worked.
But, Janis would have none of it, opting instead for the brilliant cover art of cartoonist Robert Crumb, who was a staple of the psychedelic scene in San Francisco, where the band was based.
He had already done several posters advertising gigs for most of the bands in San Francisco at the time, including Big Brother’s shows at the Avalon Ballroom.
And, even that version was altered, with James Gurley overdubbing a new intro.
Originally named “Sex, Dope and Cheap Thrills”, Columbia nixed the title, allowing the band to retain only the “Cheap Thrills” portion.
The biggest hit on the album was “Piece of My Heart”, which went on to become a classic of the era.
By October 15th the album had already surpassed $1 million dollars in sales.
The cover is in excellent condition, and I have been thinking of framing it as a way to capture a bit of the past.
The earlier shows, from the first 3 seasons, contain all that you need to know about living in harmony with your fellow man.
Although not overtly religious, these shows are like sermons, espousing a hard work ethic along with self-reliance and responsibility.
Andy Taylor, the Sheriff of Mayberry, does all he can to instill these values into his son, Opie, who grew up to be the great film director Ron Howard.
But sometimes even Andy speaks out of turn, and without thinking, winds up with his foot in his mouth, just like a politician.
In this episode from the 3rd season, Opie is having a problem with his new teacher, Ms.
When Sheriff Taylor agrees with him that history is unimportant, he unknowingly sets off a rebellion in Ms.
Crump confronts Sheriff Taylor, he is at once speechless, and slightly smitten with her.
Now, all he has to do is undo the damage he has done, while still saving face with his son and the other boys.
And let’s not forget his need to repair his reputation with Opie’s teacher, Ms.
Labels: Andy Discovers America, Andy Griffith Show, Barney Fife, Don Knotts, Helen, Miss Crump, Old TV Shows, Opie, Ron Howard, Sitcoms, Television Saturday, October 27, 2012 ""Blow me Down"" with Popeye the Sailor This old Popeye cartoon was released 79 years ago today in 1933.
It is one of the earlier Popeye cartoons, in black and white, with the animation done by Max and Dave Fleischer associates Willard Bowsky and William Sturm.
When Popeye arrives at a town on the coast of Mexico he wants nothing more than to see his beloved Olive Oyl, who is working at a bar.
When Popeye arrives, with a flower for Olive, he is quickly drawn into a game of one-upmanship with local bandit Bluto.
Things escalate to the point where Bluto calls in all of the towns’ thieves and roughnecks to finish Popeye off while he goes upstairs to “visit” with Olive.
But Popeye, after finishing off a can of spinach and soundly trouncing his foes, is quick to come to her rescue; just as he would continue to do for so many years after.
Apparently there is a book about “Bummy” Davis; who happens to be related to Mr Slater; titled “Bummy Davis vs.
Since the real story is always what intrigues me the most, I decided to go to Wikipedia and see what I could learn about him.Born Al Davis, in Brownsville in 1920, “Bummy” was raised by his mother and father, who owned a candy store in the neighborhood, which was then one of the toughest sections of Brooklyn.
According Wikipedia he was employed by his father as a lookout, hiding the fact that his father sold bootleg whiskey during the days of prohibition.
This was “Bummy’s” introduction to the world which lay beyond his own doorstep, and ultimately into contact with the life which would someday claim his own at the age of 25.
Brownsville was known as the home turf of Murder, Inc., and Al’s two older brothers worked as collectors for them.
Al, himself, was not part of that lifestyle, and is credited with having once stood up to Abe Reles, the man who would someday become famous for either falling; or being thrown from; the window of the Half Moon Hotel in Coney Island, where he was sequestered as a witness against Murder, Inc.
It is widely believed that he was thrown from the hotel’s 4th floor by the police assigned to protect him.
He was raised in a typical Jewish home of the time, with his mother referring to him as ""Vroomeleh,"" which is a play on his middle name; Avrum; or Abraham.
The nickname “Bummy” was suggested by his manager when Al was a teenager.
For obvious reasons, young Al was not altogether happy with his new moniker, but for the sake of drawing larger crowds to his fights, he accepted it.
By the close of 1939 he would go on to defeat Tippy Larkin, dispatching him with a mighty left hook in the fifth round.
That left hook was his trademark, and enabled him to amass the impressive record of 66 wins and 47 knockouts, with only 10 losses and 4 draws.
He is still considered one of the greatest punchers of all time for his weight and class.
His penchant for anger caused him to lose a bout with Lightweight Champion Lou Ambers in 1940.
Also that year, he fought Fritzie Zivic, who knocked “Bummy” down in the first round, and continued to harass him in the 2nd round, gouging his eye with a thumb.
By July of 1941, “Bummy” had been re-instated by the Boxing Commission and fought a rematch with Zivic, who scored a TKO against him in the 10th round.
For the next 4 years “Bummy” continued to fight in the ring, with his last major victory being won in February of 1944 when he defeated Hall of Famer Bob Montgomery, whom he knocked out in the 1st round.
After that it was kind of downhill for him, and he lost to former Champ Beau Jack in March, and went on to be defeated by another former title holder, Henry Armstrong, in June of that same year.
His short, but storied, career seemed to be coming to a close when he lost to future Champ Rocky Graziano in May 1945, when Graziano scored a TKO in the 4th round.
In November of that same year, ""Bummy"" was enjoying an evening in Dudy's, a local bar which he had bought a few years earlier and just sold.
While bleeding from his wounds he chased the other 3 men, who shot him a fourth, and fatal, time.
The date was November 22nd, 1945, and ""Bummy"" Davis was only 25 years old.For a great article about ""Bummy"" Davis, here is a link; provided by Mr Slater; to a Sports Illustrated article about Mr Davis.
Murder Inc., Foot in the Bucket, Glen Slater, Jewish Boxers, Mafia, Organized Crime and Sports, Ron Ross Thursday, October 25, 2012 ""Land of Islam"" Morris J Kandel Browsing the internet can be like taking a tour around the world.
I can sit here and visit places I have never seen, or re-visit the places I have.
And; as an added bonus attraction; I can go back in time to places; both seen and unseen; which, for various reasons, intrigue me.
It reminds me of my own visit there in the 1970’s, as well as capturing the flavor of the film “Casablanca”, one of my all-time favorite.
As the announcer takes us on a tour of the city, it is interesting to note the many similarities still in evidence in the 21st century world in which we live today.
Everywhere on the planet, people still struggle to eat, or seek medical care and a place to live.
In many parts of the world, little has changed since this film was made almost 70 years ago.
These videos are valuable tools in helping to understand the world around us.
Looking at them we can see the similarities of the things we share; as well as the differences which divide us.
Surprisingly; when you break it all down; there are more basic similarities than there are superficial differences.
Apparently there are quite a number of these films available on You Tube.
There are brief descriptions of the films at the bottom of all the postings, including how to get in touch with the owners for licensing of the film for commercial use.
Labels: 1930's, Africa, Casablanca, Ideal Films, Intique, Islam, Land of Islam, Morocco, Snake Charmers, Souks, Traditions, Travelouges Wednesday, October 24, 2012 ""The Fish That Ate the Whale"" by Rich Cohen I had never heard of Samuel Zemurray until I picked up this book.
As usual, I chose the book by its cover; which is something I was told never to do, and have done since.
From his first encounter with the fruit sometime around 1893 in Selma, Alabama.
Samuel, like most immigrants from Eastern Europe at the time, looked at everything in a different light than others.
Sam Zemurray is the man who popularized the banana, taking it from the small marketplaces of the southern ports of America, all the way into every grocery store in the nation.
By the time Mr Zemurray was through, bananas were celebrated in song, and had become a staple of American cuisine.
In this unusual biography of both the man and the banana, author Rich Cohen has given us both an education in the history of the banana in America, as well as a chronicle of the United Fruit Company.
This is a story of American capitalism; in a business started by an immigrant; and the effects his success had on those less fortunate than he in the countries from which he derived his that good fortune.
From his most humble beginning as a fruit peddler, with one cart of bananas, Mr Zemurray rose to become a tycoon.
Along the way he wrestled with Unions, politicians, foreign governments, and even the CIA, as he built an empire which proved capable of starting wars and influencing politics.
Just as my great grandfather Max Henkin, who hailed from Russia; and is shown here next to a palm tree; Zemurray was fascinated with this healthy and exotic fruit.
In his own turn, the author does everything within his power to convey this fascination to the reader.
He also manages to let us understand how he stayed at the top of his industry for 40 years.Also of interest is the bit of education about the industry which the author manages to squeeze into the narrative.
He ably explains the difference between a “stem”, which holds one hundred “bunches” of 9 “hands”; which in turn comprise 15 “fingers”, or bananas each.
This called forth the image of stevedores in tropical ports unloading the bananas by hand; shouldering several hundred pounds at a time; with the danger of scorpions and spiders lurking within each bunch unloaded.
This book covers everything from bananas to foreign coups in “banana republics, as well as corporate and labor disputes.
This is a real life tale worthy of a good screenplay; and your time will not be misspent in reading Rich Cohen’s entertaining; and educational; biography of a highly unusual individual.
Simply put; that means that no-one can compel you to tell them for whom you have cast your vote.
It prevents “gridlock” amongst the populace, and thus prevents “we the people” from coming to loggerheads with one another, thereby giving all power to the elected officials who will them only represent about half of the nation’s views, and needs.
Each election cycle reveals a further split; right down the middle; of our national spirit.
The repercussions of this are that there is a lack of civil discourse in the land.
There is a stagnation of solutions to the many problems which we all face, while there is a proliferation of propaganda from both sides, in a further effort to divide us; to conquer us; to keep us powerless to effect any change.
And, with the aid of the 24/7 news cycle; as well as the blogosphere; they seem to be doing a damn good job of it, too.
Let’s all take a step back and breathe a bit before pulling that lever, punching the card, or marking your ballot.
But, most importantly; let this election be a lesson to us in what not to expect of our elected officials.
We do not expect to spend the majority of the next 4 years with a partisan, obstructionist Congress, or Senate.
As usual, I urge you all to wait until after the election and then phone, e-mail, or fax your concerns for America to your Congressional Representative, as well as your Senators.
Let them know that you hold them responsible for both the successes; and failures; of the 4 years.
Remember, when you pull that lever on Election Day, you are hiring; or retaining; an employee.
That employee has benefits which the average American only dreams of these days.
Health Care, paid for by you; a very generous Retirement system, paid for by you; and all the tax loopholes necessary to wash clean the honorariums which they receive in addition to the salary of about $180,000; plus expenses; all at a time when you yourself may be struggling to find employment, or keep your home.
So, instead of screaming at one another, let’s be quiet for the next 2 weeks and ponder one of the most important decisions which we, the people, will probably ever be called upon to make in our lifetimes.
And when all is said and done; regardless of who wins the election; we, the people are all we really have to count upon.
Over the years the speech has been whittled down to about 3 minutes in which the President addresses the main point of our Quarantine of Cuba until the Soviets agreed to the removal of those missles.
I have decided to post both the complete video of the speech; which runs a bit over 18 minutes; along with the text of the speech.
At the end of that I have also posted the actual text of the Proclamation which authorized the blockade under the tenet of the Monroe Doctrine.
Good evening my fellow Citizens, This Government, as promised, has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba.
Any vessel or craft which fails or refuses to respond to or comply with directions shall be subjected to being taken into custody.
Any vessel or craft which is believed en route to Cuba and may be carrying prohibited material or may itself constitute such material shall, wherever possible, be directed to proceed to another destination of its own choice and shall be taken Into custody if it fails or refuses to obey such directions.
In carrying out this order, force shall not be used except in case of failure or refusal to comply with directions, or with regulations or directives of the Secretary of Defense issued hereunder, after reasonable efforts have been made to communicate them to the vessel or craft, or in case of self-defense. k any case, force shall be used only to the extent necessary.
His stellar performance in “The Grapes of Wrath”; in which he plays a migrant worker; is indicative of the many roles he would play in the future.
In “The Wrong Man” he plays an ordinary working stiff who is falsely accused of a crime he did not commit.
Even in the midst of the McCarthy Era witch hunts he defied the system, making “12 Angry Men” at a time when questioning anything was suspect.
So, it is no surprise that he would be the star of William Wellman’s screen adaptation of “The Ox Bow Incident”, which deals with vigilante justice.What makes this film so daring is that it was filmed and released just after the United States entered the Second World War, and Japanese-Americans were being interred in detention camps, even as their sons were fighting in our armed forces for freedom.
When Gil Carter, played by Henry Fonda, rides into a town plagued by cattle rustling, he and his sidekick Art Croft, played by Harry Morgan, become caught up in a lynching of 3 rustlers suspected of murder the town’s most popular resident.
The Sheriff is out of town and the Judge is too timid to control the mob.
Only Gil and Art, along with the son of the local Militia’s Major, and an old Negro man, are willing to question the execution without trial.
The evidence is circumstantial at best, but the dead man must be avenged at all costs.
As the men proudly head back to town the Sheriff arrives at the scene, informing them that he has captured the real killer.
When he hears what the men have done in his absence he is disgusted and heads back to town, vowing that each and every man involved in the unlawful mob action will be prosecuted.
The men head back to town and contemplate what they have done while awaiting their own trials for murder.
Gil and Art ride out of town, left to wonder about the human condition, and what drives men to do what they do.
This was only one of many daring scripts which Mr Fonda was willing to tackle during trying times.
It is also what sets him apart from so many other actors in his ability to truly portray the common man, and all of the problems encountered when you are willing to stand up for what you believe to be right.
Labels: Grapes of Wrath, Henry Fonda, Japanese Interment Camps, McCarthy Era, Movies, The Ox Bow Incident, Twelve Angry men, Vigilante Justice, William Wellman Saturday, October 20, 2012 ""Cartoons Ain't Human"" with Popeye the Sailor In this 1943 release Popeye tries his hand at drawing a cartoon for his nephews.
Quickly looking about him he comes up with a few, only to have one of his better ideas “censored” by a human hand.
This cartoon was made during the war, and there are a few references in it that may puzzle the viewer who is not acquainted with the history of World War Two on the home front here in the United States.
All in all, we had it pretty good; at least that’s what I have been told.
Another unusual approach to this cartoon; which was not produced or directed by Max or Dave Fleischer; is that Popeye draws himself, and the other cast members of his cartoon, as stick figures.
While showing the cartoon to his nephews, Popeye acts as a one man band, playing everything imaginable, creating a soundtrack as wild as the cartoon he has drawn.
In it, he plays himself, working for Newt’s Zoot Suits, carrying a sandwich board style sign to advertise Newt’s Suits.
Meantime, back at home, Olive is being accosted by the evil landlord, complete with mustache, who wants the rent, or Olive.
The only difference is that this time it’s just a cartoon inside a cartoon; so you don’t have to worry about how it all works out.
Directed by Seymour Kneitel, and animated by Orestes Calpini and Otto Feuer, this may be one of the most unusual Popeye cartoons ever.
Labels: Aliyah, Classic Cartoons, Grandkids, Julia, Molly, Saturday Morning Toons, Trinity Friday, October 19, 2012 Surrender at Yorktown 1781 Unlike Vietnam; where we won just about every battle, but lost the war; the American Revolution was the complete opposite.
We managed to lose almost every battle, and still win the War for Independence.
When people fight; on their own soil; for their own freedom; it is virtually impossible to beat them.
John Trumbull’s painting “Surrender at Yorktown” epitomizes the strength inherent in a just cause.
Had the Americans lost the war, England would have faced a hostile colony for centuries; much in the same way that Indo-China was a “thorn in the side” to the Koreans, French and eventually the Americans who tried to rule it.
The subject of this post is the surrender of the British at Yorktown in 1781.
In spite of a lack of adequate provisions, George Washington was able to lead the Continental Army to a decisive victory over the British forces for the simple reason that they were fighting on “home turf”, for their families as well as their own futures.
In September, Lord Cornwallis had been reinforced with about 7,000 new troops in a last ditch effort to stamp out the revolutionaries.
He took these troops to Yorktown, where he established a fort, hoping for relief from the British Navy, which never arrived.
Washington deployed more troops and artillery, with the result that by October; with the help of the French fleet, under the command of Admiral Compte de Grasse; Cornwallis found himself caught between the land forces of the Continental Army, and the French Navy; which had come to our aid through the efforts of Benjamin Franklin in Paris.
Those vessels repelled the British fleet, keeping them from rescuing Lord Cornwallis and his men.
The British, and the Germans fighting with them, were eventually forced from their fort under threat of further bombardment, and instructed to bring their colors with them.
The British military band played ""The World Turned Upside Down""; a popular song of the era; as a way of displaying their disbelief in their loss to the colonies.
Cornwallis elected to remain indoors, rather than face his adversary in defeat.
Even his second in command, General O’Hara, tried to surrender to the French rather than to the Americans, but he was rebuffed in this effort, leaving him no choice but to surrender to the Continental Army, thus recognizing the new nation it represented.
This was the reason which compelled General Washington in his decision to have General O’Hara surrender his sword to General Lincoln instead of himself.
So, the painting of the surrender is not exactly what many Americans think of it as being.
That is not General Washington mounted on his horse accepting the sword of surrender.
It is, rather, General Benjamin Lincoln who is extending his right hand toward that sword, which is not carried by Lord Cornwallis, but is borne by General O’Hara instead.
Depicted in Trumball’s painting, the British troops are in a line which extends into the background.
The troops on the left are the French officers, mustered under the banner of the Bourbon family.
To the right are the American officers with the flag of their new republic.
In that group are the Marquis de Lafayette and Colonel Jonathan Trumbull, who is the brother of the artist who captured it all on canvas.
General Washington is in the background, astride a brown horse, keeping an ever watchful eye on the events, just as he had guided the colonies to victory over the course of the war.
But, in spite of these proceedings, the war did not come to a formal end until sometime later, when the British and Americans signed the Treaty of Paris in 1783.
The painting itself was not completed until 1820 and hangs in the Rotunda of the capitol in Washington, D.C. today.
Labels: American Revolution, DAR, General O'Hara, Henry Pensinger, History, Independence, Paintings, Sue Pensinger, Surrender at Yorktown, Trumball, Virginia, War, Washington at Yorktown Thursday, October 18, 2012 ""Catch .44"" with Bruce Willis and Forest Whitaker In this multi-layered thriller by writer/director Aaron Harvey, he heas taken the best parts of “Pulp Fiction”; with its plot twists and shifts in sequence; and blended it with a bit of Guy Ritches’ “Snatch”; and the result is a wild, enjoyable adventure.
Bruce Willis plays “Mel”, who is a crime boss; while Forest Whitaker plays a hit man in his employ, who is masquerading as a police officer named Ronny.
The 3 women; Tes, played by Malin Akerman, and her two cohorts Kara , played by Nikki Reed, and Dawn played by Deborah Ann Woll, are also involved someway with Mel; just as Forest Whitaker is.
When Mel has the women go on an “assignment” 40 miles out of New Orleans to intercept a drug shipment and the money, something is clearly not adding up.
The film is dealt out in sequences, which all return to the fateful moment at the beginning of the film, keeping you guessing at what the real story is.
Violence and “adult” language are dealt out appropriately; though gratuitously; in this film.
This movie does not come near the level of violence of Quentin Tarentino’s “Kill Bill” series, which were way beyond belief to me.
A fantastic musical score rounds out this colorful and exciting send up of today’s action films a la “Pulp Fiction”, while doing nothing to detract from that movie.
While this is true of the time of actual confrontation, Soviet ships had been photographed with missile parts, headed for Cuba, as early as September 25th of that same year.
I was just 8 years old, but the events of that period will live with me forever.
The Soviet point of view was that if we had our Monroe Doctrine as authority to invade; or even blockade; Cuba, then they had the same authority to act in their own self-interest in their hemisphere.
What they didn’t know then, but has been divulged since, is that the Soviets already had tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba.
These weapons, which were portable, would have enabled the Cubans to wipe out any full scale invasion by the United States at the time.
It was only the resolve of President Kennedy which kept us from providing the air cover that had been promised by his predecessor, and of which the new President had not been informed.
Had he given the go-ahead on the Bay of Pigs, the Soviets would have used that as a pretext to invade West Berlin.
They either did not understand, or seemingly care about, the results which would have been precipitated by such action.
From the 15th of October until the 28th, the world seemingly stood still, as we all awaited the outcome of the unfolding events.
There was no “hot line” or “red phone” between Moscow and Washington yet.
That would only come about after the crisis was over, in an attempt to keep this type of thing from ever going so far again.
President Kennedy, along with his brother Robert, took a full week to assess the situation as if it were a chess game.
They analyzed each and every move possible, along with the outcomes these moves would provoke.
In the end they settled on the Quarantine, announcing it on the evening of October 22nd.
The photo above is of one of our Neptune aircraft buzzing a Soviet cargo ship en route to Cuba during the Missile Crisis.
In school we had daily “fallout” drills, sitting in the hallways, covering our heads with books.
While it is true that those missiles were being replaced with longer range ones based in Western Europe, the swap was so lop-sided that the full details of the deal were withheld from the American people for some time.
We were told merely that we had “won”, and that a new phone line was being installed between Moscow and Washington which would allow the leaders of the two countries to have quicker, and more direct, contact with one another.
I was going to use a portion of President Kennedy’s speech here today, but I have decided instead to post the entire 18 minute speech on the anniversary of the date on which the President delivered it.
It is one of the most vivid memories of my childhood, which is saying a lot, considering that my childhood encompassed several assassinations; including that of President Kennedy himself; and massive civil disobedience over both the War in Vietnam, as well as Civil Rights here at home.
Christie actually did disappear for a period of 11 days; and her whereabouts never explained.
She was married at the time to a Colonel Christie, who was having an affair with his secretary, one Ms.
Two years after the fictitious events in this film, the two divorced, and he married Ms.
Neele.Based solely upon that bit of gossip from the 1920’s, Kathleen Tynan penned this story almost 50 years later, creating a real life Agatha Christie mystery in the process.
Assisted in the screenplay by Arthur Hopcraft, the film is tightly woven.
Christie, and Dustin Hoffman as the sleuthing American journalist Wally Stanton, who uncovers the truth behind her disappearance, is almost palpable in the affection between the two.
The most important thing to remember when watching this film is that it is fiction, based, though it is, upon a true event.
Christie has never fully been resolved, and the story presented here could actually have been the truth.
Director Michael Apted does a great job in keeping this film on track, as well as capturing the mixture of fear; and affection; between the two main characters, as Mr Stanton first attempts to solve the mystery for personal gain, only to abandon those efforts to shield a woman he has come to deeply admire.
Labels: Agatha Christie, British Mystery, Colonel Christie, Divorce, Dustin Hoffman, Mystery Stories, Mystery Writers, The Disappearance of Agatha Christie, Vanessa Redgrave, Who dun its Monday, October 15, 2012 ""The Siege of Washington"" by John and Charles Lockwood The most fascinating thing about this book is the mystery of why the Confederacy did not immediately take possession of Washington, D.C., which would have ended the war; or at least put the South in the driver’s seat concerning a negotiated truce.
They marched off to war, thinking that they would return within months, rather than years.
In this book by authors John and Charles Lockwood, history comes alive as they explore these crucial questions, as well as the relationship his 2 key aides played during the 12 days between April 15th and April 25th, 1861; a mere 6 weeks after Lincoln had assumed the Presidency in March.
These 2 remarkable men; John Nicolay; aged 29, from Springfield, where he had worked as Lincoln’s assistant; and John Hays, aged 22, who was hired as Nicolay’s assistant in Washington; were instrumental throughout Lincoln’s Presidency.
But they were never more effective than they were in the crucial first days of the War Between the States, as the new President struggled to come to grips with the enormity of the task before him.Calling upon General Winfield Scott, the General in Chief of the nation’s Army, plans were immediately put into effect to secure the roads and railways entering the city.
Washington was; at that time, and on into my own youth; a decidedly “southern” town.
Segregation existed there openly up until the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
The threat of hostilities breaking out within the city itself was a real and constant danger that had to be dealt with.
To that end, the President called upon 75,000 Union volunteers, each of whom would serve for 3 months.
Just as the South expected to crush the North in a short while, the North fully expected the same of themselves.
California talked openly of leaving the Union, and rather than join forces with the far distant Southern states, form a Republic of her own with Oregon and the Pacific Northwest territory which would later become the state of Washington.
Added to that was the threat of the “free negro”; 4 million to be exact; who would eventually move to the Northern cities, competing with white immigrant workers for the same jobs.
Also threatening Washington was the City of Baltimore, with its own peculiar mixture of feelings concerning slavery.
The city was also home to the Union Trust Bank, which held considerable reserves for the North.
This made it imperative to hold onto Maryland, and after the events of April 18th, during which mobs in the city attacked the Union soldiers as they marched along Pratt Street, the city was under occupation for the remainder of the war.
The troops had been marching from the old train station; which stood on President Street, at the Eastern end of today’s Harborplace; to the Camden Street Station, the site of today’s Camden Yards, home to the Baltimore Orioles baseball team.
At the intersection of Charles and Pratt Streets the mob had grown to over 2,000 strong, and, armed with clubs and paving stones, attacked the troops.
In this wide ranging account, the author gives new thought to the importance of these 12 most perilous days of the war.
Until now, the most engaging story of Lincoln’s assumption of the Presidency has always been the attempted assassination which occurred before he even took office.
The author has successfully re-created the excitement; and fear; of a time when our nation was at war, and the seat of government surrounded by her enemies.
Labels: Assassinations, Charles Lockwood, Civil War, Confederacy, History, John Lockwood, Lincoln, The Siege of Washington, Union Army, Washington DC Sunday, October 14, 2012 ""The Weight"" Mavis Staples, Nick Lowe and Wilco Music is magical and can happen anywhere at any time.
This video from You Tube was filmed last December in Chicago prior to the Nick Lowe concert with Wilco and Mavis Staples, who sang this iconic song with The Band in the film “The Last Waltz” over 35 years ago.
Labels: Chicago Rehearsal 2011, Live Music, Mavis Staples, Nick Lowe, The Band, The Staple Singers, The Weight, Wilco Saturday, October 13, 2012 ""The Grasshopper and the Ants"" Silly Symphonies Silly Symphonies did some very memorable work during the 1930’s.
Some of the things they did consisted of taking the best loved classics and turning them into cartoons.
Not only did this save them time; and money; it also provided a platform from which to impart some values to the audience.
Today this would be considered to be somehow offensive, but I have always enjoyed these sort of cartoons; in much the same way as I preferred “Illustrated Classics” to the super-hero comic books of my youth.
In this cartoon, the team at Silly Symphonies takes on the old Aesop Fable of the “Grasshopper and the Ant”, giving it a few twists and making it more palpable for a young audience.
But in this cartoon, there is room for everyone as the Grasshopper learns a very valuable lesson about compassion, while picking up a work ethic in the process.
Labels: Aesop's Fables, Aliyah, Classic Cartoons, Grandkids, Illustrated Classics, Jlia, Molly, Saturday Morning Toons, Silly Symphonies, The Grasshopper and the Ant, Trinity Friday, October 12, 2012 ""One Short Night"" Grace Potter When it comes to music, we all have our private little niches which we enjoy.
When I was younger it seemed so much easier to become exposed to newer and different music than it is today.
With the advent of satellite radio, and other technologies, it has become easier to not hear a new sound which you might otherwise have been enjoying for a few years.
Although the name was lingering on the edge of my consciousness, I had never really taken the time to seek out her music.
If this were 1967 I would have already heard her music in the eclectic mix which was the signature of AM radio.
What made me seek this artist out; several years late; was a short hello to my neighbor, Linda.
She had commented that the weather didn’t look too good for an outdoor concert she was set to see that night.
When I asked who it was see was going to see, she replied Grace Potter.
This was the third video I watched, and immediately grabbed my guitar to try and figure it all out.
Halfway through the video, the scene shifts to the live concert seamlessly.
The real difference in the two films is not so much the location of the story; a mountain pass in South America versus an island in the Caribbean; but the actors themselves.
In this film, Cary Grant plays cynical Geoff Carter, the leader of a group of cargo planes located in the jungles of South America, where they fly mail, as well as any cargo, anywhere, at any time.
Brooklyn born Bonnie Lee, played by Jean Arthur, puts in by boat to a small airstrip somewhere in South America.
To fly out, the pilots must risk great danger as they go through the mountain passage, which is always clouded by fog, and even; at that altitude; sometimes snow.
It is in this environment that Bonnie meets, and falls for Geoff, who is distant and cold towards her.
He has seen too much of life to get attached to anyone, or anything; yet there is something between the two that threatens to grow into more.
When another pilot, Bat Mac Pherson, played by Richard Barthelmess, shows up with his wife Judy, played by sultry Rita Hayworth, things get complicated.
It seems that, at some point in the past, Bat bailed out of a plane ahead of his crew, which included the brother of Geoff’s right hand man, fellow pilot Kid Dabb, played by Thomas Mitchell, causing his death.
Written by Paul Donahue, and directed by the incomparable Howard Hawks, this film sizzles as events unfold and lives are altered.
Sig Ruman plays the Dutchman, which is to say that he basically plays himself.
You get the same feeling as you watch Noah Beery Jr. play pilot Joe Souther.
Though the story takes place in the fictional port of Barranca, I can tell you from experience, that as late as the 1980’s, ports like these still existed.
Labels: Bannanas, Barrancca, Cary Grant, Classic Films, Howard Hawks, Jean Arthur, Only Angels Have Wings, South America, Thomas Mitchell Wednesday, October 10, 2012 Nick Lowe ""The Old Magic"" In Concert Last night Sue and I treated ourselves to a mutual birthday gift.
We saw Nick Lowe at the McGlothon Theater, which is located in Spirit Square in “uptown” Charlotte.
Nick Lowe; for those unfamiliar with him as an artist; is one of the key people who kept rock and roll alive and kicking during the 1970’s disco craze.
And when the end of that decade rolled around; with Punk Rock all the rage; Nick Lowe, along with Dave Edmunds, formed “Rockpile”, once again keeping the genre viable and raucous.
But sometime during the late 1990’s, Mr Lowe re-invented his approach to some of his older tunes, and at the same time, developed a new way to express his more current thoughts.
For a while I had heard that Mr Lowe was alive and well, living in Amsterdam for obvious reasons.
With a mixture of old songs, along with the new, he beguiled the audience for several hours, performing old favorites solo, and telling stories between numbers.
His performance of some of the new material; including “Sensitive Man” and “Somebody Cares for Me”; which are my two favorites from the new album; was absolutely wonderful, and would have been enough to satisfy me.
I was thrilled to see him play solo, using only 1 guitar throughout his extraordinary performance, and no capo to boot.
His voice is as strong and expressive as ever, and his easy attitude with the audience was a delight to all.
I haven’t been able to find a video that does justice to last night’s solo, acoustic performance, but here he is performing with Wilco, a band which consists of Patrick Sansone, Mikael Jorgensen, Jeff Tweedy , Nels Cline, Glenn Kotche, John Stirratt.
While this video may sound lush and full, there is nothing better than seeing your favorite artist striped down to the bare minimum, highlighting just what you love about their work.
Seeing Mr Lowe perform last night reinforced my suspicion that the “old magic” is not only back; but for some of us, it never left in the first place.
What a great way to celebrate our birthdays together; listening to music which we both love.
Well, it only took a day for someone to post this video from the concert at McGlothon on October 9th in Charlotte.
