We want people to have a sense of this moment when the world nearly blew up,"" Lang said.
With filmmaker Koji Masutani, they have created ""The Armageddon Letters,"" a transmedia project with graphic novels, blog posts, podcasts and short films to convey the story of the crisis to a generation that knows about it only through history books.They say the lessons of the Cuban missile crisis are especially relevant today, when nuclear-armed North Korea is threatened and feels it has nothing to lose, much like Cuba in 1962.
Their research includes extensive documentary studies as well as oral histories taken from Americans, Russians and Cubans who experienced the crisis.
Some of the most revealing moments were exchanges between Cuban leader Fidel Castro and former United States defense secretary Robert McNamara.For Kennedy and Khrushchev, the standoff was deeply serious but involved considerable bluffing and angling for strategic advantage.
Khrushchev had moved missiles and nuclear warheads to Cuba in response to United States missiles based in Turkey and aimed at the Soviet Union.View print quality imageFidel Castro speaks with James Blight and Janet Lang at a conference in 1992.
But to the Cubans, the standoff meant the island was likely to be destroyed.
Since the failed, U.S.-backed Bay of Pigs invasion 18 months earlier, Castro was sure the Americans would attack Cuba to derail the revolution.
He expected and hoped the Soviets would respond with nuclear weapons.Unbeknownst to the Americans, Blight and Lang learned, the Soviets had installed medium-range missiles that could reach the United States and short-range tactical nuclear weapons that could be used against a United States attack.
The latter were controlled by Soviet forces based in Cuba who identified with the Cubans and were equally determined to resist an invasion.
It revealed to them how naïve they were, how 'socialist solidarity' was a phrase that didn't mean anything,"" Lang said.Blight and Lang said that both the Americans and the Soviets failed to understand how history gave Cubans a sense of pride and dignity.
Like Texans at the Alamo and Jewish rebels at Masada, they were ready to die while inflicting damage on their enemies, even if it meant starting a nuclear war.The same sense of being under siege can be seen in many countries that possess or are seeking nuclear weapons today, Blight and Lang said.
