Thant sent early and important messages to President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
Although many of KennedyÕs advisers looked upon ThantÕs initiative with derision, Kennedy asked Thant to send another message requesting a cessation of Soviet shipping.
The message gave Khrushchev a way to stop his ships but still save face.
This ended the threat of a naval confrontation and enabled the superpowers to focus on the deeper issues of the conflict.
Soviet missile withdrawal in exchange for guarantees of Cuban security.
Thant also shuttled to Cuba to mollify Prime Minister Fidel Castro and to confirm that missile dismantlement had begun.
He then aided the negotiations between Soviet and American teams at the United Nations to resolve remaining issues, such as how the missile withdrawal was to be verified.
What is not widely referring to the decision by Soviet known, however, is how the UNÕs Premier Nikita Khrushchev to withdraw 80 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 68 Soviet missiles from Cuba.
For ThantÕs secret request from the United States, proposal to take effect, it would also initiated by President Kennedy himself, need United States approval. to perform intermediary functions The American response to ThantÕs during the crisis.
Thant also took bold message was initially guarded, because initiatives of his own accord.
Indeed, Thant had not called for a freeze on misThant was lauded by newspapers of the sile-site construction nor a verified day for his efforts to de-escalate the withdrawal of the missiles.
In fact, in a crisis, even though the media did not telephone conversation discussing know the full extent of his actions.
Following the peaceful resolution of the crisis, Thant’s bold initiative LeMay characterized the agreement as ThantÕs first initiative in the crisis Òthe greatest defeat in our history,Ó an occurred immediately after the United States indication of a military eagerness for blockade took effect on October 24, war and the pressures that the president when the world feared that a naval faced . battle and a wider war would soon In spite of the apprehensions by some follow.
To reduce tensions at this critical British and American officials, Kennedy, juncture, Thant sent identical appeals to in the darkest hour of the crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev, asking them embraced ThantÕs initiative.
On the to allow time to negotiate a peaceful evening of October 24, the president settlement.
Ambassador to the United Nations Khrushchev had not yet accepted Valery Zorin privately admonished ThantÕs proposal.
Instead, the Soviet Thant for not forcefully criticizing the leader had sent Kennedy a hostile US blockade of a sovereign state. cable, accusing him of issuing an ultimaHowever, Premier Khrushchev replied tum that the United States itself would very positively to Thant, stating, ÒI welnever accept, thereby pushing mankind come your initiativeÓ and ÒI agree to toward nuclear war.
Moreover, a Soviet Dorn and Pauk 81 ship called the Bucharest was rapidly message contained exactly what the approaching the interception zone and Americans wanted, Secretary of State Kennedy was being pressed to issue Rusk sent a cable to Stevenson in New orders for boarding it, risking a naval York at 2m. on October 25, stating clash and possibly war.
To let the ship precisely what ThantÕs message to the pass, however, would suggest that the Soviets should contain.
At 10:30m., United States lacked the resolve to Stevenson handed this message to enforce the Òquarantine.Ó It was at this Thant in the form of a single typed highly strained moment that Kennedy page that was to be the basis for reached out to Thant to help the ThantÕs own proposal, which he then Soviets save face and permit the dispute cabled almost word for word to to be resolved peacefully.
Because it came as a request from the UN secretary-general rather than a demand from Kennedy’s plea to Thant the American president, Khrushchev At 11:15m. on October 24, Kennedy telmore easily accepted the proposal and ephoned Under Secretary George Ball at kept the remainder of his ships away the State Department and suggested a from the interception zone.
Foreign Relations Committee in glowing enough of an out to stop their shipments terms.
He concluded donÕt want to sink a ship. . . right in the that, if this proposal came from the UN middle of when U Thant is supposedly secretary-general rather than from the arranging for the Russians to stay outÓ American president, Khrushchev could . more easily accept it.
As Kennedy put Both the American president and the it, it would give the Russians Òa way Soviet premier embraced ThantÕs prooutÓ . posal despite their subordinatesÕ critiThat night, United States Ambassador to the cisms of its content.
The superpower United Nations Adlai Stevenson teleleaders saw that they could use Thant phoned Thant, waking him to ask if he to disengage from a naval standoff.
The would send such a message to the lesson here is that, even if a mediator is Soviets.
Thant agreed to do so in the initially criticized for proposing modermorning.
To ensure that ThantÕs ation, he can soon afterward be 82 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 68 acclaimed and utilized by the protagonreceptivity to this non-invasion-for-misists to help de-escalate and resolve the sile-withdrawal proposal (May and crisis.
If true, Moscow was settle their confrontation at sea, allowed also using Thant to transmit their prothem to finally move past the overposals as his own. whelming danger of a naval battle and ThantÕs intervention gave the decifocus on the underlying issues of the sion makers hope for a possible way conflict, notably the nuclear missiles in out of the dire situation.
After 11 grueling Cuba and Cuban security. days of crisis, many of KennedyÕs top advisersÑcalled the Executive Committee, or ExCommÑfelt helpless.
Missile negotiations All United States calls for even a temporary cessaIn the ensuing negotiations about the tion of Cuban missile activity had been missiles, Thant once again played a futile.
With the missiles becoming only route for success, short of war, lay operational, Kennedy was under enorin negotiations involving ThantÕs good mous pressure from the Joint Chiefs of offices.
The only peaceful Numerous excerpts from the solution the president could foresee ExComm discussions indicate that involved an immediate freeze on all Thant was giving the Americans hope Cuban missile activity, followed by proand exerting a powerful influence for longed negotiations with Moscow on restraint.
He told rather than escalatory actions against Ambassador Stevenson that the Cuba, citing ThantÕs efforts and their Russians would dismantle their missiles hopes that Thant would secure a Soviet immediately in exchange for a guarantee pullout.
For example, when discussions that the United States would not invade in the ExComm turned to whether the Cuba.
Thant even phoned Secretary United States should prohibit petrol, Rusk to push the idea.
He also advocated oil, and lubricants from entering it publicly in the UN Security Council, Cuba, Secretary Rusk wanted to wait to albeit in more diplomatic and less direct give Thant more time before making language.
When a Dorn and Pauk 83 Soviet ship called the Grozny was the American delegation (called the approaching the quarantine line on ÒUN teamÓ by administration officials), October 27, KennedyÕs response was to while Khrushchev had sent First Deputy ask Thant to convey a message to the Minister of Foreign Affairs Vasily Russians stating exactly where the quarKuznetsov to lead the Soviet side. antine line was drawn.
Several stormy meetings were held on Clearly the unassuming but persistent the 38th floor of UN headquarters, with Thant was fostering restraint and had Thant sometimes shuttling between the won the respect of the protagonists.
As rooms of the two delegations to help early as October 26, with pressure still them find a way to verify the removal mounting, Kennedy, Rusk, and even of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
In these Macmillan were thinking of sending UN talks, the Soviets agreed to open Thant on a mission to Cuba.
They had their shipsÕ cargo holds and uncover come to appreciate his value as an their missiles so they could be counted intermediary. by United States planes above and ships alongside.
When the two negotiating teams developed draft protocols to formalize their Thant goes to Cuba leadersÕ deal, Thant provided constructWhen an agreement was finally reached ive input, though a common protocol to remove the missiles from Cuba, and was never finalized.
Prime Minister Fidel Castro threatened Certainly United States strength played a role in to upset it, Thant flew to Havana and resolving this conflict, but unlike many convinced Castro to tone down his rhetof his military advisers, Kennedy reaoric.
Thant was unable, however, to conlized that he had to give his opponent vince the Cuban leader to allow UN an honorable way out.
Most signifiinspectors to verify the missile withcantly, he appreciated how an interdrawal, something on which the supernationally respected intermediary powers had agreed.
It was primarily the moderation sion, Kennedy even lifted the quarantine shown by both Kennedy and of Cuba while Thant was in the country.
Khrushchev, augmented by the lines of As a final contribution to the resocommunication that Thant had opened lution of the crisis, Thant assisted in and the respect he commanded, that prethe UN-mediated post-agreement negovented nuclear war.
State Department. week the United Nations helped the May ER and Zelikow PD The Kennedy superpowers pull back from nuclear Tapes: Inside the White House during the Cuban destruction.
Belknap. strike midnight, largely because Thant Samuels G The Meditation of U Thant.
Stevenson A Hearings before the Subcommittee for the final settlement of the crisis. on International Organization Affairs.
Senate As the world heaved a sigh of relief, Foreign Relations Committee, 88th Congress, 1st Thant became one of historyÕs great Session, March 13.
The authors also received Robert Pauk is a retired Canadian military research funds from the Canadian Aerospace officer who served in UN peacekeeping Warfare Centre, which is gratefully acknowledged. operations.
