He was a long-time reporter for The Washington Post, covering the collapse of communism as a foreign correspondent.
He is currently on the staff of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
His previous books include the bestselling One Minute to Midnight on the Cuban missile crisis, which was part of an acclaimed Cold War trilogy.
The Central Intelligence Agency’s chief photo interpreter hovered over the president’s shoulder.
On superficial inspection, the grainy images of fields, forests, and winding country roads seemed innocuous, almost bucolic.
One of the fields contained tubelike objects, others oval-shaped white dots neatly lined up next to one another.
He was about to display the briefing boards when there was a commotion outside the door.
A four-year-old girl burst into one of the most heavily guarded rooms in the White House.
Their frowns dissolved into smiles as the president got up from his leather-upholstered seat and led his daughter back toward the door of the Cabinet Room.
Father and daughter disappeared for a few seconds, his arm draped around her shoulders.
He took his place at the center of the long table beneath the presidential seal, his back to the Rose Garden.
He was flanked on either side by his secretary of state and secretary of defense.
Facing him across the table were his brother, his vice president, and his national security adviser.
Behind them stood a small bronze bust of Abraham Lincoln, flanked by some model sailing ships.
Above the fireplace to the right was the celebrated Gilbert Stuart portrait of a powdered and bewigged George Washington.
The thirty-fifth president of the United States called the meeting to order.
Kennedy seemed preternaturally calm to the other men in the room as he listened to the evidence of Kremlin duplicity.
In secrecy, while insisting they would never contemplate such a thing, the Soviet leaders had installed surface-to-surface nuclear missiles on Cuba, less than a hundred miles from American shores.
According to the CIA, the missiles had a range of 1,174 miles and were capable of hitting much of the eastern seaboard.
Once armed and ready to fire, they could explode over Washington in thirteen minutes, turning the capital into a scorched wasteland.
Lundahl took the briefing boards out of his bag and laid them on the table.
CIA experts had spent the last thirty-six hours poring over thousands of reconnaissance photographs of the hills and valleys of western Cuba.
Missiles of identical length had been photographed at military parades in Red Square in Moscow.
That would depend on how soon the missiles could be mated with their nuclear warheads.
So far, there was no evidence to suggest that the Soviets had moved the warheads to the missile sites.
There is some reason to believe the warheads aren’t present and hence they are not ready to fire,” said Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara.
The computerlike brain of the former head of the Ford Motor Company clicked away furiously, calculating the chances of a surprise attack.
General Maxwell Taylor had parachuted into Normandy during World War II, and had commanded Allied forces in Berlin and Korea.
Kennedy had received an initial intelligence briefing earlier that morning.
His national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, had knocked on the door of his bedroom, on the second floor of the White House, shortly after 8:00m.
The president was propped up in bed, in pajamas and dressing gown, reading the morning newspapers.
On this particular morning, his exasperation was directed at his predecessor, Dwight D Eisenhower, who had broken the unwritten convention of former presidents refraining from publicly criticizing the current occupant of the Oval Office.
Over the past two years, he and Nikita Khrushchev had been engaged in a very public game of nuclear oneupmanship.
But Kennedy thought he had an understanding with the mercurial Soviet premier.
Khrushchev had sent word through intermediaries that he would do nothing to embarrass the United States president politically before the midterm congressional elections, which were exactly three weeks away.
News that the Soviets were constructing missile bases on Cuba could hardly have come at a worse time.
Now that the Democrats were in power, the political roles were reversed.
Republican politicians were seizing on reports of a Soviet military buildup on Cuba to denounce Kennedy for weakness and fecklessness.
Determined to keep the information secret as long as possible, Kennedy decided to stick to his regular schedule, acting as if nothing was amiss.
He showed off Caroline’s pony Macaroni to the family of a returning astronaut, chatted amiably for half an hour with a Democratic congressman, and presided over a conference on mental retardation.
It was not until nearly noon that he managed to break away from his ceremonial duties and meet with his top foreign policy advisers.
Alternately ingratiating and boorish, friendly and intimidating, the metalworker turned superpower leader was unlike any other politician he had ever encountered.
Their single summit meeting—in Vienna, in June 1961—had been a brutal experience for Kennedy.
Khrushchev had treated him like a little boy, lecturing him on American misdeeds, threatening to take over West Berlin, and boasting about the inevitable triumph of communism.
Most shocking of all, Khrushchev did not seem to share his alarm about the risks of nuclear war, and how it could be triggered by miscalculations on either side.
He spoke about nuclear weapons in a casual, offhand kind of way, as simply one more element in the superpower competition.
Vice President Lyndon B Johnson was contemptuous of his boss’s performance.
British prime minister Harold Macmillan, who met with Kennedy shortly after he left Vienna, was only slightly more sympathetic.
For the first time in his life Kennedy had met a man “who was impervious to his charm,” Macmillan noted later.
In April 1961, four months after taking office, he had authorized an invasion of Cuba by fifteen hundred CIA-trained Cuban exiles.
Castro mounted a vigorous counterattack, trapping the exiles in an isolated beachhead.
Anxious to conceal official American involvement as much as possible, Kennedy refused to order United States ships and planes stationed just offshore to come to the rescue of the outnumbered invaders, most of whom ended up in Castro’s jails.
As Kennedy later confessed to Reston, his superpower rival had no doubt concluded that “I’m inexperienced.
The perception of an inexperienced leader with no guts was one that he had been struggling to reverse ever since.
Military options ranged from an air strike targeted on the missile sites alone to an all-out invasion.
General Taylor warned that it would probably be impossible to destroy all the missiles in a single strike.
The invasion plan called for as many as a hundred and fifty thousand men to land in Cuba a week after the initial air strikes.
In the meantime, the Soviets might be able to launch one or two nuclear missiles against the United States.
Robert Kennedy still had an angry glint in his eye later that afternoon when he met the men in charge of America’s secret war against Fidel Castro in his cavernous Justice Department office.
He was determined to make clear the president’s “dissatisfaction” with Operation Mongoose, which had been under way for a year, achieving virtually nothing.
Countless acts of sabotage had been planned, but none had been carried out successfully.
Fidel and his bearded revolutionaries were still in power, inflicting daily humiliations on the United States.
Officials from the CIA, the Pentagon, and the State Department were arrayed in a semicircle in front of the attorney general.
A fresh assortment of his children’s watercolors decorated the walls, along with standard-issue government art.
One of the documents on the untidy, paper-littered desk was a two-page memorandum captioned “secret mongoose” with the latest ideas for fomenting an insurrection inside Cuba.
The attorney general title masked Bobby’s true role in government, which was closer to that of deputy president.
His extracurricular responsibilities included heading a secret committee known as the Special Group , whose goal was to “get rid of” Castro and “liberate” Cuba from Communist domination.
The addition of the president’s brother to the group—signified by the cryptic word “Augmented”—was a way of emphasizing its importance to the rest of the bureaucracy.
Soon after taking personal control of Operation Mongoose in November 1961, Bobby had decreed that “the Cuban problem carries top priority in the United States government.
By coincidence, he had arranged a long-scheduled review of covert action plans against Cuba the very day that Soviet missiles were discovered on the island.
Half the officials in the room were unaware of the latest developments, and the president had stressed the need for total secrecy.
Frustrated by the lack of “push” in getting on with acts of sabotage, he announced that he planned to devote “more personal attention” to Mongoose.
To accomplish this, he would meet with the Mongoose operational team every morning at 0930 until further notice.
For Bobby, the appearance of Soviet missiles in the western hemisphere was not simply a political affront; it was a personal affront.
He was the emotional member of the family, as rough and intense as his brother was smooth and calm.
JFK had been humiliated once again by Castro and Khrushchev, and RFK was determined to redress the insult.
He was extraordinarily competitive—even by the intensely competitive standards of the Kennedy clan—and the longest to nurse a grudge.
Michael Dobbs combines the skills of an experienced investigative journalist, a talented writer and an intelligent historical analyst.
No other history of the Cuban missile crisis matches this achievement.""—Martin Sherwin, coauthor of American Prometheus""At a time of danger for a nation it is important for political leaders first to think, then to think more and try avoid shooting.
This book gives a day by day perspective on how two world leaders, John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, showed their ability to manage a crisis.
This book puts forward the first reports I've seen of Soviet-Cuban plans to wipe out the Guantanamo Naval Base.
That an American U-2 strayed over the Soviet Union during the crisis has been known all along, but Dobbs gives us the first full account of what happened.
Anyone reading One Minute to Midnight will quickly realize that we did need another—and that this is it.
This is unquestionably the most complete and accurate account of the crisis that we have, and will no doubt long remain so.
Michael Dobbs has managed to combine the careful and thorough research of a scholar into the ability of an able journalist to bring his findings to life in a dramatic story that illuminates the historical events it examines with lively characterization of the people who made up the cast of the drama.
Selected Essays <b>NAMED ONE OF THE BEST BOOKS OF THE YEAR BY <i>THE GLOBE AND MAIL</i></b><br><br>Norman Mailer was one of the towering figures of twentieth-century American See Details The Gospel According to the Son <P>Norman Mailer fused fact and fiction to create indelible portraits of such figures as Marilyn Monroe, Gary Gilmore, and Lee Harvey Oswald.
In <i>The Gospel According to the Son, See Details The Executioner's Song <P><i>Norman Mailer's Pulitzer Prize-winning and unforgettable classic about convicted killer Gary Gilmore now in a brand-new edition.</i><br><br>Arguably the greatest See Details Miami and the Siege of Chicago In this landmark work of journalism, Norman Mailer reports on the presidential conventions of 1968, the turbulent year from which today&rsquo;s bitterly divided country arose.
An American Mystery <P>In perhaps his most important literary feat, Norman Mailer fashions an unprecedented portrait of one of the great villains&mdash;and enigmas&mdash;in United States history.
