Answer booklet INSTRUCTIONS ● Answer all the questions on one option only.
Nineteenth century topic Option B: Twentieth century topic ● Follow the instructions on the front cover of the answer booklet.
If you need additional answer paper, ask the invigilator for a continuation booklet.
Background Information The Indian Mutiny of 1857–58 was the result of resentment that had been building during British rule.
It started with a mutiny of sepoys in Meerut, but soon turned into a much wider rising against British rule with cities such as Delhi, Cawnpore and Lucknow either falling to the rebels or being put under heavy siege.
In some places, such as Cawnpore, British women and children were killed.
The army of the British East India Company had to deal with the troubles, and accounts published in Britain showed it doing this with great heroism.
After the rising was put down there were demands from Britain that the rebels be dealt with severely.
The Qaisar Bagh Palace had fallen on 14 March and within half an hour, discipline was at an end, and the officers had lost all command over their men.
On 17 March General Campbell was obliged to establish patrols to prevent plundering.
In the city, while the vanguard were fighting against the natives’ fire from the houses, the rearguard plundered and destroyed to their hearts’ content.
Matters were still so bad that the most strict orders were issued for the suppression of plunder and outrage.
This is indeed a dreadful state of things in a civilised army in the nineteenth century.
But these are the deeds of the British army, and therefore we are told that such things are the normal consequences of war.
It was later republished in ‘Heroes of Britain in Peace and War’, 1880.
The Victoria Cross is the highest British award for bravery for members of the armed forces.
SOURCE E The most hostile of our foreign critics are in awe of our administration of India.
The answer is that the last of these heroes are among us still, white-haired and too often infirm, but the very men who saved India from itself in 1857 when the tide of rebellion threatened to wipe away the trace of our rule.
From a book entitled ‘In Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Indian Mutiny’, published in Britain in 1907.
SOURCE F A very large proportion of the English community has a violent hatred of every Indian of every class.
There is a cruelty, even from those who ought to set a better example, which is impossible to see without feeling shame for one’s fellow countrymen.
We reject the desire to impose Christianity on any of our subjects and we strictly charge all those in authority under us that they abstain from all interference with the religious belief of any of our subjects.
We deeply regret the misery which has been brought upon India by the acts of ambitious men, who have deceived their countrymen and led them into open rebellion.
We desire to show our mercy by pardoning the offences of those who have been misled, but who desire to return to the path of duty.
Our mercy will be extended to all offenders, except those who have been convicted of having taken part in the murder of British subjects.
From Queen Victoria’s Proclamation to the Princes and People of India, November 1858.
They argue that the broader context of the Cold War and the national interests of the USA and the USSR were crucial factors.
Kennedy speaking to an American reporter in 1961 shortly after his disastrous Vienna Summit meeting with Khrushchev.
President Kennedy issued an ultimatum, demanding that we remove our missiles and bombers from Cuba.
I remember the exchange with the President especially well because I started it and was at the centre of the action at our end of the correspondence.
I take complete responsibility for the fact that the President and I entered into direct contact at the most crucial and dangerous stage of the crisis.
Dobrynin’s report of a meeting with Robert Kennedy went something like this, ‘The President is appealing directly to Chairman Khrushchev.
For some time I had felt there was a danger that he would lose control of his military, and now he was admitting this to us himself.
We sent a note saying we agreed to remove the missiles on condition the President gave us his assurance that Cuba would not be invaded.
Within the past week, unmistakable evidence has established that a series of offensive missile sites is now in preparation on Cuba.
Their purpose can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere.
The characteristics of these new missile sites indicate two types of installations.
Several of them include medium range ballistic missiles capable of striking Washington DC, Mexico City or any other city in the south-eastern part of the United States.
Additional sites appear to be designed for intermediate range ballistic missiles – capable of travelling twice as far.
This transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base is an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas.
From a speech by President Kennedy to the American people, 22 October 1962.
The United States, it is worth repeating, could have erased every important Soviet military installation and population centre in two or three hours, while the strike capability of the USSR was negligible.
Although Kennedy held the trump cards, he granted the Communist empire a privileged sanctuary in the Caribbean by means of the ‘no invasion’ pledge.
This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download at www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination series.
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of the Cambridge Assessment Group.
