Greg advises leaders at some of the world\u2019s most admired companies, and his views about leadership have been published in The Wall Street Journal, Chief Executive, Fast Company, Forbes, Inc., Investor\u2019s Business Daily, Leader to Leader, Texas CEO and other major publications.
World War II’s once-allied superpowers had become lethal adversaries, each distrustful of the other’s clout, motives, and saber rattling.
America was in the process of deciding whether Eisenhower’s vice president Richard Nixon or Senator John F Kennedy would become the country’s 35th president.
In September, 70M Americans watched Nixon and Kennedy in the first-ever televised presidential debate, inaugurating a new political era where image mattered as much as message.
Kennedy’s good looks and confident, relaxed manner won the night and, six weeks later, the closest presidential election in history.
Kennedy’s obsession with removing Cuba’s Fidel Castro backfired in the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961.
Sensing JFK’s vulnerability and wanting to strengthen the Russia-Cuba relationship while deterring further United States invasions, Khrushchev agreed in a July 1962 secret meeting with Castro to provide Cuba missiles.
By summer’s end, missile installation was underway — 90 miles from Florida.
An emergency with no blueprint On October 15, aerial reconnaissance photos caught the Soviets red-handed.
No plan existed to confront this emergency because United States intelligence professionals were convinced the Soviets would never make this move.
The next day at 11:45m., Kennedy convened the Executive Committee of the National Security Council to determine America’s response.
With the Executive Committee assembled, Kennedy posed the first of many questions, weighing options to decide the world’s fate.
Generals advocated military solutions; politicians leaned toward diplomacy.
Tension, humor, discretion and tact Throughout the crisis, JFK kept his cool, even when criticized.
He kept his own counsel, confident the Constitution was on his side when decision time arrived.
To succeed, Kennedy’s high-stakes negotiation had to convince the Russians that the United States sought a way out while emphasizing a military response was equally possible.
On Thursday, October 18, the Executive Committee remained divided on its move, and at 5m.
JFK met with Soviet minister Andrei Gromyko, who lectured him about the Bay of Pigs.
Because a decision wasn’t finalized, JFK resisted showing Gromyko the missile photos.
Soviet troops in Cuba shot down an American U-2 spy plane, and JFK held back his generals.
Aboard a Soviet submarine in the Caribbean, cool heads prevailed as American destroyers circled above.
Decision vs gamble It would be, JFK reflected, “one hell of a gamble” if Khrushchev didn’t back down.
On Monday, Khrushchev learned JFK would announce the missiles’ discovery and blockade in a nationally televised speech.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy delivered back-channel messages to Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, pledging not to attack Cuba if the missiles were removed.
By October 25, Khrushchev informed Kennedy the missiles would be withdrawn.
Whether you get good advice or bad advice, the decision is yours alone.
Taking inspiration from JFK’s legacy, reflect on your leadership approach.
A Timeless Guide to Making Tough Choices, which debuted as the #1 new historical reference book on Amazon. 8662 views Share this:Click to share on LinkedIn Click to share on Twitter Click to share on Facebook Category: Communication & Alignment Tags: Decision Making, Leadership, Strategy Execution About the Author: Greg Bustin Greg Bustin is a 15-year Vistage Master Chair with two Chief Executive groups, a Key Executive group and an Emerging Leader group in Dallas.
Stay up-to-date and never miss a resource by joining our newsletter. privacy noticebusiness email* CommentsThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.
Gain deeper insights when you join Vistage Take advantage of peer advisory group advice, 1-to-1 executive coaching, industry networks, exclusive events and more.
Become a Member Become a Chair Become a Speaker Become a Licensee Become a Sponsor Popular Resources: Leadership Resource & PDF Center Executive Coaching Resources Leading in Challenging Times Diversity and Inclusion Vistage CEO Climb Events Vistage Worldwide Headquarters 4840 Eastgate Mall San Diego, CA 92121 858.523.6800 phone 800.589.0531 toll free © 2022 Vistage Worldwide, Inc.
