Several options were structive, lethal, noxious, pyrospeaking about his time as the Secreon the table for the Kennedy admintechnic, or incendiary chemicals tary of Defense during the Kennedy istration to choose from ranging from and designed to destroy, incapaciand Lyndon Baines Johnson adminno action to full-scale invasion of Cutate, harass, or distract (normally istration, the reporter asked him ba.
During a visit to Russia in 2002, McNamara was very suroperation United States Navy warships stopped prised to learn from a Russian submarine comany vessel bound for this island nation for inspecmander that the subs approaching the blockade tion.
If the ships were found to have goods and were carrying nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
However, if mander who had himself commanded a submarine they were carrying military equipment or compoduring the crisis revealed they had orders to shoot nents, the ships were turned around and denied “when they thought desirable” if they were out of passage.
McNamara was visually shaken tious and tempers and nerves on both sides were when given this news.
During the two week into the events of this crisis as he did, and few peostandoff, both nations teetered on the brink of nuple knew how desperately close the world came to clear war.
And I was so shocked I lost my cool.” continuous orbit within striking distance of the SoviIn October 1962, American spy planes photoet Union.
On October 26, the United States ingraphed evidence that Russia had deployed offenformed its North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies sive intermediate-range ballistic missiles into Cuba. that “the situation is growing shorter…the United These missiles were capable of hitting the United States may find it necessary within a short time in States with thermonuclear warheads within minutes its interest and that of its fellow nations in the Westof being launched.
It appeared that both world and desired to have weaponry that would dissuade powers were at a “stalemate” with neither willing to his neighbors to the north from invading his country budge. and removing him from power.
The following was one officially awarded to thenhave different political views, but adapted from an article by Military Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel in you can honor the soldier who Times writer Kevin Lilley.15.
Barry fought without necessarily endorsMcCaffrey received his ing the outcome of the conflict,” he A lapel pin available pin during a brief ceresaid.
The word ""grenade"" derives to all active-duty milimony at the Military from the French word for a tary members who Times offices on Nov.
It is likely derived from eagle inside a blue Old French pomegranate erans Day gathering at circle, stars and the Vietnam Veterans (influenced by Spanish granastripes in the backMemorial in Washingda), so called because the many ground, surrounded by ton, D.C. -seeded fruit suggested the powa laurel wreath. der-filled, fragmenting bomb, or McCaffrey, who But the words on the earned two Distinfrom similarity of shape.
It is used at short Commemoration, launched in limica's men and women in uniform, range, thrown by hand or regardless of politics.
The resulting powerful explosion causes shockwaves and disperses high-speed fragments October 27, became known within by Major Rudolph Anderson was tober 27, Captain Charles F. of metal, which can cause the Kennedy administration as shot down by one of the S-75 surMaultsby took shrapnel wounds for those with“Black Saturday” with three sepaface-to-air-missiles as he flew over off in his U-2 for this previously in its effective radius. rate incidents taking place that Cuban airspace – Major Anderson scheduled eight hour mission.
HalfAlthough its original inventor could have escalated the conflict was killed.
Despite what seemed to way to his destination, Maultsby has never been determined into all-out nuclear war.
Since the be clear aggression against the was blinded by the aurora borealis beginning of the conflict, the AmeriUnited States, President Kennedy or northern lights and had trouble beyond doubt, the consensus can U-2 spy plane had been making decided against military action to taking a positional fix via the stars. among military historians is that overflights of Cuba to determine the neutralize the S-75 Dvina SAM sites.
Off course, Maultsby penetrated grenades first came into use status and progress on completing Later, Nikita Khrushchev told his Soviet airspace and Soviet Mig around the 15th century.
In the days prior, son Sergei that the shoot down was Fighters were scrambled to interfirst grenades were hollow iron Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered by Raul Castro, brother of cept his aircraft.
Once he realized balls filled with gunpowder and had instructed that the Soviet S-75 Fidel. that he was well off course, Dvina surface-to-air-missiles Maultsby turned his aircraft to exit ignited by a slow burning wick. were only to be fired if multiple In 1962, both the United States and Soviet airspace and return home.
During the 17th century, armies American planes were to cross into the Soviet Union were conducting SAC Headquarters was now tracking began to form specialized diviCuban airspace. nuclear tests in the the errant flight and was also trackHis concern was atmosphere.
To ing the Soviet Migs in hot pursuit. sions of soldiers trained to that shooting down monitor the Soviet Alaska Air Defense Command throw grenades.
These specialtests conducted at ists were called grenadiers, and an American U-2 Novaya Zemlya, scrambled two F-102 interceptors could be interpretwith nuclear air-to-air missiles, to for a time were regarded as the United States ed by President intercept the Mig fighters if needed elite fighters.
Kennedy as an sent U-2 spy and escort the U-2 back to United States terriescalation of the planes to the North tory.
Fortunately, the Migs did not By the 19th century, with the Pole to collect high increased improvement of firecrisis.
Fidel Castro, catch the U-2; however, Maultsby’s on the other hand, altitude radioacplane ran out of fuel as it left Soviet arms, grenades popularity detive air samples. was anxious about airspace and he glided the plane to creased and largely fell out of American overThese routine misa landing at Kotzebue, Alaska at use.
They were first used extenflights and wanted sions were being 2:25m. after the longest sively again during the Russomore aggressive flown out of Eilson flight ever recorded by a U-2 of 10 action against Air Force Base hours, 25 minutes.
Later, Nikita Japanese War . , Alaska even American intervenKhrushchev stated that the flight tion.
At approxias the Cuban Miscould have easily been mistaken for Typical WWII sile Crisis was takGerman mately noon on a nuclear bomber which could have October 27, a U2 ing place.
Charles Maultsby, USAF m. on Ocgrenade CONTINUED ON PAGE 3 CONTINUED ON PAGE 3 Captain Maultsby’s errant flight into national crisis.
As the incidents with depth charges the size of hand grethe Soviet Union only added more the two U-2 flights were occupying nades) on the B-59 as it reached the tension and drama to a day that was the military and civilblockade line. full of close calls, any of which could ian leaders in the The hand grenades of World have pulled the trigger on full nucleKennedy administraInside the B-59, the Soviet Captain ValenWar I can be described as ar war.
Secretary of Defense Robert tion, a situation of far tin Savitsky ordered empty cans filled with gunpowMcNamara was not informed of the greater significance errant flight until an hour and a half was occurring in the the submarine to go der and stones, with a primiafter the aircraft had entered Soviet deep in order to tive fuse.
The Australians used waters off Cuba. evade the American airspace. the tin cans from jam and their The American aircraft carrier USS destroyers – it was also too deep to Upon hearing that the U-2 had made Randolph was in charge of a group monitor any radio traffic.
The Soviet early grenades were nickan unauthorized ninety minute flight of eleven destroyers enforcing the Union had authorized its naval comnamed ""Jam Bombs."" over the Soviet Union’s Far East quarantine of Cuba.
A Soviet Foxtrotmanders to use their nuclear tipped The first safe grenade (that is, coast, McNamara became furious. class submarine, B-59 was detected torpedoes if they felt they were unsafe for the person throwing it) As he left the room with the Joint trying to evade the blockade.
The der attack and had no communicaChiefs of Staff to call President Kendestroyers began maneuvers to force tions with their chain of command. was the Mills bomb, invented nedy, McNamara was heard to say, the Soviet submarine to surface for Without communications, the officby English engineer and de“this means war with the Soviet Unidentification.
President Kennedy was incredtempts at communications, they er war had started or not.
Mills bomb incorporated some ulous that these missions were still started dropping a series of design elements of a Belgian being flown in the midst of this inter“signaling depth charges (practice CONTINUED ON PAGE 4 self-igniting grenade; however, he added safety enhancements and upgraded its deadly efficiency.
Britain manufactured millions of Mills bombs pin during the course of World War I, popularizing the explosive device that remains one of the most iconic weapons of the 20th century.
Two other important grenade designs that emerged from the First World War are the German stick grenade (a narrow explosive with oftentroublesome pull cord that was prone to accidental detonations) and the Mk II “pineapple” grenade, designed for the United States military in 1918.
Former Defense mation, is at Secretary Ash Carter honors Vietnam All United States veterans who served on active www.vietnamwar50th.com/events.
I, 1955 and May If a veteran is not able to attend a anniversary commemorative pin in 15, 1975, regardless of location, are public event, a private ceremony March 2016. eligible for the pin.
A list of the groups is available Vietnam during the conflict are not at www.vietnamwar50th.com, and a eligible. list of commemorations held by the CONTINUED NEXT MONTH 14 Feb 1864 Union General Wilmilitary objectives but also at the tional Federal troops that he hoped liam T Sherman enters Meridian, will of the southern people.
Sherto use on his planned campaign 5510 Falls of Neuse Road Mississippi, during a winter camman launched the campaign from against Atlanta, Georgia, in the folRaleigh, NC 27609 paign that served as a precursor to Vicksburg, Mississippi, with the goal lowing months.
Sherrepaired the rail lines within a www.fbcweb.net warfare, a strike aimed not just at man believed this would free addimonth.
But the very hairs of your the torpedo tubes loaded with the the provisions that the United States head are all numbered.” nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
Unlike would remove its Jupiter missiles Joe Perez other Soviet submarines, the B-59 from Turkey and Italy, and that the Even before the Garden of Eden, our had three people United States Heavenly Father knew that mankind who had to authorwould guarantee was headed for destruction.
He sent Robert Carver 3 The study of this His only Son to Earth to die for our Rose Wilson 6 sub, the political officer Ivan Maslencritical point in sins.
DestrucAlbert & Becky Watkins 14 flotilla Captain Vadestruction that it tion was in our future and we had no sili Arkhipov.
Seemrecourse or no means to avoid the submarine captain ingly, one man, coming destruction.
Paul tells us and political officer Vasili Arkhipov, was later in the same chapter; “For if wanted to launch all that stood bethrough the offence of one many be the torpedoes.
However, Captain tween the world and total destrucdead, much more the grace of God, Arkhipov thought the better course tion.
However, in the Bible we find and the gift of grace, which is by one was to surface and wait to hear from that all things are in God’s control. man, Jesus Christ… For if by one Moscow.
I am the LORD, righteousness shall reign in life by vailed; the B-59 surfaced and reand there is none else.
I the LORD do Through the disobedience of one man, Adam, sin came into the world For those who would like to who was then director of the United States all these things.” assuring us of certain eternal dedrop Andrew Folz a note of National Security Archive said “a guy Isaiah 14 also tells us: “The LORD of struction.
Each of us has a Unit 61239 chev reached an agreement to end be interrupted and as Jesus told us decision to make; to choose Christ APO AE 09309-1239 the crisis.
Please continue to pray for Ashley Huskey minister to soldiers and families at Ft. as she is being treated for vasculitis.
