American reconnaissance aircraft discovered the missiles in October, before they could become operational.
President Kennedy demanded their removal and instituted a blockade of Cuba, while calling up reserve forces.
The world stood on the brink of a nuclear holocaust, but the Soviets, under Premier Khrushchev, blinked and agreed to remove their missiles. .push; n the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs crisis, the United States continued to make plans for the ouster of Fidel Castro.
In August 1962, reports reached Washington of a significant increase in Soviet aid.
Reports stated that over the previous month, 20 Soviet ships had arrived in Cuba with military supplies.
Reconnaissance photos soon made it apparent that the Soviets were installing Sam 2 anti-aircraft missiles in Cuba.
The Sam 2 was good only against very high flying aircraft such as a U-2.
Thus, the reason for the missile buildup became the subject of much speculation.
If the missiles were not there to protect against an invasion, they were obviously there to protect something else.
Many theories abounded throughout September and early October, but there was no hard evidence.
On October 14th, the sky over Cuba was clear, and a U-2 flight took place.
By the following night, photo experts had concluded that the Soviets were building medium-range missile sites in Cuba.
At 8:45 AM on Tuesday, Oct.th, national security advisor McGeorge Bundy knocked on the president's door and broke the news to him.
Director John McCone; Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon; United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson; Undersecretary of State for economic affairs George Ball and advisors McGeorge Bundy, Ted Sorensen, Roswell Gilpatric, Llewellyn Thompson, Alexis Johnson and Edwin Martin.
In addition, former Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Wall Street banker Robert Lovett attended some of the meetings.
For almost a week, the president and his advisor tried to decide on a course of action.
In the midst of the meetings, on Thursday, Soviet foreign minister Gromyko had a meeting with Kennedy.
At the meeting, he gave assurance that the Soviets would never place any offensive weapons in Cuba.
The initial response, among most of the participants, was that the missiles had to be bombed.
First, a surprise attack on the missiles reminded many of Pearl Harbor in reverse.
Finally, Kennedy and his advisors felt that foreign governments would not understand the need for such drastic actions.
On Monday, October 22, Congressional leaders were brought to the White House and informed of the crisis.
That evening at 8:00 PM, the president addressed the country about the crisis.
As he spoke, 22 United States airforce planes turned toward Cuba, in case the country responded to Kennedy's speech with an attack.
In his speech, he announced the quarantine, demanded that the missiles be removed, and stated that further actions would be taken if they remained in place.
Immediately, 56 American warships steamed to their positions to enforce the blockade.
All military leaves were canceled, and United States forces were placed on a DEFCON-3 alert.
The Organization of American States met and voted unanimously to condemn the Soviet actions, and demand the removal of Soviet missiles.
On Wednesday, as the blockade went into effect, the White House received word that a number of Russian ships had stopped in mid-sea.
