The new book, “One Minute to Midnight” by Michael Dobbs is a masterfully written account of the Cuban missile Crisis in October 1962.
The book is written from the perspective of those who lived through the most dangerous Cold War encounter between the two nuclear super powers, Russia and the United States.
It probes the power plays of the introduction of nuclear missiles in Cuba by Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy’s response that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Being a veteran who served with the Navy photo reconnaissance squadron VFP-62 during that period, I had particular interest in reading the new material uncovered by Mr Dobb’s investigative reporting.
VFP-62 photo Crusaders flew the low-level photo missions over Cuba, gathering the intelligence needed to help President Kennedy forge a plan of action that avoided nuclear catastrophe.
The discovery of nuclear capable cruise missiles, by VFP-62 photos, revealed new information on how they were to be used against Guantanamo Naval Base and invading United States forces.
The use of tactical nuclear weapons was not considered by the Pentagon in the initial planning of the intended invasion of Cuba.
The book is spell binding with the fast moving anticipation of a Tom Clancy novel, although in this case, events are real.
Mr Dobbs gets into the minds of the decision makers and probes the many ways the crisis could have ended in a total nuclear annihilation for Cuba, the Soviet Union, and the United States.
The accounting of the wayward U2 that strayed over the Soviet Union during the height of the crisis, the crash of a F-106 with a nuclear bomb on board, the shoot down of a U2 over Cuba, the lack of full control over the nuclear weapons, in Cuba, the Soviet Union, and the United States, is a chilling reminder of how close we came to a nuclear disaster.
After 46 years, many today believe that they know all that is necessary about the Cuban missile crisis.
Through television documentaries such as, “Man, Moment, Machine”, or “DEFCON 2” by the History and Discovery Channels, or the movie “Thirteen Days”, the public is led to a superficial coverage of the most dangerous time in our nation’s history.
Only a book such as this, written by a skilled writer, can provide that sense of conflict between the military and the civilian control over the use of nuclear weapons.
The book provides the most chilling account of the indifference of the Generals and Fidel Castro to the eminent deaths and destruction of millions of lives.
A well researched and well written account of a near confrontation between nuclear powers which could have resulted in hundreds of thousands of casualties.
Fortunately the two leaders involved had experienced war an understood the potential results of a nuclear conflict.
Kruschev and his advisors had been ""fretting"" about the Jupiters in Turkey.
Although the ""Bay of Pigs"" fiasco must have given him some idea that he Kennedys would back off and accept the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The book verified or negated the stories that many of us had heard over the years.
The author seems to have utilized excellent sources to compose believable accounts.
I have other comments regarding the author's lack of familiarity with basic aircraft technology and jargon regarding aircraft, ships, submarines and personnel.
The tac nukes had to have been in place in Oriente Province and Pinar del Rio months earlier.
It was also noted that detailed geodesic surveys had never been conducted in Cuba.
The Soviets needed to know elevation in order to accurately launch the R-12s.
The CIA had been observing new activities since as early as December, 1961 and probably even earlier.
I am convinced that the photos of Bejucal taken in May, 1962 were the results of Skipper Winslow and my flights in May, 1962.
I do not believe that the U2 photos from 72,000 feet ,even with 36"" cameras would provide the resolution necessary to ID shock-proof bunkers, and other features mentioned.
Even so CREST still did not recognize the facility as a warhead storage facility.
As stated before I do not recall many details while over the target because I was tucked in pretty close to leader.
I also wondered why we were photographing the middle of Cuba vice the coastline.
I believe we were photographing new roads and facilities at lower altitudes that had been available from the U2s.
This Naval Aviator was as flamboyant as his CNO brother David was staid.
Here is a report on the Seminar at the Smithsonian in DC on Thursday evening July 10.
Michael was able to obtain about 20 cans of film from the National Archives that are stored in what he described as a Gravel Pit in Kansas.
The film included mostly work by our VFP-62 aircraft, but also some RF-101 and U-2 photography as well.
Michael began the Seminar after introductions with about 45 minutes focused primarily on the flights and photography from VFP-62 aircraft.
He displayed many photos of those flights that showed the missile sites, support equipment, and soviet personnel in the area.
He was able to talk to Russian military personnel during his research as well as Cuban personnel to enhance his research.
He had one photo provided to him by either a Russian or Cuban that showed the Soviet troops marching in civilian clothing.
Had hoped to purchase one of his books after the Seminar, but was detained by Seminar attendees asking questions and when I got to the book sales area, they were all gone.
The next speaker was Dino Bruigioni a top CIA analyst at the time who studied the film and prepared briefings that his boss gave to President Kennedy.
Dino spoke for about 30 minutes and provided an excellent insight into how his team was structured and how the briefings were prepared.
He maintains a large collection of photos from this time period at his home in Northern Virginia.
He does not allow media or others to take the photos out of his home, but does permit media and individuals to view and make photo copies at his home.
Adam, I know you would like to meet him and see some of his collection.
After Dino finished his presentation the three of us sat on the platform and Michael asked a few questions of me to get an idea of how the camera systems worked in the F8-U1P and my experience flying the perimeter at Gitmo in November.
We then fielded questions from the audience for about 15 to 20 minutes.
The Seminar was at the Ripley Center which is about 50 feet underground and is a large bomb shelter that I did not realize existed there.
I did not see the extent of the facility, but was told it extends completely across the Mall to the Northern side to Constitution Avenue.
It was a memorable evening and I encourage the purchase of Michael Dobb’s book.
Dino Bruigioni has written a book about these events, but I don’t recall the title of his book.
