Timeline AIM OVERVIEW To gain an overview and This lesson enables students who have been studying the Cold War to perspective of key events of the reflect on important dates and events within the Cuban missile crisis and Cuban missile crisis. gives students who have not studied the Cold War a clear overview of significant events during the period of the Cuban missile crisis.
Some students will be able to Timeline cards explain the different ideological Blank A3 timeline motivations that existed during this time, and how they contributed to SUGGESTED TIME the missile crisis.
This is a one hour lesson, but can be differentiated to serve as a starter activity for a subsequent lesson.
A few students will be able to highlight the relationship of the ROOM LAYOUT missile crisis to events in the For pair/group work. present.
SKILLS CONCEPTS TO EXAMINE Presentation skills The bombing of Hiroshima and Debating Nagasaki.
Discuss with them what they thought the most critical aspects of the run up to the bombing were. Deliver a brief overview of the bombings and the arguments for/against them.
Explain how this led to the beginning of the cold war – and how one of the most dangerous time in the Cold War was the Cuban missile crisis. . Students could work in pairs and write up a list of questions to do with the Cuban missile crisis, at the end of the lesson, revisit these.
Students to sort through the cards and images of key events in the Cuban missile crisis Students to pick 3 images and 7 written cards out of the 20 possibilities and create a collage timeline of events.
Students need to discuss the different cards to consider which ones are more important and why.
At the end, the timeline can be presented to the rest of the class, with particular attention being paid to why certain events were deemed of more significance than others.
Students can take part in external research to learn more about the Cuban missile crisis and its events – links to use can be found at the back of the resource.
DIFFERENTIATION Use all the caption events and images on the A4 timeline Students to draw the events and make their own collage instead of using glue. Student present a chronological sequence of events. Underline and define key words in events and explain what they mean. Students to consider events in relation to each other.
EXTENSION Students explain why each event was significant in the Cuban missile crisis overall. Using the further information about the Cold War, add Cold War events to the timeline and link this back to the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Students to write the events down and make their own collage instead of using glue.
ENRICHMENT Take students to the National Cold War Museum in Cosford to learn more about the period of the Cuban missile crisis Use newspapers and images to make a creative art and design collage. Students can begin a scrapbook or piece of display work that they carry through the entire scheme of work in this resource and present it at the end. Students could role play each event on the timeline. Give students larger images/text and make a stand up timeline with students moving around the room depending on where they feel their event would be placed on a timeline.
The Cold War As a result of the Manhattan project, the United States of America become the first country in the world to develop nuclear weapons.
These weapons were used against the Japanese cities of Hiroshima & Nagasaki in August 1945 at the end of World War Two and just prior to the Japanese surrender.
By August 1949, the Soviet Union had developed and tested their own nuclear weapons.
Despite being allies during the Second World War the two superpowers, which had differing economic and political ideologies, began forming alliances with other nations.
Their aim was to restrict each other’s global influence, and champion their own.
By 1986 the Soviet Union had 41,000 nuclear bombs and the USA had 23,000.
The name Cold War was applied to the conflict as there was an absence of direct warfare between the two states.
The conflict was characterised by several aspects; the mass stockpiling of nuclear weapons in an arms race between the Soviet Union and the USA; superpowers backing opposing sides in ‘proxy wars’ across the world; espionage; propaganda and psychological warfare.
Both countries sought to build up their supplies of nuclear weapons so as to deter the other from using a nuclear weapon against them through their ability to launch a similar attack in retaliation.
The logic followed that one country would never attack the other with a nuclear weapon as that would mean they would suffer a similar attack in return, leading to the large scale destruction of both countries.
It was said to be illogical for either country therefore to launch a nuclear attack.
However, this did not stop the two countries from coming incredibly close to nuclear Armageddon.
The Cold War ended in 1991, but the consequences shaped world politics, and continue to do so.
The Cuban missile crisis During the Castro government of Cuba, a series of reforms that nationalised many industries and appropriated the property of many individuals took place.
This prompted President Eisenhower in 1960 to freeze Cuban assets in the US, sever diplomatic ties and tighten the embargo on Cuba.
The loss of trade with the United States led the Cuban government to find a new ally in the Soviet Union to export sugar to in exchange for oil.
Concerned at the direction the Cuban government was taking and the perceived dangers of having a communist state a mere 90 miles from the United States border, President Eisenhower gave $13. million to the CIA with the intention of overthrowing the Castro government.
On the 17th of April 1961 a CIA sponsored paramilitary group launched an attempted invasion of Cuba, known as the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States had been rising since the end of the Second World War, with both sides building up their stockpiles of nuclear weapons.
The United States had positioned nuclear missiles in Turkey, the UK and Italy with the capability of striking the Soviet Union and was in a militarily stronger position than the Soviet Union at that point.
The Soviets believed that placing missiles on Cuba, capable of striking the United States would not only defend their ally Cuba, but also give them leverage to attempt to win control over West Berlin from the West, through conceding the removal of the missiles from Cuba in return for West Berlin.
After the United States attempted to overthrow the new Cuban government, the Cubans looked to the Soviet Union for protection.
The installation of Soviet missiles on Cuba had begun by September 1962 and on October the 14th US reconnaissance planes captured footage of the construction of a missile base.
Once reported to President Kennedy, he was left with a number of options, from ignoring the threat and appearing weak in the face of Soviet aggression, to launching an invasion of Cuba and risking a nuclear exchange.
Many of his advisors thought that air strikes or an invasion of Cuba were the most appropriate reactions, but Kennedy worried that this could lead to retaliation from the Soviet Union.
Kennedy eventually opted to form a naval blockade of Cuba to stop Soviet missiles reaching the island.
The Soviet commander in Cuba was authorised to use tactical nuclear weapons against United States forces should they invade, and as Soviet missiles were already installed, any attack on Cuba could have led to the outbreak of nuclear war.
With the blockade in place there were questions of how the United States would enforce the blockade and continue to surveil Soviet missile construction on Cuba, without Soviet retaliation.
Kennedy later received another message from Moscow, offering to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the United States removed theirs from Turkey as well as promising not to invade Cuba.
This possible resolution angered many of Kennedy’s advisors as it would make the United States seem weak and uninterested in supporting their Turkish allies.
Kennedy sent his brother Robert to deliver a message to the Soviet ambassador, agreeing to pledge not to invade Cuba and also privately agreeing to remove United States missiles from Turkey once the crisis had passed.
Had it been rejected, a United States invasion of Cuba, followed by a nuclear retaliation from the Soviet Union would have been likely.
It is claimed that the Cuban missile crisis was the closest the world came to a nuclear armed World War Three, with governments and people across the world fearing a nuclear apocalypse.
Gromyko meets with policies reverse course – except for President Kennedy and one. assures him that Soviet weapons were given to Cuba only for the defence of Cuba.
In early June the possibility of dropping the bombs on an unoccupied area as a demonstration of their power is also discussed.
