Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was a Cuban revolutionary and politician who was the leader of Cuba from 1959 to 2008, serving as the prime minister of Cuba from 1959 to 1976 and president from 1976 to 2008.
Under his administration, Cuba became a one-party communist state; industry and business were nationalized, and state socialist reforms were implemented throughout society.
After a year's imprisonment, Castro traveled to Mexico where he formed a revolutionary group, the 26th of July Movement, with his brother Raúl Castro and Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara.
The United States came to oppose Castro's government and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him by assassination, economic embargo, and counter-revolution, including the Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961.
Abroad, Castro supported anti-imperialist revolutionary groups, backing the establishment of Marxist governments in Chile, Nicaragua, and Grenada, as well as sending troops to aid allies in the Yom Kippur, Ogaden, and Angolan Civil War.
In the 2000s, Castro forged alliances in the Latin American ""pink tide"" – namely with Hugo Chávez's Venezuela – and formed the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas.
In 2006, Castro transferred his responsibilities to Vice President Raúl Castro, who was elected to the presidency by the National Assembly in 2008.
The longest-serving non-royal head of state in the 20th and 21st centuries, Castro polarized opinion throughout the world.
His supporters view him as a champion of socialism and anti-imperialism whose revolutionary government advanced economic and social justice while securing Cuba's independence from United States hegemony.
Critics call him a dictator whose administration oversaw human rights abuses, the exodus of many Cubans, and the impoverishment of the country's economy.
Early life of Fidel Castro Youth: 1926–1947 Castro was born out of wedlock at his father's farm on 13 August 1926.
His father, Ángel Castro y Argiz, a veteran of the Spanish–American War, was a migrant to Cuba from Galicia, in the northwest of Spain.
He had become financially successful by growing sugar cane at Las Manacas farm in Birán, Oriente Province.
After the collapse of his first marriage he took his household servant, Lina Ruz González – of Canarian ancestry – as his mistress and later second wife; together they had seven children, among them Fidel.
At age six, Castro was sent to live with his teacher in Santiago de Cuba, before being baptized into the Roman Catholic Church at the age of eight.
Being baptized enabled Castro to attend the La Salle boarding school in Santiago, where he regularly misbehaved; he was next sent to the privately funded, Jesuit-run Dolores School in Santiago.
Castro, second from left, at Colegio de Belén 1943, Havana, Cuba In 1945, Castro transferred to the Jesuit-run El Colegio de Belén in Havana.
Although Castro took an interest in history, geography, and debate at Belén, he did not excel academically, instead devoting much of his time to playing sports.
Admitting he was ""politically illiterate"", Castro became embroiled in student activism and the violent gangsterismo culture within the university.
A charismatic figure, Chibás advocated social justice, honest government, and political freedom, while his party exposed corruption and demanded reform.
Though Chibás came third in the 1948 general election, Castro remained committed to working on his behalf.
Student violence escalated after Grau employed gang leaders as police officers, and Castro soon received a death threat urging him to leave the university.
In later years, anti-Castro dissidents accused him of committing gang-related assassinations at the time, but these accusations remain unproven.
The only ideas that appear to have driven him were a lust for power, a willingness to use violent means to get it, and an unwillingness to share it once he had it.
I witnessed the spectacle of a totally spontaneous revolution ... hat experience led me to identify myself even more with the cause of the people.
My still incipient Marxist ideas had nothing to do with our conduct – it was a spontaneous reaction on our part, as young people with Martí-an, anti-imperialist, anti-colonialist and pro-democratic ideas. – Fidel Castro on the Bogotazo, 2009 In June 1947, Castro learned of a planned expedition to overthrow the right-wing government of Rafael Trujillo, a United States ally, in the Dominican Republic.
The protests, accompanied by a crackdown on those considered communists, led to violent clashes between activists and police in February 1948, in which Castro was badly beaten.
In contrast, his former public criticisms had centered on condemning corruption and United States imperialism.In April 1948, Castro traveled to Bogotá, Colombia, leading a Cuban student group sponsored by President Juan Perón's Argentine government.
There, the assassination of popular leftist leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán Ayala led to widespread rioting and clashes between the governing Conservatives – backed by the army – and leftist Liberals.
Castro joined the Liberal cause by stealing guns from a police station, but subsequent police investigations concluded that he had not been involved in any killings.
In April 1948, the Organization of American States was founded at a summit in Bogotá, leading to protests, which Castro joined.Returning to Cuba, Castro became a prominent figure in protests against government attempts to raise bus fares.
That year, he married Mirta Díaz Balart, a student from a wealthy family, through whom he was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite.
Prío faced widespread protests when members of the MSR, now allied to the police force, assassinated Justo Fuentes, a socialist friend of Castro's.
In response, Prío agreed to quell the gangs, but found them too powerful to control.
Castro had moved further to the left, influenced by the Marxist writings of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Vladimir Lenin.
Visiting Havana's poorest neighborhoods, he became active in the student anti-racist campaign.In September 1949, Mirta gave birth to a son, Fidelito, so the couple moved to a larger Havana flat.
The group's purpose was to oppose the influence of the violent gangs within the university; despite his promises, Prío had failed to control the situation, instead offering many of their senior members jobs in government ministries.
Attracting the attention of the national press, the speech angered the gangs and Castro fled into hiding, first in the countryside and then in the United States Returning to Havana several weeks later, Castro laid low and focused on his university studies, graduating as a Doctor of Law in September 1950.
Castro co-founded a legal partnership that primarily catered to poor Cubans, although it proved a financial failure.
He took part in a high school protest in Cienfuegos in November 1950, fighting with police to protest the Education Ministry's ban on student associations; he was arrested and charged for violent conduct, but the magistrate dismissed the charges.
Seeing himself as Chibás' heir, Castro wanted to run for Congress in the June 1952 elections, though senior Ortodoxo members feared his radical reputation and refused to nominate him.
He was instead nominated as a candidate for the House of Representatives by party members in Havana's poorest districts, and began campaigning.
Batista offered him a place in his administration if he was successful; although both opposed Prío's administration, their meeting never got beyond polite generalities.
On 10 March 1952, Batista seized power in a military coup, with Prío fleeing to Mexico.
Declaring himself president, Batista cancelled the planned presidential elections, describing his new system as ""disciplined democracy""; Castro was deprived of being elected in his run for office by Batista's move, and like many others, considered it a one-man dictatorship.
If you win tomorrow, the aspirations of Martí will be fulfilled sooner.
As in '68 and '92, here in Oriente we will give the first cry of Liberty or Death! – Fidel Castro's speech to the Movement just before the Moncada Attack, 1953 Castro formed a group called ""The Movement"" which operated along a clandestine cell system, publishing underground newspaper El Acusador , while arming and training anti-Batista recruits.
From July 1952 they went on a recruitment drive, gaining around 1,200 members in a year, the majority from Havana's poorer districts.
Castro stockpiled weapons for a planned attack on the Moncada Barracks, a military garrison outside Santiago de Cuba, Oriente.
Castro's militants intended to dress in army uniforms and arrive at the base on 25 July, seizing control and raiding the armory before reinforcements arrived.
Supplied with new weaponry, Castro intended to spark a revolution among Oriente's impoverished cane cutters and promote further uprisings.
The rebels suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties, whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded.
Meanwhile, some rebels took over a civilian hospital; subsequently stormed by government soldiers, the rebels were rounded up, tortured and 22 were executed without trial.
Accompanied by 19 comrades, Castro set out for Gran Piedra in the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains several kilometres to the north, where they could establish a guerrilla base.
The government broadcast misinformation about the event, claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients, although news and photographs of the army's use of torture and summary executions in Oriente soon spread, causing widespread public and some governmental disapproval.Over the following days, the rebels were rounded up; some were executed and others – including Castro – transported to a prison north of Santiago.
Castro was sentenced on 16 October, during which he delivered a speech that would be printed under the title of History Will Absolve Me.
Castro was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment in the hospital wing of the Model Prison , a relatively comfortable and modern institution on the Isla de Pinos.
Imprisoned with 25 comrades, Castro renamed his group the ""26th of July Movement"" in memory of the Moncada attack's date, and formed a school for prisoners.
He read widely, enjoying the works of Marx, Lenin, and Martí but also reading books by Freud, Kant, Shakespeare, Munthe, Maugham, and Dostoyevsky, analyzing them within a Marxist framework.
Initially permitted a relative amount of freedom within the prison, he was locked up in solitary confinement after inmates sang anti-Batista songs on a visit by the president in February 1954.
Meanwhile, Castro's wife Mirta gained employment in the Ministry of the Interior, something he discovered through a radio announcement.
Both Fidel and Mirta initiated divorce proceedings, with Mirta taking custody of their son Fidelito; this angered Castro, who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment.
Fidel Castro and his men in the Sierra Maestra, 2 December 1956 In 1954, Batista's government held presidential elections, but no politician stood against him; the election was widely considered fraudulent.
Setting about strengthening the MR-26-7, he established an 11-person National Directorate but retained autocratic control, with some dissenters labeling him a caudillo ; he argued that a successful revolution could not be run by committee and required a strong leader.In 1955, bombings and violent demonstrations led to a crackdown on dissent, with Castro and Raúl fleeing the country to evade arrest.
Castro also associated with the Spaniard Alberto Bayo, who agreed to teach Castro's rebels the necessary skills in guerrilla warfare.
Requiring funding, Castro toured the United States in search of wealthy sympathizers, there being monitored by Batista's agents, who allegedly orchestrated a failed assassination attempt against him.
Castro kept in contact with the MR-26-7 in Cuba, where they had gained a large support base in Oriente.
Other militant anti-Batista groups had sprung up, primarily from the student movement; most notable was the Directorio Revolucionario Estudiantil , founded by José Antonio Echeverría.
Antonio met with Castro in Mexico City, but Castro opposed the student's support for indiscriminate assassination.After purchasing the decrepit yacht Granma, on 25 November 1956, Castro set sail from Tuxpan, Veracruz, with 81 armed revolutionaries.
The 1,900-kilometre crossing to Cuba was harsh, with food running low and many suffering seasickness.
The plan had been for the crossing to take five days, and on the Granma's scheduled day of arrival, 30 November, MR-26-7 members under Frank País led an armed uprising in Santiago and Manzanillo.
However, the Granma's journey ultimately lasted seven days, and with Castro and his men unable to provide reinforcements, País and his militants dispersed after two days of intermittent attacks.
Castro biographer Robert E Quirk noted that there was ""no better place to hide"" in all the island.
The Granma ran aground in a mangrove swamp at Playa Las Coloradas, close to Los Cayuelos, on 2 December 1956.
Upon arrival, Castro discovered that only 19 rebels had made it to their destination, the rest having been killed or captured.
Setting up an encampment, the survivors included the Castros, Che Guevara, and Camilo Cienfuegos.
They began launching raids on small army posts to obtain weaponry, and in January 1957 they overran the outpost at La Plata, treating any soldiers that they wounded but executing Chicho Osorio, the local mayoral , who was despised by the local peasants and who boasted of killing one of Castro's rebels.
With volunteers boosting the rebel forces to over 200, in July 1957 Castro divided his army into three columns, commanded by himself, his brother, and Guevara.
The MR-26-7 members operating in urban areas continued agitation, sending supplies to Castro, and on 16 February 1957, he met with other senior members to discuss tactics; here he met Celia Sánchez, who would become a close friend.
Map showing key locations in the Sierra Maestra during the 1958 stage of the Cuban Revolution Across Cuba, anti-Batista groups carried out bombings and sabotage; police responded with mass arrests, torture, and extrajudicial executions.
In March 1957, the DRE launched a failed attack on the presidential palace, during which Antonio was shot dead.
Batista's government often resorted to brutal methods to keep Cuba's cities under control.
In the Sierra Maestra mountains, Castro was joined by Frank Sturgis who offered to train Castro's troops in guerrilla warfare.
Sturgis purchased boatloads of weapons and ammunition from Central Intelligence Agency weapons expert Samuel Cummings' International Armament Corporation in Alexandria, Virginia.
Sturgis opened a training camp in the Sierra Maestra mountains, where he taught Che Guevara and other 26 July Movement rebel soldiers guerrilla warfare.Frank País was also killed, leaving Castro the MR-26-7's unchallenged leader.
Although Guevara and Raúl were well known for their Marxist–Leninist views, Castro hid his, hoping to gain the support of less radical revolutionaries.
Castro with fellow revolutionary Camilo Cienfuegos entering Havana on 8 January 1959 Castro's guerrillas increased their attacks on military outposts, forcing the government to withdraw from the Sierra Maestra region, and by spring 1958, the rebels controlled a hospital, schools, a printing press, slaughterhouse, land-mine factory and a cigar-making factory.
By 1958, Batista was under increasing pressure, a result of his military failures coupled with increasing domestic and foreign criticism surrounding his administration's press censorship, torture, and extrajudicial executions.
Influenced by anti-Batista sentiment among their citizens, the United States government ceased supplying him with weaponry.
The opposition called a general strike, accompanied by armed attacks from the MR-26-7.
Beginning on 9 April, it received strong support in central and eastern Cuba, but little elsewhere.Batista responded with an all-out-attack, Operation Verano, in which the army aerially bombarded forested areas and villages suspected of aiding the militants, while 10,000 soldiers commanded by General Eulogio Cantillo surrounded the Sierra Maestra, driving north to the rebel encampments.
Despite their numerical and technological superiority, the army had no experience with guerrilla warfare, and Castro halted their offensive using land mines and ambushes.
Many of Batista's soldiers defected to Castro's rebels, who also benefited from local popular support.
In the summer, the MR-26-7 went on the offensive, pushing the army out of the mountains, with Castro using his columns in a pincer movement to surround the main army concentration in Santiago.
By November, Castro's forces controlled most of Oriente and Las Villas, and divided Cuba in two by closing major roads and rail lines, severely disadvantaging Batista.Fearing Castro was a socialist, the United States instructed Cantillo to oust Batista.
By this time the great majority of Cuban people had turned against the Batista regime.
Smith, who felt the whole CIA mission had become too close to the MR-26-7 movement, personally went to Batista and informed him that the United States would no longer support him and felt he no longer could control the situation in Cuba.
General Cantillo secretly agreed to a ceasefire with Castro, promising that Batista would be tried as a war criminal; however, Batista was warned, and fled into exile with over US$300,000,000 on 31 December 1958.
Cantillo entered Havana's Presidential Palace, proclaimed the Supreme Court judge Carlos Piedra to be president, and began appointing the new government.
Furious, Castro ended the ceasefire, and ordered Cantillo's arrest by sympathetic figures in the army.
Accompanying celebrations at news of Batista's downfall on 1 January 1959, Castro ordered the MR-26-7 to prevent widespread looting and vandalism.
Cienfuegos and Guevara led their columns into Havana on 2 January, while Castro entered Santiago and gave a speech invoking the wars of independence.
Heading toward Havana, he greeted cheering crowds at every town, giving press conferences and interviews.
Entering Havana, Castro proclaimed himself Representative of the Rebel Armed Forces of the Presidency, setting up home and office in the penthouse of the Havana Hilton Hotel.
Castro exercised a great deal of influence over Urrutia's regime, which was now ruling by decree.
He then pushed Urrutia to issue a temporary ban on political parties; he repeatedly said that they would eventually hold multiparty elections.
Although repeatedly denying that he was a communist to the press, he began clandestinely meeting members of the PSP to discuss the creation of a socialist state.
In response to popular uproar, which demanded that those responsible be brought to justice, Castro helped to set up many trials, resulting in hundreds of executions.
Although popular domestically, critics—in particular the United States press, argued that many were not fair trials.
Acclaimed by many across Latin America, he traveled to Venezuela where he met with President-elect Rómulo Betancourt, unsuccessfully requesting a loan and a new deal for Venezuelan oil.
Returning home, an argument between Castro and senior government figures broke out.
As a result, Prime Minister José Miró Cardona resigned, going into exile in the United States and joining the anti-Castro movement.
Cuba under Fidel Castro § Premiership Consolidating leadership: 1959–1960 On 16 February 1959, Castro was sworn in as Prime Minister of Cuba.
In April, he visited the United States on a charm offensive where President Dwight D Eisenhower would not meet with him, but instead sent Vice President Richard Nixon, whom Castro instantly disliked.
His ideas as to how to run a government or an economy are less developed than those of almost any world figure I have met in fifty countries.
CBC/Radio-Canada's journalist and future Premier of Quebec, René Lévesque, interviews Castro during his trip to Montreal in late April 1959.
Proceeding to Canada, Trinidad, Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina, Castro attended an economic conference in Buenos Aires, unsuccessfully proposing a $30 billion U.S.-funded ""Marshall Plan"" for Latin America.
Around 200,000 peasants received title deeds as large land holdings were broken up; popular among the working class, it alienated the richer landowners, including Castro's own mother, whose farmlands were taken.
Castro undertook many foreign visits during his initial years in power.
Castro appointed himself president of the National Tourist Industry, introducing unsuccessful measures to encourage African-American tourists to visit, advertising Cuba as a tropical paradise free of racial discrimination.
Judges and politicians had their pay reduced while low-level civil servants saw theirs raised, and in March 1959, Castro declared rents for those who paid less than $100 a month halved.
The Cuban government also began to expropriate the casinos and properties from mafia leaders and taking millions in cash.
Before he died Meyer Lansky said Cuba ""ruined"" him.In the summer of 1959, Fidel began nationalizing plantation lands owned by American investors as well as confiscating the property of foreign landowners.
He also seized property previously held by wealthy Cubans who had fled.
He nationalized sugar production and oil refinement, over the objection of foreign investors who owned stakes in these commodities.Although then refusing to categorize his regime as socialist and repeatedly denying being a communist, Castro appointed Marxists to senior government and military positions.
Most significantly, Che Guevara became Governor of the Central Bank and then Minister of Industries.
President Urrutia increasingly expressed concern with the rising influence of Marxism.
On 23 July, Castro resumed his premiership and appointed Marxist Osvaldo Dorticós as president.Castro's government emphasised social projects to improve Cuba's standard of living, often to the detriment of economic development.
Major emphasis was placed on education, and during the first 30 months of Castro's government, more classrooms were opened than in the previous 30 years.
Health care was nationalized and expanded, with rural health centers and urban polyclinics opening up across the island to offer free medical aid.
A third part of this social program was the improvement of infrastructure.
Within the first six months of Castro's government, 1,000 km of roads were built across the island, while $300 million was spent on water and sanitation projects.
Castro , Che Guevara , William Alexander Morgan , and other leading revolutionaries marching through the streets in protest over the La Coubre explosion, 5 March 1960 Castro used radio and television to develop a ""dialogue with the people"", posing questions and making provocative statements.
His regime remained popular with workers, peasants, and students, who constituted the majority of the country's population, while opposition came primarily from the middle class; thousands of doctors, engineers and other professionals emigrated to Florida in the U.S., causing an economic brain drain.
Productivity decreased and the country's financial reserves were drained within two years.
After conservative press expressed hostility towards the government, the pro-Castro printers' trade union disrupted editorial staff, and in January 1960 the government ordered them to publish a ""clarification"" written by the printers' union at the end of articles critical of the government.
Castro's government arrested hundreds of counter-revolutionaries, many of whom were subjected to solitary confinement, rough treatment, and threatening behavior.
Cuba's government ordered the country's refineries – then controlled by the United States corporations Shell and Esso – to process Soviet oil, but under United States pressure they refused.
La Coubre explosion, 4 March 1960 Relations between Cuba and the United States were further strained following the explosion of a French vessel, the La Coubre, in Havana harbor in March 1960.
The ship carried weapons purchased from Belgium, and the cause of the explosion was never determined, but Castro publicly insinuated that the United States government was guilty of sabotage.
Inspired by their earlier success with the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, in March 1960, United States President Eisenhower authorized the CIA to overthrow Castro's government.
He provided them with a budget of $13 million and permitted them to ally with the Mafia, who were aggrieved that Castro's government closed down their brothel and casino businesses in Cuba.
Staying at the Hotel Theresa in Harlem, he met with journalists and anti-establishment figures like Malcolm X Castro had decided to stay in Harlem as a way of expressing solidarity with the poor African-American population living there, thus leading to an assortment of world leaders such as Nasser of Egypt and Nehru of India having to drive out to Harlem to see him.
The opening session of the United Nations General Assembly in September 1960 was a highly rancorous one with Khrushchev famously banging his shoe against his desk to interrupt a speech by Filipino delegate Lorenzo Sumulong, which set the general tone for the debates and speeches.
Castro delivered the longest speech ever held before the United Nations General Assembly, speaking for four and a half hours in a speech mostly given over to denouncing American policies towards Latin America.
Subsequently, visited by Polish First Secretary Władysław Gomułka, Bulgarian First Secretary Todor Zhivkov, Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser, and Indian Premier Jawaharlal Nehru, Castro also received an evening's reception from the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.Back in Cuba, Castro feared a U.S.-backed coup; in 1959 his regime spent $120 million on Soviet, French, and Belgian weaponry and by early 1960 had doubled the size of Cuba's armed forces.
Fearing counter-revolutionary elements in the army, the government created a People's Militia to arm citizens favorable to the revolution, training at least 50,000 civilians in combat techniques.
In September 1960, they created the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution , a nationwide civilian organization which implemented neighborhood spying to detect counter-revolutionary activities as well as organizing health and education campaigns, becoming a conduit for public complaints.
Some Americans disagreed with President John F Kennedy's decision to ban trade with Cuba, and outwardly supported his nationalist revolutionary tactics.Castro proclaimed the new administration a direct democracy, in which Cubans could assemble at demonstrations to express their democratic will.
United States Secretary of State Christian Herter announced that Cuba was adopting the Soviet model of rule, with a one-party state, government control of trade unions, suppression of civil liberties, and the absence of freedom of speech and press.
Both President Eisenhower and his successor President Kennedy supported a CIA plan to aid a dissident militia, the Democratic Revolutionary Front, to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro; the plan resulted in the Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961.
Fearing invasion, he ordered the arrest of between 20,000 and 100,000 suspected counter-revolutionaries, publicly proclaiming, ""What the imperialists cannot forgive us, is that we have made a Socialist revolution under their noses"", his first announcement that the government was socialist.
Che Guevara and Castro, photographed by Alberto Korda in 1961 The CIA and the Democratic Revolutionary Front had based a 1,400-strong army, Brigade 2506, in Nicaragua.
On the night of 16 to 17 April, Brigade 2506 landed along Cuba's Bay of Pigs and engaged in a firefight with a local revolutionary militia.
Castro ordered Captain José Ramón Fernández to launch the counter-offensive, before taking personal control of it.
After bombing the invaders' ships and bringing in reinforcements, Castro forced the Brigade to surrender on 20 April.
He ordered the 1189 captured rebels to be interrogated by a panel of journalists on live television, personally taking over the questioning on 25 April.
Fourteen were put on trial for crimes allegedly committed before the revolution, while the others were returned to the United States in exchange for medicine and food valued at United States $25 million.
Castro's victory reverberated around the world, especially in Latin America, but it also increased internal opposition primarily among the middle-class Cubans who had been detained in the run-up to the invasion.
Castro sent Fidelito for a Moscow schooling, Soviet technicians arrived on the island, and Castro was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize.
In December 1961, Castro admitted that he had been a Marxist–Leninist for years, and in his Second Declaration of Havana he called on Latin America to rise up in revolution.
Despite their ideological affinity with China, in the Sino-Soviet split, Cuba allied with the wealthier Soviets, who offered economic and military aid.The ORI began shaping Cuba using the Soviet model, persecuting political opponents and perceived social deviants such as prostitutes and homosexuals; Castro considered same-sex sexual activity a bourgeois trait.
Gay men were forced into the Military Units to Aid Production ; after many revolutionary intellectuals decried this move, the UMAP camps were closed in 1967, although gay men continued to be imprisoned.
On a personal level, Castro was increasingly lonely, and his relations with Guevara became strained as the latter became increasingly anti-Soviet and pro-Chinese.
The United States saw the missiles as offensive; Castro insisted they were for defense only.
Castro urged that Khrushchev should launch a nuclear strike on the United States if Cuba were invaded, but Khrushchev was desperate to avoid nuclear war.
Proposing a five-point plan, Castro demanded that the United States end its embargo, withdraw from Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, cease supporting dissidents, and stop violating Cuban air space and territorial waters.
He presented these demands to U Thant, visiting Secretary-General of the United Nations, but the United States ignored them.
Seeking to further consolidate control, in 1963 the government cracked down on Protestant sects in Cuba, with Castro labeling them counter-revolutionary ""instruments of imperialism""; many preachers were found guilty of illegal U.S.-links and imprisoned.
Measures were implemented to force perceived idle and delinquent youths to work, primarily through the introduction of mandatory military service.
In September, the government temporarily permitted emigration for anyone other than males aged between 15 and 26, thereby ridding the government of thousands of critics, most of whom were from upper and middle-class backgrounds.
In January 1964, Castro returned to Moscow, officially to sign a new five-year sugar trade agreement, but also to discuss the ramifications of the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Castro was deeply concerned by the assassination, believing that a far-right conspiracy was behind it but that the Cubans would be blamed.
The greatest threat presented by Castro's Cuba is as an example to other Latin American states which are beset by poverty, corruption, feudalism, and plutocratic exploitation ... his influence in Latin America might be overwhelming and irresistible if, with Soviet help, he could establish in Cuba a Communist utopia. – Walter Lippmann, Newsweek, 27 April 1964 Despite Soviet misgivings, Castro continued to call for global revolution, funding militant leftists and those engaged in national liberation struggles.
Cuba's foreign policy was strongly anti-imperialist, believing that every nation should control its own natural resources.
He supported Che Guevara's ""Andean project"", an unsuccessful plan to set up a guerrilla movement in the highlands of Bolivia, Peru and Argentina.
He allowed revolutionary groups from around the world, from the Viet Cong to the Black Panthers, to train in Cuba.
He considered Western-dominated Africa to be ripe for revolution, and sent troops and medics to aid Ahmed Ben Bella's socialist regime in Algeria during the Sand War.
He also allied with Alphonse Massamba-Débat's socialist government in Congo-Brazzaville.
In 1965, Castro authorized Che Guevara to travel to Congo-Kinshasa to train revolutionaries against the Western-backed government.
Castro was personally devastated when Guevara was killed by CIA-backed troops in Bolivia in October 1967 and publicly attributed it to Guevara's disregard for his own safety.In 1966, Castro staged a Tri-Continental Conference of Africa, Asia and Latin America in Havana, further establishing himself as a significant player on the world stage.
From this conference, Castro created the Latin American Solidarity Organization , which adopted the slogan of ""The duty of a revolution is to make revolution"", signifying Havana's leadership of Latin America's revolutionary movement.
Castro and Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space Castro's increasing role on the world stage strained his relationship with the USSR, now under the leadership of Leonid Brezhnev.
Diverting from Soviet Marxist doctrine, he suggested that Cuban society could evolve straight to pure communism rather than gradually progress through various stages of socialism.
In turn, the Soviet-loyalist Aníbal Escalante began organizing a government network of opposition to Castro, though in January 1968, he and his supporters were arrested for allegedly passing state secrets to Moscow.
Recognising Cuba's economic dependence on the Soviets, Castro relented to Brezhnev's pressure to be obedient, and in August 1968 he denounced the leaders of the Prague Spring and praised the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia.Influenced by China's Great Leap Forward, in 1968 Castro proclaimed a Great Revolutionary Offensive, closing all remaining privately owned shops and businesses and denouncing their owners as capitalist counter-revolutionaries.
The 1969 crop was heavily damaged by a hurricane, and to meet its export quota, the government drafted in the army, implemented a seven-day working week, and postponed public holidays to lengthen the harvest.
When that year's production quota was not met, Castro offered to resign during a public speech, but assembled crowds insisted he remain.
Despite the economic issues, many of Castro's social reforms were popular, with the population largely supportive of the ""Achievements of the Revolution"" in education, medical care, housing, and road construction, as well as the policies of ""direct democratic"" public consultation.
Seeking Soviet help, from 1970 to 1972 Soviet economists re-organized Cuba's economy, founding the Cuban-Soviet Commission of Economic, Scientific and Technical Collaboration, while Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin visited in October 1971.
In July 1972, Cuba joined the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance , an economic organization of socialist states, although this further limited Cuba's economy to agricultural production.
Castro and members of the East German Politburo in Berlin, June 1972 In May 1970, the crews of two Cuban fishing boats were kidnapped by Florida-based dissident group Alpha 66, who demanded that Cuba release imprisoned militants.
In April 1971, Castro was internationally condemned for ordering the arrest of dissident poet Heberto Padilla who had been arrested 20 March; Padilla was freed, but the government established the National Cultural Council to ensure that intellectuals and artists supported the administration.In November 1971, Castro visited Chile, where Marxist President Salvador Allende had been elected as the head of a left-wing coalition.
In 1973, the military led a coup d'état and established a military junta led by Augusto Pinochet.
Castro proceeded to Guinea to meet socialist President Sékou Touré, praising him as Africa's greatest leader, and there received the Order of Fidelity to the People.
At the conference he publicly broke off relations with Israel, citing its government's close relationship with the United States and its treatment of Palestinians during the Israel–Palestine conflict.
This earned Castro respect throughout the Arab world, in particular from the Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, who became a friend and ally.
As the Yom Kippur War broke out in October 1973 between Israel and an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria, Cuba sent 4,000 troops to aid Syria.
Leaving Algiers, Castro visited Iraq and North Vietnam.Cuba's economy grew in 1974 as a result of high international sugar prices and new credits with Argentina, Canada, and parts of Western Europe.
A number of Latin American states called for Cuba's re-admittance into the Organization of American States , with the United States finally conceding in 1975 on Henry Kissinger's advice.
Cuba's government underwent a restructuring along Soviet lines, claiming that this would further democratization and decentralize power away from Castro.
The decision to intervene in Angola has been a controversial one, all the more so as Castro's critics have charged that it was not his decision at all, contending that the Soviets ordered him to do so.
Castro always maintained that he took the decision to launch Operation Carlota himself in response to an appeal from Neto and that the Soviets were in fact opposed to Cuban intervention in Angola, which took place over their opposition.Traveling to Angola, Castro celebrated with Neto, Sékou Touré and Guinea-Bissaun President Luís Cabral, where they agreed to support Mozambique's Marxist–Leninist government against RENAMO in the Mozambican Civil War.
In February, Castro visited Algeria and then Libya, where he spent ten days with Gaddafi and oversaw the establishment of the Jamahariya system of governance, before attending talks with the Marxist government of South Yemen.
Throughout much of Africa he was hailed as a friend to national liberation from foreign dominance.
There is often talk of human rights, but it is also necessary to talk of the rights of humanity.
In an desperate attempt to stop the war, Castro had a summit with Barre where he proposed a federation of Ethiopia, Somalia, and South Yemen as an alternative to war.
Barre who saw seizing the Ogaden as the first step towards creating a greater Somalia that would unite all of the Somalis into one state rejected the federation offer, and decided upon war.
Castro sent troops under the command of General Arnaldo Ochoa to aid the overwhelmed Ethiopian army.
Mengistu's regime was barely hanging on by 1977, having lost one-third of its army in Eritrea at the time of the Somali invasion.
Castro's critics accused the government of wasting Cuban lives in these military endeavors; the anti-Castro Center for a Free Cuba has claimed that an estimated 14,000 Cubans were killed in foreign Cuban military actions.
When American critics claimed that Castro had no right to interfere in these nations, he countered that Cuba had been invited into them, pointing out the U.S.' own involvement in various foreign nations.
The Cuban intervention in Angola was envisioned as a short-term commitment, but the Angolan government used the profits from the oil industry to subsidize Cuba's economy, making Cuba as economically dependent upon Angola as Angola was militarily dependent upon Cuba.In the late 1970s, Cuba's relations with North American states improved during the period with Mexican President Luis Echeverría, Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, and United States President Jimmy Carter in power.
Conversely, his relationship with China declined, as he accused Deng Xiaoping's Chinese government of betraying their revolutionary principles by initiating trade links with the United States and attacking Vietnam.
In 1979, the Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement was held in Havana, where Castro was selected as NAM president, a position he held until 1982.
His speech was greeted with much applause from other world leaders, though his standing in NAM was damaged by Cuba's refusal to condemn the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
For the first time, unemployment became a serious problem in Castro's Cuba, with the government sending unemployed youth to other countries, primarily East Germany, to work there.
In what was known as the Mariel boatlift, hundreds of boats arrived from the U.S., leading to a mass exodus of 120,000; Castro's government took advantage of the situation by loading criminals, the mentally ill, and homosexuals onto the boats destined for Florida.
The event destabilized Carter's administration, and later, in 1980, Ronald Reagan was elected United States president.
Reagan's administration adopted a hard-line approach against Castro, making its desire to overthrow his regime clear.
Cuba's economy became even more dependent on Soviet aid, with Soviet subsidies averaging $4–5 billion a year by the late 1980s.
Soviet economic assistance had not helped Cuba's long-term growth prospects by promoting diversification or sustainability.
Although described as a ""relatively highly developed Latin American export economy"" in 1959 and the early 1960s, Cuba's basic economic structure changed very little between then and the 1980s.
Tobacco products such as cigars and cigarettes were the only manufactured products among Cuba's leading exports, and even these are produced by a pre-industrial process.
The Cuban economy remained highly inefficient and over-specialized in a few highly subsidized commodities provided by the Soviet bloc countries.Although despising Argentina's right-wing military junta, Castro supported them in the 1982 Falklands War against Britain and offered military aid to the Argentinians.
Castro supported the leftist New Jewel Movement that seized power in Grenada in 1979, befriending Grenadine President Maurice Bishop and sending doctors, teachers, and technicians to aid the country's development.
Cuban soldiers died in the conflict, with Castro denouncing the invasion and comparing the United States to Nazi Germany.
Castro's image painted onto a now-destroyed lighthouse in Lobito, Angola, 1995 By November 1987, Castro began spending more time on the Angolan Civil War, in which the Marxist MPLA government had fallen into retreat.
In response to the siege of Cuito Cuanavale in 1987–1988 by South African-UNITA forces, Castro sent an additional 12,000 Cuban Army troops to Angola in late 1987.
From afar in Havana, Castro was closely involved in the decision-making about the defense of Cuito Cuanavle and came into conflict with Ochoa, whom he criticized for almost losing Cuito Cuanavle to a South African-UNITA assault on 13 January 1988 despite warning for almost two months prior that such an attack was coming.
On 30 January 1988, Ochoa was summoned to a meeting with Castro in Havana where he was told that Cuito Cuanavale must not fall and to execute Castro's plans for a pull-back to more defensible positions over the objections of the Angolans.
The Cuban troops played a decisive role in the relief of Cuito Cuanavale, breaking the siege in March 1988, which led to the withdrawal of most of the South African troops from Angola.
Cuban propaganda turned the siege of Cuito Cuanavle into a decisive victory that changed the course of African history and Castro awarded 82 soldiers medals of the newly created Medal of Merit for the Defense of Cuito Cuanavle on 1 April 1988.
Tensions were increased with the Cubans advancing close to the border of Namibia, which led to warnings from the South African government that they considered this an extremely unfriendly act, causing South Africa to mobilize and call up its reserves.
In the spring of 1988, the intensity of South African-Cuban fighting drastically increased with both sides taking heavy losses.The prospect of an all-out Cuban-South African war served to concentrate minds in both Moscow and Washington and led to an increased push for a diplomatic solution to the Angolan war.
The cost of Cuba's wars in Africa were paid for with Soviet subsidies at a time when the Soviet economy was badly hurt by low oil prices while the apartheid government of South Africa had by the 1980s become a very awkward American ally as much of the American population, especially black Americans, objected to apartheid.
From the viewpoint of both Moscow and Washington, having both Cuba and South Africa disengage in Angola was the best possible outcome.
The low oil prices of the 1980s had also changed the Angolan attitude about subsidizing the Cuban economy as dos Santos found the promises made in the 1970s when oil prices were high to be a serious drain upon Angola's economy in the 1980s.
South African whites were vastly outnumbered by South African blacks, and accordingly the South African Army could not take heavy losses with its white troops as that would fatally weaken the ability of the South African state to uphold apartheid.
The Cubans had also taken heavy losses while the increasing difficult relations with dos Santos who become less generous in subsidizing the Cuban economy suggested that such losses were not worth the cost.
Gorbachev called for a negotiated end to the conflict and in 1988 organized a quadripartite talks between the USSR, U.S., Cuba and South Africa; they agreed that all foreign troops would pull out of Angola while South Africa agreed to grant independence to Namibia.
Castro was angered by Gorbachev's approach, believing that he was abandoning the plight of the world's poor in favor of détente.When Gorbachev visited Cuba in April 1989, he informed Castro that perestroika meant an end to subsidies for Cuba.
Ignoring calls for liberalization in accordance with the Soviet example, Castro continued to clamp down on internal dissidents and in particular kept tabs on the military, the primary threat to the government.
With the collapse of the Soviet bloc, the United States secured a majority vote for a resolution condemning Cuba's human rights violations at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, Switzerland.
By 1992, Cuba's economy had declined by over 40% in under two years, with major food shortages, widespread malnutrition and a lack of basic goods.
He ceased support for foreign militants, refrained from praising FARC on a 1994 visit to Colombia and called for a negotiated settlement between the Zapatistas and Mexican government in 1995.
Publicly, he presented himself as a moderate on the world stage.In 1991, Havana hosted the Pan American Games, which involved construction of a stadium and accommodation for the athletes; Castro admitted that it was an expensive error, but it was a success for Cuba's government.
Castro welcomed debate between proponents and opponents of the economics reforms—although over time he began to increasingly sympathise with the opponent's positions, arguing that such reforms must be delayed.Castro's government diversified its economy into biotechnology and tourism, the latter outstripping Cuba's sugar industry as its primary source of revenue in 1995.
Economic hardship led many Cubans toward religion, both in the form of Roman Catholicism and Santería.
Although he viewed the Roman Catholic Church as a reactionary, pro-capitalist institution, Castro organized a visit to Cuba by Pope John Paul II for January 1998; it strengthened the position of both the Cuban Church and Castro's government.In the early 1990s Castro embraced environmentalism, campaigning against global warming and the waste of natural resources, and accusing the United States of being the world's primary polluter.
In 1994 a ministry dedicated to the environment was established, and new laws established in 1997 that promoted awareness of environmental issues throughout Cuba and stressed the sustainable use of natural resources.
Castro also became a proponent of the anti-globalization movement, criticizing United States global hegemony and the control exerted by multinationals.
Castro maintained his strong stance against apartheid, and at the 26 July celebrations in 1991, he was joined onstage by Nelson Mandela, recently released from prison.
Mandela praised Cuba's involvement in battling South Africa during the Angolan Civil War and thanked Castro personally.
Castro later attended Mandela's inauguration as President of South Africa in 1994.
In 2001, Castro attended the Conference Against Racism in South Africa at which he lectured on the global spread of racial stereotypes through United States film.
Castro and Chávez developed a close friendship, with the former acting as a mentor and father-figure to the latter, and together they built an alliance that had repercussions throughout Latin America.
In 2000, they signed an agreement through which Cuba would send 20,000 medics to Venezuela, in return receiving 53,000 barrels of oil per day at preferential rates; in 2004, this trade was stepped up, with Cuba sending 40,000 medics and Venezuela providing 90,000 barrels a day.
That same year, Castro initiated Misión Milagro, a joint medical project which aimed to provide free eye operations on 300,000 individuals from each nation.
In September 2005, Castro established a group of medical professionals, known as the Henry Reeve Brigade, with the mission of international medical solidarity.
ALBA sought to redistribute wealth evenly throughout member countries, to protect the region's agriculture, and to oppose economic liberalization and privatization.
ALBA's origins lay in a December 2004 agreement signed between the two countries, and was formalized through a People's Trade Agreement also signed by Evo Morales' Bolivia in April 2006.
Castro had also been calling for greater Caribbean integration since the late 1990s, saying that only strengthened cooperation between Caribbean countries would prevent their domination by rich nations in a global economy.
Diplomatic ties were reinstalled in 2005 following the election of leftist President Martín Torrijos.
Castro's improving relations across Latin America were accompanied by continuing animosity towards the United States However, after massive damage caused by Hurricane Michelle in 2001, Castro successfully proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States while declining its government's offer of humanitarian aid.
Meanwhile, in 1998, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien arrived in Cuba to meet Castro and highlight their close ties.
He was the first Canadian government leader to visit the island since Pierre Trudeau was in Havana in 1976.
In February 2007, Raúl announced that Fidel's health was improving and that he was taking part in important issues of government.
Later that month, Fidel called into Hugo Chávez's radio show Aló Presidente.
In January 2009 Castro asked Cubans not to worry about his lack of recent news columns and failing health, and not to be disturbed by his future death.
He continued meeting foreign leaders and dignitaries, and that month photographs were released of Castro's meeting with Argentine President Cristina Fernández.
Castro with Mexican president Enrique Peña Nieto, January 2014; even in retirement, Castro continued his involvement with politics and international affairs.
On 7 August 2010, Castro gave his first speech to the National Assembly in four years, urging the United States not to take military actions against those nations and warning of a nuclear holocaust.
Now without any official role in the country's government, he took on the role of an elder statesman.
In March 2011, Castro condemned the NATO-led military intervention in Libya.
In March 2012, Pope Benedict XVI visited Cuba for three days, during which time he briefly met with Castro despite the Pope's vocal opposition to Cuba's government.
Later that year it was revealed that along with Hugo Chávez, Castro had played a significant behind-the-scenes role in orchestrating peace talks between the Colombian government and the far left FARC guerrilla movement to end the conflict which had raged since 1964.
During the North Korea crisis of 2013, he urged both the North Korean and United States governments to show restraint.
Calling the situation ""incredible and absurd"", he maintained that war would not benefit either side, and that it represented ""one of the gravest risks of nuclear war"" since the Cuban missile crisis.In December 2014, Castro was awarded the Chinese Confucius Peace Prize for seeking peaceful solutions to his nation's conflict with the United States and for his post-retirement efforts to prevent nuclear war.
In January 2015, he publicly commented on the ""Cuban Thaw"", an increased normalization between CubaUnited States relations, by stating that while it was a positive move for establishing peace in the region, he mistrusted the United States government.
In September 2016, Castro was visited at his Havana home by the Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, and later that month was visited by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzō Abe.
In late October 2016, Castro met with the Portuguese president Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, who became one of the last foreign leaders to meet him.
Death and state funeral of Fidel Castro Castro's funeral procession passing through Sancti Spíritus Province, Cuba Castro died on the night of 25 November 2016.
His death came 9 months after his older brother Ramón died at the age of 91 in February.
As a Marxist, Castro sought to transform Cuba from a capitalist state which was dominated by foreign imperialism to a socialist society and ultimately to a communist society.
The Cuban Revolution nevertheless did not meet the Marxist assumption that socialism would be achieved through proletariat revolution, for most of the forces involved in Batista's overthrow were led by members of the Cuban middle-class.
Castro described Karl Marx and Cuban nationalist José Martí as his main political influences, although Gott believed that Martí ultimately remained more important than Marx in Castro's politics.
Castro described Martí's political ideas as ""a philosophy of independence and an exceptional humanistic philosophy"", and his supporters and apologists repeatedly claimed that there were great similarities between the two figures.Biographer Volka Skierka described Castro's government as a ""highly individual, socialist-nationalist 'fidelista' system"", with Theodore Draper terming his approach ""Castroism"", viewing it as a blend of European socialism with the Latin American revolutionary tradition.
Political scientist Paul C Sondrol has described Castro's approach to politics as ""totalitarian utopianism"", with a style of leadership that drew upon the wider Latin American phenomenon of the caudillo.
He drew inspiration from the wider Latin American anti-imperialist movements of the 1930s and 1940s, including Argentina's Perón and Guatemala's Jacobo Árbenz.
Castro took a relatively socially conservative stance on many issues, opposing drug use, gambling, and prostitution, which he viewed as moral evils.
Although his government repressed homosexual activity for decades, later in his life he took responsibility for this persecution, regretting it as a ""great injustice"", as he himself put it.
Religious views of Fidel Castro Castro first and foremost is and always has been a committed egalitarian.
And there are political prisoners – those who have expressed positions against the revolution – though today only some 300, down markedly from the number at the outset of the revolution. – Wayne S Smith, United States Interests Section in Havana Chief from 1979 to 1982, in 2007 Juan Reynaldo Sánchez, Castro's former bodyguard, detailed much of his personal and private life in his book The Double Life of Fidel Castro.
He profiled him as an egocentric who loved being the center of attention, and with his almost electric charisma, grabbing the attention of the people around him.
He was also extremely manipulative; with his formidable intelligence, he was capable of manipulating a person or a group of people without much difficulty.
In discussions with his colleagues or foreigners, he would repeat the same things over again on a continuous loop until they were convinced he was right.
It was absolutely impossible to contradict him on any subject whatsoever.
Fidel would then make a mental mark of the individual as an ""idiot"", and would wait for the right time to retaliate against them.
Nobody, not even Raúl was exempt from this; despite being the minister of the armed forces, he would bring seemingly minor military decisions to Castro for his final approval in order to avoid inadvertently contradicting him.
Publicly he was known for throwing tantrums, and could make ""snap judgements"" which he refused to back down from.
In private though, Castro was actually skilled at keeping his anger in check and not allowing it to affect his judgement, simply becoming cold and withdrawn; Sánchez stated that in 17 years he had only seen Castro explode in anger twice, one upon being informed of his daughter Alina's defection in 1993.
Castro was known for working long hours; he primarily woke up late – rarely before 10 or 11 am – and started his working day around noon, and would work until late at night, often only going to bed at 3 or 4 am.
He preferred to meet foreign diplomats in these early hours, believing that they would be tired and he could gain the upper hand in negotiations.
Castro with his son Angel in 1954 Balfour described Castro as having a ""voracity for knowledge"" and ""elephantine memory"" that allowed him to speak for hours on a variety of different subjects.
His hero was Alexander the Great, whose Spanish equivalent Alejandro he adopted as his nom de guerre.
Castro was a voracious reader; amongst his favorite authors were Ernest Hemingway, Franz Kafka, William Shakespeare, and Maxim Gorky, and he named For Whom the Bell Tolls as his favorite book, committing several portions of the novel to memory and even utilizing some of its lessons as a guerilla fighter.
He enjoyed art and photography and was known as a patron of both within Cuba but was uninterested in music and disliked dancing.
His favorite film was the five hour long 1967 adaption of Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace.
Castro had a lifelong passion, almost obsession, with cows and, starting in 1966, with bovine genetics and breeding.
State media frequently published details of his attempts to breed cows with increased milk yields.
She was promoted into a national celebrity and propaganda tool, and when the cow died in 1985, Granma published an official obituary for her on the front page, and the postal service issued stamps in her honor as well.Fidel Castro's religious beliefs have been a matter of some debate; he was baptized and raised as a Roman Catholic.
He promoted the idea that Jesus Christ was a communist, citing the feeding of the 5,000 and the story of Jesus and the rich young man as evidence.
Castro was often nicknamed ""El Caballo"" , a label attributed to Cuban entertainer Benny Moré which alludes to Castro's well known philandering during the 1950s and early 1960s.With his logorrheic oratorical abilities and profound charisma, Castro was extremely skilled at the art of manipulation and deception, easily whipping up his audience and even entire segments of the population into support for him.
Large throngs of supporters gathered to cheer at Castro's fiery speeches, which typically lasted for hours and without the use of written notes.
Officially, the Cuban government did maintain a cult of personality, but unlike other Soviet-era leaders and his allies, it was less widespread and took on a more subtle and discreet form.
There were no statues or large portraits of him but rather signs with ""thoughts"" of the Comandante.
Indeed, by 2006 Castro's image could frequently be found in Cuban stores, classrooms, taxicabs, and on national television.
In private, however, Castro hated such idolization campaigns and believed that he had intellectual ascendancy over leaders who engaged in such behavior, such as his friend Kim Il-sung of North Korea whose cult of personality he considered excessive, outlandish, and unreasonable.
Castro in his characteristic green fatigues, 2012 He gave no importance to his appearance or clothing; for 37 years, he wore only his trademark olive-green military fatigues or the standard MINFAR dress uniform for formal events and special occasions, emphasizing his role as the perpetual revolutionary, but in the mid-1990s began wearing dark civilian suits and guayabera in public.
Until his uprising against Batista, Castro typically kept a pencil-thin moustache along with combed back hair, typical of Upper-class Cuban men in the 1950s but grew out both during his years as a guerilla fighter and retaining them afterwards.
Castro also disliked worrying about his appearance and hated shaving, making the beard and uniform all the more convenient for him.
His uniform was also kept simple, he never wore any medals or decorations and his only marker of rank was the Comandante El Jefe insignia stitched on the shoulder straps.
Until the 1990s, he wore combat boots, but due to orthopedic issues, abandoned them for sneakers and tennis shoes instead.
Around his waist, he often carried a 9mm Browning pistol in a brown leather holster with an additional three clips.
His personal weapon of choice was a 7.62 Kalashnikov AKM which Castro occasionally carried with him during the 1960s but was later kept stored in a suitcase carried by one of the members of his escort or kept placed between his feet while driving along with five cartridges; he frequently used it during shooting exercises and practice.
Castro had a lifelong love of guns and was considered an expert sharpshooter, impressing foreign visitors and even holding up against members of his own elite bodyguards who engaged in frequent competition with him.Castro's most iconic public feature eventually became the Cuban cigar that he smoked on a daily basis.
Introduced to it by his father at the age of 15, Castro continued the habit for almost 44 years with the exception of a brief period during the 1950s while a guerilla fighter and boycotting against Batista linked tobacco firms.
Sánchez disputes this, saying that his doctor had Castro reduce his cigar usage starting in 1980 and quit entirely in 1983 after a cancerous ulcer was found in his intestine.
In the early 1960s, Castro saw one of his bodyguards smoking a noticeably aromatic but unbranded cigar.
Castro and the bodyguard located the cigar maker, Eduardo Ribera, who agreed to establish the El Laguito Factory and branded the cigars as Cohiba which became Castro's signature brand and elevating its profile internationally.
Initially restricted for his own private use and other members of the Politburo, it was later presented as diplomatic gifts for allied countries and friends of Castro, most notably seen smoked by Che Guevara, Josip Broz Tito, Houari Boumédiène, Sukarno, and Saddam Hussein.
Lifestyle Castro's primary residence was at Punto Cero, a large and vegetative estate approximately 6 km from the Palacio de la Revolution in the Siboney neighborhood.
Close by is a second two-story building used to house the bodyguards and the domestic staff.
The house itself was decorated in a classical Caribbean style, with local wicker and wood furniture, porcelain plates, watercolor paintings, and art books.
Sánchez described the estate as naturally beautiful and tastefully decorated, and while considered luxurious for the average Cuban, was not lavish or over-the-top compared to the residences of the Somoza clan or the Kim dynasty of North Korea.
Raúl and Vilma's house La Rinconada is located close by on 222nd street.
Raúl usually hosted large family barbecues on Sundays where Fidel would sometimes come, giving his extended family, sisters, and his elder brother Ramón a rare opportunity to see him.
The base was over five acres large and surrounded by high walls, essentially a ""city within a city"" consisting of support personnel for transportation, communications, electronics, food, and an extensive armory of Kalashnikovs, Makarovs, and Browning's.
Casa Cojimar, his initial home after 1959 but disused by the 1970s; a house on 160th Street near the Playa district; Casa Carbonell, maintained by Cuban Intelligence for his covert meetings with representatives of foreign groups or intelligence assets; A beach house in Santa Maria del Mar ; and two houses retrofitted with air-raid shelters and connected to the MINFAR command bunkers for use in war: Casa Punta Brava and Casa Gallego, near the bodyguards base at Unit 160.
Casa Americana ; Rancho la Tranquilidad in the locality of Mil Cumbres; and La Deseada, a hunting lodge utilized in the winter for duck hunting and fishing trips.
Castro's main vacation destination was Cayo de Piedra, a small key island formerly the site of a lighthouse, approximately a mile long and divided into two by a cyclone in the 1960s.
He came upon the island by accident while reviewing the region in the aftermath of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
Instantly falling in love with the island, he ordered it closed off and had the lighthouse demolished.Osmany Cienfuegos designed the a private bungalow, guesthouse, bridge, marina, and a building for the use of the bodyguards and support staff.
He arrived here from his inaccessible private marina located near the Bay of Pigs, La Caleta del Rosario, which also housed another residence and guesthouse.
His diet was quintessentially Cuban, based on traditional pescatarian cuisine but also the additional influence from his native Galicia.
All of his food was sourced from Punto Cero or fished from his private island of Cayo Piedra, with the exception of cases of Algerian Red Wine gifted initially from Houari Boumediene and continued by successive Algerian governments and Iraqi figs and fruit jams from Saddam Hussein.
Castro, who typically woke up in the late morning, usually had tea or fish bouillon for breakfast accompanied by milk provided from one of the cows that grazed on Punto Cero; they were all bred to provide milk which suited Castro's demanding taste.
His lunches were also frugal and consisted of fish or seafood soup with fresh produce.
Dinner was his primary meal, consisting of grilled fish, chicken, mutton, or even pata negra ham on special occasions along with a large serving of green vegetables, but was prevented from eating beef or coffee by his dietician.Until 1979, Castro's primary vehicle was a black ZiL limousine, first an armored convertible ZIL-111 from Khrushchev, a ZIL-114 and briefly a ZIL-4104 gifted to him by Leonid Brezhnev, while his escort would accompany him in several Alfa Romeo 1750s and 2000s.
Subsequently, Fidel ordered two mechanics from his bodyguard unit to West Germany to purchase several second-hand Mercedes-Benz 500's to replace the obsolete Alfa Romeos.
Whenever he would leave Havana, a fifth Mercedes would join the procession carrying his doctor, nurse, and photographer.
Relationships Castro and Camilo Cienfuegos before playing a baseball game In his personal life, Castro was known for being distant, withdrawn, and confided in very few people.
His closest and most trusted friend was Raúl Castro, his younger brother by five years and longtime armed forces minister.
Although Raúl has a vastly contrasting, almost polar opposite personality to Castro, Sánchez describes Raúl as complementing Castro's personality in all the ways that he is not.
Castro spoke nearly every day with Raúl, met several times a week, and was a frequent visitor at Raúl and Vilma's house; Vilma was also considered close to Castro and often appeared in public with him at national events.
Besides Raúl, Castro was not close to any of his other siblings, although he did have friendly relations with his elder brother Ramón and sister Angelita.
His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the United States since the early 1960s, and is a public opponent of the Cuban regime.Outside of his immediate family, Castro's closest friend was fellow revolutionary Celia Sánchez, who accompanied him almost everywhere during the 1960s, and controlled almost all access to the leader.
Castro provided a large apartment for Celia on 11th Street near Vedado, El Once whom Fidel visited every day before returning home.
Over the years, Castro added an elevator, fitness room, and a bowling alley for his and Celia's personal use.
Department 1 was for Fidel's security, Department 2 was Raúl and Vilma's, and Department 3 was for the members of the Politburo and so on.
Unlike the other MININT Departments, both his and Raúl's units bypassed the normal chain of command and reported to them directly.
The third ring consisted of thousands of soldiers both in MININT and MINFAR who provided support for Logistics, Air-Defense, Intelligence, etc.
He spent most of his time under their protection and were usually his companions in his personal interests.
A sports fan, he also spent much of his time trying to keep fit, undertaking regular exercise such as hunting, fly fishing, underwater fishing, scuba diving, and playing basketball.
They were also his companions on special events, such as his birthday or during national holidays, which they would regularly exchange gifts and engage in one-sided discussions with Castro where he would recall his life stories.
The members of the Escort Castro was closest to was the former Mayor of Havana Jose ""Pepín"" Naranjo who became his official aide until his death in 1995 and his own personal physician, Eugenio Selman.
Outside of his escort, Castro was also close to Manuel ""Barbarroja"" Pineiro, the head of the American Department of the DGI, Antonio Núñez Jiménez, and the Colombian novelist Gabriel García Márquez.
Marital history The Cuban government has never published an official marital history of Castro, with most information coming from defectors and scarce details published in state media and pieced together over the years.
In his earlier years in power, he showcased some of his family life, in particular his eldest son Fidelito in order to portray himself as a normal ""family man"" to the apprehensive American audience, but eventually abandoned that as he became more concerned about his personal safety.
Throughout his rule, Castro never named an official ""First Lady"" and when the need for such a public female companion was necessary, Celia Sánchez or Raúl's wife, Vilma Espín, would play such a role of la primera dama.Overall, Sánchez described Castro as a compulsive lover or ""womanizer""; he has been officially married twice but has carried on numerous affairs, including many one-night stands.
Popular with women and often recognized as a sex symbol in Cuba, Castro never had difficulty in finding love and seduction, and Sánchez denies that Castro ever engaged in any unusual or un-consensual behavior.
Castro was also described as a poor father; often absent from their lives, he had little interest in the activities of his children and was more interested in his work.
Raúl, who had much more stronger paternal feelings towards his family, was often the one who played the role of surrogate father to Castro's children, in particular Fidelito and Alina.
Castro's first wife was Mirta Díaz-Balart, whom he married in October 1948.
She divorced him later in 1955 while he was in prison due to the attacks on the Moncada Barracks.
Fidelito grew up at various times between Havana and Miami; he later went to the Soviet Union to study Nuclear Physics.
For a time, he ran Cuba's atomic-energy commission before being removed from the post by his father.
He took his own life in February 2018, over a year after his father's death.
During his first marriage, Castro had a brief encounter with Maria Laborde, an admirer from Camaguey whom very little is known and has long been deceased.
It was long believed that his birth was in 1956, but Sánchez and another defector uncovered that he was in fact born earlier than Fidelito.
While Castro was married to Mirta, he had an affair with Natalia ""Naty"" Revuelta Clews.
Widely regarded in Havana for her beauty, Natalia herself was married to Dr.
Orlando Fernandez but sympathized with the aims of the Revolutionary movement.
She initially joined the movement as a friend of Castro but later became his mistress and visited him while he was imprisoned on Isla de Pinos.
Castro showed little interest in her but sent her to a boarding school in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France.
One of the few people willing to stand up to Castro, several defectors have described her personality as the most similar to her father.
Alina became a public relations director for a State-owned fashion company and a model for Havana Club.
Her father inadvertently found out about the latter job while reading Cuba magazine, coming across an advertisement showing Alina posing in a bikini on a boat with two other models; he nearly exploded with rage.
Alina left Cuba in 1993, disguised as a Spanish tourist, and sought asylum in the U.S., from where she has criticized her father's policies.
Castro's second and longest wife was with Dalia Soto Del Valle, another admirer who met Castro during a speech in Villa Clara in 1961.
She was a teacher who was part of the government's literacy campaign who moved to Havana on Castro's initiative and later moved in with him at Punto Cero as his permanent family.
Castro and Dalia had five sons, each of them starting with the letter A and three of them a variation of ""Alexander"" :Alexis Castro Del Valle, born in 1962.
Described as a loner with few friends, he eventually got a degree in computer science but has since become a mechanic.
Much more affable and outgoing, he was initially trained as an engineer as well but instead became a photographer and cameraman for Granma and Cubavisión respectively.
He later became the official photographer of his father and published several books and hosted the exhibitions Fidel Castro:Photografia Intimidade.
Considered a ""computer geek"", like his brothers, he also studied computer science and engineering but was passionate about the subject.
Around 1990, he wrote software that allowed Russian programs to be run on Japanese ones; the product was purchased by NEC of Japan, which raised his national profile in the engineering community of Cuba and even public praise from his father.
He is currently the head of the Surgery unit at the Elite Frank Pais Orthopedic Hospital, Doctor to the National Baseball team and President of the Cuban Baseball Federation.
Considered spoiled by his parents from a young age, he was long considered the ""trouble child"" of the family.
He was passionate about cars and frequently earned the ire of his father's escort unit for disrupting the work of the mechanics.
Angelito never obtained any higher education, but later became the senior executive of the Mercedes-Benz concession of Cuba.
After the 1970s, Castro began a long relationship with Juanita Vera, a Colonel in the foreign intelligence service who joined his escort unit as his English interpreter.
She often appeared in public with Castro, in particular in Oliver Stone's Comandante as his translator and interpreter.
Castro had another daughter, Francisca Pupo , the result of a one-night affair.
Another son known as Ciro was also born in the early 1960s, the result of another brief fling, his existence confirmed by Celia Sánchez.
Human rights in Cuba, List of awards and honours bestowed upon Fidel Castro, and List of things named after Fidel Castro Within Cuba, Fidel's domination of every aspect of the government and the society remains total.
He wants to increase people's standard of living, the availability of material goods, and to import the latest technology.
But the economic realities, despite rapid dramatic growth in the gross national product, severely limit what Cuba can buy on the world market. – Peter Bourne, Castro biographer, 1986 One of the most controversial political leaders of his era, Castro both inspired and dismayed people around the world during his lifetime.
According to political scientists, Castro ruled a single-party authoritarian regime in Cuba.
Censorship of information was extensive, and independent journalism was repressed;Despite its small size and limited economic weight, Castro's Cuba gained a large role in world affairs.
The Castro government relied heavily on its appeals to nationalistic sentiment, in particular the widespread hostility to the United States government.
According to Balfour, Castro's domestic popularity stemmed from the fact that he symbolised ""a long-cherished hope of national liberation and social justice"" for much of the population.
Castro publicly rejected the ""dictator"" label, stating that he constitutionally held less power than most heads of state and insisting that his regime allowed for greater democratic involvement in policy making than Western liberal democracies.
Nevertheless, critics claim that Castro wielded significant unofficial influence aside from his official duties.
Balfour stated that Castro's ""moral and political hegemony"" within Cuba diminished the opportunities for democratic debate and decision making.
Describing Castro as a ""totalitarian dictator"", Sondrol suggested that in leading ""a political system largely his own creation and bearing his indelible stamp"", Castro's leadership style warranted comparisons with totalitarian leaders like Mao Zedong, Hideki Tojo, Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, and Benito Mussolini.
Balfour stated that Castro's story had ""few parallels in contemporary history"", for there existed no other ""Third World leader"" in the second half of the twentieth century who held ""such a prominent and restless part on the international stage"" or remained head of state for such a long period.
Bourne described Castro as ""an influential world leader"" who commanded ""great respect"" from individuals of all political ideologies across the developing world.
In Cuba Following Castro's death, Cuba's government announced that it would be passing a law prohibiting the naming of ""institutions, streets, parks or other public sites, or erecting busts, statues or other forms of tribute"" in honor of the late Cuban leader in keeping with his wishes to prevent an extensive cult of personality from developing around him.
Citing ECLAC, La Economia Cubana, 217; IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics Yearbook, various editions; and EIU, Cuba, Annual Supplement, 1980,22.
