This belief generated a panic in the United States public sphere; and Sputnik only further deepened the sense of national humiliation.
Actually, no missile gap emerged, for in reality, the United States possessed many more nuclear warheads than the Soviets; and it would soon stand armed with a new generation of Atlas and Titan, inter-continental ballistic missiles, , along with new intermediate-range ballistic missiles , like Jupiter.
Nonetheless, Eisenhower decided to place IRBMs in various NATO countries in order to strengthen NATO, both militarily and psychologically.
While NATO members unanimously approved Eisenhower’s missile plan, most of them refused the weapons, some because they feared antagonizing the Soviet Union, and others because they did not want to provoke domestic opposition.
Only three NATO countries, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Turkey accepted them.
In spite of its willingness to receive these weapons, Turkey was not originally the US’s ﬁrst choice, because both General Lauris Norstad, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe , and some authorities in the US Department of State were of the opinion that installing a missile site in the immediate proximity of one of the USSR’s borders would provoke strong Soviet reaction.
However, the refusal of other countries, particularly France, to cooperate put Turkey on the frontline.
Accordingly, ignoring several Soviet warnings, Turkey signed an agreement on 25 October 1959, accepting an instalment of 15 Jupiter missiles in _ Izmir, a Turkish city on the coast of the Aegean Sea.
The decision to launch, however, would be made by SACEUR only with the consent of the United States and Turkish governments.
The interesting thing was that the Jupiter missiles were obsolescent due to their use of liquid fuel, their slow ignition time, their inaccuracy and vulnerability.
Moreover, soon after the Jupiter arrangement had been signed, new modern weapons such as the Polaris and the seaborne nuclear force were developed.
The year 1957 marked a milestone in American foreign policy regarding the Middle East.
The Eisenhower Doctrine of 1957, for example, signalled the White House’s resolution to be more actively involved in the Middle East.
Before this, the proAmerican Menderes government5 had been eager to play a major role in the region in order to gain support from Washington, hence enhancing its own security in the face of the Soviet threat.
This stance had also suited United States foreign policy in the region, as seen in the Baghdad Pact of 1955, signed by Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan and the United Kingdom thanks to the eﬀorts of John Foster Dulles, an American Secretary of State.
Although the Menderes government had worked hard to bring Middle Eastern countries into the pact, its authority was negatively aﬀected by the Suez Crisis of 1956.
Iraq pulled out of the Baghdad pact after experiencing a military coup in 1958.6 Inevitably, Turkey’s role in United States policy-making endeavours in the Middle East became a secondary matter; and the United States failed to provide the ﬁnancial aid it had promised, due to the Turkish government’s mismanagement of the economy.
Consequently, the traditionally pro-American Menderes administration tried to promote a closer relationship with the USSR in order to secure from the Soviets the ﬁnancial support that Turkey so desperately needed.
When one closely examines the Menderes administration’s foreign policy track record from 1958 onwards, one is impressed by the evidence that Turkey abandoned a unilateral foreign policy.
In fact, Ankara tried to establish a balance in its relations with the superpowers by courting Moscow.
Within the context of this new approach, Lütﬁ Kırdar, the Turkish Minister of Health, paid a visit to Moscow in 1959, and planned for Menderes and Nikita Khrushchev to exchange visits following the Washington summit between Eisenhower and Khrushchev in September 1959.
At the same time, the Soviet Embassy personnel in Ankara had become more active in their contact with Turkish authorities, institutions and newspapers in an attempt to gain the support of more inﬂuential Turks and increase contacts between Turkish and Soviet politicians.
Not unsurprisingly, these developments were perceived as a challenge to the American authorities’ political establishment in the region.
Following this warning, Turkish diplomats in Iran spent their time and energy trying to convince the Shah that there was nothing to worry about.
Semih Günver, a diplomat in the Turkish Foreign Ministry at that time, claimed that American authorities feared Turkey’s new approach to Moscow, taken without permission from Washington, because they believed it could provoke some undesirable moves against American interests by NATO members or other democratic countries.
As a matter of fact, there had been a more extensive discussion of Turkish foreign policy in the Turkish press since 1959.
Although Turkey’s ﬁrm adherence to the West was constantly reiterated, and not even one article indicated the Turks’ disagreement with their country’s basic alliance with the West, most pointed out that a new era was beginning and that perhaps tactics should change.
This article is signiﬁcant because it posed the question of how Turkey could capitalize on its position in the East-West conﬂict when the strategic value of its geographic position had decreased due to advancements in defence technology.
The article correctly observed certain changes in attitudes toward foreign policy that had taken place in the USA since the death of Secretary Dulles and in the USSR since the accession of Khrushchev.
Americans were readjusting their view of their allies across the Atlantic.
At this point, one of the United States policymakers’ main concerns with Turkey’s rapprochement with the USSR was Menderes’ readiness to accept ﬁnancial aid from Moscow, which, they felt, might lead to Soviet inﬂuence on Ankara’s foreign policy.
According to the American National Council, if Ankara itself had not viewed the Soviets as a threat to Turkish sovereignty, its acceptance of ﬁnancial aid might have signalled a new era, in which the USSR would come to dominate the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East.
What worried the USA was the possibility that Turkey, a nation whose lands had long been threatened by Russia, and whose unwavering desire to be accepted by Western Europe and the United States as a member of the Western community had helped it to maintain a staunch pro-Western and anti-Soviet foreign policy, might now seek economic, political and military cooperation with Moscow.
Hence, from the American perspective, the Menderes government was becoming a fragile structure that might put the US’s vital interests at stake.
Faced with such criticism, Menderes tried to persuade Washington and Turkey’s other allies that his government’s relations with the Soviets represented nothing more than the regional version of a more positive atmosphere created by recent visits and exchanges between the Soviets and Western leaders.
He argued that Turkey had never intended to make unilateral concessions to the Soviets which could harm the position of the free world.
This new approach, he maintained, was motivated by a purely pragmatic assessment of his country’s ﬁnancial situation, but had been misinterpreted by some of its NATO allies.
It should be noted here that, at the time, American oﬃcials categorically denied the possibility of reaching an agreement with the USSR in order to dispel the notion that relationships between Moscow and Washington had been improving.
Following the military coup of May 1960, the military regime declared its respect for Turkey’s commitments to NATO and the USA, emphasizing its loyalty to Turkey’s traditional Western-oriented foreign policy.
However, it soon became clear that the new leaders were also pursuing a multilateral foreign policy.
In the meantime, the USSR stepped up its eﬀorts to inﬂuence Turkey and made enticing oﬀers of economic assistance.
Although the military government, strained by the country’s economic crisis, was undoubtedly tempted by these oﬀers, it did not accept them.
However, in light of serious criticism of Turkey’s relations with the West,e. of discourse by certain Turkish intellectuals and politicians in the Turkish media,16 Washington believed that elements within the Turkish government were urging the acceptance of at least some additional Soviet assistance, on the grounds that Turkey was in a position to beneﬁt from both sides of the Cold War, as neutrals did.
There seemed to be little likelihood that Turkey would join the ranks of the ‘neutralists’ as long as the Soviet threat remained, and as long as Turkey’s friends and allies provided suﬃcient aid to make continued resistance to Soviet oﬀers possible.
Thus, the United States had to ﬁnd a way to guarantee that Turks would continue to view the USSR as a threat and to ensure that the provisional Turkish government would not be pulled closer to the USSR, out of the grasp of the US and other Western allies.
The major bargaining cards in Turkey’s hands, according to Turkish government assessments, were the continued Soviet threat to its sovereignty and its strategic position, which was indispensable to the United States The proposed missile installation was one of the main symbolic responses to the Soviet threat, and hence served both the US’s and Turkey’s interests.
For this reason, Turkish diplomats never missed an opportunity to use this card in their contacts with Americans.
On 6 June 1961, in his conversation with Raymond R Hare, American Ambassador to Ankara, Selim Sarper, the Turkish Foreign Minister, referred to great technological and psychological improvements in the battle against Soviet propaganda aimed at Turks.
After the coup, the Soviets had promised many things and had for example urged all citizens to seek power, students to seek more liberty, and Muslims to remain conservative and avoid the West.
Bizim Radio, in particular, was an eﬀective source of propaganda in this regard.
It was in this context that Sarper informed Hare of the attitude of many senior military oﬃcers, who were complaining that the United States had not given enough assistance.
On the basis of this unsubstantiated but generally accepted premise, Turkish oﬃcials went on to connect all issues to their unfulﬁlled desire for military equipment.
Concerns about the US’s modiﬁcation of strategic concepts in a manner possibly detrimental to Turkey culminated in a response to Kennedy’s statement emphasizing the importance of Western Europe.
At some point immediately prior to Kennedy’s entrance into the White House, Turkey became an important element in Soviet foreign policy regarding Cold War politics.
In order to strengthen its hand against Washington, the Kremlin desired Turkey’s departure from its Western-oriented foreign policy and its establishment of closer relations with Moscow.
The Kremlin’s stance regarding Turkey should be examined within the missiles context.
As the United States built military establishments within the NATO context along its Eastern border, the Kremlin could not remain unmoved.
From the very beginning, Moscow put pressure on Turkey to discontinue the missile plans; sometimes this pressure came in the form of threatening language.
The Soviet Union had once before secured the attention of the Turkish government, on 28 April 1959, on the occasion of accord negotiations between Turkey and the United States concerning the construction of missile bases on Turkish territory.
At that time, the Soviets had reminded the Turkish oﬃcials in their aide memoire of the provocative ﬂight of the American U-2 spy-plane, which had taken oﬀ from the American airbase in Incirlik, Turkey, and was shot down on 1 May 1960 in the region of Sverdlovsk.
They referred to this incident to argue that in utilizing bases placed at their disposal on Turkish territory, foreign military circles threatened not only the security of the USSR and Turkey, but also that of their neighbours.
The Turkish government had replied that measures taken by Turkey within the framework of its alliances were not directed against the USSR.21 The Soviet tone had not always been so threatening.
Some articles that appeared in the Turkish press in early January 1962 claimed that the Soviets would make $500 million in Soviet credit available on easy ﬁnancial terms, but that Nikita Rijov, the Soviet Ambassador to Ankara, was trying to ascertain how much political quid pro quo the Turks might give.
A Turkish daily newspaper with socialist leanings, Cumhuriyet, claimed that the Soviet oﬀer of aid was contingent on the elimination of missiles and other military bases on Turkish soil.
In early January 1962, the Turkish _ press featured various stories about Soviet oﬀers of aid.
Meanwhile, Inönü strongly reaﬃrmed Turkey’s loyalty to the NATO and CENTO alliances on 9 January 1962, as well as its support for UN policy at the party’s congress.
He made clear that although Turkey wanted to get along with the USSR within the above frameworks, and would avoid provocative policies, it was not possible to form an alliance with the USSR, just _ as it was not possible to be neutral.
At the same meeting, Inönü spoke of a favourable development in relations with the US, and indicated that the Turkish government would cooperate with a new American approach to economic assistance.
A few days earlier, at the Turkish Parliament’s Budget Commission Meeting, Sarper had reportedly been displeased with alleged Soviet oﬀers of aid, characterized the press publicity as ‘part of the Soviet’s own propaganda’, and spoken encouragingly about the American economic and military assistance policy.
The magnitude of socio-political developments in Berlin, Cuba and Laos increased the Cold War political tension, just as Kennedy entered the White House.
Instead, committee members suggested, a Polaris submarine should be deployed and operated and controlled by American personnel.
Some memoirs and documents suggest that President Kennedy wanted to end the Jupiter missiles plan and that he ordered their removal before October 1962, because they were considered insecure, vulnerable, and limited in use.
Kennedy’s memoirs even convey his shock when he learned during the crisis that the missiles were still in Turkey.
According to him, Kennedy knew all the details about the Jupiter missiles; and his administration, not Eisenhower’s, installed these missiles in late 1961 to fulﬁl the 1959 agreement.
If this is true, then the construction of the Jupiter missiles would not yet have begun when Kennedy stepped into power.
The NSC had suggested that the projected deployment of IRBMs to Turkey not be cancelled.
Bernstein suggests that it was no accident that the committee was to be chaired by a representative from the State Department, which, for political reasons, did not look favourably upon the removal of the Jupiter missiles, rather than by one from the Defence Department, which was deeply concerned about the missiles’ provocative nature.
In short, the NSC’s evaluation was based primarily on the State Department’s logic.
When the Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, raised this matter with Sarper at CENTO, the latter’s reaction was strongly adverse.
Sarper explained that as the Turkish government had just spent a lot of money on the missile installation, the Turkish people would hardly understand the reason why the missiles were to be removed, unless they were to be replaced by another system that would enhance Turkey’s security.
Hence, American authorities could not successfully put pressure on the Turkish government, because Turkey’s citizens regarded the Jupiter missiles as a symbol of the alliance’s determination to use atomic weapons in the case of a Soviet attack on Turkey.
Ironically, Turkish authorities stated on more than one occasion that Jupiter missiles based on Turkish soil represented ‘ﬁrm proof of the U.S.’s commitment to Turkey’s security’ – whereas submarines cruising the Mediterranean with Polaris missiles clearly did not.
The support of General Norstad, who emphasized the military importance of sending IRBMs to Turkey, displayed in his discussion with Sarper regarding the Jupiter missiles’ presence in Turkey, also made it unlikely that any attempt to persuade the Turkish military to abandon the project would succeed.
Accordingly, Nash points out that Kennedy disliked going ahead with the Jupiter project, but understood the Turkish point of view.
Turkey’s insistence on keeping IRBMs in its territory contains some historical irony.
In naming the Jupiter missiles after him, it is clear that the authors wanted to emphasize the missiles’ lack of defensive capacity.
Although it is likely that most Turkish authorities were aware of their limited defensive value, the missiles continued to be viewed as a symbol of Turkey’s importance within the Western security system, and also as a source of prestige.
For this reason alone, Turkish military authorities were also reluctant to give up the missiles.
At this point, the account of Admiral Sezai Orkunt, head of the Turkish Military Mission in Washington from 1961 to 1964, becomes signiﬁcant.
Orkunt wrote in his book that the Turkish military authorities had been informed of the Jupiter missiles’ low military value for Turkish defence, but that his report was ignored by Turkish military authorities.
In fact, the Turkish government did not have the luxury of acting against military authorities’ wishes, particularly in those years, when the military had a strong inﬂuence on governmental decision making.
It seems unlikely that the Turkish government could have supported the instalment if the Chiefs of the Turkish General Staﬀ had not wanted it.
The military value of Turkish Jupiter missiles was discussed not only at the administrative level, but also in the Western and the Turkish press.
The Daily Sketch, a British newspaper, reported that Jupiter missile bases in Turkey and Italy would be removed because the Americans had manufactured a suﬃcient number of Polaris submarines and launching missiles, and furthermore, that the United States would no longer require overseas bases because Polaris missiles could be ﬁred from moving bases upon command.
The same newspaper article stated that this change would take place after 1 November 1962.
Such reports were then quoted by some Turkish papers, and it was indicated that this decision might also aﬀect United States aid to Turkey.
For instance, the socialist weekly Yön commented that past and present assistance given to Turkey by Western countries had been provided primarily due to Turkey’s military importance.
Since Polaris missiles would decrease Turkey’s role in Western defence, it must, therefore, be expected that future foreign aid would not be as generous.
However, Yön concluded, the Turkish Foreign Ministry did not want to believe that there would be any question of the removal of the Jupiter missiles for years to come.
On 23 August 1962, probably under the inﬂuence of these discussions, Kennedy once again ordered George Ball, the Under-Secretary of State, to accelerate the study into the removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Italy.
Even though the Department of State opposed the removal of the missiles from Turkey because of Turkey’s displeasure over the proposal, Kennedy was ready to cancel the project at the expense of oﬀending his ally.
However, Kennedy’s directive failed again, as the proposal once again faced strong objections, from both Turkey and the US Secretary.
In reality, Kennedy’s directive did not mean that Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be dismantled immediately, for they had become operational only a short time before.
In fact, American political circles were well aware that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey were obsolete and provided no military advantage; but the real problem was political and by no means simple.
Withdrawal of the missiles could cause a major crisis of conﬁdence, which would complicate and deepen the political turmoil and perhaps enhance the establishment of a military dictatorship there.
United States oﬃcials understood that the Turks would view such a decision as desertion by an ally.
Moreover, American authorities were not just concerned about Turkey’s reaction, but also about the way a trade-oﬀ would be read by many other allies, particularly of those on the Asian–Soviet periphery.
The Jupiter issue acquired more dangerous overtones when the Cuban Crisis erupted on 22 October 1962.
On this date, the American government instigated a naval blockade of Cuba, after the White House learned that the Soviet Union had begun to install intermediateand long-range missile sites in Cuba, and that certain nuclear warheads targeted the US.40 It seems that from the very beginning, the Soviets made an analogy of Cuba and Turkey.
However, with the exception of John McCone, the CIA director, no American authorities foresaw that the Soviets would install a missile site in Cuba.
When the crisis erupted, American authorities argued that the Soviet weapons were designed for aggression and had been deployed secretly, whereas American weapons were defensive and had been deployed openly.
Of course, the installation of Jupiter missiles in Turkey was not the main factor in Khrushchev’s decision to install missiles in Cuba.
Rather, his brinkmanship on the Berlin issue and the uniﬁcation of Germany, that is, the pressure he put on the United States to solve problems in Germany, played a larger role.
At the same time, the possibility that Fidel Castro, the revolutionary leader, Prime Minister, and later President of Cuba – might distance himself from Moscow meant that something had to be done by Khrushchev to restore Castro’s conﬁdence in Moscow.
In retrospect, it seems that the existence of Jupiter missiles in Turkey provided quite a reasonable excuse for the Soviet installation of intermediateand long-range missiles sites in Cuba.
Even so, Khrushchev had long badgered American visitors about missile sites along the Soviet periphery.
Harriman stressed the fact that there had undoubtedly been great pressure on Khrushchev for a considerable time to do something about the American ring of bases, an undesirable situation which was only further aggravated by the American placement of Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Khrushchev frequently referred in one way or another to what was being discussed in the Kremlin councils.
An item of particular interest in this context was his statement that the Soviet Union must be dealt with like America, as a partner equal in strength; and that this relationship had become more deﬁnite as a result of new Soviet inﬂuence in the Western Hemisphere.
Harriman felt that the proposal and actual placement of American missiles in Turkey and Italy had been counterproductive, both to US–Soviet relations and domestically.
Even though these missiles could easily be destroyed, their existence had been humiliating to Soviet pride.
Harriman had also thought for some years that since the United States had begun a policy of abandoning military bases, either because of local pressures or because they were no longer needed, these particular bases should have been used in negotiations with the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev could have won the hearts of his people and justiﬁed a more cooperative approach if he could have shown that these bases had been eliminated through his negotiation.
Harriman even stated that since 1941 he had been convinced that the United States should do its best to reduce the inﬂuence of the more hawkish group in the Kremlin councils and to increase that of more cooperative members.
He claimed that Khrushchev was persuaded to take this dangerous action in Cuba by the more hawkish group.
But, Turkey borders us; our sentries patrol back and forth and see each other.
You have placed destructive missile weaponry, which you call oﬀensive, in Turkey, literally, right next to us.
This was a hint from Khrushchev that there was only one way out of this crisis, namely a Turkey–Cuba trade-oﬀ to be sounded by Kennedy.
It was at this point that Kennedy began to accept the Cuba–Turkey analogy.
However, the State Department already knew from earlier talks with Turkish oﬃcials that this would create serious political and military problems for American–Turkish relations in regard to Turkey’s place in the NATO alliance.
It was this quality of steadfast, even stolid courage in both spirit and policy, together with traditional Turkish military skill, which is actually the nation’s greatest asset to the United States and to the West, generally speaking, and by the same token it is here that we would have the most to lose in the process of the Jupiter removal.
Turks might get the impression that their interests as an ally were being traded oﬀ in order to appease an enemy.
The problem was substantive in the sense that the Turks set great store on arms, which they felt necessary to meet their needs, and just a year before had been adamant in refusing the American suggestion that the Jupiter project might not be implemented.
Since then, there had been no indication that their position had changed; and it could therefore be assumed that if the United States insisted on removal, then the Turkish demand for arms to ﬁll the vacuum would be speciﬁc and sizeable.
In that case, they might have some interest in a Polaris or seaborne nuclear force; but, it was doubtful that they would consider either of these options an adequate compensation for the loss of the Jupiter missiles; and it was foreseeable that they would make alternative or supplemental requests for military hardware.
After his conversation in Paris with Feridun Cemal Erkin, who replaced Sarper on 25 March 1962, Finletter understood the fact that the Jupiter missiles’ obsolete and vulnerable status did not aﬀect Turkish thinking.
It was apparent that any arrangement that did not guarantee atomic capability equal to that of the Jupiter missiles on Turkish soil would be rejected by the Turks.
The removal of the missiles and subsequent stationing of Polaris submarines in the area left doubts about whether the mere deployment of a Polaris would be attractive to Turkish authorities, since they really would have no power to use a Polaris in a time of crisis.
Moreover, they had already turned down a similar proposal in April 1961.
Turkish concern regarding a Polaris substitution might be partially met by consulting them on targeting, so as to assure them that targets in which they were interested would be covered by a Polaris.
It would also be important to assure them that three Polaris submarines in the area would eﬀectively more than double the coverage then aﬀorded by obsolete Jupiter missiles.
Even so, Finletter doubted that the above arrangements would adequately compensate the Turks.
If such a ﬁrm suggestion were made, it should be an acceptable arrangement for the Turks, fairly compensating them for the loss of the obsolete Jupiter missiles.
Such an oﬀer would take the form of converting a number of merchant-type vessels to a Middle Range Ballistic Missile force, utilizing Polaris A-2 missiles.
Ships could be deployed in the Eastern Mediterranean with appropriate targets of interest to the Mediterranean allies involved, and could be manned by mixed Turkish, Italian, American, and possibly Greek crews.
The Polaris deployment would then ﬁll the gap caused by the removal of the Jupiter missiles, while a southern command multilateral force was being put together.
The Policy Planning Committee of the State Department was of the opinion that the eﬀects of phasing out or eliminating the Jupiter missiles in Turkey could lead to the fall of the Turkish government unless suitable NATO measures were taken.
For this reason, the Committee’s suggestion for dealing with the Jupiter missiles in Turkey was to ‘push hard’ to establish the Pilot Southern Command Multilateral Force, as proposed by Finletter.
The Committee suggested that Finletter should be instructed to solicit the North Atlantic Council’s consideration of the sea-based multilateral MRBM concept.
However, in a conversation with American oﬃcials, Turkey strongly objected to some United States and allied countries’ commentators’ tendency to equate the Soviet missile bases in Cuba with the missile bases in Turkey.
The bases in Turkey, Turks claimed, were not speciﬁcally American bases in that they were a joint eﬀort by the United States and Turkey to carry out a NATO requirement.
By agreeing to the NATO requirement, Turkey, like Italy and the UK, had demonstrated courage, resolution and a deep commitment to the common defence of the NATO region as a whole.
Stressing the nation’s good standing as a NATO and UN member which had done its best to contribute to collective security, as in the example of IRBMs and sending Turkish forces to Korea, Turgut Menemencio glu, Turkish Ambassador to the US, indicated that Turkey bitterly resented being equated ‘with a country in the Caribbean, run by a bearded pirate who had turned his island into a base for aggression against the free world’.54 In short, the Turks sought to minimize the Turkish–Soviet bilateral irritants and transfer this relationship into a broad pattern of East–West confrontation.
Substitution of the local Jupiter missiles for a multinational area force could constitute contribution to this policy objective without constituting a concession to the Soviets.
During the crisis, the Turkish government and military authorities also feared that the allied countries’ reaction would not escape the notice of the Soviets, who might decide to take advantage of this atmosphere and put more pressure on Turkey in an eﬀort to eliminate United States missile installations.
Thus, Turkey had to receive desperately needed military equipment as soon as possible.
It became obvious that Turkey, focused on the need for self-defence, would not be eager to dismantle the Jupiter base.
Kennedy’s message began by reaﬃrming the solidarity of American commitments to Turkey and emphasized that the United States would make no bargain of any kind without Turkish agreement.
As Turkey wanted to hear, he made assurances that the bases in Turkey and Cuba were not comparable, despite his prior acceptance of the analogy.
What concerned Kennedy about the Soviet announcement was the possibility that it might bring increased hazard to Turkey in the event of a necessary extension of American military action against Cuba.
In such circumstances, the President saw a real possibility of an immediate reprisal by the Soviet Union against Turkey or the bases there.
In this situation, Kennedy stated that he would understand and equally respect a Turkish refusal to alter the existing situation; or a Turkish decision to render nuclear weapons on its soil inoperable during the Cuban crisis; or Turkish recognition that current weapons systems in Turkey were obsolete and needed to be replaced by other NATO weapons.
If the Turkish government should be interested in the last alternative, the President was prepared to commit a Polaris submarine at once to the Eastern Mediterranean for the protection of Turkish soil.
The President told Hare that Finletter’s suggestion regarding the MLF was relevant, and stressed the fact that these longer range considerations should not be presented to the Turks at once, unless considering them might be helpful.
The President’s immediate aim was to give the Turks a chance to make their own judgements about a foreign threat.
In one sense, however, the United States and the USSR were on the brink of nuclear war, in part because of the obsolete missiles in Turkey.
Leaving aside troubles in Berlin and domestic concerns, Khrushchev had already told the world that the reason for the Soviet missile installation in Cuba was the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, and that if the US agreed to remove the bases in Turkey the problem might be easily solved.
In other words, Khrushchev’s proposal regarding the Cuba–Turkey missiles had already been announced.
Kennedy’s diﬃculty in responding to the Khrushchev proposal lay in its timing and the way that it was announced on the radio.
The United States would withdraw the blockade and guarantee no invasion of Cuba in return for the Soviets’ dismantling of the missiles.
The United States also agreed to the Soviet demand that missiles in Turkey be dismantled within four to ﬁve months, on the condition that the Turkish missile deal, of which only a few people knew, would be kept secret.
The way in which Khrushchev made his proposal gave no opportunity for Kennedy to talk privately with the Turks about the missiles.
He did not dare to take the risk of appearing to yield to a Soviet demand.
He also did not want to risk Charles de Gaulle blaming him for selling out his ally in his own interests, if the trade-oﬀ on Turkey were made public.
However, the Turkish government wanted to dispel the misunderstanding that Turkey had been at fault when the dangers arose by discussing the matter with its allies.
Turkey instructed its permanent representative in NATO to urgently request a special session of the North Atlantic Council to review the events that had led up to the IRBM’s existence in Turkey, emphasizing that the IRBMs were placed in Turkey not merely for its defence, but also for NATO’s defence.
At this point, American oﬃcials again reassured Turkey that there had been no deal regarding Turkey.
It remains unclear whether Turkish oﬃcials knew or at least guessed that a trade-oﬀ regarding the Turkish missiles was made in the course of US–Soviet negotiation during the crisis.
First of all, this matter was most probably raised by Rijov to Erkin in Ankara.
The same sources stated that Khrushchev had agreed to the removal of the missiles in Cuba in return for the American removal of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Even though United States oﬃcials began to investigate the idea of building a Mediterranean MLF immediately following the resolution of the crisis, the removal of the Jupiter missiles took on a particular urgency in the Department of State, when Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defence, directed that the missiles be moved from Italy and Turkey by no later than May 1963.
McNamara told the State Department that this move would require almost immediate initial approaches to NATO and preparatory steps to be taken with the Italians and Turks.
McNamara’s early removal plan was opposed by some bureaucrats in the Department of Defence and the Department of State.
William Taylor, for example, asserted that from a military point of view, the missiles remained a signiﬁcant military asset of NATO, despite the fact that they were obsolete and in a certain respect vulnerable, because 80 per cent of them could be ﬁred with a 15-minute alert at Soviet targets.
Also, he argued, that it was not advisable for the United States to remove these missiles quickly, regardless of their strategic importance.
When the time was ripe for removal, the United States had to be able to oﬀer the Turks and Italians immediate participation in a defence force.
For this reason, and because of the President’s keen interest in this matter, Taylor suggested to Paul Nitze of the Department of State, who also opposed the early removal of missiles, that they should send a memorandum to the President containing detailed analysis of this subject and emphasizing the symbolic and psychological importance that the Turkish IRBMs had since assumed.
Clearly, no matter how vigorous the United States denials, an immediate proposal for removal would give rise to suspicion of the existence of a secret US– Soviet deal.
However, the memorandum stated that this line of argument was not accepted by Dean Rusk, as Kennedy did not see any need to stall the removal plan.
Another objection to the immediate removal of the Jupiter missiles came from Robert W Komer, the National Security Council Staﬀ to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Aﬀairs, who did not know about the secret American–Soviet deal over the Turkish missiles.
Turkey was not the strongman of the Middle East; rather, it was in the throes of a continuing domestic political crisis.
Furthermore, the withdrawal of the missiles would be widely regarded, and played up by the Soviets, as a retraction of United States power.
One of the cruxes of the matter was that the historical and geographical framework in which the Turks viewed their security interests was diﬀerent in important respects from that of the American and continental European NATO partners.
The Turkish public, as well as Turkish authorities, focused on the Soviets as the supreme enemy, against whom they had stood guard and battled for several centuries.
The most characteristic Turkish diplomatic policy was to identify and align Turkey with the most powerful Western nation opposing Russian or Soviet aggression.
In light of this reality, Hare brought the department’s attention to the fact that the balance of tension between friend and foe still existed, but that it involved a higher level of military power, higher stakes, and the possibility of greater destruction.
Because Turkey lacked independent military strength of a determining nature, the ‘Turkish authorities developed a compulsive desire to see, hear, and even feel manifestations of Western support on a constant basis.
Hare warned that they ‘should shun then like the plague giving an impression that the sea born missile force and any subsequent eﬀort we may make in the direction of having the Jupiters removed is similarly connected with Cuba’.66 In this context, one local reaction in Ankara to the Soviet proposal for removal of American missiles in Turkey in conjunction with removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba was ‘a glacial insistence’ that the security of Turkey not be linked with the Cuban problem.
For example, Hare suggested that even though the Turks would consider a more up-to-date eﬀective weapons system, like a seaborne force, as an acceptable replacement for the Jupiter missiles, the State Department would have to manage the transfer in a way that would not give rise to suspicions that they were creating, however indirectly, such a linkage.
What really concerned the Turks was the continued publicity equating the missiles in Cuba with those in Turkey.
The Turkish Foreign Ministry recommended that world newspapers be thoroughly briefed on the diﬀerences between the missiles in Cuba and those in Turkey.
It was clear that one element in the successful transfer of Turkey’s land missiles into a seaborne force would be how well American oﬃcials could maintain the aforementioned separation.
As far as the proposal itself was concerned, the Turkish authorities could conceivably ﬁnd advantage in the eventual phasing out of the Jupiter system, if the seaborne force’s military superiority could be conclusively demonstrated.
The Jupiter missiles were expensive for the Turks as well as for the Americans in terms of trained manpower and money.
Hare warned the department that anything done regarding the missiles in Turkey should be in a NATO context.
If pressure were put on Turkey to make a unilateral statement which would single it out from the rest of NATO, it could remind Turkey of the Soviet treatment of Castro.
Erkin indicated to Hare on 27 December that the Turkish government would most likely agree to the removal of the missiles, provided they were replaced with something which knowledgeable members of the Turkish public would consider eﬀective.
Erkin suggested to Hare that the ﬁrst step should be to prepare the Turkish public via an oﬃcial announcement by – or leaks from – American sources about an alteration in strategic positions and the search for new means to assure Western deterrence capabilities.
According to Erkin’s plan, the sources would state that NATO is always in the process of reviewing changes in strategic circumstances and their implications in terms of weapon systems.
This general statement would be followed by a more speciﬁc announcement that a new, up-to-date means of defence, one not vulnerable to immediate retaliation, would be placed in position in order to protect Turkey.
The political success of this kind of operation, of course, would depend on the proper order and timing of United States actions, and the degree to which these were carried out in cooperation with Ankara, when both capitals agreed to do so.
In fact, the Turkish government had already commenced to make its public ready via the press.
For instance, the Turkish daily Milliyet, at the behest of the Turkish government, wrote on 25 December 1962 that missile bases in Turkey would not be removed until new weapons and Polaris missiles were given to Turkey, and that a new defence strategy would be discussed at the NATO meeting to be held in Canada in May.
The pro-government Turkish newspaper Dünya also stated that an oﬃcial had veriﬁed that the Polaris would be given to Turkey, saying that NATO’s two strong members, Turkey and Greece, would possess these nuclear war weapons along with a defence strategy to be established.
Throughout the ﬁrst week of January 1963, several Turkish papers published reports based on the Herald Tribune article of 31 December concerning possible reductions in Western bases located in Turkey.
Çetin Altan, one of Turkey’s most inﬂuential columnists from Milliyet wrote on 1 January 1963 that bases located in NATO countries, including Turkey, had lost their strategic importance with the development of advanced weaponry such as the Polaris, and hence that the tactic of bargaining with the United States for aid in return for allowing it or NATO to use certain facilities was losing its eﬀectiveness.
Other columnists from various Turkish newspapers expressed the same views.
Erkin complained to Hare that these kinds of press reports put him in an embarrassing position since he would have diﬃculty concocting an ad hoc reply due to lack of information about Washington’s thoughts on the matter.
He would also face the same diﬃculty in the foreign policy debate within the GNA and cabinet discussions, where the question of missiles in Turkey would be raised under the subject heading of ‘the Turkish role in NATO’.74 Finally, the White House assured Turkey in early January via Ambassador Hare that Turkish press article references indicating that the existence of new weapons, such as the Polaris, were reducing the value of Turkey to the West, as well as United States aid to and interest in Turkey, were completely unsubstantiated.
The White House also stated that the American government was not discussing the details of this matter with representatives of the Turkish press.
Hare also emphasized, as instructed by Washington, the importance of Turkey in the move to create a stronger NATO, and the speciﬁc advantage of substituting the Polaris deterrent for the Jupiter missiles.
Due to widespread speculation about the removal of missiles in Italy and Turkey, Erkin was forced to make a statement in the Turkish Senate on 17 January 1963.
In this speech, he said that if NATO decided to terminate the role of the Jupiter missiles in the alliance’s defence strategy, both NATO’s general security and Turkey’s individual security would be ensured by the most modern and eﬀective conventional and nuclear devices.
It was during the US–Soviet bargaining that the missiles in Turkey had become a hot subject of discussion in domestic and foreign presses.
However, Erkin stated that such news and reports had no value or truth, other than reﬂecting the personal opinion of the writers.
The Minister of Defence, Sancar, supported Erkin’s views with more detailed information in his Senate speeches.
He stated, for example, that no change had yet taken place in NATO’s strategic concept, but he left the door open to the possibility of such a change in the future.
He insisted that Turkey would be part of any development, from the planning stage to the ﬁnal decision.
Sancar also explained that even if Turkey were not a member of NATO, it would be obliged to make the same eﬀorts and maintain the same forces for its own national defence.
He praised NATO and the United States for the military assistance they had given Turkey, and indicated that there were no grounds for Turkey to feel slighted on this score.
The Turkish press continued to publicize, possibly with the backing of the government, the removal of Turkish missiles.
The article also stated that removal had been made possible by an agreement that United States Polaris submarines under NATO command would be stationed within six months.
In the light of this new public information about the possible removal of missile sites, Finletter wanted to be authorized to make statements on the matter at the North Atlantic Council meeting on 23 January.
However, two editorials in Milliyet and Yeni Gün were more critical of the proposed removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
One of them, entitled ‘Before Our Shortcomings are Revealed’, by Cetin Altan, appeared in Milliyet on 23 January 1963, and referred to reports from United States sources that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be replaced by Polaris missiles.
Altan remarked that the word ‘replaced’ was a transparent attempt to appease Turkish sensibilities, because the Polaris would be ﬁred from an oﬀshore submarine.
In fact, he argued, the announcement simply meant that missile bases in Turkey were being removed.
Altan linked this development with a report that the Soviets had accepted United States inspection of nuclear disarmament in their own territory.
This new dynamic posed great problems for Turkey, who could no longer use the justiﬁcation, ‘we are a NATO base’, in order to request Western aid.
The article stressed the fact that, according to American sources, several proposals to remove the missile bases had been made to the Turkish government in 1961.
The article harshly criticized the game Turkey had played with the missiles in order to secure United States economic assistance.
Erkin may have already known that the American proposal did not meet his demand, although he tried his best to make it happen.
Finally, on 17 February 1963, Erkin oﬃcially announced in the GNA that Turkey had accepted the removal of the Jupiter missiles.
Following oﬃcial Turkish agreement on 28 February 1963, McNamara directed that the process of dismantling the missiles in Turkey commence on 15 April 1963, and be completed under the auspices of the United States Air Force as expeditiously as possible.
General Robert J Wood was sent to Turkey on 12 March 1963 to discuss the details of the removal with the Turks.
American authorities were worried about the physical removal of the Jupiter missiles because the Turkish military had the capacity to stall the process via a Parliamentary ratiﬁcation of their bilateral agreement to the removal, technical agreements as to the precise details of the physical dismantling of the missiles, and the basic context of future Turkish– American relations.
One critical element in the success of the Wood Mission in these contexts was the nature of any future United States military aid programme for Turkey, as it would aﬀect the modernization of the Turkish armed forces.
More speciﬁcally, Turkish military leaders were concerned about the Turkish army’s capacity to defend itself against potentially hostile neighbours.
For reassurance, the Turks badly wanted, and sincerely believed that they needed and deserved a rate of military modernization much higher than anything the United States was proposing to help provide in the next few years.
In fact, American oﬃcials were preparing to reduce military aid to Turkey.
In order to prevent a stall in the removal of the Jupiter missiles, Wood had to assure the Turkish authorities that Turkey remained important in United States and NATO strategic plans.
It was clear to General Wood, when he arrived in Turkey, that the Turkish military had been badly shaken by the possible implications of the Jupiter removal to future plans for United States military assistance.
To dispel those kinds of worries, Sancar asked him to do what he could to see that Turkish personnel participated in the Polaris forces.
General Wood told him that this was a Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe matter, but that he would look into it.
Following the Wood mission, the United States decided to send a Polaris submarine to Izmir on 14 April 1963 for publicity purposes.
The White House hoped that its visibility would oﬀset the removal of the Jupiter missiles and restore Turkey’s conﬁdence.
Since the Jupiter missiles had been located near Izmir, the Polaris visit to that city would be seen as a great opportunity for public demonstration of the proposition that the Jupiter missiles had been dismantled due to modernization requirements.
Finally, towards the end of April, the Jupiter missiles were dismantled.
Turkish military personnel joined the MLF by boarding the American warship Ricketts in 1964; however, Turkey soon withdrew its personnel from the MLF because of the cost of maintenance and the fact that the ship did not serve Turkey’s interests.
It is clear that the removal of the Jupiter missiles from Turkey marked a signiﬁcant shift in Turkey’s strategic importance in Cold War politics, because no nuclear weapons directed at the USSR remained on Turkish soil.
However, in retrospect, we can say that this did not mean that Turkey’s strategic position in American world politics changed dramatically.
Rather, the United States kept some military bases in Turkey, leaving Turkey’s strategic value intact.
Furthermore, Turkey’s continued control over the Straits of Dardanelles and the Bosporus put it in a unique position, as it rendered Turkey capable of preventing the largest Soviet ﬂeet, the Black Sea Fleet, from freely entering the Mediterranean during the Cold War.
Turkish authorities learned about the secret deal a few months after the crisis; and both the Turkish _ government and the public were bitterly disappointed.
The Americans told us that they would remove the missiles because they had become outmoded, and that they would replace them with the Polaris.
This event showed us that Turkish authorities should not let the Americans drag us into an unwanted crisis.
All Turkish governments, both before and after the military coup, failed to analyze the disadvantages of keeping surplus nuclear weapons on their soil, which could have cost them much more than they actually did.
In this sense, the departure of the Jupiter missiles removed a major irritant in Soviet–Turkish relations.
Following the missile crisis, the Inönü _ government began to discuss a multilateral foreign policy without changing its fundamentally Western-oriented foreign policy.
The Cuban crisis is usually viewed as the factor triggering Turkey’s departure from single-track foreign policy.
However, this shift was not the exact result of the crisis; rather, it developed as a consequence of new elements that entered Turkish–US relations immediately following the crisis.
One such element was the international argument surrounding the status of Cyprus, whose heated tension was felt by Turkey, Greece, and Turkish and Greek Cypriots, and in which the United States felt obligated to get involved.
He also urged the provision of economic aid to those countries with anticommunist governments.
With the coup of 27 May 1960, a military government ruled until Ismet _ Inönü came to power on 20 Nov.61.
The headquarters of the pact moved to Ankara, and its name was changed to CENTO, the Central Treaty Organization.
Editorial comment on ‘Türkiye’deki Jupiter Füzeleri’, Yeni Gün, 24 Jan.63.
