Once again, President Kennedy disagreed because he did not want to potentially start a World War III with Cuba and the Soviet Union.-October 20, 1962 Because President Kennedy wanted to avoid a nuclear war and did not know how missiles the Soviets had on Cuba, he chose to blockade, or quarantine, Cuba disallowing Soviet ships from bringing any more missile parts into Cuban harbors.-October 21, 1962 After attending Sunday morning Mass, President Kennedy met with the Commander of the Tactical Air Command, TAC, General Walter Sweeney, and he encouraged President Kennedy to use an airstrike.
Because the Soviets had come into contact with American forces, the DEFCON level was raised to level 2, the highest it had ever been in United States history.-October 25, 1962 United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson revealed to the world and Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin clear photographic evidence of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The American public responded by finding it necessary to invade Cuba and retrieve the weapons of mass destruction. -October 26, 1962 Along with the quarantine of Cuba, President Kennedy, who sought to avoid a nuclear holocaust, was willing to trade and remove the missiles in Turkey and Italy only if the Soviets removed the missiles in Cuba.
Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev did not immediately respond to this. -October 27, 1962 The conflict in Cuba escalated when President Kennedy, EX-COMM, and the JCS learned that an American U-2 plane had been shot down by the Soviets.
Though President Kennedy was upset, he did not order the launch of missiles, but instead he contacted Khrushchev and organized an appointment in Washington D.C. the following day.-October 28, 1962 Known as the closest day the world was to nuclear war, American and Soviet ballistic missiles were aimed at one another and fully operation.
However, President Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed upon peace terms as the missiles in Turkey and Italy were removed, and the warheads in Cuba were also removed.
Share to TwitterShare to FacebookShare to Pinterest Works Cited Works Cited Aakre, Nels and Silverman, Leslie.
Beginning on the morning of Sunday, October 28, at six o’clock am, it was reported by the CIA that all of the Cubans ballistic missiles were operational and were in standby waiting for the signal by Khrushchev.
In response to this action, President Kennedy allowed the Air Force to also move into position as several American F-102 fighter planes, armed with nuclear missiles, monitored the skies of the Bering Sea and Cuba.
With a push of a button, nuclear warheads could have been launched to the Soviet Union and Cuba, resulting with a nuclear war.
However, President Kennedy and Khrushchev met between the hours of six and nine o’clock am, and after their long discussion, war was averted.
Both President Kennedy and Khrushchev had met each other’s demands, and people around the world began to rejoice.
Though the world had been saved by the actions of President Kennedy, EX-COMM, the JCS, and Khrushchev, the conflict known as the Cold would still exist between the Americans and Soviets for nearly three more decades until peace was finally achieved in 1989.
President Kennedy also informed the press about the talks with the Soviets because he wanted all Americans to be on high alert and to retreat to fallout shelters as soon as possible.
In order to address the situation at hand, President Kennedy scheduled an immediate meeting with both the JCS and EX-COMM, and he made it clear that if any other planes were to be shot down, he would unquestionably launch nuclear missiles at the Cubans and the Soviets.
In order to avoid this nuclear disaster, President Kennedy was willing to trade and take out his missiles in both Turkey and Italy while the Soviets and the Cubans had to remove their missiles from Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The president found most of steps in this option to be favorable towards the United States, but he did not rule out the second plan, created by EX-COMM, which was to invade Cuba and forcibly remove the missiles from the country.
Although the military leaders of the JCS found this a great opportunity for the United States to show their guns, President Kennedy seemed to back away from this option because he did not want to start World War III and because it was reported that approximately 18,500 soldiers were to become casualties during the first ten days of fighting in Cuba.
Although President Kennedy wanted to negotiate with the Soviets in order to avoid a nuclear holocaust, his emotions swayed him to consider using an invasion because the Soviets did not want to listen to the pleas and proposed resolutions by the United States.
Adlai Stevenson also played a huge role as the American Ambassador to the United Nations when he questioned Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations, Valerian Zorin, on whether nuclear warheads were on the island of Cuba.
Immediately after stating this, several large photographs, taken by U-2 spy planes, were presented on national television, and these high quality pictures depicted the bomb assembly plants scattered throughout Cuba.
Stunning millions of viewers and Ambassador Zorin alike, the American public now felt that an invasion was absolutely necessary because of the threat posed by the unstable Cubans and fiery Soviets.
Famed news icon, Walter Cronkite was even superstitious of the blockade of Cuba, and he warned Americans to pack their bags and flee to their nearest fallout shelter.
Though people were skeptical of President Kennedy and his decision to place quarantine on Cuba, surprisingly, it was a huge success for the United States as only one ship, Bucharest, was allowed through because it was an oil carrier.
On the brink of nuclear war, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was intimidated by the potential effects of barging through the quarantine and lost his first battle with the United States.
Though some tensions were eased for a few moments, under the direction of the JCS, the Strategic Air Command, or SAC, raised the alertness of the nation by increasing the DEFCON level to 2, the highest it had been in the history of the United States.
Again, the United States was getting much closer to a full-scale nuclear war with the Soviets, and the American public demanded answers to their hundreds of questions.
Khrushchev even sent a personal letter to President Kennedy reaffirming him that the missiles in Cuba were only for self defense in case of an attack.
Also wanting to obtain more coverage of what was occurring on Cuban grounds, President Kennedy sent more U-2 spy planes to investigate, and he met with EX-COMM to discuss the actions that would be taken if a spy plane were to be attacked by Cuban ground forces.
Seeking to protect his soldiers, President Kennedy also formally established the quarantine by signing Proclamation 3504 at seven o’clock pm, and the enforcement of the quarantine was moved to ten o’clock am the following morning.
Along with this President Kennedy cleared made his point that if the Soviet Union or Cuba were to launch any missiles anywhere, it would be considered an attack against the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response solely against the Soviet Union.
At the conclusion of his short speech to the American public, President Kennedy also mentioned that he was raising the Defense Condition of the United States to level 3, or DEFCON 3, meaning that the United States was on high alert and rapidly approaching a full-scale war.
In addition, President Kennedy also declared that the quarantine would be effective immediately on October 23, 1962 at seven o’clock pm and that all orders to attack would be given by his signal and no one else.
While winding up his speech on the major broadcast networks, President Kennedy also hinted at attacking Soviet ships and using a large airstrike on Cuba if the Soviets failed to recognize the proposals made by the United States.
It was clear that President Kennedy wanted to negotiate with the Soviets and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in order to avoid a large conflict, but he was willing to go to war with the Soviets if they wanted to challenge the American military and his ideologies.
President Kennedy then met with the Commander of the Tactical Air Command, TAC, General Walter C Sweeney and they discussed an airstrike attack on Cuba, even though President Kennedy had already decided on the quarantine.
Though President Kennedy still believed that the quarantine was the greatest option, he still told General Sweeney to be on high alert in case the Soviets attacked American warships during the Cuban quarantine.
As the commander in chief, President Kennedy told General Sweeney that he would personally call him if he wanted to attack Soviet ships, and he did not want anyone to tell him otherwise.
In addition, as more photographs were taken by American reconnaissance planes, under the command of Commander William Ecker of the Photographic Reconnaissance Squadron 62, or VFP-62, it was not known how many destructive missiles the Cuban and Soviets had, and the JCS had no way of taking out all of these missiles through an airstrike.
Instead, President Kennedy, the commander in chief, chose the radical option of blockading Cuba, disallowing Soviet ships to bring more missile parts and supplies.
Though the quarantine was considered an act of war against Cuba and the Soviets, President Kennedy wanted them to see this as an act of defense, and if it were to fail, he did not count out raining hell on Cuba with several airstrikes.
Through this tactic no Soviet ships could reach Cuba, and by attacking American military ships, they would have started the fight, and President Kennedy would have allowed the use of nuclear missiles against both Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Not only were the men of both EX-COMM and the JCS querulous with President Kennedy regarding his statements, but they were also shocked to find out that four more additional nuclear assembly sites had been found during U-2 flights.
It appeared as if the nuclear arms race between the communists and Americans was heating up, and President Kennedy’s cabinet members now felt even more justified using airstrikes against Castro’s communist forces in Cuba.
Though President Kennedy did not make his decision on this day, he and EX-COMM met privately with Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei Gromyko in the Oval Office.
While explaining the Soviet Union’s decision to place ballistic missiles in Cuba, Foreign Minister Gromyko soothed the fears of the Americans and explained that it was solely for defensive purposes.
Although this sounded like an astute plan, several of the men in the Joint Chiefs of Staff, of JCS, thought that it was necessary to verbally negotiate with the Soviets and Cubans first in order to meet their demands.
By agreeing to comply with the enemy, they believed that they could then achieve success in Cuba and bring this “crisis” to a conclusion before it blew out of proportion.
In addition to complying with the communists, it is also suspected that several of the group’s members wanted to also invade Cuba and intercept their nuclear missiles, as well as capture Fidel Castro.
By capturing their ballistic warheads, the Soviets would be severely crippled, and this would end their interference in the Western Hemisphere.
Though these plans were extremely difficult and not set in stone, it was clear that if the United States government and military negotiated with Cuba and then invaded the country, no other nation on earth would rival the United States.
However, many of the other JCS board members fund many faults in this particular plan of action, and there is no clear resolution to the conflict in Cuba.
During the preliminary session that took place at approximately six thirty pm, the fifteen men discussed several options that could be used to engage the communist forces in Cuba and in the Soviet Union.
Some of the consensus ideas that they formulated included ignoring the surreptitious operations in Cuba, negotiating with the communists, or using nuclear warheads against the attackers in the South and against the Soviets.
Although several other options were discussed, they did not formulate a specific procedure to use against the communists and in the coming days they planned on contacting the Cuban and Soviet governments privately.
In the early hours of the morning, on October 15, 1962, White House officials discovered that the Soviets and Cubans were constructing numerous medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba.
This was a huge breakthrough for the group because they now had evidence that the communists were planning a surprise combined effort against the United States.
They also believed that they could not let this conflict get too far out of hand and must not let these findings get anywhere near the public because they would only cause more suspicion and chaos from the American people.
It was also unknown to the fifteen men how long the communists had been creating and constructing these nuclear weapons because they had only commissioned the U-2 spy planes to start flying over Cuba on October 14.
The posts in this blog are of historical nature about a specific event in United States History.
There has been a genuine effort to properly cite all pictures, quotes, information gathered in this research project.
Within the ranks of these officials, the information about the issue was extremely confidential; however it frightened these men, and they did not know what was in store for America during this conflict against the communist countries of Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The men were on high alert because it was speculated that the communists were nearing a combined offensive against the United States and that the use of atomic arms would be available to their disposal.
However, President Kennedy and his men believed that America should be careful in utilizing this Joint Resolution because they already failed twice in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs and through Operation Mongoose, misguided attempts at assassinating Cuban dictator, Fidel Castro, in early 1961.
In addition to Joint Resolution 230, the fifteen man board agreed that the Soviets had violated the Monroe Doctrine, which stated that Eastern countries could not interact with countries of Latin America.
It was imperative to these men that they kept a close eye on Cuba through the use of several espionage tactics.
