The section “A Student Guide to Better Writing, Speaking, and Research Skills” begins on page 4.
It includes practical advice on such topics as improving your writing skills and preparing a short report, a book review, and a term paper; preparing, rehearsing, and delivering a speech; and using a library's resources and tapping other sources of information.
Included are a Glossary of terms and abbreviations encountered in research; a listing of general and specific Selected reference books; and information on two systems for arranging materials in a library— Dewey Decimal Classification and Library of Congress Classification.
To make it even easier for you to find what you seek, the index refers you to the specific volume and page where the information appears.
If it sends you to a fairly long article, it tells you which section or sections of that article to look for.
Page numbers in the two C volumes are indicated with Cand Ci, and those in the two S volumes are indicated with Sand So.
Page numbers for the volumes that contain more than one letter indicate the letter you seek, rather than the first letter of the volume.
Core Core Core Core CORE [organization Core [sun Some identifiers are not complete in themselves, but the article titles that follow them complete the identification.
Feisal See Faisal in this index A see also reference indicates that another heading in the index has entries you may want to look up.
References to illustrations appear along with other references in this index, not separately.
The wording shows whether you will find both pictures and text information or only pictures on the pages listed.
If the entry says picture on, diagram on, or map ona given page, it indicates that the illustration listed is related to the subject of the index heading you found, even though no significant text information on that subject appears on the same page.
That’s why we developed this section—to help you improve your skills in these important areas.
It also provides how-to-advice on preparing a short report and on preparing a book report.
The section concludes with helpful hints on the effective use of audio-visual aids.
A Guide to Research Skills, part three, helps you get the most of the resources from the library or media center.
It includes detailed information about library catalog systems and reference sources.
It tells how to evaluate reference sources and how to prepare source cards and take notes.
The — ~. até i Wa FF; section provides guidance for tapping sources of information outSide of the library, such as conducting an interview or using television or the Internet as a source.
A Student Guide to Better Writing, Speaking, and Research Skills concludes with a Glossary of terms and abbreviations often encountered in research; a list of general and specific Selected Reference Materials; and information on two library classification systems—Dewey Decimal Classification and Library of Congress ClasSification.
Schoolwork involves a steady stream of writing assignments, and many jobs require the writing of effective letters, memos, and reports.
Writing also plays a role in your personal life, as you fill out forms or write letters to friends and relatives.
Good writing gets its message across so clearly that the reader Knows exactly what the writer meant to say.
It also holds the reader's attention so completely that the entire message—not just a fragment of it—is received.
Don't believe anyone who tells WRITING’ SKILLS you that it’s easy to write well.
People who have no trouble expressing themselves out loud may freeze when they pick up a pencil.
Like any other skill—for example, shooting baskets or playing the piano—writing requires practice.
If practicing writing sounds like drudgery, you probably haven't thought of all the possibilities.
They also provide specific guidelines for preparing such school assignments as short reports, book reports, and research papers. to express yourself.
Keep a journal or diary to record your experiences, thoughts, and feelings.
Try writing a fan letter to your favorite author, TV personality, or rock star.
Send for brochures, pamphlets, and free samples that you see advertised in newspapers or magazines.
You might also consider writing your own invitations and greeting cards instead of buying commercially produced ones.
The more you write for fun, the more you'll realize that writing doesn’t have to be a chore.
Every time you write, youll be practicing a skill and getting better at it.
Some of your school writing assignments, such as themes, essays, and stories, are based on your own opinions, ideas, or imagination.
Other writing assignments, such as book reports and research papers, are based on facts gained from reading and research.
Be sure you understand the specifics of the assignment, such as its length and whether the topic is your choice or assigned.
Plan ahead and organize your time to help assure that you have enough time to do a good job.
If the topic is your choice, select one that interests you, one that you already Know something about, or one that you're eager to learn more about.
Limit your topic so that you can cover it adequately in the assigned length and the available time.
Simply talking about your assignment with friends can trigger ideas that you might be able to use in your paper.
Develop an outline to organize your thoughts and to guide your writing so you won't forget a point you intended to include.
A simple list of the main ideas may be adequate for a short assignment.
In the introduction, you briefly introduce your topic, giving the reader a preview of what's to come.
The body of the paper—the longest part by far— provides the facts, examples, and details that support the main idea expressed in the introduction.
The three parts of your paper should work together to make an effective whole.
Strive for an attention-getting introduction—one that will arouse interest and encourage your reader to read on.
In the body, make sure each point relates to the subject youre discussing.
Don't stray into unrelated material or get caught up in trivial details that don’t support your main idea.
A Guide to Writing Skills 7 As you get ready to start writing, think of the three parts of your paper in terms of this simple formula.
When the time comes for you to write a first draft, don't sit with pencil poised waiting for the perfect sentence to come to mind.
It’s better to plunge right in, without worrying about making mistakes in grammar, spelling, and punctuation.
At this stage, you simply need to put down the information and ideas you've gathered.
And don't feel you have to begin with the introduction, especially if you're having difficulty with it.
In many cases, you'll think of an effective introduction after you ve written the body of your paper.
Always write or type your first draft on one side of the paper only, with wide margins to allow plenty of room for revisions.
If you type, set your computer, word processor, or typewriter for doubleor triple-spacing.
Thesesenable astronauts down to keep from without b to sleep uxstrapped 14 floatingabout.
Eating aboard the space shuttle also requires astronauts to They “revolved adjusting to the conditions of weightlessness.
Astronauts eat their meals with their feet strapped down te-keep Their them-fromfoating-about.
Foods include frozen or chilled facilities for heating soups, vegetables, and meats.
The shuttle has aways-to-heat food. use The astronauts eat,with dishes and silverware.
Think of writing as a building process, with words, sentences, and paragraphs as building blocks.
Your goal is to choose the best words, to put them together into clear, grammatical sentences, to form the sentences into logical, coherent paragraphs, and to link the paragraphs into a well-organized paper.
In most cases, writing involves a lot of rewriting—turning out as many drafts as necessary to produce the best results.
After you've completed your first draft, the best thing to do is forget about your paper for a while.
You might be SO impressed or satisfied with your first effort that you think it cant be improved.
Look for weak spots in content, organization, and writing style as well as errors in grammar, capitalization and punctuation.” are it can be.
Editing your own work is one of the hardest and most important tasks in turning out a well-written paper.
Also look for weak spots in content, organization, and writing style, as well as for errors in grammar, spelling, capitalization, and punctuation.
Keep a dictionary, thesaurus, and grammar handbook nearby—and be sure to use them.
If you are working on a word processor, use such built-in aids as the dictionary.
If you're adding one or more sentences, write them in the margin and use an arrow to show where the additions should go.
If you want to take out material, don't erase it or black it out completely.
Instead, draw a neat line through the material or draw a circle around it.
That way, if you later decide to restore the material or move it somewhere else, it will still be readable.
To judge the content of your paper, keep in mind your reader and your purpose.
All other sentences in the paragraph should relate to the topic sentence.
If you have a sentence that doesn't seem to fit in the paragraph, move it to another paragraph or eliminate it.
Make sure your paragraphs flow smoothly from one to the next in logical order.
Style—the way you express yourself—can make a big difference in the effectiveness of your writing.
A paper that has all the necessary information but is boring to read may leave the reader disappointed and unimpressed.
If you're writing a report on the Pueblo Indians, for example, tell how the Indians dug irrigation ditches, wove cloth, and carved dolls, not how they made ditches, cloth, and dolls.
For example, a figure for the population of India is more interesting if you add the fact that more people live in India than in all the countries of North and South America combined.
For example, write today or now rather than at the present time and if rather than in the event that.
Don't use words that you yourself don't understand or that are intended merely to impress your reader.
For example, write end rather than termination and best rather than optimum.
Replace overused expressions, called clichés, with fresher expressions.
Hungry as a bear, the last straw, and /ast but not least are examples of clichés.
For certain assignments, your writing style may be more formal than your everyday conversation.
Mistakes in grammar can confuse the reader and even change the meaning of what you write.
Here are some of the most common grammatical problems you should look for as you revise your work.
Run-on sentences consist of two or more independent clauses written together without a proper connection.
To correct a fragment, you can join it to a sentence or add words to make it a sentence.
Known for their skill as hunters, lions have little trouble finding food. or Lions are Known for their skill as hunters.
A pronoun must also agree with its antecedent—that is, the particular noun to which it refers.
When Karen told Ann the story, Ann looked surprised. or Ann looked surprised when Karen told her the story.
Dangling modifier is an element in a sentence that seems to modify a word that it does not logically modify.
Running at record10 A Guide to Writing Skills AN \) eg os Go 47% BL, 5 \ N Ss whe cA 3 + eNRS Ve ‘ Ns OAS OAL A ' h ‘ 4, wert re r AAS VIAN : . "" \ breaking speed, the race was the highlight of the day.
Running at recordbreaking speed, Kelly made the race the highlight of the day.
Misplaced modifier is a phrase or clause not close enough to the word it modifies.
After you've completed all your revisions, your work should be the best it can be.
The next sections provide specific suggestions on how to prepare a Preparing a Short Report During a school year, you'll probably be asked to write short reports on various subjects.
This research provides you with “raw material""—the information you need for your report.
As the writer, your job is to produce a finished product—a report that presents the research information in your own words in a clear, interesting manner.
The section Writing Tips included a list of preliminary steps to follow before short report, book report, and research paper as well as general guidelines for producing the final copy. you begin a writing task.
Here are some additional suggestions that apply specifically to short reports.
It probably won't matter if you're a bit over or under the number of words assigned, but stay close to the target.
You need to know if your teacher expects a summary report or a critical report.
In a summary report, you present the information you've found without expressing any opinions or judgments.
For example, a paper describing the founding of the United Nations could be presented as a summary report.
In a critical report, on the other hand, you're expected to present your own reactions to the information you've found.
You need to evaluate the information, take a stand, and justify your stand with supporting points.
In a critical report on the United Nations, you might take a position for or against continued United States membership in the organization.
If your teacher lets you choose between a summary report and a critical report, wait and see how you react to the research material before you decide.
If you find yourself strongly agreeing or disagreeing with what you read, a critical report might be in order.
On the other hand, if the information seems straightforward and noncontroversial, a summary report would be appropriate.
For example, if you tried to write a paper on “The Circulatory System,” “Life in Colonial America,” or “The United States Space Program,” you'd find yourself swamped with information.
One way to get ideas on how to limit your topic is to check an encyclopedia.
Using the index or the search feature, look for the general subject heading you're interested in, such as Circulatory System.
The article titles listed under the heading will provide you with a starting point for narrowing your topic.
Then check the individual articles to see what they cover and how they are organized.
A subheading in one of the articles might give you just the idea you need for a suitable topic.
Other sources of ideas include the table of contents of a book covering your topic or the articles listed under your topic in a periodical index.
Encyclopedia articles on your topic are good sources for background reading.
As you read, you can decide what kinds of information you'd like to include in your report and what can be left out.
It’s a good idea to jot down a list of points to serve as a sort of preliminary outline and a guide to your research.
Your list might take the form of a series of questions you hope to answer in your report.
Researching the topic involves finding sources, reading them, and taking notes on what you've read.
The encyclopedia articles you used for your background reading may have included adaitional resources—lists of books or Web sites that provide additional information about your subject.
After you've found good source material, you need to read it carefully and take accurate notes.
For a short report that requires only a few sources, you may find it easiest to take notes on lined paper A Guide to Writing Skills 11 or a notepad.
If you are using electronic reference materials, you can print out the information you need or save it on a disk.
See “A Guide to Research Skills” for more complete information on research sources and how to take good notes.
Preparing an outline is the last step you need to do before writing your report.
It will help you organize your notes and make writing your first draft easier.
Begin preparing the outline by gathering all your notes and reviewing them.
Then decide how the information can be organized into major topics and subtopics.
For a short report, your outline can be simple, with only a few main headings and subheadings.
Performing scientific experiments This kind of outline is a topic outline. lt uses words or phrases for headings.
A sentence outline uses complete sentences for head12 A Guide to Writing Skills ings.
After you've completed your outline, stop and think about the information you've gathered.
It should tell the reader what your paper is about and should guide you as you write.
Al] the points you make in your report should relate in some way to the thesis sentence.
A look inside a space shuttle shows how people can adapt to living under unusual circumstances.
When you're ready to write your first draft, keep your notes and outline nearby.
Your notes should provide you with the specific details and examples you'll need to support your thesis statement.
Follow the suggestions given in the section “Writing Tips” that begins on page 6 as you write and revise your work.
Shs apes BS Ie ae 2385 “Begin preparing the outline by gathering all your notes and reviewing them.
After you've made your last revision, you're ready to prepare a clean, fresh copy of your report.
If your teacher has given you instructions on how to submit the report, follow them exactly.
If you can, type your report on a computer, a word processor, or a typewriter.
A written report about a book may be only a brief summary, or it may be a lengthy analysis.
If you cannot type, write your report in ink on white, lined paper, using one side only.
Check, too, for last-minute mistakes in spelling or punctuation and for typing errors.
It’s important that you underStand exactly what you are expected to cover in a book report.
That way, you'll Know what factors to pay particular attention to as you read the book.
If you are allowed to choose the book for your report, you obviously should pick one that you think you'll enjoy reading, whether it's fiction or nonfiction.
If a book report is due in three weeks, don't assume you'll have three weeks to read a book.
Don't pick a ' * A Guide to Writing Skills 13 book that’s too easy to read just So you can finish it quickly.
On the other hand, don't choose a book in which the content, vocabulary, or writing style is too difficult.
Select a book that seems to be at or slightly above your reading level.
The bibliography in the article Literature for children also rates books according to various reading levels.
If you have trouble selecting an appropriate book, ask your teacher or librarian for suggestions.
If the teacher has specified the topic you are to report on, pay particular attention to the parts of the book that pertain to that topic.
Take notes as you go along, and record page numbers of pasSages you want to remember.
If the book is your own copy, you may underline or otherwise highlight important parts and make notes in the margins.
If the topic of your book report is your choice, take time after you've finished the book to think about what you've read.
You may decide there were more things you didn't like about the book than you liked.
Whatever your overall impression was, it’s best to select one or two aspects of the book as the topic of your book report.
After you've decided what your topic will be, it’s helpful to make an outline to guide your writing.
Follow the suggestions in the section “Writing Tips” on pages 6-10 as you write the first draft and revisions.
Remember the need for a strong introduction, a supportive body, and an effective conclusion.
In the body of your book report, back up your thesis sentence with direct references to the book.
Interweave your personal comments with summaries of specific parts of the book or direct quotations.
If you quote directly, be sure to copy accurately, use quotation marks, and include the page number in parentheses after the quotation.
If you quote from a source other than the book you're reporting on, you'll need to use a footnote.
When you're ready to prepare your final copy, follow your teacher's instructions precisely.
Think of your research paper assignment as a chance to learn a lot more about something that interests you.
It’s also an opportunity to develop skills in information gathering, organization, and writing.
These skills will make you better equipped to handle many other school assignments and perhaps job duties later in life.
But a research paper is longer—generally eight or more pages—and it requires checking more sources.
It also has more parts, including a title page, an outline, footnotes, and a list of sources.
The following sections give specific guidelines you'll need for preparing a research paper.
You may be surprised to learn that writing your research paper is one of the last steps you'll do after receiving the assignment.
There are many tasks that need to be completed before you can begin writing.
You might have several weeks, or even months, to prepare a research paper.
Whatever you do, don't let yourSelf be lulled into thinking you can relax until a week or two before the deadline.
Consider other assignments and commitments you have and plan to spend a certain number of hours a day—perhaps two or three—working on your research paper.
Allow about an hour per page to type the final copy, including all text pages, the final outline, and the list of sources.
That hour or So includes time for proofreading, making corrections, and placing footnotes correctly.
Allow one day to organize your notes and one day to prepare your final outline.
The time left will be used to choose your topic, read, gather A Guide to Writing Skills 15 “Planning ahead is a good idea for any writing assignment.
Consider other assignments and commitments you may have...” information, and take notes.
In most cases, your instructor will allow you to choose the topic for your research paper.
One way to begin the selection process is to choose a broad topic and then narrow it down.
Remember that you'll be spending much time on your research paper, so be sure you choose a topic you're really interested in.
Even if you don't particularly like the subject, you can probably find a specific topic within the subject area that appeals to you.
For example, perhaps you don't care much for United States history, but you love music.
A United States history research paper on songs of the Civil War could be more fun to prepare than you thought possible.
Don't be fooled into thinking that you'll have plenty of time and space to cover a broad topic.
It’s far better to cover a narrow topic in depth than to skim over a broad topic.
See the section “Preparing a Short Report” for how to narrow your topic.
Another important point to consider in selecting a research paper topic is the availability of research materials.
Go to the library or media center and check the library catalog and The Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature to be sure enough books or articles have been written on your topic.
If no such books or articles are available, your topic may be too recent or too specialized.
After you've chosen your research paper topic, do some background reading.
An encyclopedia won't give you all the information you need, but it will provide an overview of the topic.
Check the index and read the various articles that deal with your topic.
Most likely, your background reading will turn up aspects of your topic you hadn't thought of.
You may find yourself reshaping your topic according to something that strikes your interest.
As you read, jot down ideas that occur to you about what you'd like to cover in your paper.
Note charts, tables, photographs, maps, and bibliographies that could be helpful.
With your background reading behind you, you're ready to prepare a preliminary outline for your research paper.
The outline will help you organize your thoughts and guide your research.
Begin your preliminary outline by figuring out what the main idea, or purpose, of your research paper is.
As you're figuring out your thesis, also decide what kind of approach your paper will take.
If your subject inspires strong opinions, you may want to take a pro or con approach, in which you take a stand for or against a certain proposition.
You may choose to compare or contrast two or more things or show the cause and effect of something.
A chronological approach, which traces the order in which events occurred, Suits some topics.
Other topics lend themselves to an analytical approach, in which a topic is thoroughly examined.
After you've decided on your thesis and approach, ask yourself what points you want to cover to Support your thesis.
At this stage, you needn't be too concerned about the order or completeness of your outline.
The important thing is that you give yourself a clear direction before you begin to conduct your research.
The next step you need to perform is preparing a list of sources to consult in your research.
To begin with, go back to the encyclopedia articles you read earlier to see if they include lists of sources to check for additional information.
In addition, many of the sources you consult for your paper will include additional source lists or bibliographies.
You'll find additional sources when you check the catalog, magazine and newspaper indexes, and electronic sources in your library.
For each source you locate— book, article, pamphlet, record, tape, Web site, and so on—make a note.
If you are using a computer, you can add each source you find to one list.
If you are writing your source list, use one index card for each source.
These cards will be easy to organize and alphabetize when you later prepare your final list of sources.
If a source does not have usable information, make a note on your list, or draw a line through its card.
But keep the note so that you'll have a record of every source you checked in doing your research.
The quality of your research paper depends greatly on the information in it.
It's important to find reliable, interesting information and record it in accurate notes.
You may need to examine various kinds of sources before you find the best possible ones.
But you may discover that your best information comes from a survey or interview, the Internet, or a museum or historical society in your community.
Valuable information may turn up in places you least expect to find it.
The notes on a record jacket, for example, could provide interesting details for a report on the origins of rock music.
You're out to track down leads and find the facts you will need to write the best paper you can.
See “A Guide to Research Skills” beginning on page 26 for detailed Suggestions on how to use the library or media center and on how to get information from various sources.
When you feel you have ail the information you need, it’s time to review and organize your notes.
Remember, the thesis statement should summarize the purpose of your paper.
All these questions will help you get ready to prepare your final outline.
It should be an accurate guide to what you plan to include in your paper.
After you've arranged your information in logical order, group it into large, obvious divisions.
You must have at least two subtopics under a main topic—or none at all.
The final outline may be a topic outline or a sentence outline, but not a combination of them.
In either form, all the headings must be expressed in parallel phrasing.
Topics and subtopics are identified by Roman numerals, capital letters, Arabic numerals, and lower-case letters, in that order, followed by periods.
The bottom of this column shows an example of a final outline for a research paper, preceded by the thesis sentence.
Computers are learning tools that can significantly improve the writing skills of students, and they should be made available nationwide.
Uses in the classroom A Encyclopedia and Internet research B Interactive learning programs C Testing spelling and other skills behind you.
If you've done a good job on all the preceding steps, the writing should go smoothly.
With your final outline before you and your notes arranged in proper order, you're ready to begin writing your first draft.
Use doubleor triple-spacing and wide margins to make later revisions easier.
As you write your first draft, concentrate on putting your ideas down in a clear and orderly fashton, with smooth transitions from one point to the next.
Your thesis sentence should appear in the introduction and guide you as you write.
The details you include in the body of your report should relate to the thesis sentence.
If you use a quotation, copy it exactly and enclose it in quotation marks.
A quotation that is more than five lines long should be indented and single-spaced, with no quotation marks.
If you omit part of a quotation, use an ellipsis in place of the part left out.
Local B Private foundations C PTA’s and other local organizations A Guide to Writing Skills 17 tions and certain other material in your research paper require footnotes.
The main purpose for footnotes in a research paper is to document sources—that is, to give credit to the author whose words or ideas you are using.
Even if you restate someone else’s idea or opinion in your own words, you must credit that person.
Otherwise you may be guilty of plagiarism—stealing someone else's words or ideas and passing them off as your own.
You should also footnote facts or figures that a reader might have cause to question.
As you write your first draft, put a footnote number in the margin whenever you write something that needs documentation.
On a Separate sheet, write the footnote number and information about the source—title, author, and page number.
You'll use this information later when you type your final draft. some instructors require that footnotes appear at the bottom of each page on which documentation is required.
Others prefer to have all footnotes on a separate sheet headed “Notes” after the text of the paper.
Some allow putting footnotes in parentheses after the quotation or material being footnoted.
The number of the footnote appears slightly raised above the line, after the quotation or other material being footnoted.
That same number appears before the footnote itself at the bottom of the page or on the separate “Notes” sheet.
The footnote number is raised slightly above the line, and the start of the footnote is indented like a paragraph.
Be consistent, and follow your teacher's 18 A Guide to Writing Skills instructions.
The list of Sources contains all the sources—books, articles, pamphlets, letters, interviews, Web links, and so on—that you used to prepare your research paper.
The list of sources tells the reader both where you got your information and where further information on the topic can be obtained.
With your source cards or printout at hand, preparing your final list is easy.
Simply arrange the cards in alphabetical order by author (or title for a work that has no author), and copy the information.
You may decide to include tables, charts, graphs, diagrams, lists, or other material with your research paper.
If so, place the material at the end of the paper and label each item Appendix A, Appendix B, and so on.
In the appropriate place in your text, you can refer to the material with a crossreference to the specific appendix.
Revising your first draft. \f time permits, set aside the first draft of your research paper for at least a day before you begin to revise it.
Then cast a critical eye on it and judge it for content, organization, and style, as well as for such mechanical details of grammar, spelling, and punctuation.
Revising a research paper involves a few more steps than are needed for most other written work.
First, see that your footnotes are numbered correctly and have the required information.
Second, check any direct quotations to be sure they are worded accurately.
Finally, check the list of sources to see that it is alphabetized properly and that each entry has all the required information with correct punctuation.
The final copy. \f your teacher has given you a style sheet, be sure to follow it precisely as you prepare your final copy.
Type or print out your report on high-quality white paper, using one side only.
Leave a margin of 1 to 14 inches on the left and 1 inch (2 % centimeters) on the right, the top, and the bottom of the paper.
Indent the first line of a footnote five spaces, and put the second and following lines flush with the left margin.
Single-space the lines within a footnote, but double-space lines between footnotes.
Begin each item on the list of sources at the left margin and indent the second and following lines five spaces.
Single-space quotations that are indented rather than run-in with the text.
User lower-case Roman numerals for the outline pages and Arabic numerals for all other pages.
Center the number at the bottom of the first page of the outline, the text, and the bibliography.
Prepare a title page, which contains the title, your name, and the date.
The final outline, including the title of the paper and the thesis sentence.
The text of the paper, with the title of the paper repeated in all capita] letters on the first page.
A page titled NOTES, which lists the footnotes if you did not put them at the bottom of each page.
Fasten your paper in the upper left-hand corner, or put it ina folder or binder.
Then congratulate yourself, You're finished, and the paper is ready to turn in.
Yet the thought of making a speech before an audience may fill you with dread.
The guidelines given here for preparing and delivering a speech can help you become a confident Speaker.
And chances are that sometime during your life you will be asked to give a committee report at a club meeting, ask for donations for a charity, or make a presentation to your boss.
Learning how to handle SPEAKIN SKILLS J a it Wie M | oe NJ ¢ vA ¢, “ Speaking situations with ease is a Skill well worth developing.
It will help you communicate more efPreparing a Speech There are six basic steps to follow in preparing a speech.
They are analyzing the audience, choosing a topic, determining the purpose of the speech, gathering information, organizing the content, and choosing a format.
To Speak effectively before a group of people, you need to Know something about them.
You need to know such factors as their age and educational level and their attitudes regarding various subjects. cP 3 EX \ WSS ies Vi fectively in a wide variety of everyday situations.
People of different ages and educational levels have different vocabularies and different abilities to understand ideas.
Be sure your audience can understand what you're talking about and adjust your vocabulary to their abilities.
Also consider how much knowledge about the topic your audience already has.
For example, a speech about Apache Indian crafts presented to a group of 8-yearolds would be far different from a speech on the same topic presented to a group of high school students.
The language you use and the number and kinds of facts you present would differ.
Attitudes. |\f you are presenting a controversial topic, try to find what attitude your audience already holds toward the topic.
If they're indifferent or likely to disagree, you may have to gather more facts and present them more forcefully to be effective.
A large group may require a more formal speech presentation than a small group.
If the group is large, you may be speaking behind a podium or ona Stage.
If the group is small, you simply may be seated at a table with the other members of the group.
These factors may influence your choice of speech format and your delivery techniques.
First, choose a topic that interests you or that you already know something about.
Youre more likely to enjoy preparing and delivering a speech on a topic you like than on one you don't particularly care about.
A speech on how to improve scores on video games might win an enthusiastic response from a sixthgrade class.
But such a speech would probably be of little interest to a group of senior citizens.
You would not make the same kind of speech at a graduation ceremony that you would at a pep rally.
Fourth, if your topic requires research, see that the necessary information is readily available.
Finally, make sure you can cover your topic adequately within the time allowed.
Limit your topic so you can present your main idea and support it with meaningful details.
An informative speech provides information and consists largely of facts presented in a straightforward manner.
A persuasive speech tries to convince an audience to do something or adopt a particular point of view.
Persuasive speeches may rely on emotional appeals as well as facts to achieve their purpose.
An entertaining speech provides a pleasant experience for the audience and may have a more informal tone than the other two kinds of speeches.
For example, you may try to entertain the members of your audience in order to win them over—or perSuade them—to accept your point of view.
If your speech requires information you don't already have, you'll need to do research.
If your speech is about how newspapers are recycled, for example, you could visit a recycling plant to observe the process.
The books, magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, electronic databases, Web sites, and other materials you'll find will provide information on almost any speech topic.
Interview an expert or others who have firsthand knowledge. |f you re preparing a speech on the effects of budget cutbacks on elementary schools, for example, you might interview the principal and some of the teachers at a local elementary school.
As you develop the content of your speech, always keep in mind the importance of attracting your audience's interest in the beginning and holding it to the end.
In the body of the speech, present your main points and supporting details.
Make sure the details are closely related to your topic and interesting to your audience.
You can present your main points in several ways, depending on your topic.
You can arrange them in order of importance, putting the most important points first.
You can use chronological order, describing events in the order in which they occurred.
In some speeches, you might discuss a topic that is new to your audience or difficult to understand.
In such cases, begin with the simplest facts and work your way up to the more difficult ones.
Or think of something that the members of your audience already know about that could help them understand the new or more difficult topic.
The conclusion of your speech is your last opportunity to impress the members of your audience.
In many cases, a quotation from a famous person could provide a memorable conclusion to your topic.
An outline can help you organize the ideas and facts that make up each part of your speech.
The phrases or sentences of the outline briefly state the points to be presented.
Or your outline may consist of a simple list of points to be covered—in proper order, of course.
You need to decide what kind of format to use in delivering your speech.
In choosing a speech format, make sure it is one you are comfortable with and one that suits the occasion.
You don't have to worry about forgetting anything, and you can make sure your speech precisely fits the allotted time.
You may become so engrossed in your manuscript that you forget to look up at the audience.
You may begin speaking in a monotone-tone, causing your listeners to lose interest.
Once they've lost interest, the point of your speech may never get across.
Reading your speech also makes it difficult to adjust the content in response to audience reactions.
If you choose to read your speech, type it double-spaced or write it out neatly so that you can read it easily.
Some people write their speeches on large note cards and make an effort to look up at the audience at least at the end of each card.
Memorizing the speech requires that you first write it out and then memorize it word for word.
Depending on the length of the speech, this type of delivery could mean hours or days of extra preparation time and effort.
You might concentrate so hard on remembering the speech that your voice sounds unnatural.
And you'll be unlikely to add remarks or otherwise adjust your speech to suit the mood of the audience.
If you decide to memorize your speech, you'll have to keep in mind the need to make your delivery natural and relaxed.
Comments offered at a committee meeting or club gathering are examples of impromptu speaking.
This format can succeed only if you are well-informed about the subject.
An impromptu Speech enables you to give a lively, spontaneous delivery.
Without adequate preparation, you may ramble and never get your point across effectively.
If you know ahead of time that you'd like to say something at a meeting or other occasion, take at least a few minutes to organize your thoughts and perhaps jot down your main ideas to serve as a checklist.
Speaking extemporaneously is the most commonly used type of delivery in public speaking.
You organize your ideas in a written outline and use it as a guide when you give your speech.
An extemporaneous speech has the advantage of being both organized and spontaneous.
And it’s not as difficult to maintain eye contact with your audience when you Speak extemporaneously as it is when you read from a manuscript.
To take full advantage of the flexibility of the extemporaneous speech, learn about your topic in depth.
There are many steps involved in the preparation of an effective speech.
And yet this would be the kind of mistake that could ruin a presentation.
You can also vary the Rehearsing and Delivering a Speech After you've completed all the words.
If possible, make a tape Steps in preparing your speech, recording of your speech and lisyoure ready to begin rehearsing ten to it critically.
You may find unless you're going to give anim_—‘ that you're not pronouncing all promptu speech.
Rehearsing is your words clearly or that you re obviously necessary for a memogoing too fast or too slow. rized speech, but it is also vital to a good extemporaneous speech or Next, practice in front of a mirto a speech you plan toread.
The ror, paying attention to your posmore you rehearse your speech, ture and gestures.
Then, ask the more confident you'll be when someone to listen to your speech the time comes to deliver it. and give an honest reaction to both content and delivery.
Your As you rehearse, remember listener may be able to spot disthat you want to convey more tracting mannerisms that you than information.
You also want should correct, such as clenching to convey enthusiasm for your your fists at your sides or shuftopic.
You can also your audience will be more likely videotape yourself to observe to listen to, and enjoy, your your own strengths and weakspeech. nesses.
Finally, if you will be delivering your speech in an unfamiliar How to rehearse.
Begin replace, try to practice it there at hearsing by using your outline or least once.
That way, you can reading aloud from your manupractice with a podium and microscript.
As you repeat the speech phone if they are to be provided. many times, you'll come to depend less and less on your written Your voice.
The way you use A Guide to Speaking Skills 23 your voice can add greatly to the impression you make when delivering your speech.
As you speak, pay special attention to the vo/ume, speed, and pitch of your voice and to clarity of pronunciation.
Obviously, you'll want to speak loudly enough so that the audience can easily hear you.
You'll have to consider such factors as the size of the room, whether you'll be using a microphone, and whether there are outside noises you must speak over.
At other times, you might gain attention by speaking more softly, making the audience listen more carefully.
Varying your speed from time to time can make your speech more effective.
And a dramatic pause at the end of a particularly important statement can be an effective technique.
Your voice sounds higher when you are excited and lower when you are serious.
During a speech, your voice should follow this natural pattern of pitch variation.
Dress neatly in comfortable clothing that is appropriate to your audience.
Avoid wearing unusual clothes or jewelry that might distract the audience or get in your way as you speak.
If you're reading from a manuscript, hold it up slightly so that you can easily glance at the audience from time to time.
If you gesture constantly, you'll lessen the effect and make the audience more aware of your gestures than your words.
And make sure your gestures look natural and blend smoothly with what you're saying.
ILE bi speiertties fot) etest ert ad a Lsistee “8 S& Sse aS 7%, ate “Bare * oe % cv) | * ox x me ak teet as 4 2 ste ae Aye.
Audio-visual aids can add welcome variety to your speech and help hold the audience's attention.
They can also make your speech more memorable by leaving the audience with a more vivid impression of your topic than words alone can convey.
Whichever kind of audio-visual aid you choose, be sure it serves a definite purpose.
An effective aid should clarify, illustrate, or dramatize a fact or idea.
For example, a speech explaining how the human ear works would benefit from a drawing, model, or computer animation of an ear.
A discussion of various dialects might be greatly enhanced by a tape recording.
In graphs and charts, the use of different colors can make statistical comparisons much easier to understand.
You also need to be sure that your visual aid is big enough to be seen by the entire audience and that it is clearly labeled.
Take into consideration the size of the room and the size of the audience as you choose and prepare your audio-visual aids.
Rehearse with your audio-visual aids so you can incorporate them smoothly into your speech.
If an aid is particularly interesting or unusual, it may be a good idea to have the aid handy, but hidden, until the appropriate time in your speech.
Practice in front of a mirror, paying attention to your posture and gestures.” y 7 ty \ wd | HV, S fat 1 ag) A Wig A 2.
Mount illustrations and set them up on an easel, rather than trying to hold them while speaking.
If you're going to write on a chalkboard or paper, remember to Keep turning back to your listeners to keep your eye contact with them.
If you'll be using such equipment as a film, a tape, a videotape recorder, or a computer, check it out before you speak.
Be Sure it’s in good working order and that an electrical outlet is nearby.
Don't stand in front of a viSual aid or block the view of part of the audience.
When the time finally comes to deliver your speech, you ll probably suffer from that common ailment— Stage fright.
To Keep your nervousness from working against you, concentrate on what the person speaking before you is saying, rather than worrying about your own presentation.
Walk briskly to your place and look directly at the audience to gain the group’s attention.
Most of us spend time each day asking questions and finding the answers to them.
But others are more difficult, and you may need help in finding the answers.
It involves locating and retrieving information and then working with or communicating that information.
If you know where to go or the person to ask to get answers to your questions, you've developed a skill that you can use all your life—in school, in a career, and in many everyday situations.
Developing good reA KAR A WEN ¥ vy AN an i search skills can help you find information more quickly and efficiently, thus saving time.
You'll also learn other ways to get information and how to take notes so you can put your information to good use.
The library is probably the first place that comes to mind when you think about doing research.
Libraries—-or media centers in many schools—contain more information than any one person could learn in a lifetime.
Many libraries also have pamphlets, brochures, computerized information, microreproductions, prints, photographs, maps, audiotapes and videotapes, slides, and movies.
In addition, a library may have videotape recorders, slide and movie projectors, personal computers, copiers, satellite dishes, and other equipment.
Whether you're using a small school library or the main branch of a major city library system, it’s good to know what materials and services the library provides.
Some libraries provide online orientations to familiarize you with their services.
Then take some time to browse around in the library to become familiar with the various sections.
Most libraries have two major sections—the general circulation section and the reference section.
The general circulation section contains books and other materials that may be checked out of the library.
In that section, you're likely to find all the fiction and most of the nonfiction books your liprary owns.
The reference section has materials that, in most instances, must be used in the library.
Most books in the reference section are not the kinds you would read from cover to cover.
They include encyclopedias, dictionaries, atlases, and other reference works that play an important role in research.
Or they can direct you to sources that contain information on a broader topic, such as the history of baseball.
Some libraries have several librarians who speCialize in different kinds of information and services.
For example, a reference librarian would be more familiar with the library's reference section than a children’s librarian would be.
A librarian also can help familiarize you with the library's various electronic and mechanical resources and devices, such as the Internet, a CD-ROM, or a photocopier.
The library catalog is your guide to locating the vast resources of the library.
It has information about every book the library contains and gives its location.
Catalogs may also include entries for records, tapes, films, and other nonprint items.
If your library does not include entries for nonprint items in its catalog, ask where such material is indexed.
Library catalogs take various forms, from traditional card catalogs to computer catalogs.
It’s important to learn how to use whatever type of catalog your library has.
If you go directly to the shelves without checking the catalog, you may never know about books that have been checked out or are waiting to be reshelved.
If you know your library has a particular book, but can't find it on the shelves, the librarian—or media specialist in many school libraries—may be able to see if it’s simply waiting to be shelved.
If the book has been checked out, you can ask that a “reserve” be put on it.
In many libraries, however, it has been replaced or supplemented by other kinds of catalogs.
For most books, there is one card under the author’s name, one under the book title, and one or more under the general subject.
Some books may have additional cards for a joint author, an editor, a translator, or an illustrator.
They look much like the main entry, but they have an additional line at the top, giving the title, the subject, or some other heading above the author's name.
The cards are arranged in A Guide to Research Skills 27 alphabetical order, according to the words on the top Jine.
Each drawer has author cards, title cards, and subject cards, all interfiled alphabetically.
The subject cards are the best place to begin library research if you don't have a specific title or author in mind.
To find books on your topic, you first need to think of an appropriate subject heading.
If you have trouble finding books on your topic, ask the librarian to suggest other subject headings to look under.
Filing rules. \ts helpful to know the library rules for filing catalog cards.
Cards are arranged in alphabetical order, letter by letter to the end of the word, then word by word to the end of the heading.
If a title begins with “a,” “an,” or “the,” the card is filed beginning with the next word in the heading.
Abbreviations are arranged alphabetically according to the letters in the abbreviation, not the letters of the entire word that is being abbreviated.
Adams” appears before “Collection of poems” because, alphabetically, the letters c-o-/-a come before c-o-/-l.
Names beginning with Mc and Mac are listed alphabetically and treated as one word.
Macadamia nuts Macmillan, Macbeth Thomas Machinery McAdam Maclean, John McHenry McLean, Alan 6.
U.S.—HISTORY—WAR of 1812 U.S.—HISTORY—CIVIL WAR U.S.—HISTORY—1920-1929 U.S.—HISTORY—WORLD WAR, 1939-1945 7.
Catalog entries for books bya person are filed before entries for books about that person.
Unlike the card catalog, the computer catalog does not interfile all the records.
Instead, the catalog has separate indexes containing authors, subjects, or titles.
In addition, the computer catalog files alphabetically rather than chronologically.
For example, the computer screen would display U.S.— HISTORY—CIVIL WAR before U.S.—HISTORY—WAR OF 1812.
Each catalog card contains information that can help you decide how useful a book will be.
The author, or main entry, card shows the author's name and life dates.
When the author lived may be important in judging the value of the book for your particular purposes.
Similarly, the publication date can provide a clue as to how useful the book will be.
If you’re looking for up-to-date information, a book published 20 years ago may not be helpful.
The card tells you how many pages of front matter (content in front of the main text) the book has.
The card also tells how many text pages there are and whether the book is illustrated.
Listed near the bottom of the card are other places in the catalog where a card for the book is filed.
This information can lead you to subject headings where you will find entries for other books.
Call numbers are used to classify nonfiction books and other materials according to subject area and to arrange them on the shelves in a certain order.
Most public and schoo] libraries use the Dewey Decimal Classification System to classify nonfiction books.
A letter and number code based on the author's name appears below the Dewey or LC number.
The call number of a book appears in the upper left-hand corner of the catalog card and on the spine of the book itself.
The call number is important because it acts as the book's “address,” telling you exactly where to find the book on the shelves.
Continued decimal notation (e.g., 599. and 599.61) permits ever-finer subdivisions.
A number appears on each library book and determines the way books are arranged in the library.
By getting the number from an auaad thor, title, or subject record in the card catalog, you can quickly locate any book on the shelves.
Paenungulata number Si9\9 fr 599.61 Proboscidea WORLD BOOK photo is located in the library's reference section.
In most libraries, biographies are shelved together, separate from other nonfiction books.
Biographies are arranged in alphabetical order according to the last name of the person the book is about.
If only letters or the letter F appears instead of a call number, the book is a work of fiction.
Such books are shelved separately in alphabetical order according to the author's last name.
When you find an entry in the catalog for a book you want to use, copy down the call number, title, and author.
Go to the appropriate section of the library, and the call number should guide you to the book you are looking for.
Computer, or electronic, library catalogs have replaced traditional card catalogs in many Iibraries.
Like traditional catalogs, they store information about books and other media.
You can access information in computer catalogs by using the keyword search technique.
For example, to find information about Siamese cats, you can type the keyword Siamese.
The computer then searches the database for all “matches” or “hits” of that word.
The keyword may appear anywhere in the title, subject, or description of the topic.
Using a specific keyword, such as Siamese, helps you find information faster than using a more general word, such as cat.
If your search turns up nothing, you then can try using a broader keyword.
Likewise, starting any search with a general word such as war, history, geography, or science will probably yield too much material.
Words such as or, and, and not, called Boolean operators, connect keywords.
Use or if you need to expand a topic or are unsure about how a topic is listed.
For example, you can search under The electronic catalog record contains the same information you would find in a traditional card catalog record.
This information includes the title, subject, author, publisher and copyright date, number of pages. illustration information, and call number.
Computer card catalogs also allow searches by author, by subject, and by title.
Many also allow you to limit your search to materials published before or after a certain date or to certain types of materials.
Most computer catalogs indicate if material is in the library or checked out.
With many computer card catalogs, you can print out information you need. some computer catalogs only store information about materials available on site.
Other catalogs are networked, or connected, to other libraries and collections in your city, region, or state.
In microfilm and microfiche catalogs, printed material is photographed and greatly reduced in size, so that many lines fit onto a small piece of film.
Special equipment enables users to enlarge the film image so it can be read on a screen.
For this reason, each individual item may not be listed in the library catalog.
You can find many answers to your research questions in reference materials.
Some reference works, such as almanacs and encyclopedias, provide information directly.
Other works, such as indexes and bibliographies, tell you where to find information.
Special or subject reference works, such as The New Grove 30 A Guide to Research Skills Dictionary of Music and Musicians and The Encyclopedia of the American Revolution, provide information on only one subject.
Such reference works cover a subject in greater detail than general reference works.
Many of these sources are in multimedia format and supply photographs, graphics, sound, and video; information originally published in other sources such as newspapers or magazines; or articles in books.
Like the rest of the nonfiction collection, the reference section is arranged according to subject.
Familiarize yourself with the part of the reference collection that contains materials for your research.
Then you will be able to refer to them quickly when you need information.
But some will become reliable sources of information that you turn to again and again.
The most frequently used reference works include encyclopedias, yearbooks, almanacs, dictionaries, and periodical and newspaper indexes.
They contain thousands of articles on a variety of topics, and so the subject you re interested in is likely to be covered in some form.
Reading an encyclopedia article can give you a good introduction to your topic and provide you with many of the facts you'll need.
The encyclopedia will also list related information, both encyclopedia articles and other sources.
Together with yearly almanacs, they provide up-to-date statistics and other facts on many topics, including business, politics, sports, entertainment, foreign countries, and population.
Archives, or collections of yearbook articles, can also be a good source of information on recent history.
Most people think of a dictionary as a source to use when they want to know how to spell or pronounce a word or learn what it means.
But if you take time to become familiar with a good dictionary, you may be surprised at the other kinds of information you find.
For example, it may contain information about grammar, writing style, and how to proofread a manuscript.
Many dictionaries list foreign alphabets and words, common signs and symbols, and place names.
Magazines and newspapers are valuable sources of information, especially for topics of current interest that may not be covered adequately in books.
They can also give you present-day views of events, issues, and perSonalities of the past.
Periodical and newspaper indexes are the reference tools that can tell you where to find articles on your topic in such sources.
Some online sources provide methods of searching newspapers and magazines, and enable the user to select and read articles of interest.
The Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature is the most widely used guide to magazine articles.
The periodicals included may vary from volume to volume, so be sure to check the list that appears in the volume you're using.
You'll also need to find out which periodicals your library has in its collection.
The entries in the Readers’ Guide appear in alphabetical order by subject and author and, sometimes, by title.
Abbreviations are used for many parts of the entry, including the name of the magazine and the date of the issue.
An explanation of the abbreviations appears in the front of each volume of the guide.
Acid rain When nitrate reigns [air pollution damage to forests; cover story} J Raloff. il.
The entry tells you that an article titled “When nitrate reigns,” by J Raloff, begins on page 90 of the February 11, 1995, issue of Science News. |t discusses air pollution damage to forests.
In addition to the Readers’ Guide, there are a number of specialized guides to periodicals, such as the Art Index and the Business Periodicals Index.
These works may lead you to articles not indexed in the Readers’ Guide.
Many libraries subscribe to this newspaper because it provides broad coverage of national and international news.
Many are also updated more frequently than printed materials. some electronic sources provide video, sound, and motion in addition to text.
A feature called Aypertext found in some electronic sources allows you to click on a word or phrase of interest, which will cause additional information to be displayed.
Keyword searching is used to find information in most electronic sources.
Electronic encyclopedias store all the information found ina multivolume set of encyclopedias.
Such encyclopedias as The McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology are also available in electronic format.
Other reference works stored in electronic systems include dictionaries, the Bible, William Shakespeare's plays, ZIP Codes and addresses, and Bartlett's Familiar Quotations.
Electronic periodical indexes, such as InfoTrac, index hundreds of magazines and journals.
In addition to bibliographic information, electronic indexes may include a summary of the article or the article's full text.
The Internet is a worldwide network of computers that has become a popular online information service.
Government agencies, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and individuals provide free or fee-based access to their Web sites.
Each site is a collection of information taken from other publications or produced specifically for online delivery.
Search features such as those in America Online , Netscape, and Yahoo on the World Wide Web allow keyword searching to find new Web sites or specific information.
The Internet is especially useful when you are looking for information that changes often.
For example, you might go to the Web site of a newspaper to search the advertising section for used cars or apartments for rent.
Before going “online,” think about your information needs and your search strategy.
There is a wealth of information on the Internet, but much of it is unrefiable or of poor quality.
You will find help in evaluating information sources in the section Judging the value of reference and source materials on this page and on page 32.
In most school and public libraries, you can go to the shelves directly to find the item you want.
But in some large libraries, you'll need to fill out a ca// slip and request the item from someone who works at the library.
Most libraries Keep current issues Of newspapers and magaA Guide to Research Skills 31 zines on shelves for easy access.
Bound volumes consist of all the issues for a particular period bound together in one volume.
A viewing machine enlarges the images and projects them on a screen so you can read the pages.
As with books, you may be able to get bound volumes and microfilm yourself, or you may need to fill out a call slip.
If your topic appears on several pages, the work is worth checking carefully.
You can use either one to see how much coverage there is on your topic.
If you're doing research in a rapidly developing field, such as computers, you'll want the latest material available.
But if you're dealing with a historical topic, such as the Korean War, the publication date may not be as important.
Ina book, the publication date usually appears on the back of the title page.
On a Web site, if the publication date Is not available, spot check the Web site by searching on it 32 A Guide to Research Skills for a recent event that you Know of, such as the death of a famous person.
If the site contains the current information, it is more likely that the rest of the site is kept up to date.
If you're consulting periodicals, it may be wise to avoid articles in popular magazines not recognized as authoritative.
If you have any doubts about the suitability of a magazine article, check with your teacher to see if it would be acceptable.
If you use a newspaper article as a source, keep in mind that the information presented Is perishable.
Ongoing events are covered in newspapers on a day-to-day basis as more information comes to light.
As a result, comprehensive coverage on a topic is seldom available in one newspaper article.
If you are using the Internet to find sources, one way to ensure authoritativeness is to use Web sites with a “.org,” “.gov,” or “edu” extension in the address of the site.
These extensions are used for the official Web sites of organizations, government agencies, and educational institutions.
Web sites with ”.com” extensions are generally owned by companies or individuals, and are often less authoritative.
Although the latter Web site may have some interesting information, it is likely to be narrower in focus, be opinion-based, or omit important information.
For example, if you are doing research on the 1967 ArabIsraeli war, a book, article, or Web site on the subject by either an Arab or an Israeli author might be biased.
Although it could be an interesting source to include among others, it would be unwise to use it as your main source.
Check the title page or copyright page to see if the book is a first edition or a revised edition.
If there have been several editions, it could mean that the book has been well received and is considered a reliable source.
Skimming a few pages should tell you if a book, article, or Web site will be easy to understand or if it is chiefly for scholars in the field.
Check to see if the book, article, or Web site has illustrations, maps, charts, a glossary, a bibliography, or other helpful features.
Some Web sites provide animations, simulations, and video and audio files.
Judging the quality of a book ts relatively easy. lf itis in a liorary, it will have been carefully chosen.
However, there are thousands of Web sites, and judging their quality can be more difficult.
The presentation of information on a Web site does not necessarily determine the reliability of that information.
However, to minimize the time spent researching your topic, you should avoid sites that are poorly organized or slow to use because of advertising or irrelevant graphics.
To make full use of a reference work, take time to familiarize yourself with its organization before you plunge in to search for information.
See if the book or Web site has an introductory section on how to use the work, a key to abbreviations, or similar helpful information.
Consult the table of contents to get an idea of what the reference work covers and how the material is organized.
The table of contents lists chapter titles and such features as illustrations and maps.
Don't neglect to check any material that appears in the front and back of the book.
Appendixes may include charts, tables, the text of documents, and author's notes.
Bibliographies can provide you with titles of additional sources to check.
The index offers a far more complete guide to the book or Web site than the table of contents.
Most reference books have one general index, which lists proper names, titles, and topics together.
Some works have several indexes—for example, an author index, a title index, and a Subject index.
Always check the index to find out where the information you want is located.
To use an index, think of the word that most clearly identifies your topic.
For information on the Nile River, for example, look Preparing Source Cards You should prepare a source card for every source you consult—books, magazine and newspaper articles, pamphlets, filmstrips, records, and so on.
To prepare source cards, use standard-sized cards, ruled or unruled, and write in ink on one side only.
That way, it will be easy to arrange the cards in alphabetical order later.
Use the same format for your source cards that you'll use for the final list of sources.
The information you find in reference works must be clearly and accurately recorded in your notes before it can become part of a well-organized and well-written report.
This method will make it easier to arrange and combine your notes in any order you want.
After you've located the proper pages, skim the text quickly to see if it has the information you need.
Look at any headings; the first, or topic, sentence of each _Gronig, Karl, and Saller, Martin.
If you number each source card in the upper right-hand corner, you can use this number on your note cards to identify the source of the note, instead of writing the author and title.
Include the page number of the source in case you need that information for a footnote later.
Write a short heading—called a s/ug—at the top of Elephant anatomy pig Caer neue their large to cool themselvey off.
If the source has useful information, fill out a source card, read the text carefully, and take notes.
For more information on taking notes and preparing source cards, see the following sections.
When citing o book, include the authars' lost nomes, First nomes, the title ond publisher of the book, ond the year the book wos published. i ro of Pittyburgh Note the nome of the librory where you found the book. also a good idea to include on the source card the call number of the book and the library where you found it.
Then if you need to check the source again, you'll Know exactly where to find it. the card to identify the topic or subtopic the note refers to.
If you've prepared an outline, the Slug should correspond to a heading in your outline.
Poge number 34 A Guide to Research Skills Before you write a note, evaluate the material you've read to make sure the information is worth recording.
You may also wish to add personal reactions or other comments on your notes.
If so, circle them, write them in a different color, or use some other method to distinguish them.
Using Other Sources The library and the Internet are by no means the only sources for research material.
People and places near and far can provide you with information that will make your research more complete and more interesting.
Government agencies and business and professional associations can be important sources of information.
By contacting such organizations, you may be able to get reliable statistics and other facts that would be difficult to track down elsewhere.
For example, if you were writing a report about literacy in Canada, it might be helpful to e-mail or write to Canada’s provincial departments of education for the most recent statistics on literacy.
Furthermore, these sources publish a variety of pamphlets and other materials that you can use for research.
Your library will have directories with addresses of government, business, and other organizations.
When you write for information, Keep in mind that some groups are better equipped than others to handle requests.
Generally, make notes in your own words because they reflect your thinking, not somebody else’s.
You should use direct quotes only when the author's words are particularly striking, when you want to refer to an expert’s Knowledge or opinion, or when you want to hold an author accountable for a particular idea or statement.
Most important, don't assume that the reply will arrive by the time you need it.
Conducting an interview can be an effective way to get facts and personal viewpoints that add Special interest to your report.
Begin with a courteous phone call or letter identifying yourself and requesting an interview.
Make yourself available at a time that is convenient for the person you are contacting.
That way, you'll be better able to ask intelligent questions and follow-ups.
Take notes on important points and be careful to write direct quotations exactly as they are Said.
Ask for clarification of points you don’t underStand and the spelling of unfamiliar terms or names.
A tape recorder can eliminate the need for taking lengthy notes by hand.
If you use a tape recorder, make sure that it’s working properly and that you have enough tape for the length of the interview, as well as fresh batteries or an extension cord.
Before you leave the interview, be sure to write down accurately the subject’s name, position or title, and place of business.
You can ask people questions in person or draw up a written questionnaire.
In either case, phrase your questions carefully so that people can respond easily and clearly.
Surveys that use a “yes or no” or “for or against” format are the easiest to evaluate.
Whatever method you choose, take care to record the results accurately.
Television documentaries, news programs, and interview shows can give you access to expert opinions and valuable information.
If you watch a program as part of your research, be prepared to take careful notes.
Be sure to note the name of the program, the network, and the date of broadcast for your list of sources and footnotes.
Museums, art galleries, and historical societies may enable you to explore your subject firsthand.
For example, a report on the painter Vincent van Gogh could be enhanced by a visit to an art museum that exhibits some of his works.
Many museums and other cultural centers have libraries or other research facilities open to the public.
Check to see what your community has to offer that can help you understand your topic better.
Abridged; abridgment added entry The heading above the author line on a catalog card.
The card is filed by this entry. annotation A brief description of the content of a book. anon.
Anonymous appendix A section that follows the text, containing material relative to but not essential to the subject. bibliography A list of books or other sources.
May be general, selective, on a particular subject, or have a common theme, often annotated. bk., bks.
Refers to an approximate date (e.g., C 1340). call number The classification number used to request a book.
A small disc used to hold text, graphics, video, and sound for catalogs and reference works. cf.
It generally appears on the verso of the title page. cross-reference A reference to another entry.
A see reference is to the preferred entry, the one under which the material appears; a see a/so reference is to related material. cumulate The contents of several volumes arranged into one volume. database Information stored in a computer.
A compact disc that can hold between 8 and 20 times as much information as a CD-ROM. documentation Support for a statement, as in a footnote or bibliography. g. exempli gratia, for example ed., eds.
Editor; edition ellipsis Three spaced periods used to indicate an omission.
Ibid. takes the place of the author's name, the title. and any identical material in the preceding footnote.
Used in place of the author's name in additional references within a single footnote. ii., illus. \\lustrations, illustrator, illustrated infra See below; to be mentioned later.
Internet A global computer network that links smaller networks, including government facilities, universities, corporations, and individuals.
In a footnote, refers to a passage already identified when there are intervening references to other sources. main entry The catalog card that has full information about a book . modem Modulator-Demodulator.
A device that adapts a terminal or computer to a telephone line, allowing users to communicate with one another.
No date of publication or copyright given. network An information system that links several pieces of computer equipment and computer databases together for sharing information among many users and stations. no., nos.
Published, publication v. quod vide, which see recto Right-hand page of a book; the back of a verso page rev.
Revised, revision scope Extent of treatment, coverage series title The collective title for a group of books. sic So, thus, in this way.
Supplement supra See above; previously mentioned thesis The statement of purpose, the proposition to be explained or proved. tr., trans.
Volume vide, see verso Left-hand page of a book; the back of a recto page viz. videlicet, namely.
Each Web site contains a home page, and may also contain additional documents and files.
Each site is owned and managed by an individual, company, or organization.
World Wide Web A system of Internet servers that support specially formatted documents, which can be easily accessed using a Web browser.
In order to list as many items as possible, information is limited to titles and individual authors.
The section on electronic information sources represents those materials most frequently found in school and pubtic libraries.
In the section on special reference works, the number in parentheses after a heading—Theater —is the Dewey Decimal Classification for that group.
Although some libraries may give different classifications to certain titles, this device will assist you in locating books on these subjects.
The books listed below were selected from the many that exist under each subject heading.
They represent some of the most inclusive sources of information on various subjects of interest to students from the junior high school through the college level.
Students should find these books most useful in helping them accumulate the kind of information they need in order to write essays, research papers, reports, theses, and dissertations.
The books listed below are available in many school and public libraries.
Brewer Encyclopedia of World Literature in the 2Oth Century Oxford Illustrated History of English Literature Contemporary Authors, 1962Cyclopedia of World Authors, Frank N Magill, ed.
Familiar Quotations, John Bartlett Granger's Index to Poetry Play index, 1949-1997 Music The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians The New Oxford History of Music Mythology Bulfinch's Mythology A Dictionary of World Mythology, Arthur Cotterell Meridia Handbook of Classical Mythology, Edward Tripp Philosophy The Concise Encyclopedia of Western Philosophy and Philosophers, James O Urmson and Jonathan Ree, eds.
Concise Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy Theater The Oxford Companion to the Theatre, Phyllis Hartnoll, ed.
A Guidebook, Janet Ramage Random House Webster's Computer and Internet Dictionary Webster's New World Computer Dictionary Medicine Doctors: The Biography of Medicine, Sherwin Nuland Dorland’s Iilustrated Medical Dictionary Oceanography Essentials of Oceanography, Harold Thurman Zoology Walker's Mammals of the World, Ronald M Nowak, ed.
General International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences Oxford Dictionary of Sociology, Gordon Marshall Anthropology Encyclopedia of Social and Cultural Anthropology, Alan Barnard and Jonathan Spencer Encyclopedia of Human Evolution and Prehistory, Alison Brooks, Eric Delson, lan Tattersall, and John Vancouvering, eds.
Dictionary of American History Encyclopedia of American History An Encyclopedia of World History, Peter N Stearns, ed.
A Division of OCLC Online Computer Library Center, Inc., owner of copyright.
Subdivision is achieved by adding second letters and Arabic numerals through 9999.
Laws that begin Act of or Act for appeer under their key words, as in Union, Act of.
Doctors appear under the key wards in their titles, as in Chiropractic, Doctor of Dr.
Titles beginning with La appear under their key words, as in Boheme, La.
Titles beginning with the article Le appear under their key words, as in Nozze di Figaro, Le.
Titles beginning Los appear under their key words, as in Pazas de Ujloa, Los.
Names beginning with Van are alphabetized as single words or under their key word.
Names beginning with Von are alphabetized either as single words or under their key words.
