Beyond reminding us how close the world came to nuclear war, today’s hot doc gives us a glimpse of the two brinksmen’s personal correspondence as they approached the precipice.
Cold War historians still believe the Crisis to have been the Cold War’s pinnacle.
Less than three months after JFK was inaugurated, the new President launched an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
It failed miserably; the Castro regime remained firmly in power and strengthened its security alliance with the Soviet Union.
This alliance included a Cuban-Soviet agreement to secretly construct nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Finally, on 14 October 1962, an American U2 reconnaissance aircraft photographed the missile sites.
Upon seeing the photographs of the nuclear missiles, Kennedy assembled a secret, fifteen-member committee to determine the course of action for the United States.
October 23, 1962 United States Naval photograph showing Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba Do nothing.
Kennedy—swayed by his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara—essentially chose the blockade.
He “rebranded” the procedure as a quarantine—a blockade was internationally accepted as an act of war—and won the support of South and Central American nations.
On 22 October 1962, in a nationally televised broadcast, Kennedy announced the existence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba and his decision to quarantine the island.
The Secretary General warned that “with the advent of modern types of armament” the United States had “completely lost its former isolation”—a not so subtle reference to the Soviet nuclear weapons miles off the Florida coast.
But despite its bellicose tone, Khrushchev’s letter ultimately conveyed that he understood and feared nuclear war.
Next week we’ll look at the President’s reply to Khrushchev, the Crisis’s resolution, and new evidence proving that nuclear war was even closer than Khrushchev and Kennedy believed at the time.
A large snow storm also blasted Washington just before his 1961 inauguration.
That said, it always sounded to me like JFK listened a lot more closely to his brother – who honestly didn’t really belong in the room, if one looked at the virtues of his position in the government alone – to really make the claim that it was truly “rational”, but that again, is a bit of a tangent.
They were tape recorded but the transcripts themselves make a fascinating read.
Nate Jones permalink February 13, 2010 6:57 pm True, people often mistakenly assume that nuclear weapons will always launch and detonate as planned.
Also, McNamara made an important point when he stated that the missiles in Cuba did nothing to alter the strategic balance.
He said in 1990, “It made no difference…The military balance wasn’t changed.
Melanie permalink February 19, 2010 5:08 pm Insightful piece– thank you Mr Jones.
Misery permalink January 4, 2011 6:00 am Didn’t Kennedy have to give something too. like standing down his missiles in the Mediterranean sea.
Also doesn’t the United States violate other sovereignty’s with impunity.
The United States buys up these small countries in order to legitimize their presence in the area.
Well…. mr. president, WE DID IT “ jUAN permalink April 6, 2011 5:17 am Didn’t Kennedy have to give something too. like standing down his missiles in the Mediterranean sea… Gave up Turkish missiles. jUAN permalink April 6, 2011 5:20 am not Turkish missles but United States sites in Turkey.
