It was the first of a dramatic 13-day crisis that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
The superpower navies were about to collide, and an escalation to general war with nuclear weapons was a definite possibility.
Historians often glorify the role of Kennedy’s resolve and American military might in bringing this about, but recent sources indicate that the UN’s unassuming secretary general, U Thant, played a crucial role in helping mediate an end the crisis.
Thant ultimately was lauded by the two leaders for his contribution as well as by many newspapers of the day.
His first task was to de-escalate the world-threatening crisis and create a space for negotiation.
He began on Oct. by appealing for a Soviet suspension of arms shipments and United States suspension of the quarantine.
This would allow time for negotiations to resolve the crisis peacefully.
Specifically, Kennedy wanted Thant to ask the Soviets, as his own proposal, to stop their ships for a few days so preliminary talks could be arranged under UN auspices.
Coming as a proposal from the UN secretary general rather than an ultimatum from the American president, it was accepted by Khrushchev and indeed he used it to save face while withdrawing his ships.
Adlai Stevenson, United States ambassador to the UN during the crisis, later lauded Thant’s action.
The recorded deliberations of Kennedy’s top advisers, called the ExComm, reveal the powerful influence for restraint Thant was having.
His initiatives for negotiations were used by Kennedy and Dean Rusk to prevent hawks from pushing the United States to invade Cuba.
Both the president and his secretary of state argued with their colleagues that sufficient time needed to be given to Thant’s initiatives.
Khrushchev too was influenced by Thant, and sought his “mediation” in a cable to Kennedy.
When Kennedy was under enormous pressure from the military brass to attack Cuba before the Russian missiles were deemed operational, Thant proposed that the Russians would dismantle all their missiles immediately in exchange for an American guarantee that it would not invade Cuba.
Thant advocated this solution publicly, then specifically insisted on it with Stevenson.
Two days later it became the final agreement, accompanied by a secret commitment by Kennedy to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
Thant flew to Cuba to mollify Castro, the third party in the conflict, who might otherwise have upset the arrangements.
While Castro refused a follow-on UN supervisory force, Thant was able to get first-hand accounts of missile dismantling.
Soviet and American negotiators wrestled with the issues in the UN Secretariat building as Thant shuttled between the conference rooms.
They agreed that United States ships and aircraft could come into proximity with departing Soviet ships to count the missiles.
Kennedy’s strength certainly played a role but so did his understanding of the need to give his opponent an honourable way out and of how to use an intermediary to achieve that.
The humble Burmese diplomat who epitomized quiet diplomacy deserves no less.
Walter Dorn is a professor of defence studies at the Royal Military College of Canada and chair of the department of security and international affairs at the Canadian Forces College.
Robert Pauk is a retired Canadian military officer who served in UN peacekeeping operations.
