Kennedy knew when Khrushchev was lying, what his capabilities were, and just as important, what they were not.
Hi Additionally, in this day and age of high-tech, ""Third Wave"" theories of our national ability to depend upon technical intelligence collection and information warfare, Colonel Oleg Penkovsky stands as a classic example of the value of human intelligence operations.
This potentially cataclysmic incident brought policy makers on both sides of the Iron Curtain to seriously question and review their strategic policies for the use of nuclear weapons and military forces, to adjust their use and understanding of diplomatic channels of communication, to continue their development of better, more sophisticated intelligence gathering platforms and humint sources, and to moderate their somewhat simplistic rhetoric of foreign policy goals, objectives, and stated national interests.
The Soviet Union completely misjudged the character and resolve of the United States presidency, the mood of the country, and most importantly, United States intelligence capabilities to learn what was really happening in both Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Mr Cohen outlines three reasons for the popularity of serious, academic inquiry into the sequence of events in October of 1962, and then proceeds to dismiss these reasons as irrelevant or immaterial, Mr Cohen's first position is the, ""unusual quality and 2 quantity of information available"" to the scholar.
International diplomacy between the Superpowers was changed forever, from the installation of the ""hot line"" communications system between Moscow and Washington to transmit rapid exchanges of correspondence , to President Richard M Nixon's establishment of detente with the Soviet Union and his recognition of the People's Republic of China, all of these events can be traced directly to the Missile Crisis of October 1962.
The incident validated President Kennedy's strategy of ""flexible response"" and again proved the value of combined military operations in meeting a direct threat to the United States.
Kennedy's apparent lack of will and determination in providing t United States air support to the Bay of Pigs invasion may have led Khrushchev to believe that 6 Kennedy was a weak character.
In deciding to install the missiles secretly, Khrushchev failed to understand that while the Soviets had a good case for contending that the introduction of missiles into Cuba was legal and was comparable to United States actions in Turkey, the Soviet's use of secrecy and deception would undercut the rationale of normalcy and legitimacy.
President John F Kennedy quickly perceived the multiple dangers and high stakes.
Inextricably, the prestige and interests of the United States and the prestige and political fiiture of John F Kennedy were merged by this action.
Khrushchev could perceive such action as an exploitable opening, and encourage him to attempt to capitalize on his investment, without understanding the seriousness of the president's intentions and regarding subsequent threats by Kennedy as mere bluff On the other hand, direct military action would certainly result in American casualties, and perhaps trigger a strong Soviet response, leading to war.
First, enforcing the blockade were the superior United States naval forces which the Soviets could not possibly match, positioned across the globe.
By the fall of 1962, CIA U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had achieved an impressive intelligence record, flying over the Soviet Union during the 1950's, proving decisively that the Soviet Bomber Gap was an Air Force m3nh.
Approximately twenty American U-2 missions were flown over the Soviet Union from July 1956 until Francis Gary Powers was shot down on 1 May 1960, thus 15 ending overflights of Soviet airspace.
When the Soviets first began sending weapons and armaments abroad, such equipment was fi'equently carried as deck cargo on merchant vessels.
Many of these cargo ships were old United States Liberty ships or vessels constructed in Western shipyards, and consequently, their dimensions were available to intelligence analysts.
With an intuitive sixth sense and a steadfast belief in the value of high-tech equipment.
Director of Central Intelligence, John A McCone was convinced that the discovery of SAM sites in mid-August presaged the installation of Soviet ballistic missiles.
McCone, a Republican appointee in a Democratic administration, faced heavy political skepticism for his views regarding Cuba, skepticism fueled by the impending mid-term Congressional elections to be held in November 1962.
Some reports were the result of fertile imaginations designed to prod the United States into direct militaiy action against Castro.
Monitoring construction of power, fiael lines, launching booms and other equipment at the launching sites provided critical information that gave President Kennedy three extra days to discuss and decide how to proceed with Khrushchev.
Deputy Director for Intelligence, Ray Cline, who was in charge of preparing briefing packages for the President and the ExComm, believed that the initial imagery of the missile sites at San Cristobal, which were fully understandable only because of Penkovsky, was the key to the successful resolution of the crisis.
Along with these successes in intelligence there were certainly some failures.For example, it has not been conclusively determined to this day whether any of the nuclear warheads had actually arrived in Cuba by mid October 1962.
CIA estimates of Soviet combat troop strength in Cuba were greatly underestimated, intelligence estimates of 12,000 to 16,000 Soviet military personnel were provided to the President and the ExComm.
In the midst of the crisis, it provided the President and his advisors with very accurate, detailed infonuation on the sequence of events as they occurred, and could even predict future events, such as the timing of Soviet missile activation.
This action nearly triggered a United States decision to retaliate against one or more of the Soviet SAM sites in Cuba, a development that would have placed the burden of continued peace in Khrushchev's pudgy hands.
