I’m Jane Harman, president and CEO of the Wilson Center, and I apologize to some of you if you had trouble getting into our space.
That is because a few hours ago we were part of a very touching memorial service to Nancy Hamilton, wife of my predecessor, Lee Hamilton, and there are hundreds of people in this building who want to shake Lee’s hand, and some of you are probably among those people, and both events went on at the same time.
I also want to welcome not just those in this audience whom I’m looking at, but those tuning in via live webcast which is a terrific tool for bringing even more people into our discussions.
Our hope is that these events will provide the public with new opportunities to engage in much needed civil discourse free from spin.
Civil discourse free from spin -imagine that in this election season -in the safe political space that the Wilson Center provides.
Through the Wilson Center’s Cold War International History Project led by our own Christian Ostermann.
Our experts conduct research and analysis on the Cold War, perhaps the most informative period in our history for policymakers and members of the public thinking about crisis management and presidential decision-making today.
This National Conversation will focus on the time when the -when the Cold War got hot.
Thinking of that crisis reminds us that history sometimes calls for presidents to risk their careers to get things right.
Over the past 50 years there have been other such moments including with LBJ pushed the Civil Rights Act through Congress, when Nixon went to China, when Bush 41 led a coalition of United Nations member nations into the Gulf War Conflict, the first of its kind after the Cold War.
The most recent example, in my view, was President Obama’s call to carry out the attack to take down Osama bin Laden.
I’m not sure if anyone has ever used this word to describe Graham, but he is delicious.
We were driving around and couldn’t find an entrance that was open, imagine.
Graham is currently the Director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and Professor of Government at Harvard’s Kennedy School.
He previously served as special advisor to the secretary of defense under President Reagan and assistant secretary of defense for policy and plans under President Clinton.
The title comes from a JFK quote that I love, quote, “The essence of ultimate decision remains impenetrable to the observer, often in -"" let me try this again.
After Graham speaks he will join a panel with Michael Dobbs and Tim Naftali, both Wilson Center alums.
Michael, a former short-term Wilson Center Scholar is now a correspondent for foreign policy.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War,” which is currently being made into a movie.
And his new book on the period between the Second World War and the Cold War is coming out tomorrow.
My kids say grandma here isn’t allowed to join Twitter, but those of you who do have access should be sure to check it out.
He worked here in the '90s on a project called a comparative history of United States and Soviet policy toward Fidel Castro in the Kennedy-Khrushchev era.
Tim is a former director of the Nixon Library and now serves as a senior research fellow at the New America Foundation.
He is currently working on a study of the Kennedy presidency for publication next year, and he is also a visiting professor at UCLA, a place I once taught too.
Our spectacular moderator is my friend, Tom Gjelten, whose wife, -he knew I was going to say this -Martha Raddatz, won last week’s vice presidential debate.
She is now -he -I don’t know if either of them is enjoying the fact that she’s a celebrity, but everyone now recognizes her all over this town and surely her talent is enormous.
Tom led a terrific NatCon, as we call them, here last month on America’s role in the world post-9/11.
I’ve been called many things, and I’m happy to be called anything by Jane, but to be called delicious, I think I should probably stop now.
I’m a huge fan of Jane and her former husband, Sidney, they’ve been great, great friends for many, many years.
I told Jane at one stage that I’m happily married for more than 40 years, but if I weren’t I would be courting.
My wife, I’m not sure would agree, but that’s because sometimes things look better than they are.
I’ve Jane asked me to take 12 minutes, I’m not going to take more, to introduce this topic, and she set, as usual, an unusual question about the Missile Crisis.
So, having got an assignment from Jane I know better than not to try to answer it.
I’m going to give you three dates, three vignettes, three questions, and three lessons and that’s four times three is 12 minutes, but I have only 11 left, so let me go fast.
The dates are October 1962; you shouldn’t have trouble figuring out what that one was.
And I don’t know whether they handed out this one-page sheet that I brought copies of, and I think there’s some there, Tom, on the table.
That’s President Kennedy’s private estimate to his brother of the likelihood that this would end in nuclear war.
These are notes taken -handwritten by Bobby Kennedy in the personal papers that were just revealed last -just opened last week in Boston at the JFK Library on how many Americans would die in scenario one and scenario two.
I think nothing that historians have found in the 50 years since the Missile Crisis would lead one -would lead me to believe that JFK’s estimate was an exaggeration.
And if you can’t work your way to a dozen paths to that you’re not working hard enough.
So an air strike plus invasion would have triggered use of those weapons and you can work your way down that path.
Now, unfortunately, the contest ends tonight at 11:59, but you still have time.
He did not say that it was we did crisis management, we knew how to do it, bring it on, we can do it again.
He had the feeling that he had had a gun to his head with five chambers and two of them had bullets in them, the trigger had been pulled and he had survived.
So the moderator says, “Well, okay, yes, but wait a minute, let me see here.
He’s even not saying 50 percent chance that this is just going to happen.
Thank goodness, two senators, Senator Lugar and Senator Nunn, and on the House side, Les Aspin and Lee Hamilton, who we were just remembering a few minutes ago.
That a seemingly insurmountable problem can, in some instances, by imagination and courage and great good fortune, produce results that nobody could have imagined.
Well, we’re all accustomed, especially people who do international security, to bemoan the list of crises that we currently have and think that the top 10 make this the most dangerous period, blah, blah, blah.
Nuclear weapons in the hands of somebody like al-Qaeda producing something like a nuclear 9/11.
Well, but let’s stand back and think about it if we’re putting it in a historical perspective given the question Jane gave us.
Chance of a great power war today, the thing that was the major characteristic of the 20th century, I would say not more than one in a 100,000.
Chance of nuclear terrorism today, a topic that I worry hugely about, I’d say maybe 5 percent, not more.
Chance of dying violently in the world today for the seven billion souls, less than half of one percent.
I would say before giving into conventional wisdom about the worst of times we should remember 1962, we should remember 1991, we should remember how a combination of imagination and strategy and stick-toitiveness and grace and good fortune produce results that make us today safer, in my view, less dangerous, though extremely dangerous and extremely daunting, than the world of 1991 or the world of 1962.
Okay, so, before we begin, let me just say that on behalf of NPR how delighted we are to be partnering with the Wilson Center in these very important National Conversations, very useful discussions.
One is to continue the discussion that Graham just raised which is to look at the lessons that this Missile Crisis has had for us now when confronted with the challenges that we face today, but also, secondly, to review, recollect, remember actually what happened 50 years ago this week, and I’m going to turn to Michael Dobbs for that.
But before we do, Graham, just at your very end here you said something that immediately had a question in my mind.
Good question, very good question, and we’d have to go back and try to get into the mental frame, but I would say the generic thought in the early '60s of the conventional wisdom would be that it was quite likely that the Cold War would end with a bang rather than a whimper.
So there was a famous course given at Harvard when I was an undergraduate, I graduated in 1962, by Tom Shelley called ""Bombs and Bullets"" and there it was, you know, whatever, two-thirds likely that this ends in war.
We know that there’s a risk every year, therefore, it’s a certainty that there’ll be a nuclear war.
So the general mood was that great powers traditionally had struggled with each other for a while and eventually found their way to war and that if -it wasn’t about in '61, Cuba in '62, but there’d be a fuse in Berlin or here or there something would happen.
So, I would say people would say 50/50 wouldn’t have been unreasonable.
NATCON20121015 9 10/17/12 Graham Allison: Absolutely, and you can imagine if you’re stretching -I mean, I just -there’s no magic to these numbers, I just sucked my thumb, but I would say that the -if you say great power wars, now the United States and Russia continue to maintain these huge nuclear arsenals, and if they were exchanged we would kill several billion people.
So the consequences are the same but the likelihood now, there are still ways you can get there but it’s pretty farfetched as compared to then.
Well, let’s go back now, 50 years ago this week, and we have the ideal person on this panel to take us through that moment by moment, and I want to echo what Jane Harman said, that there’s -Michael Dobbs has this terrific live Twitter feed that you can check in every day over the next two weeks and see what happened 50 years ago on that date.
In fact, I’ve just come from an event at the National Geospatial Agency which is the successor to NPIC which is the National Photographic Interpretation Center which identified for the first time Soviet missiles on Cuba exactly 50 years ago today, and among the guests they had there were a couple of analysts who examined these photographs 50 years ago and they gave their recollections.
Now, to just go back a little bit, there were rumors of missiles being deployed to Cuba.
The Kennedy Administration, like today, was in pre-electoral mode, and the Republicans were attacking them for doing nothing about Cuba.
So Jack Kennedy wasn’t exactly thrilled to have missile discovered in Cuba.
NATCON20121015 10 10/17/12 imposed, a U2 blackout, between August and October 14.
One of our U2s had been shot down over Cuba and the president and the secretary of state decided it was too risky to send U2s over Cuba, but on October 14 they sent a U2 over Cuba and it took photographs of a missile site at San Cristobal.
About the time they were due to leave, about 4:00 or 5:00 in the afternoon.
Then the question was -they reported this up the chain to their bosses.
I think Bundy -Mac Bundy, the national security advisor, was informed about 8:00, 9:00 in the evening.
The president had already retired for the evening, and by the time they had definitively decided there were missiles in Cuba the president had gone to bed.
So, Mac Bundy, the national security advisor, decides not to wake up the president.
The private phase they had six days before they went public with the news -before the President addressed the nation on October 22, and they were able to decide what they would do about this.
Had then taken an immediate decision, they might well have bombed the missile sites.
That was everybody’s preference including the president, but they had some time to think about it, and they adopted this alternative option of a blockade, which was introduced on October 24, two days after the president spoke to the nation.
And the culminating moment of the crisis was Black Saturday, October 27.
And then all kinds of things were happening that neither the president nor Mr Khrushchev could fully control, and October 28, finally, Khrushchev decides to withdraw his missiles from Cuba.
NATCON20121015 11 10/17/12 when the president finds out which is October 16.
So the 13 days are from October 16 to October 28 when the Soviet leader announces he’s withdrawing his missiles.
Michael, there’s an interesting -you have interesting discussion in your book when they showed the president those pictures neither he nor Bobby Kennedy had any idea what they were looking at.
It was very vague, and it was actually a testament to the skill of the intelligence community analysts who were able to see those fuzzy pictures and know what they actually represented.
You know, they were taken by a U2 from 60,000 feet and Kennedy’s first reaction was that this looks like a football field or something.
Actually, the Russians had this habit of -custom of parading their missiles through Red Square so, of course, photographs were taken and they matched up missiles that had been paraded through missiles Red Square with those little dots in the football -in what Kennedy thought was a football field.
Now, Tim, Graham said that in hindsight this crisis was every bit as dangerous as President Kennedy thought at the time.
NATCON20121015 12 10/17/12 Tom Gjelten: I wouldn’t -she wouldn’t let you get away with it.
I don’t know if the audience on the radio or watching us understands why this was a crisis.
Because, you know, placing missiles in Cuba was very much as we had done in Turkey.
There’s nothing illegal about the Soviets putting missiles in Cuba and there was nothing illegal about the United States putting missiles in Turkey.
And this is the part of the story that has immediate relevance to today.
We have heard how many times prime minister -the prime minister of Israel and Congressional Republicans ask for a red line -for the president to draw a red line about Iran.
He did it because he was convinced the Soviets never intended to put missiles in Cuba.
In fact, using back channels the Soviets told them that they didn’t intend to put missiles in Cuba.
The problem was the president went on television and promised the American people, and this is just before an election, mid-term but still important, that there -the United States would not countenance the placement of Soviet offensive weapons, which everyone understood to be missiles, on Cuba.
Now, how, when he discovered the Soviets had been lying to him, could John F Kennedy have said, “Oh, never mind.
His credibility with his allies and most importantly with the Soviets was on the line, and it’s because the Soviets had lied to him about what they were up to.
His military advisors, particularly Robert McNamara, are telling him that strategically this doesn’t really matter much.
Yes, it means there’s less time if the Soviets were to launch a missile, the amount of time you’d have to be notified would be cut.
NATCON20121015 13 10/17/12 the United States is way ahead of the Soviets in strategic power.
Kennedy until the summer -until October 1962 was a failed foreign policy president, let’s not forget.
What he was known for as of that moment was the Bay of Pigs, a failed attempt to overthrow Castro, and months and months of failed efforts to develop democratic regimes in Latin America and a collapsing ally in Laos in Southeast Asia.
So Kennedy faced this problem that he had promised the American people he wouldn’t let the Soviets do something and they were doing it.
As Michael very well reminded us, Kennedy chooses after some debate the middle point, the quarantine.
The quarantine was not a solution, the blockade was no solution because the missiles were already -some of them were already in Cuba.
Nobody understood how you could actually get the Soviets to take down missiles they already had there.
And, by the way, by one week into this crisis those missiles were operational.
So the problem for the president -and that’s where the danger that Graham described -the problem for the president was the Soviets already had missiles, they were already operational.
Yes, it wasn’t as many missiles as they intended to have, but there were still enough.
Or, I mean, we can all argue whether he should have ever done it, but I assure you that he probably would not have drawn this red line had the Soviets not so successfully deceived him.
Which is a reminder that presidents ought to be very, very careful about drawing red lines because if you do, that will mean war if the other side does what you’ve told them they can’t do.
NATCON20121015 14 10/17/12 nightmare -very interesting in the context of 1963.
In fact, during the Missile Crisis, Kennedy’s administration assumed there were warheads but never actually saw them.
And they came back to him and they said, “Mr President, it is true that the Soviets are able to make warheads that are small enough now that could be fit in a suitcase.
It is impossible for us to monitor the movement of nuclear weapons in the world.
Because there was only one country in the world that could do it and we could deter them, we knew their address.
So Kennedy understood by the technology of '63 that weapons -and by the way they used the term weapons of mass destruction -that weapons of mass destruction could be moved around without the United States intelligence community ever observing it.
But the point was, only another state could create it, and that was a state that was afraid of us because we had lots of nuclear weapons.
So, just to review a couple of points here, Tim, the president’s position was no offensive weapons in Cuba; however, tactical nuclear weapons are generally, I think it’s fair to say, not necessarily considered offensive weapons.
But those were not known to the United States at the time and, in fact, we now know that those were operational and that the authority for operating them resided in Cuba.
My colleague, David Coleman, has written a brilliant book called, “The Fourteenth Day,” which I think shows rather conclusively that the United States military knew that there were tactical nuclear weapons and, by the way, this is something to keep in mind about the leadership of the United States military in the early 1960s.
They’re heroes -they’re heroes of World War II, but they thought in a prenuclear way, and they thought of tactical nuclear weapons as if they were just an artillery with a bigger bang.
They knew there were nuclear weapons -tactical nuclear weapons, and they knew that they were the same type as something that Americans created, something called the Honest John, which could have a conventional weapon -warhead, but you generally assumed that they had nuclear weapons.
The plans the Joint Chiefs of Staff developed for Kennedy for the invasion of Cuba anticipated it would be a nuclear environment.
That they knew full well that they were going to encounter -the possibility of encountering a nuclear response.
Well, historians have different views on this, but the equivalent to the Honest Johns were called FROGs or Lunas and they were discovered on October 25.
One of our lowlevel reconnaissance planes happened to discover these FROGs in a field.
That was the first time that he had got an inkling that there were these tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba and the full scale of it did not become apparent until 30, 40 years later when the Soviets revealed that they actually had 98 tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, including a whole class of weapons that we never suspected called FKR cruise missiles that were aimed at Guantanamo Naval Base.
So, in -during the 13 days -at the beginning of the 13 days Kennedy didn’t know about the tactical weapons.
Toward the end he discovers about the possibility that there are nuclear-capable FROGs so then they start have to planning for a tactical nuclear war, but up until that point they hadn’t planned for a tactical nuclear war.
They based their battlefield casualty estimates on the idea of a conventional resistance rather than nuclear weapons in the hands of the other side.
Well, one person -Timothy Naftali: Excuse me, I just wanted to say -but that means, though, that when the United States military in the second week of the crisis was advocating an invasion of Cuba they knew that there was the possibility that the Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons.
And to have advocated an invasion of Cuba knowing that the Soviets could respond tactically -with tactical nuclear weapons is, I would argue, itself highly dangerous.
No, I think Tim is right that the war planners were thinking this is conceivable and that the FROGs were nuclear capable, but the presentations to Kennedy of the war plan that he said he would have rolled out on the 28th or 29th, which he may or may not have done, would have included an invasion and would not, in terms of its estimates of how many Americans would be killed, include nuclear weapons being used against them.
There’s another -someone else who definitely knew that these nuclear weapons were in Cuba was Fidel Castro, and he’s a character that doesn’t get probably as much attention as he deserves in this episode.
He famously argued that these weapons should be used, in fact, not only those weapons but there should be a first strike against the United States homeland in the case of an invasion which seems certainly in retrospect to be a suicidal kind of thought.
And that raises the question of rationality in moments of decision making like this.
And he thought -the relationship between Khrushchev and Castro was always quite -whatever -complex and tense.
And Khrushchev, I mean, he was our guy, he’s the, you know, the bastion of Soviet revolution and communist revolution in the western hemisphere and all that, but he was not somebody that Khrushchev thought was dependable or otherwise.
So early on he had been essentially excluded from the action, and he was very frustrated by this.
Well, the Cubans see the Crisis as just one in a series of crises that began, certainly, well before the Bay of Pigs.
I mean, Fidel had been preparing for some kind of showdown with the United States ever since taking power on January 1, 1959, and first -the big ones were the Bay of Pigs 1961 soon after Kennedy becomes president, and then that was followed by a campaign -a covert campaign of sabotage against the Cuban regime called Operation Mongoose which signaled to the Cubans and to their Soviet patrons that the Kennedy administration was out to overthrow the Castro regime, and the deployment of missiles in Cuba was partly a response to that.
From our point of view he was irrational, but you have to remember the slogan of the Cuban Revolution, ""Patria o Muerte,"" Fatherland or death.
They were prepared, in order to defend their revolution, they were a much smaller country, the weakest of all these three players, obviously.
In order to have a chance of standing up to the super powers they had to be willing to push their resistance to the limits to be willing to die in defense of the revolution, and that was inculcated in the Cuban mind.
From Fidel’s point of view it was rational because it was the only real weapon he had, and he is in power 50 years later, at least he and his brother are in power.
This year we’re in a context of a Presidential election and words like appeasement get thrown around a lot, weakness in foreign policy leadership.
NATCON20121015 20 10/17/12 Oh, it was a huge success for the president but because -that was because the president and the administration didn’t let the American people know how the Crisis actually was resolved.
Actually, he was a better president, if I may in my own humblest estimation, than his rhetoric.
For example, John Kennedy did not believe that a war in Europe was likely, nor did he think the Soviets were interested in taking over Western Europe.
But the American people had been inculcated with hawkish rhetoric for 15 years, and Kennedy was such a smart politician he understood he could not reveal to the American people his complex view of the Cold War without seeming weak because, sadly, in our country at times we expect presidents because they’re not only chiefs of government and commanders-in-chief, but they’re also our bald eagle, we expect them to be tough, to talk tough, to say, to draw lines.
Kennedy knew that was all stupid, but he couldn’t admit it, so he was the kind of person who worked secretly, some would say deceptively, behind the scenes, all the time to seek compromises.
Now, as I mentioned, on the issues of the missiles staying in Cuba there could be no compromise.
What Kennedy wanted to do was find something else, a little benni [spelled phonetically], something to give the Soviets that would give them a chance to save face so that the missiles could be removed from Cuba.
Kennedy ultimately decided that he would give away the missiles in Turkey if that’s was Khrushchev needed to save face and remove the missiles from Cuba.
There is yet another yet delicious debate -the beauty of this whole Crisis is that it can be debated forever -over whether Khrushchev really needed that benni or not.
That concession made it a lot easier for Khrushchev to swallow this outcome, and when Kennedy used his brother to offer it secretly to the Soviets the Soviets were happy.
In fact, the full story of Bobby Kennedy’s concession -the full story didn’t come out until the 1980s.
The Kennedys understood that pragmatic presidents in the nuclear age had to be prepared to give concessions.
Let me just make one footnote because as Tim said, this is delicious for students of this subject.
So Kennedy secretly taped the deliberations -that’s a whole other story, but just leave it aside -for us, after the fact as Jane said, we can go be flies on the wall.
You can read a transcript of the tapes that Ernie May and Phil Zelikow produced so you can -the tape is sort of scratchy, so you can just hear people deliberating about things.
Either we attack the missiles now or -to prevent them from becoming able to fire against us or we acquiesce and this becomes a Soviet offensive base.
So, you can see that this is in his head and he’s playing with the idea, but he can’t get any agreement at all.
Then he holds back his brother and five other people and says, “I got an idea.
We’ll have a public deal, you withdraw the missiles, we’ll agree not to invade Cuba.
I need to hear from the president -from Khrushchev within 24 hours that he’s withdrawing the missiles or I’m going to act independently.
There’s 10 people that don’t know that while we were talking -you know, we were having dinner -you were out making this arrangement.
And so they’re still debating options that have already been overtaken.
We’re going to open it up to some questions from the audience in a few minutes, but first I want to talk about today.
And Graham, very quickly, you have a foreign policy -foreign affairs article this summer where you draw some lessons for today’s challenges from the Missile Crisis.
One of the things that you said that intrigued me, is that there may, in your words, a Kennedy-esque third option for dealing with Iran.
Third option in the sense of not complete capitulation or complete military response.
So I think actually thinking of Iranian nuclear challenge, which is the big issue on the agenda today, as a Cuban missile crisis in slow motion actually gives you some clues.
And in the missile crisis, in 13 days one rushed up to the brink, here over the next 13 months we’re going to get to a point where there’ll be a confrontation in which a president is going to have to choose between attacking to prevent Iran becoming a nuclear state, or acquiescing and it becoming so.
It may not take 13 months, it may take, you know fewer, or -about like that.
So, if one looks at this as Kennedy did the missile crisis, he thought, “Gee, if we attack, I might end up in a nuclear war.
Attacking, whew, I worked my way down that path and it just seems catastrophic; acquiescing, cascade of proliferation in the region, that one also seems horrible.
And I’d think in that space might be doing a lot of things that we would say would never, never, never do.
Because I don’t think that the Iranians are going to ever not know how to enrich -excuse me, they’ve been doing this for 10 years.
So all these things, the United Nations resolution say “no, no, no,” you can’t do this, but the answer is, they did it; this already happened, you can’t reverse those facts.
Because today, with 24/7 news and many more investigative reporters and all the culture of leaks, you know, a Kennedy-esque kind of deal would be extremely hard to do.
Of course, these situations today with Iran and North Korea involve many more players than were involved in the Missile Crisis, which was basically just Washington and Moscow.
There are some differences, there are many -some similarities and many differences.
And I think that when people use history in order to bolster their case for doing something, often we start making mistakes.
And reading through these lessons, what really struck me was how the wrong lessons -many of these lessons have been the wrong lessons.
President Johnson thought he was following in Kennedy’s footsteps of acting tough, controlling a crisis when he escalated in Vietnam, and we ended up in the quagmire of Vietnam.
NATCON20121015 24 10/17/12 I think he drew -I mean, people can disagree with that, personally I think that was the wrong lesson and got us into a war that we should have avoided.
Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel has been citing the Missile Crisis as a precedent for drawing a red line and taking action against Iran.
I think the right sort of lessons -so you can’t just take one historical situation and compare it to another, because there are many differences.
Kennedy, when he was trying to figure out what to do in the Missile Crisis, he just read a book by Barbara Tuchman called The Guns of August, which is about the beginning of the First World War.
And it showed for Kennedy how we got into the First World War without the political leaders in any of these countries really intending to -really understanding what they were getting into and not intending to bring the world to war.
In fact, I was just looking at some of the materials from the Robert Kennedy collection at the -that have just been declassified, and he jots down on October 23, he’s having a private conversation with his brother and Jack Kennedy is thinking about The Guns of August.
And if I go to war I better have a very good explanation for the American people about why I’m going to war.
And that this is even more important in the nuclear age than it was in 1914.
We haven’t talked about the Soviets much, and so that’s part of a lesson, which is that your adversary may actually be rational and have a certain bounded rationality -you have to figure them out.
One of Kennedy’s talents was to try to think through what Khrushchev needed to save face in this crisis.
NATCON20121015 25 10/17/12 this crisis was that sometimes your adversary will bluff out of weakness, not out of strength.
One of the challenges for a democracy, of course, is that because we fortunately have access to information, that means all of us have access to the bluffs of our adversaries.
And there’s often a lot of pressure on our president to act on a bluff rather than the reality of the threat.
Weak states often will puff -I think of them as like those fish, the puffers -they’ll puff themselves up in order not to be swallowed.
I’m not saying that Nikita Khrushchev and Saddam Hussein were the same, but the essential logic of lying about your weapons of mass destruction program in order to scare not only the United States but your allies and people in your own regime, that’s a good strategy for a dictator.
That’s a good -to add to what Michael said about general lessons -that’s a very useful general approach that presidents ought to keep in mind when they face foreign adversaries.
My favorite anecdote involves the Soviet decision making piece of this story and Tim, we’ve talked about this in the past.
It was a shock to me when I first discovered that, in fact, the Politburo had not decided on this decision to shoot down the U2.
NATCON20121015 26 10/17/12 of the reasons why the Goldilocks principle applies to this crisis: It’s not too short and it’s not too long.
If it had been too short they probably would have -both the Soviets and the Americans would have acted on their passions and God knows what would have happened.
If it had gone on longer, it was coming apart at the end -at the seams, and a lot of passions were flowing that might have led to war.
The situation in Cuba became almost untenable by the second week of the Crisis.
Not only have we heard about Fidel’s long night -it’s a fantastic story of how he spent the evening drinking beer and eating sausages with the Soviet KGB resident and Ambassador Alexiev during which he wrote and rewrote and rewrote this Armageddon letter.
And the Cubans were working closely with the Soviets on the ground, not up in the diplomatic sphere, but down on the ground.
And it was that tension, that edginess, maybe also the bravado of the Cubans that led to the decision by the Soviet commander to shoot down the U2 without preauthorization by Moscow, which gives you a sense of how -again The Gun of August analogy -how things can run out of the control of even the best president or chairman of the presidium.
I would mention on that point too, that the shoot-down of the U2 in addition to Castro’s letter and in addition to intelligence the Americans actually might invade Cuba, placed an enormous amount of pressure on Nikita Khrushchev on the morning of October 28, and helped make the final decision for him to accept the American offer and end the Crisis.
I think what that incident really illustrates -the shoot-down of the U2 in Cuba -was that neither leader really knew what was going on in Cuba.
As Tim said, the U2 was shot down on the authority of local soviet commanders in Cuba.
And Khrushchev didn’t know, he only found out later and he got a rather garbled version of it.
NATCON20121015 27 10/17/12 War, we were sending U2s to the north pole to gather nuclear evidence of Soviet nuclear tests.
And that U2 blundered over the Soviet Union on the most dangerous day of the crisis, without the president being informed until it spent an hour and a half over the Soviet Union.
There were many things that neither Khrushchev nor Kennedy was aware of.
And to me that is really the real risk that we ran in the Missile Crisis, was that we got to a point when there were many sons-of-bitches who didn’t get the word.
And the two leaders were unable to fully control what was going on and indeed they weren’t aware of many things that were going on.
This is a -what happened was, best as we can determine because it involves oral testimony -the best that we can determine is that there was some discussion of an oral pre-delegation of the -for the use of tactical weapons.
But once the crisis started for the Soviets, which is once they -once John F Kennedy gave his speech on October 22, Khrushchev and the presidium, that’s what the Politburo was called then, told the local commanders, you may not use tactical nuclear weapons without our permission.
Okay -Graham Allison: But just a footnote on that, so, first, the commander had physical control of the weapons, that is, at the time if he had said use it -Tom Gjelten: he could have done it.
Secondly, the reason why they rescinded the permission would suggest that they had permission, so that -and so if instead of announcing the blockade, which Kennedy did on the 22nd, he had gone with the air strike, these weapons wouldn’t have been used.
We have the minutes of the first presidium meeting, as they’re awaiting Kennedy’s speech.
They don’t know if he’s going to announce an invasion, in fact I don’t think any of them thought he would announce a blockade.
And so there is a discussion of how he will respond and there is a discussion which Khrushchev leads about using tactical nuclear weapons in response, but then he calms down, they hear the speech, and they make sure that they control weapons.
But the truth of the matter is, if the United States had launched an attack, it is hard to predict, it’s impossible actually to predict if the Soviet response would have been measured.
Penkovsky was the Soviet spy who -actually he was quite crucial during this period because he had given the technical manual for the R12 missile, which is this medium-range ballistic missile.
So when they were figuring out what these things were in Cuba, they Identified them as R-12s or as we called them, SS-4s.
They had the technical manual which told them which told them what you had to do to prepare them to fire.
And they were able to observe what was happening in Cuba at the missile sites, put that against the information that they’d received from Penkovsky, and told the president when these missiles were ready to fire.
The Soviets probably had an eye on him for some time and they wrapped him up during the 13 days and he was later executed.
And when you listed the foreign policy failures that the president was dealing with for October, I’m surprised you didn’t mention the construction of the Berlin Wall and Kennedy getting cuffed around by Khrushchev in Vienna in 1961.
One, I don’t share the view about Vienna because I’ve seen -I’ve wrote a -my co-author Aleksandr Fursenko and I wrote about this in a couple books, most recent Khrushchev’s Cold War, but -Kennedy walked into an ambush.
Khrushchev intended to do what he did, which was to embarrass Kennedy, to harangue him, to throw an ultimatum at him.
Kennedy’s mistake was not to have anticipated this, but you know what, none of the Sovietologists around Kennedy anticipated it.
In terms of the Berlin Wall, I don’t fault Kennedy for the Berlin Wall at all, in fact the Berlin Wall took some of the pressure off of Berlin.
He stood tall against Khrushchev, and it’s Khrushchev who really emerged from the that ’61 crisis hurt.
The Chinese, the Albanians, they don’t care so much, but in those day’s they were part of the socialist commonwealth.
They were very critical, the Chinese and the Albanians were very critical of Khrushchev, as were the East Germans for standing down.
But the -I think the point is that Kennedy’s efforts to work with the Soviets which had been largely secretive -you know, his use of Bobby during this crisis was not unique.
He’d used Bobby Kennedy working with a Soviet intelligence officer named Georgi Bolshakov who was military intelligence.
NATCON20121015 30 10/17/12 or tried to establish a back channel with Khrushchev to try to figure out what Khrushchev’s bottom line was.
And you can say that naive -that Kennedy was naive I suppose, but he felt that all leaders have a bottom line, and he tried to suss out Khrushchev’s.
Michael points out that we’re very fortunate to have, in the audience, the last surviving witness of JFK’s handling of the Missile Crisis, former deputy head of intelligence at the State Department.
The way he saves face presumably is to have it widely known that he’s -that that was the deal.
That’s a good question, Tom, and certainly he discusses it with his, you know, inner circle, with the members of the Politburo, and then it begins to leak out, and then -among Soviets -and that the question we had at Harvard where we all were, Andrei Kokoshin was there, and Andrei was a young, whatever, Komsomol leader, you know at the time, and they said that when they would have party meetings, as early as 1963; they would say, “We know a big secret, look and see what happened with -” so they were doing a little bit to shore him up.
I think the Soviets simply weren’t as savvy about spinning the press as the Americans, and the Americans, if the situation had been reversed, the Kennedy administration would have leaked it.
And the main -Khrushchev’s main constituency was not Soviet public opinion, which played absolutely no role in the Soviet Union.
His main constituency was his fellow members of the Soviet leadership, the Soviet Presidium.
So he certainly made sure that they were aware of it, and in fact, he argues that he said well we got them to take their missiles out of Cuba -out of Turkey.
But he was not so interested in shaping public opinion as his American counterpart would have been.
I would add one more thing which is, it took a number of months, four months actually for those Turkish missiles to be removed, and Khrushchev knew that he had promised Kennedy not to say anything and he also probably assumed that if he said something about it, those missiles would never be removed.
So the time to have actually done the spinning was the time during which the Turkish missiles were actually still in Turkey.
Mr Hughes, I want to ask you if you have -if there’s a memory that you have from those events that you’d like to share or that maybe hasn’t got a lot of attention.
I think somewhere Graham Allison said that if the missiles had been discovered two weeks earlier or two weeks later it would have had a considerable difference in how the whole thing was handled.
So the fact that they were -a great intelligence coup, and I would say great intelligence success; the combination of Penkovsky, as was already discussed, and these magical U2 overflights which had cameras that at the time took pictures of the ground that would allow you to see things this is way, way before the Internet, Google Earth, anything like this.
So, had this been two weeks later, the construction project would have been finished.
So I think that actually we were extremely fortunate that one was in this quite short window.
And I think if you’d gone two weeks later and now try to see what Kennedy’s options would have been, they would have been much, much narrower and not have included the blockade which at least punitively was about preventing additional missiles, additional warheads, and without even knowledge of whether there were even warheads there at the time.
One thing to keep in mind is that the Soviets had operational missiles already, so in terms of the Soviet attitude, it probably wouldn’t have been different.
I think, first of all, that this whole proposition and this whole plan was Khrushchev’s plan and his alone.
Now imagine, Khrushchev is supposed to be the dictator of the Soviet Union and yet it takes two meetings for them to agree to this cockamamie scheme.
And secondly, Khrushchev never told them that this would entail going to the brink of war.
And I think one of the -the one element of this story that is very important is that the Soviets never wanted to go to the brink of war, and so when they went to the brink of war, they removed them.
And it wouldn’t matter if they had, you know, 40 or 80 missiles operational.
The fact that the United States would go to war over one operational missile in Cuba was something that they had not taken into consideration.
They were given -there were Polaris submarines placed off the -that was -these Turkish missiles were obsolete.
I think Tim has bought the administration’s story, which was a good story and is as good a story as you could tell, but was not true.
So, first, the missiles only became operational for the first time just by accident during these 13 days.
That wouldn’t be the first government program to be obsolete the minute it starts.
The second question is, anybody that’s offered Polaris submarines which are in the ocean, which are of course, just as good as the missiles that are here in Cuba -excuse me, missiles, sorry, missiles in Turkey, missiles in Turkey mean that if there’s an attack on Turkey, it’s an attack on you and you’re in the game.
In the same way that American troops at a base are, quote, a guarantor.
The recent years has witnessed a series of escalating disputes or confrontations in the South China Sea between the two powers.
As we can see that when the president especially President Obama, in his election debate, he accentuated that by the year 2014 Americans troops going to pull out.
But they of course they won’t all of the troops won’t just pull out in a time till the -let’s say San Francisco.
They’re providing some kind of operational, technical support to American troops which actually, it’s just in front of the gates of China.
I mean -not to mention the North Korea and Japan and the -what’s happening between Pakistan and India, they’re all about nukes.
Because that is where we -that’s the scenario under which we can imagine kind of a U.S.-Chinese confrontation.
I’ll do a short version of it and then in the Foreign Affairs piece, I’ve got a little bit -a longer version.
NATCON20121015 35 10/17/12 century that he’s supremely confident is the American century, there’s some analogies here that are interesting.
When the British proposed that they’ll help resolve territorial disputes between the United States and Venezuela or the United States and Panama, Honduras, or the United States and Mexico, or the United States and Canada, he says, “Forget about it.
So the U.S resolves all these issues bilaterally, entirely on our own terms.
How about we have a coup, we declare a new country, it’s called Panama.
So I would say it’s going to be extremely difficult, I call this the Thucydides Trap that when you see a rising power rival a ruling power, generally this is a sad story.
So if the leadership of China and the leadership of the United States performs no better than the leadership before -in the Guns of August -before World War One, this will end up badly and I think looking at the size of the challenge should remind us, it’s not inevitable but it’s -it’ll require a stretch to better sense -than history as usual.
NATCON20121015 36 10/17/12 then again when I was working on my master’s degree, and then again when I was working on my Ph.D, Professor Allison.
Timothy Naftali, in his opening remarks, spoke very eloquently about the political and even electoral considerations on President Kennedy.
I want to ask anyone on the panel, specifically about the strategic reality, and it’s something I’ve never really gotten about the crisis, which is the Sovs had had nuclear weapons for 13 years and two months, since August of 1949.
According to the theory, they were deterred from doing so by our massive nuclear capability.
So I’m not quite sure what really changed in terms of the fundamental strategic status quo by moving missiles a little bit closer and a little bit less of a warning time.
It didn’t change a huge amount strategically, but the president had said, “This would be unacceptable to us,” so therefore he had to act.
NATCON20121015 37 10/17/12 gap but it was in favor of the United States.
The United States had about a 10-to-one advantage in warheads that could hit the other side at this point.
The Soviets would have got another 40 warheads that could reach the United States, if they’d succeeded in getting away with the Cuba gamble.
The president was deterred actually just by the thought of one of those Soviet warheads getting through.
But deploying these warheads to Cuba -missiles to Cuba, did not give the Soviets a first-strike capability against the United States.
Kennedy’s credibility was wrapped up in a certain -in a prohibition of placement of missiles in Cuba.
And that’s why, I think, President Obama is so careful about the words he chooses and uses about Iran.
Because each time he says something about Iran, he is investing his credibility into that policy.
Yeah I’d like to return what -to what Graham Allison said about the lessons learned with regard to Iran.
And I would like to look at a different scenario where it’s not us and Iran which are in this but, again, us and Russia.
And Russia, people don’t think about it these days, but our relationship with them has deteriorated significantly and the situation in Iran and Syria is considered by them a strategic issue.
And I would like you to comment on that aspect of this Middle East situation.
NATCON20121015 38 10/17/12 Tom Gjelten: As brief as you want to make it.
Just very -very briefly I would say, very good question and it would require a long answer to be thoughtful but the -I think what you remind us of is that in the Missile Crisis, fortunately this was essentially a two-person game.
In the case of Iran, there’s Iran, there’s the U.S., there’s the P5-plus-one, there’s Israel.
So there are a lot of actors, and getting the pieces right in this case, therefore, is I think, hugely more challenging than in the Missile Crisis.
