This enraged the United States, as they were already in a conflict of whether capitalism or communism was better with the Soviet Union.
Then on January 1960, when President John F Kennedy was elected, Castor thought that these threats would stop but he thought wrong.
President Kennedy still attempted to destroy Castor but after many fail attempts like the Bay of Pigs and Operation Mongoose, the Kennedy administration was humiliated.
Things got heated on April 1962, the Soviet Union began to station... ... middle of paper ... ...he Cuban missiles in exchange for a promise by United States leaders not to invade Cuba.
The USSR appealed to Cuba because they could provide protection for them after the then recent Bay of Pigs invasion.
During this invasion, the United States in April 1961, more than 1000 Cuban exiles made an amphibious landing in Cuba at a place called the Bay of Pigs.
The Crisis was ultimately a showdown between the United States and the Soviet Union from October 16 to October 28, 1962.
During those thirteen stressful days, the world’s two biggest superpowers stood on the brink of a nuclear catastrophe.
The Crisis started as a result of both the Soviet Union’s fear of losing the arms race, and Cuba’s fear of United States invasion.
Many nations were frightened that nuclear war would put everyone in misery.
After the Bay of Pigs Invasion the USSR increased its support of Fidel Castro's Cuban regime, and in the summer of 1962, Nikita Khrushchev secretly decided to install ballistic missiles in Cuba.
President Kennedy and the other leaders of our country were faced with a horrible dilemma where a decision had to be made.
As pressure between the Soviet Union and United State grew so did the fears of the American people.
Due in part because of its proximity to the United States, Cuba was the perfect place from which the Soviet Union could launch an attack.
This was cause for real alarm, Cuba had already begun building silos and launch pads for nuclear missiles that would be able to do massive amounts of damage to the United States.
The next morning, President John F Kennedy was made aware of the situation in Cuba and quickly assembled a group of twelve advisors, called EX-COMM, to help him throughout the crisis.
After seven days of intense discussion with government officials, he ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba to prevent any more weapons form arriving at the island.
On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy made the events public and tensions rose throughout the world.
The Soviet premier of Russia was caught arming Fidel Castro with nuclear weapons.
The confrontation left the world in fear for thirteen long days, with the life of the world on the line.
In 1962, Nikita Khrushchev, Premier of the Soviet Union, employed a daring gambit.
With a heady mixture of nationalism and left wing ideologies United States became very cautious for its southern comrades Central and Southern America and perhaps herself.
When Castro took over Cuba, the United States lost valuable investments in the sugar and tobacco crops of Cuba.
