But all their skill would have been to no avail if in the end Khrushchev had preferred his prestige, as they preferred theirs, to the danger of a world war.
The CIA began campaigns to assassinate the Cuban leader and President Kennedy initiated the complete economic blockade that exists until today.
In October 1962, United States spy planes sighted the construction of Soviet surface-to-air missile installations and the presence of Soviet medium-range bombers on Cuban soil.
These sightings were made after Republican leaders had begun to attack Kennedy for allowing a Soviet military presence on the island.
Photos indicated that the Soviets had also begun to build ground-to-ground missile installations on the island, which Kennedy defined as “offensive” and a threat to national security.
After securing the photographs Kennedy assembled a special team of advisors, known as EXCOM, to discuss various responses the United States might make.
He excluded any strategy that prioritized taking the issue to the United Nations for resolution.
High drama, much of it televised, followed the initiation of a naval blockade of Soviet ships heading across the Atlantic to Cuba.
Fortunately, the leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev, sent notes to the President that led to a tacit agreement between the two leaders whereby Soviet missiles would be withdrawn from Cuba and the United States would promise not to invade Cuba to overthrow the Castro government.
In addition, the President indicated that obsolete United States missiles in Turkey would be disassembled over time.
They agree with the administration view that the missiles constituted a threat to United States security, despite Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s claim in EXCOM meetings that the missiles did not change the strategic balance between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Given the importance of the missiles, leading social scientists have written that the Kennedy team carefully considered a multitude of policy responses.
EXCOM did not ignore competing analyses, as had been done in the decisional process prior to the Bay of Pigs.
All observers agreed that the United States and the Soviet Union had gone to the brink of nuclear war.
Even the President estimated that there was a 50 percent probability of full-scale nuclear war.
The crisis actually suggests that the United States quest to maintain and enhance its empire would lead it to go to any extreme, even nuclear war, to defend the interests of capitalism.
To avoid serious losses, whether symbolic or material, for capitalism, any policy was justified.
Further, in terms of United States politics, Kennedy was calculating the effects of the missiles on the chances for his party to retain control of Congress in 1962.
Finally, in personal terms, Kennedy was driven by the need to establish a public image as courageous and powerful in confronting the Soviets.
Because of imperialism, politics, and personal political fortunes, the world almost went to nuclear war 50 years ago.
Newer Post Older Post Home Go to TheRagBlog.comRichard D Jehn, founderThorne Webb Dreyer, editor Onward Through the Blog The Rag Blog is a reader-supported newsmagazine produced by activist journalists committed to progressive social change.
This blog enforces a specific comment policy that prohibits personal attack, goading and harassment, and other malicious remarks.
We will delete remarks considered inappropriate, at the discretion of the editors.
Progressive Dems See Opening for New Politics by Tom Hayden / The Rag Blog.
The sight of progressive Democrats shaming and exposing the Wall Street-funded ""Third Way"" Democrats is a sign of a powerful new opening for progressives on the American political spectrum.
Climate Change Confab Brings Too Little Too Late by Jack A Smith / The Rag Blog.
The sharply increasing scientific indicators of impending disastrous global climate change have failed to motivate the principal developed countries to accelerate the lackluster pace of their efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Opportunist Narvaiz Takes On Doggett Again in Gerrymandered 35th by Lamar W Hankins / The Rag Blog.
Former San Marcos mayor Susan Narvaiz, who is again challenging United States Rep.
Lloyd Doggett in Texas' gerrymandered 35th district, is a political chameleon who says what she needs to say to protect herself from political accountability.
The southern half of TransCanada's Keystone XL tar sands pipeline includes a ""Houston Lateral Pipeline"" that is leading the LyondellBasell refinery to retool itself for the looming feast of tar sands crude and fracked oil bounty.
November Guests Include Spiritual Counselor, Citizens' Advocate, Singer-Songwriter by Rag Radio / The Rag Blog.
Thorne Dreyer's guests in November included a Methodist minister and longtime social activist, a noted citizens' advocate, two staffers from the original Rag, the author of a book about the 'movement that started the civil rights movement,' and an acclaimed singer-songwriter.
Paul Buhle's 'Radical Jesus: A Graphic History of Faith' by Alan Wieder / The Rag Blog.
Noted historian Paul Buhle, who has published an acclaimed series of nonfiction comics, is one of the most prolific and insightful critics from the American left.
The Coachella Valley in Southern California hosted a massive four-day health clinic that helped more than 2,500 uninsured patients.
Our celebrations during the Winter Solstice take from many traditions, including the Roman Saturnalia, Druid customs, the German ""Yule,"" and the birth of Jesus; and it was Queen Victoria who popularized the lighted Christmas tree.
Paul Anthony Ciancia considered himself a ""good man with a gun"" -a warrior against the traitors who were taking over our government, bankrupting our currency, and trying to establish a New World Order -when he walked into the Los Angeles airport and opened fire with an assault rifle.
Matt Hern Writes With Bravado That Sports Do Matter by Ron Jacobs / The Rag Blog.
Engagingly written, Matt Hern's ""One Game at a Time"" is motivated by the belief that sports do matter as much as sports fans think they do.
Right-Wing Rants and the Abominable Straw Man by Lamar W Hankins / The Rag Blog.
The Internet is a marvelous tool when used honestly and correctly, and with recognition of its limitations.
But it is also home to angry rants, often from the far right, that make ridiculous claims -like the one saying that the Obama administration was setting up gasoline stations to provide free gas to low-income people.
More in Bob's series on the continuing movement to democratize Egypt, this time covering the period from 1947-48 when an anti-imperialist left made experienced growth -and the Muslim Brotherhood collaborated with the Egyptian regime.
An irony of 21st century historical discourse is how real historic figures -like the late Nelson Mandela -get lionized, sanitized, and redefined as defenders of the ongoing order rather than activists who committed their lives to revolutionary change.
Mike continues his remarkable memoir, accompanied -and inspired by -photos from his upcoming book.
Chileans went to the polls Sunday and appear to be reelecting Socialist president Michelle Bachelet on the 40th anniversary of the bloody U.S.-supported coup against Socialist president Salvador Allende.
Alice writes about the dramatic contradictions in Chilean politics and history.
A Tale of Two Alternative Media Conferences by Paul Krassner / The Rag Blog.
Paul remembers the original Alternative Media Conference in June 1970 at Goddard College in Vermont -and it was a wild and wooly affair headlined by the likes of Ram Dass, Harvey Kurtzman, and Art Spiegelman -as the college hosts another conference keynoted by progressive radio host Thom Hartmann.
Singer-Songwriter Slaid Cleaves in Interview and Performance Interview by Thorne Dreyer / Rag Radio.
Acclaimed musician Cleaves talks about Woody Guthrie's influence on his work, reflects on his time as a busker on the streets of Ireland, and spins some yarns.
From the fear of ""falling behind the Soviets"" to the missile gap and, more recently the wars on drugs and terrorism, the fear of falling behind some fictional adversaries is an ongoing ""meme"" used by economic, political, and military elites.
Anne Lewis' New Website Brings Austin Movement History to Life by Alice Embree / The Rag Blog.
Novelist Beverly Gologorsky Was Shaped by Sixties, Feminism, and The Bronx by Jonah Raskin / The Rag Blog.
Another unique interview from Jonah with novelist Beverly Gologorsky, whose latest book, ""Stop Here,"" ""the title of which nearly shouts its presence.
Gologorsky, ""a novelist shaped by the New Left,"" edited anti-war publications Viet-Report and Leviathan in the '60s and '70s.
The latest in Feldman's series on the ""movement to democratize Egypt"" covers the period of 1945-6 when Egyptian communist and labor grew and faced government retaliation.
Long-time pacifist writer and activist McReynolds says there's something ""infinitely sad"" about the recent celebration of Veterans Day.
October Interviews with Poppy Northcutt, Maneesha James, Seth Holmes, and Thomas Zigal Interviews by Thorne Dreyer / Rag Radio.
In October Rag Radio guests addressed Texas feminist history, issues involving death and dying, the plight of migrant farmworkers, and the post-Katrina craziness captured in fiction.
Waldman has been reviewing vintage, mostly-British television series now available on DVD, Netflix, and YouTube.
From the Rag Bloggers Alan Locklear Alan Pogue Alan Waldman Alice Embree Alyce Guynn Anne Lewis Bernardine Dohrn Bill Ayers Bill Fletcher Jr.
Bill Freeland Bill Meacham Bill Narum Bob Feldman Bob Simmons Bruce Melton Carl Davidson Carl R Hultberg Carlos Calbillo Charlie Loving Chellis Glendinning Chuck Spinney Danny Schechter Dave Zirin David Bacon David Holmes Morris David MacBryde David McReynolds David P Hamilton David Van Os David Zeiger Diane Stirling-Stevens Dick J Reavis Don Swift Doug Zachary Dr.
