We have disasters for breakfast; mined ships for luncheon; burned cities for dinner; trenches in our dreams, and bombarded towns for small talk.
Using this new manufacturing paradigm and mechanism, a completed automobile could be put together in three hours.
The era of independent craftsmen producing customized goods, each one unique and imbued with its maker's personality, gave way to the automated, one-size-fits all, dehumanizing, demoralizing, cog-in-a-wheel, you-canbe-replaced-you-know world of machine-driven manufacturing.
Lizzie Huddleston gave credence to the credo ""Third time's a charm"" with her marriage to James Branstuder on April 23 rd in Carrollton, Missouri.
Her first short-lived marriage to Harry Kollenborn had produced their son Albert.
Lizzie was twenty-six when she commenced married life for the third time with Jim Branstuder.
As when she married Harry Kollenborn in 1906, both Lizzie and her new husband were residents of the town of DeWitt, Missouri, in Carroll County.
But the Branstuders would soon move to Brunswick, a few miles east in neighboring Chariton County.
In order to marry Jim, Lizzie had to first divorce her middle husband, Charles E Davidson.
The day before she married Jim, she obtained her divorce from Charles, who did not even show up for the proceedings.
Wednesday April 22 nd 1914 Eighth day of Term Elizabeth L Davidson Plaintiff vs.
It is therefore ordered, adjudged and decreed by the Court that the plaintiff be divorced from the defendant Charles E Davidson and be forever freed from the obligations of said marriage, it is further ordered and adjudged by the Court that the plaintiff have and retain the care custody and control of Charles Edgar Davidson the minor child, born of said marriage.
The Branstuders' union held— they remained married for forty-five years, up until Lizzie's death in 1959.
Lizzie's aunt Anna Lee Huddleston apparently ended up marrying Lizzie's father-in-law Squire Branstuder.
Both Chillicothe and Hale are in the vicinity of Carrollton, DeWitt, and Brunswick, the towns where the Kollenborns/ Davidsons/ Branstuders had lived.
Deborah and Robert had become estranged sometime after their move to California in 1891.
As Deborah lived with their daughter Marian in California (and is buried in Dinuba in that state), she must have been visiting her other children in Canada at the time that she died.
The global conflict which began in 1914 and didn't end until 1918 was first called ""The Great War,"" but got a name change in the 1940s when another world conflict broke out.
Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria had been warned to stay out of Bosnia, whose Serbian population was seeking independence.
Later on the same day, however, a Serbian student named Gavio Princip was successful in his plot to assassinate the Archduke — along with his wife, the Duchess.
The first bullet hit Ferdinand's wife Sophie in the abdomen; the second struck Francis in the jugular.
The First World War began on July 3 rd when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia, although the Serbia government apparently did not sponsor or condone the murder of the Archduke and Archduchess.
One declaration of war led to another, until practically the entire world was involved, at least tangentially.
Banding together on one side were chiefly Britain, France, Russia, and China.
In the view of many, the Victorian era ended with the advent of this terrible bloodbath.
This global cataclysm, although not as costly in terms of lives lost, was even more a watershed event than the Second World War.
It brought a greater break with the past, gravely altering people's view of the world and its future.
At the time of the war, it would have been difficult to imagine a more devastating one.
Ten million died in battle, and twenty million more died of hunger and disease related to the war.
To an even more dramatic extent than in most battles, there were no winners— only losers.
To provide an idea of just how devastating and world-changing this war was, all one has to do is consult history books that expound on the era and put the conflict in context.
Before the war, most people thought world conditions were improving, and that the future looked bright.
Prior to the war, people and nations felt secure enough, and trusted each other enough, that passports were not required when traveling from country to country.
As just one example of just how far-reaching and fundamental this jolt to the world was , note this translation of an excerpt from the German history book Kursbuch Geschichte by Dr.
Artillery and machine guns, battle cruisers and submarines, as well as the first tanks and bombers led to an extermination of people and materials, which exceeded anything previously imagined.
Poison gas, first employed in 1915, was one of the especially dreadful battle means employed.
It signified the great downfall of the values of civilization in the consciousness of contemporaries.
The war-waging nations mobilized every member of their societies for the war at the front and on the ""homefront, "" which led to a shaky separation between the military and the civil sphere.
In the course of the war almost the entire civilian population, male and female, was involved in the war, both in the armaments factories and in the ""normal"" work positions, where women replaced men who were drafted into the military.
The First World War meant the breakdown of the system of states, but not simply because all great powers were part of it, as a hundred years before in the Napoleonic Wars.
Rather all the states and peoples involved felt and experienced it as an existential struggle for survival.
Actually this war patriotism developed a tremendous power of integration, which concealed the tensions within populations and consequently deepened the chasms between the nations.
Not since the wars of religion in the 1 6 th and 1 7 th centuries had the population been drawn in such measure into the occurrences of war as both fighters and sufferers — and that meant mobilization, nationalization, fanaticism, in completely new dimensions.
Even the beginning of the great conflict in old Europe may have had an adverse affect on the man's health.
Perhaps needing to get away and meditate in solitude, John Muir wandered the Mojave Desert.
If you couldn 't read, write, spell, and quote all twelve multiplication tables by then you probably never could... "" from ""Under a Buttermilk Moon a Country Memoir"" by Roy Webster ""He was a good worker, with a head on his shoulders and could get up in the morning.
Attacked by a German submarine on May 7 th , the Lusitania did not dawdle in its descent to the depths of the sea.
A mere eighteen minutes after being struck, it vanished beneath the ocean's surface.
One thousand one hundred ninety eight men, women, and children perished.
Although Germany offered apologies and reparations for the Americans killed, outrage over the incident played a large role in getting America directly involved in The Great War.
Americans' view towards Germans changed drastically after this incident.
Theodore Shannon began working full time this year as a logger, at the age of thirteen.
The area had previously experienced a gold rush; Redwood trees were now the valuable commodity to be extracted from the soil.
The Coast Redwood of northwestern California is taller than its cousin, the Giant Sequoia that is found inland, such as in eastern Tulare County, but is not as wide of girth.
Both are tall, both are thick, but each one takes decided precedence over the other in one of the two characteristics.
Another difference between the two species is that Coast Redwoods live approximately 2,000 years, whereas the Giant Sequoias endure for approximately 3,000 cycles of the seasons.
As do Cypress trees, Redwoods hold up well against fire — in fact, fire seems necessary for this insect-, rot-, and fire-resistant marvel.
Thriving in areas where lessrobust trees had been victims of previous fires, the location of groups of redwoods coexisting together may correspond to areas where there had been localized hot spots in past fires.
At the time Theodore was finishing his formal schooling and beginning his life-long career as a logger, some were still using ox teams for transporting logs out of the woods.
As the form of transport to market changed from sail to steam to diesel, the logging industry went from using oxen to horses to ""donkeys"" to ""cats"" in the woods.
Two thousand miles away, in northwestern Arkansas, the bucolic times in the Green family's Ozark home came to an end after just one decade.
Belle would have to carry on without Tommy in caring for their seven children, ranging in age from two to fourteen.
GREEN, Thomas We are sorry to announce the death last week of Thomas Green of near Dug Hill on Sugar Creek.
The family doctor, as well as relatives, offered to adopt the two youngest children— Alice, who was five years old, and the baby of the family, two-year-old Andy.
Belle was determined to keep the family together, though, and declined the offers.
Although she had to sell most of the stock, she succeeded in retaining the land for which Tommy had traded.
This retention of the beloved family property did not come easily, though.
As a child, every time she entered one with her mother, the two of them ended up leaving the bank with less land than they had when they entered— the bank having confiscated some of it for back taxes.
Today, a golf course has supplanted the formerly productive land nearby.
Will acted as ""midwife"" in this instance also, and helped to deliver his sixth child and fourth son.
Gertie says that Robert was named for Will's brother; however, Robert was also the name of Will's father, who had died in 1901.
Other documents, however, indicate that the middle name given Robert was Taft.
However, if he was actually named Robert Lee, one would assume that it were given him in honor of the Confederate General Robert E Lee.
If so, Will's uncle James, who served for four years on the Union side in the Civil War, might have disapproved.
Ishi died on March 25 th of a disease he had contracted while living amongst the Euro-Americans at the San Francisco Museum of Anthropology.
Since his time, term limits have been imposed on the presidency, limiting the officeholder to two consecutive terms.
Of the forty-three Presidents in all of United States History, there have only been fourteen who served two or more full terms.
Of the first seven Presidents, the only ones to be held to serving a single term were John Adams and his son John Quincy Adams.
In the next four hours Hughes piled up a commanding lead in the other eastern states.
Neither the United Press or the Associated Press declared him elected, although it seemed certain until Wednesday morning.
In California, all of the counting had been completed, even though the balance of the State had cast 925,000 votes.
Election observers began to realize the outcome would depend on who won the State's 13 electoral votes.
It was the isolated county in the Redwood Country which held the history -making answer.
Morris DeHaven Tracy of the United Press, San Francisco, was a former Eureka newspaperman.
Going to work, he traced the final results through his old friend, County Clerk Fred M Kay.
In spite of my best efforts, I could not keep back the tears, and for blocks down Fifth Avenue I wept over the pitiful spectacle.
I could not look at those long lines of fine looking men, marching so gaily along, and with so little realization of what it all means, without afresh outburst of tears.
How little they realized that they were endorsing a system which means that great armies of splendid manhood shall go forth and slay other great armies.
Because stupid diplomats were too avaricious, too selfish, too ambitious to sanely handle the affairs entrusted to their care.
All the lunatics turned loose from all the hospitals in the world could not have made so sorry a mess of things as have the diplomats of Europe.
And yet we, blind and stupid as we are, are rushing into the same horrible cataclysm.
Buys the Virgin Islands ♦ United States enters the ""Great War"" On January 25 th , The United States of America purchased the Virgin Islands for $25 million.
As FDR would later say regarding the second World War while it was first raging— and as LBJ would later say about Vietnam— Woodrow Wilson had previously emphatically asserted that America would not sacrifice its young men and women's lives to the war effort.
Whether reluctant or otherwise, Wilson's earlier assertion about America not fighting proved a hollow promise.
The hatchway had been opened to America's direct involvement when Germany sunk an American merchant vessel.
Germany claimed the vessel was carrying weapons, bound for use against her by Germany's enemies.
In retrospect, it appears the vessel had indeed been transporting weapons for use against the Germans.
After asking Congress for a declaration of War on Germany, which was met with thunderous applause, Wilson told an aide, ""My message 12 today was a message of death for our young men.
Reportedly, Wilson then returned to the Oval Office, laid his head on his desk, and wept.
Now it must turn with its whole might to combating the greatest enemy of all-infectious disease.
Germany, considered the primary instigator of the war was slapped with heavy reparations costs by the victors in the war.
Many feel that the extreme strain that this put Germany under inexorably led to a bitter and belligerent Germany in the 1930s and 1940s that would later resume an aggressive stance against its enemies.
Tomorrow is the last day for the German alien enemies to register at the local police department.
Some of the local unnaturalized citizens have been hesitant to make the fingerprint impressions but the officers say it is no disgrace.
The names of the registrants will be published in tomorrow's Register to show good faith of the German-born citizens in their willingness to co-operate with the government.
NEW YORK — Fourteen states in the Union have abolished the teaching of the German language in the schools and in 1 6 other states a campaign to eliminate German is underway, according to an announcement made today by the American Defense Society.
Every male in Allen County between the ages of 18 and 45 must register tomorrow under the new manpower bill.
The local board has completed arrangements for the registration in every voting precinct in the county.
It is expected there will be about 2, 5000 men go to designated places in each precinct to register.
The draft call which has been expected for the first week in October has been postponed indefinitely by the government on account of the epidemic of Spanish influenza in the military camps.
We know he did not die from Spanish influenza, and yet he apparently only had a couple of years to live.
The pestilence that appeared this year was to prove costlier, in terms of lives lost, than all the bullets and bombs of the war combined.
In fact, more Americans died as a result of the pandemic in a single year than had died in both world wars.
Thus the War and the Flu overlapped— some were already in the fire when the remainder of the contents of the frying pan were overturned into the flames.
The flu originated in a war setting, and spread further and faster because of war conditions.
In fact, it first appeared on March 9 th at an army base just seventy miles west of Topeka, in Fort Riley, Kansas.
Fort Riley also happened to be the home base of George Custer and the 7 th Cavalry half a century earlier, at which time a cholera epidemic swept the fort and the surrounding region.
Due to the wartime news censorship, Spain was the first locale to report on the widespread deaths.
From Fort Riley, and another base in Kansas, Fort Funston, the flu quickly spread to army bases throughout the country.
Not understanding 15 the danger, the military sent thousands who carried the virus to Europe.
Conditions in the trenches there only encouraged further rapid spreading of the flu.
The unhygienic conditions that prevailed there due to all the casualties, wounded and dead, were a perfect breeding ground for the virus.
The deaths came so fast and furious (many died within 24 hours of becoming ill) that some feared that germ warfare was being used on them by the Germans.
By the fall every major army in combat in Europe had a significant number of its troops sick.
A strange thing about the flu was that it most affected the healthiest cross-section of the country — those between 20 and 40 years of age.
Most public gatherings were prohibited, and unnecessary travel was discouraged.
In Chicago, a man who refused the order to don a mask was shot dead on the street by a city health official.
A remarkable aspect of the flu was the suddenness with which it could strike.
In a mine in South Africa, a lift operator was overcome so quickly with a sweating paralysis that he could no longer control his machine, and twenty-four miners died as the lift fell to the bottom of the shaft.
In Washington, D.C., a young woman called the authorities, reporting that two of her three roommates were dead, and the other one was sick — she was the only healthy one there.
By the time they reached the apartment shortly afterwards, all four of the young women were dead.
More than half of American casualties in the war were a result of the flu — forty-three thousand American soldiers died from the disease.
Upwards of 550,000 Americans lost their lives as a result of the flu, which was more than ten times the number of the American soldiers who died in battle throughout the entire World war.
By the time the pandemic was finally over, a total of 675,000 Americans had died from it — greater than the number of American soldiers killed in all the wars of the 20 th century combined.
During the month of October 1918 alone, over 195,000 Americans died from the flu.
Two women in the extended family had another kind of ""flu"" this year, a strain they had had before and would have again.
Lizzie and Jim's first child Ruie M Branstuder was also born this year, and was named for her mother and possibly her mother's great aunt, Ruth Elizabeth M Huddleston.
Born in DeWitt, as her brother Albert was, Ruie Barner lived in and around Arkansas most of her life.
When the Branstuders were growing wheat and oats in Verdigris, Oklahoma, in the northeastern part of the state, harvest time would bring workers to their farm, who boarded with them throughout their term of employment.
Ruie would unscrew the bolts on the sides of the bunk beds until they were almost all of the way out— just enough to keep the boards attached, but very loosely.
When the harvester allotted the top bunk grabbed ahold of the board to climb into bed, the board would come off and clatter onto the floor, the dumbfounded farm laborer presumably sprawled on the floor, doubtless to the amusement of his companions.
Ruie would also play a similar trick with the salt and pepper shakers, loosening the tops enough so that when they were overturned, their tops would come off, pouring copious amounts of spices all over the food and across the table.
Her half-brothers Albert Kollenborn and Buck Davidson were also recipients of her keen sense of humor.
On cold winter days, she would hide a metal poker in the snow, and then, prior to bedtime, stuff the icecold poker under the covers of her brothers' bedsheets.
Three planes flew over Trinity County on December 18 th , bound for Eureka.
Such an event which would hardly be noticed today was quite a thrill in those early days of aviation.
All in the county seat of Weaverville went outside to see them, some even climbing onto the tops of buildings for a better view.
I would say that the things our corporatecontrolled government has done at best are shameful, and at worst, genocidal.
But there's an incredible and a permanent culture of resistance in this country that I'm very proud to be apart of.
It's not the tradition of slave-owning founding father It's the tradition of the Frederick Douglasses, the Underground Railroads, the Chief Josephs, the Joe Hills, and the Huey P Newtons.
People often get tricked into going overseas and fighting Uncle Sam's Wall Street wars, but these are people who knew what they were fighting for here at home.
Workday ♦ Belle Green refuses amputation ♦ Volstead Act ♦ Prohibition ♦ The First Woman President When the telephone was invented in 1876, men were hired as operators.
This didn't last long, though, as they were found to be too rambunctious with one another and tended to be surly with the parties they were employed to connect.
Thus, being a telephone operator soon became primarily a woman's profession.
This year, though, operators of either gender started becoming more scarce— for the first time, telephone users could dial direct.
His namesake, Theodore Roosevelt Shannon, whose father had possibly followed the 19 President's career closely, was twelve days shy of being seventeen years old.
Had the Great War not ended the previous year, he probably would have been a candidate for direct involvement in that bloody contest.
Theodore Roosevelt Shannon was not the only baby named for the President.
One who would make quite an impact on history as well as on many baseballs was Jackie Roosevelt Robinson, born this year.
This physically and emotionally resilient individual would break the color line in baseball as a member of the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1940s.
The Brooklyn Dodgers organization, and even more so Robinson himself, displayed the content of their character in the roles they played in obliterating the ""color line"" in baseball.
African-American athletes are taken for granted in Major League Baseball today, but at the time Jackie Robinson was added to the Dodgers' squad, he was subjected to animosity and cruelty from fans and fellow players alike.
As one example, opposing first-baseman and future baseball announcer Joe Garagiola deliberately spiked Robinson, jamming his foot down on Robinson's as he crossed first base.
On the other hand, some players, such as southerner ""Pee Wee"" Reese went out of their way to befriend Robinson.
The heavily favored Chicago White Sox lost to the Cincinnati Reds five games to three in the World Series.
After investigation, it was determined that certain members of the Chicago White Sox had accepted bribes to ""throw"" the Series.
One of those indicted, and banned from baseball for life, was ""Shoeless"" Joe Jackson, a country bumpkin batting phenom.
Superstitious and eccentric, ""Shoeless Joe"" would, among other things, send his bats to the South for the winter and practice his batting concentration by having stare-outs with lit matches.
Although possibly agreeing with the scheme, or at least accepting the money, Jackson's .375 batting average in the series led all hitters, and his twelve hits tied a world series record.
Gertie Shannon related in her memoirs that her sons Theodore and Kenneth relocated to Tulare County in 1919.
After finding work and getting settled there, they asked their parents to move down with them.
Will and Gertie did come down, with their other four surviving children, Howard, Marian, Robert, and George.
Not long 20 after they had got their Trinity County family to relocate with them down to Tulare County, though, Theodore and Kenneth returned north, returning to working ""in the woods"" as loggers.
Prior to the move south, Will and Gertie's daughter Marian Adele, who was then seven years old, fell off her horse at school and broke her arm.
The teacher, Miss Holtorf, carried Marian into her own home about a half mile away and doctored her up ""and did a fine job of setting the arm"" according to Gertie.
It was not uncommon in this era for workers to spend six days a week, twelve hours and more per day, on the job.
The eight-hour workday, although still not the norm for everybody, was established this year as a standard.
In Arkansas, Belle Green badly injured herself while cutting sorghum cane for winter molasses.
Hurley was called, the poison had spread rapidly and developed into gangrene.
He explained to Belle that her only hope was for him to amputate above the poisoned area.
Despite the dire prognostication, Belle refused, saying, ""But doctor, I have a farm to run and seven children to raise.
The doctor did all he knew how to do, but left the Green farm with little hope.
Hurley returned, he was amazed to find that Belle's heartbeat was stronger and her temperature lower.
He said, ""Belle, when I left last night, your heart was pounding like a rusty tin can.
The doctor could only shake his head, feeling he had just witnessed a miracle.
Ruth became nurse and second mother to her three youngest siblings Mary, Alice, and Andy, while ""Man"" and Effie did the outside chores, which consisted of milking, feeding the stock, cleaning the stalls, and cutting wood.
They recall a neighbor named Port Howard who came with a big load of wood during a blizzard.
One of the reasons many men opposed women getting the vote was their fear that the fairer sex would use their newly gained power to mandate the prohibition of alcohol.
Preparations were already being made for that, though, even without women's suffrage.
This Pharisaical law defined just what products constituted ""alcoholic beverages,"" paving an ultra-puritanical path that would lead to the imminent ban of all such.
Disallowance of the production, sale, and consumption of alcohol became law throughout the nation with the passing of the 18 th Amendment to the Constitution.
In many cases it also meant a degradation of quality of the spirits imbibed.
And this was not just a case of less taste, but a situation where some of the illegal liquor sold was downright dangerous to drink.
This good-intentioned social experiment was not only welcomed by teetotalers and temperance advocates, but also by many who saw in it ""business"" opportunities.
Enterprising individuals who didn't mind breaking the law to make their living went into the bootlegging/ rumrunning trade.
Family lore has it, in fact, (there is, as one would expect, no documented evidence) that Albert Kollenborn was a bootlegger for a time.
If true, it was probably when he was in his early twenties, at the time the family was living in northeastern Oklahoma.
A natural destination for him to deliver his wares would have been Wichita, Kansas.
The only big cities that are closer to Verdigris are Tulsa and Oklahoma City.
It could also have been the case that Albert had been involved in this activity while living in northern Missouri in his late teens, taking his wares to Kansas City.
Prohibition was an understandable idea, viewed from the perspective of those who had seen homes shattered as a result of alcohol abuse.
It was impractical, though, as a means of solving the problem — and punished the innocent along with the guilty.
This experiment failed miserably and was finally repealed in 1933 22 People who like to smoke as well as drink had an even tougher time in Kansas than elsewhere in this period.
As National Prohibition lasted from 1920 to 1933, the outlawing of both tobacco and alcohol in Kansas overlapped during most of the 1920s.
Before women even got the vote , a woman was running the affairs of the country.
The woman in question had not been elected to the post, nor did she act in an official capacity.
Nevertheless, Woodrow Wilson's wife Edith made presidential decisions on the sly for her husband while he was incapacitated for a time following a stroke this year.
Following this state of affairs, a law was passed that allowed the Vice President to take over the Presidential duties in the event that the President were to become incapacitated.
In this first year of the decade, for the first time, more Americans lived in cities than in rural areas.
The population, at 1 10 million, was about one third of what it is today.
Men and women who were middle-aged in the 1920s had lived through more change than did citizens during any other period in American history up till then.
They had seen the introduction of rockets, movies, radios, advertisements, ""brands"" of products, chain stores (against which some protested, because of the inroads these made on the traditional ""mom and pop"" shops), and now women voting and working outside the home, and the strict prohibition of all alcoholic beverages.
Considering his statement that he didn't like the ""country"" in Colorado due to the great volume of snow, one wonders about his last choice of domicile.
He was apparently one of the last surviving members of the 16th Michigan Infantry.
The year before, only nineteen of their number attended the annual reunion they had been holding since 1881.
If Ruth was in fact African-American (even according to the ""one drop rule,"" which states that any African ancestry at all constitutes one as being ""colored""), he ""passed"" as a white man throughout his career.
The National Football League was founded this year in the city which houses the Pro Football Hall of Fame, Canton, Ohio.
Louis after the 1959 season and then relocated to Arizona in 1988; and the Decatur Staleys, who moved to Chicago in 1921.
Amateur football had already been played in the country for several decades.
Back in 1873, Yale, Princeton, Columbia and Rutgers Universities had drafted the first code of football rules.
Thora Louise Wheeler is the only surviving child of Harry and Myrtle Kollenborn.
As Harry was included in it, he disappeared at some point after that in that year, but the exact date is unknown.
Thirty-one year old Harry left his wife and five children for a young lady of nineteen.
About a week later, the girl returned to town, but Harry was never 25 seen again— at least, no family member has ever reported seeing him after that.
It has been speculated that the whole affair was a ""setup"" to allow the brothers to ambush and rob Harry.
If such is the case, they apparently killed him also, although his body was never recovered.
His car was found near a river (presumably the Neosho, as the Kollenborns lived in the La Harpe/Iola / Carlyle area of Allen County) with his architectural drafting tools still in it.
Although Harry was listed as a farmer in the 1920 census, family lore has him as a draftsman at this time.
Iola and Allen counties were growing quite a bit at the time, so there was certainly a lot of work in that field.
Of course, Harry could have been pursuing both professions simultaneously, as a small farm does not require full-time year-round attention and many farmers work at other jobs, especially during the winter, when farm work is less demanding than at other times of the year.
Harry could have simply left, with no ""foul play"" being involved, but it is thought that if he had done that he would have taken his drafting tools along.
Naturally, he may have deliberately left them for that very reason — so that the family and/ or the authorities would be less likely to consider him alive and go looking for him.
Harry's brother George is said to have thought that Harry ""rode the rails"" out of town and concluded that he had probably died somewhere along the way.
Men abandoning their families in that area at that general time period was not a rare occurrence.
The sacred bonds of matrimony seem to be as the tiniest thread around the hands of a giant so far as the holding power on Iola husbands is concerned.
Scarcely a month passes that some husband doesn't desert his wife and children and leave them for friends or the county or their town's feeble efforts to support.
Charles, James, Emma, Roy Another daughter, Eda Irene, was born to Will and Gertie Shannon on September 4 th of this year, in Tulare.
Eda was the first of Will and Gertie's children to be born in a hospital.
Will and Gertie's later children also 26 stayed in school longer than the first ones had.
Most of those born in the Central part of the state graduated from High School, Eda among them.
Thora was born to his father Harry , as already mentioned, and Juanita was born to his mother Lizzie and Jim Branstuder.
Albert may not have known about Thora at the time, as the Kollenborns and Branstuders did not seem to stay in contact with one another — Albert reportedly only saw his biological father once in his life.
Albert and Thora never did meet one another, although she had tried to stop by and see him once when passing through Coos Bay, Oregon when the Kollenborns were living there.
Thora's brother James and Albert did meet, years later, toward the end of both of their lives.
Juanita was well-known to Albert, though— they grew up together, in Missouri and Oklahoma.
They would also live near each other in northwestern Arkansas, where Juanita died at a young age.
In 1920, though, the Branstuders were still in Missouri and, like some of her siblings— such as Albert— Juanita was born in DeWitt.
Although it is possible that Juanita was born in 1921, it is most likely that she was born 1920.
The reason for drawing that conclusion is that she was nine years old in the 1930 census, which was taken early in the year, in April.
It is most likely she was born after April, and so she would have turned ten in 1930 in that case.
Not the hypothetical overseas movement that has had the Lords ducking, hut a home-made epidemic that will be shoved right up to the men of Iola, of Allen County and of the state of Kansas to decide.
She desired information as to the attitude of this paper toward a state campaign for equal suffrage.
She stated that such a campaign is now on and that the state has been divided into districts and that she is the district manager in 27 this district.
In the 1920 census, Harry Kollenborn was listed as a farmer in Carlyle, Allen County, Kansas.
In yet another inconsistency or point of confusion, Harry claimed that his mother was born in Missouri, whereas in actuality his biological mother, Nellie Jean Moore, had been born in Pennsylvania.
Perhaps Harry was referring to his stepmother Rosa Pennington, who indeed had been born in Missouri in 1872, in the appropriately named tiny town of Tina.
In the census, Harry's father James and James' second wife Rosa were listed as living nearby in La Harpe, which is also in Allen County, Kansas.
Rosa's parents had also apparently relocated along with the Kollenborns to La Harpe, as Rosa's father John J died there on July 2 nd , 1917, at the age of 75, and is buried in the town cemetery.
Another son of William Kollenborn and brother of James, Richard Lee Kollenborn, was also in Allen County, Kansas at this time, Osage township to be exact.
Coincidentally, the Belle Green family was also listed as being in Osage township — but the one in Benton County, Arkansas, not the one in Kansas.
Lizzie Huddleston's father Bob, living in Kansas City, Missouri, was listed as working as a miller for a flour company.
Emma Laura Silva was in Eureka, California, on Clark Street to be precise.
The ""Donald"" is actually Gerald; the census taker obviously misunderstood or mis-read the boy's name.
Emma, who would later cook for California Governor (and future Supreme Court Justice) Earl Warren, was a waitress at the time.
Emma's future son-in-law, Theodore Shannon, was farming in Tulare township, California.
Myrtle had siblings in the central part of the golden state who urged her to move out, telling her that she could find work there.
Youngest daughter Thora says about the move, ""We all worked as soon as we could.
I should say the boys did, we girls kept up the house and did the cooking.
My brothers were old enough when our father left to know, and always said they hoped he didn't come back, because he was mean to all of us.
To say such a thing indicates that they may have felt he was still alive, somewhere.
This is so because Kern County, where the Myrtle Kollenborn household 29 lived, borders Tulare County.
In fact, the Will Shannon family and Myrtle Kollenborn family were both in Kern County for a time, as the 1930 census shows.
We never heard of such things; hard work and long hours took care of everything — kept you lean and rugged. "" from ""Under a Buttermilk Moon a Country Memoir"" by Roy Webster ""Sometimes I wonder whether the world is being run by smart people who are putting us on or by imbeciles who really mean it.
As is also true of Harry and Myrtle's last child, Thora Wheeler, Lula Mae is still living.
Siloam Springs, Arkansas, where Lula Mae lives today, is located on the boundary between northwestern Arkansas and northeastern Oklahoma.
It is nineteen miles from Siloam Springs Smith, Arkansas, and two hundred and three miles from Siloam Springs, Missouri.
Wanna-be Davy Crocketts would have no more opportunities to try to grin down grizzly bears in California.
What was thought to have been the last one in the state was killed in Sequoia National Forest this year.
Apparently this was considered a grand achievement at the time, an event to celebrate.
Following the events of two years earlier, when Harry Kollenborn abandoned his family and subsequently mysteriously disappeared, Myrtle divorced him this year.
Additionally, Harry was to pay a total of $102 in Attorney's fees and related costs.
These costs were apparently eventually covered by Myrtle herself, but she was unable to do so until early 1928.
To be precise, they were not breeches proper at all, but the ordinary blue cotton overalls, at a dollar the pair, which almost every male workman of the West uses instead of the more expensive article.
I had often seen little girls in these bifurcated garments, but here was a comely matron, still on the bright side of forty, who, with ""Boss of the Road"" on a label at the small of her back, carried out her domestic duties unhampered by any vestige of skirt.
Though, to my eye, the trousers might have been more comfortable had they been made a little wider, she went about her work unashamed.
And Kansas wasn't the only state where the KKK was strong — Oklahoma declared martial law this year in response to terrorist activity carried out there by the white-robed, lily-livered do-badders.
Many things are so commonplace today that we take them for granted, and imagining matters otherwise seems bizarre.
On May 28 th of this year, the Attorney General, the top lawyer in the country, declared it legal for women to wear trousers whenever and wherever they pleased.
Having the legal right to do something and that something being acceptable or fashionable are, though, not always one and the same.
It would be decades before it would become commonplace for women to wear pants in public.
While we were living at Carl's, and Robert was about seven years old, he gave me a scare.
I had been outside with the boys, picking up the chips and carrying wood in, and the boys were playing and everything was all right.
Everything got quiet and I went out to check on my children, and Robert was sitting in the swing with his tongue sticking out and the rope all around his neck.
His tongue was black and I pulled him out of the swing, laying him on the ground, and ran into the house, calling for Dad.
Mr Reeves heard me calling but thought it was the children at play and didn't realize anything was wrong until he saw Dad carrying Robert.
George didn't realize anything was wrong and was playing around and under the swing through all this.
Robert would experience another close call as an adult, in 1949, this time at the side of his brother Calvin Coolidge Shannon, who would be born the next year, in 1924.
But that's not what killed the Presidentthere were no casualties as a result of that accident.
Bronchial pneumonia was soon thereafter diagnosed, and he died in August after suffering apoplexy while his wife was reading to him at his bedside.
Coolidge was serving out Harding's term, but would be elected by the populace to continue in the post in the election at the end of this year.
As they had named their first son for the President who was in office at the time , so did Will and Gertie name their son born this year for the current President.
Will apparently didn't follow Roosevelt into the Progressive, or ""Bull Moose"" camp.
The Progressives nominated Bob La Follette of Wisconsin as their Presidential candidate.
Or, if Will did follow Roosevelt in his party change , Will simply went with the winner of the election as regards his choice of name for his son.
In those days before ultrasound, they may not have known twins were on the way, and thus possibly only had one name selected.
Some of them, such as the Iroquois, declined the offer to become citizens.
The ""Indians"" had been in the country for thousands of years before the Euro-Americans arrived.
Significantly, there is no known record of Native Americans granting citizenship to members of Congress.
On the contrary, I look at national affairs with rose-colored glasses, as it were.
Albert Kollenborn 's great-grandfather William Kollenborn died in Iola, Kansas, on July 7 th of this year.
Albert and his great-grandfather William apparently never met, although their lives overlapped for eighteen years.
Olive Hathaway of this city, died suddenly early Tuesday morning at his home here, aged 97 years and 9 months.
Funeral services will be held Thursday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the Presbyterian church and interment will be made at the Moran cemetery.
Notwithstanding the obituary, most documents indicate William was born in 1833, and was thus ninety-two, not ninety-seven, when he died.
Elderly William and Charlotte were living with their youngest son Richard Lee Kollenborn in their final years.
It was customary for rural families to pass on the family farm to the youngest son, and as a recompense for that live out their retirement years being taken care of by the youngest son's family.
Although many 37 might think the eldest son would be the logical inheritor of the farm, this youngest-son arrangement does make sense, as the parents are usually not ready to retire when the oldest son leaves home and starts a household; but by the time the youngest son begins his family they would usually be at least close to being ready for retirement.
It should not be inferred from this that the older sons got nothing in the way of an inheritance, though.
Charlotte, who was seven or eight years younger than William, would survive her husband and live one more year, until 1926.
They had the power of the times, when it was believed that men with money not only knew better but acted better. "" — from ""Rising Tide, the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How it Changed America"" by John M Barry ""Fire burns; water erodes.
Say what you will about fire 's speed and efficiency, but I've never seen anyone put out a river.
There was a time when what was modern in films was based more on whether it was a ""silent"" film or if it had sound.
The Mississippi River floods on a regular, albeit random, basis; that is to say, floods on the Mississippi are not rare, but they are also not predictable.
The floods of 1927 were especially bad— so bad, in fact, that many wanted to take matters into their own hands and engineer a way to control the river.
Various theories were put forth on how best to do that so as to safeguard people and property.
This year, New Orleans, among other localities, was seriously threatened by the floodwaters.
That's why New Haven, like other intelligently situated river towns, for a century remained dry without floodwalls or levies.
At the time Heat-Moon wrote the previous passage, and the following one, he was describing a flood that he and his crew were experiencing on the Missouri.
It was only the foolishness of trying to control the Missouri that was not as it should be.
And he, ""I'm saying there isn't any way to manage the Missouri because only it can manage itself.
My grandfather never had to do this, and old What's-his-name over there at Treloar never had to fertilize that bottomland the river did it, and with no chemicals to get into our drinking water.
So now we got levees and rock dikes and we've seen two fivehundred-year floods in two years.
Louis, Missouri, is located at just about the midway point of the Mississippi River, where the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers meet, mix, meld, and eventually mesh.
Exhausted, he ended it amidst an ecstatic crowd at the Paris airport the next day.
Charles Lindbergh and his wife Anne Morrow Lindbergh would suffer heartbreak as an indirect result of their fame and fortune in the near future — more on that in the 1934 chapter.
Albert Kollenborn and the rest of the Branstuder household (halfbrother ""Buck,"" mother Lizzie, stepfather Jim, and the three Branstuder girls) apparently remained in Carroll and Chariton counties, Missouri, until the late 1920s.
Although they were in Oklahoma by the time of the 40 1930 census, Albert's sister Lula Mae recalls Albert building a large model airplane while they were living in Brunswick in the latter part of the '20s.
Recall, though, that Albert didn't spend all of his time in the Branstuder household.
He stayed off and on with his grandfather Bob Huddleston in ""the bottoms"" of Kansas City, Missouri.
As a young man, Albert worked both for the railroad and on Missouri river boats.
Kansas City, which is a rail hub and lies on the river; or Brunswick, which is adjacent the Missouri River.
Louis, Kansas City & Northern Railroad ran its tracks through the Brunswick area, also.
Albert also lived in Joplin, on the Missouri/ Kansas border for a time after he married, and in Oberlin, Kansas— both of which were railroad towns.
Lula Mae also recalled a time when Albert ""sprung"" his ankle one winter ice-skating on the Grand River near Brunswick.
The Branstuder girls (Ruie, Juanita, and Lula Mae) placed Albert on a sled and pulled him up the riverbank back toward the house.
Probably instigated by Ruie, the practical joker of the bunch, they pulled him partway up the hill, then let go of the sled and watched him slide helplessly back down the hill again.
The Branstuders may have left Brunswick due to the flooding this year — which took place not only on the Mississippi River proper, but also on many of its feeder rivers, such as the Missouri, which flows past Brunswick.
Lula Mae recalls that she was five years old when they left Brunswick for Claremore, Oklahoma.
When the Branstuder family moved to Oklahoma, they transported their goods by train.
It is possible that Albert may have been an employee of the railroad at this time and been able to get their belongings on board at a reduced rate, or even free.
During the heyday of river travel and commerce, the Missouri River was a major thoroughfare, and the Branstuders had lived near it in northern Missouri.
George Herman ""Babe"" Ruth hit sixty home runs this season, a new single-season record.
Vying with teammate Micky Mantle to see who could break the home record this year, Mantle got injured late in the season.
The added media attention this brought Maris distressed him so much that he began losing his hair.
Many of them wanted Yankee legend Babe Ruth's record to stand or, if to be broken by somebody, then by the more gregarious Mantle, not Maris.
Even in little Hibbing, Minnesota, Maris turned out to be only the second most famous hometown boy.
Robert Zimmerman, better known as Bob Dylan, also hails from that town.
Just three years later, Barry Bonds broke the record again, with seventy-three round-trippers.
One wonders how many home runs Ruth and Maris might have hit had they taken steroids and similar chemical supplements.
It is no longer a government of the people, by the people, and for the people but a government of Wall Street, by Wall Street, and for Wall Street.
Speculation in stocks became widespread barbers, stenographers, and elevator boys seized their opportunity to make money in an expanding economy.
That left too much of everything -food, clothes, cars and too few people to buy it.
The Untold Story of Those Who Survived the Great American Dust Bowl"" by Timothy Egan ♦ Gary Gene Shannon born California ♦ Will Shannon Talks to his Truck and Hits a Train ♦ Martin Luther King, Jr. born Georgia ♦ Stock Market Crash / Great Depression Twenty seven years previously, on January 18 th , 1902, Gertie Shannon had given birth to her first child, Theodore Roosevelt Shannon.
Her eleventh and last child, Gary Gene Shannon, was born this year on January 14 th in an adobe house that Will built in Shafter, California.
Three years later she would become a grandmother, when her firstborn named his firstborn William after his father.
While living in Shafter, Marian got married, George and also Robert, went back to Tulare to farm, and we met Lavern Cordy because he was a car salesman and sold Dad his first pick-up.
At this time, a very amusing and at the same time a very serious thing happened to Dad.
Although Gary's father Will was a contemporary of Herbert Hoover , and Hoover, who had won the 1928 election, was about to take office when Gary Gene was born, Will and Gertie did not name any of their boys Herbert.
Perhaps Will's sympathies were still with Calvin Coolidge, for whom he had named an earlier son and who, like Will, had borne the pain of the loss of a child.
Martin Luther King, Jr. was born in Atlanta, Georgia to a minister who was himself the son of a minister.
America has experienced many economic downturns, recessions, and even downright depressions over the centuries.
These ""hard times"" have been of varying magnitudes, but when modern people speak of The Depression, they are referencing the one that began this year.
The Wall Street Stock Market Crash of 1929 began on October 29 th with a precipitous plunge of stock prices.
But this depression turned out to be even worse then the calamitous one of 1873.
The Untold Story of Those Who Survived the Great American Dust Bowl"" tells of the immediate reaction to what would in hindsight be viewed as the start of the Depression: It was nothing, brokers said, a correction at the end of a dizzying decade, the most prosperous in the story of the republic.
Over the next three weeks, the market lost 40 percent of its value, more than thirty-dive billion dollars in shareholder equity — money enough to float a hemisphere of nations.
More likely, they had bought more shares on margin, 44 borrowing on the bet that stocks were going only skyward.
To pay the margin loan after the crash sometimes as high as 18 percent they had to sell at a time when many stocks did not get any bids at all.
Banks had gone on their own speculative binges, reaching into people's savings accounts to make millions in interest-free loans available to bank officers and other insiders for stock purchases.
One company, Union Cigar, went from $113 a share to $4 in a single day.
The company's owner jumped to his death from a building on Wall Street.
As bad as it was for stockholders, only one in thirty Americans at the time counted themselves as such.
This did not mean those without a literal stake in the market were unaffected, though by no means.
In spite of the widespread suffering, multimillionaire President Hoover kept a ""hands-off"" attitude toward government intervention in the economy, or at least in aid for the needy.
Society was so shaken, and so many people ""fell through the cracks"" that even some schools went bankrupt and closed down.
Two hundred fifty thousand teenagers ended up ""on the road"" during the Depression years, in search of a way to make some money— sometimes following the harvest, sometimes continually chasing rumors of work somewhere else.
In 1932 alone, Southern Pacific evicted a half million people illegally riding their freight trains.
Sometimes they were simply escorted to the police station, where they were arrested for vagrancy, a crime that was punishable by fines or incarceration.
Other times, these ""hobos"" were dealt with more severely and violently, oftentimes even being killed by the ""bulls"" who kept as many of these ticketless passengers off the trains as possible.
The railroads of Kansas have discarded harvest leniency toward side door sleeper tourists.
Clary, special agent for the MoPac was here yesterday on a mission for his road and said his work chiefly is the elimination of the hobo.
Hoover's laissezfaire approach to the country's economic problems would contrast dramatically with those of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who would be voted into the White House for the first of a record four times in 1932.
Brown You've Got a Lovely Daughter"" by Herman's Hermits ""You bested my giant. "" from the movie ""The Princess Bride"" ""In th ' circus I seen in the city there was a feller that lifted a man, big as Jed here, clean above his head with one hand. "" from ""The Shepherd of the Hills"" by Harold Bell Wright Look at that young man He is feeling good Because his sweetheart Is watching him Indian Sun Dance chant ""Put your hand on a hot stove for a minute and it seems like an hour, sit next to a pretty woman for an hour and it seems like a minute.
Some of the movements promoted by Kansans, prohibition for instance, seem ill-advised and extreme, at least in hindsight.
Their concerns regarding the proliferation of chain stores and corporate farming, though, against which the Sunflower Staters took up the cudgels at this early date, seem downright prescient in the present-day world of Wal* Martians and corporate megafarms.
Up until 1930, he had only lived in Missouri and Oklahoma, but Arkansas and Kansas would soon follow, with three western states added later.
As has been noted, Albert was not the first of the Kollenborns to live in Kansas.
His father Harry, his grandfather James, and his greatgrandfather William had all resided there.
Before finally ""lighting out for the Territory"" and heading west in the early 1940s, Albert made his home, for the most part, in the four corners area of the AMOK states.
Normally, when an American citizen hears of a geographical ""Four Corners"" region, he thinks of the meeting point of New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona and Utah, where one can — theoretically— be in four states simultaneously, provided one perform a few Twister™ -like gyrations, with one hand in contact with the Colorado soil, the other in the Utah desert, one leg in the Arizona mesquite, while the other one touches down in the enchanted land of New Mexico.
That, while admittedly the most famous, is not the only Four Corners in America, though — provided, at any rate, that a smidgen of ""poetic license"" is granted.
The ""almost"" Four Corners of the AMOK states would meet, if the Oklahoma line was dropped down just a tad, at the junction of southeastern Kansas, northeastern Oklahoma, northwestern Arkansas, and southwestern Missouri.
This is not as ""clean"" and obvious as the Four Corners area of the UNMAC states (Utah, New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado), but nevertheless worthy of note.
On September 23 rd , Albert Lee Benjamin Kollenborn and Alice Gladys Green got married by the Justice of the Peace in Bentonville, Arkansas.
The Greens had been a somewhat prosperous family (employing many seasonal fruit pickers) up until the time of Tommy's death, and were still making a go of their farming operation a quarter-century after relocating there from Kansas.
Albert was an odd-jobber and field worker (and, perhaps, part-time bootlegger) at the time, similar to the hired men the Greens would engage on their farm during fruit-picking time.
According to one family story, Albert and Alice met when Alice went to visit her pregnant sister Ruth in Oklahoma.
Another family member (who still lives in Benton County at the time of writing) says, though, that Albert and Alice met there in Arkansas, on the Green farm — Albert walked across a field in which he was working and introduced himself to Alice.
Alice found the tall, handsome, musical, and athletic Albert more appealing than her current ""beau,"" a man named Stringer.
Alice, with her green eyes and auburn locks, was the most beautiful girl they had ever seen.
Six decades later, the elderly Mr Stringer revealed no fury as a result of the ""scorning"" Alice had given him.
On seeing a relative of Alice's, he asked about his old flame and 47 volunteered anew that Alice was the most ravishing beauty he had ever laid eyes on.
For his part, Albert was no less impressed with Alice's charms and vowed that he was going to get Alice one way or another.
One thing Albert tried was impressing Alice with his physical strength.
Taking her to the circus on a date, he won a $50 prize (a fair amount of change in those days) in the wrestling ring.
That prize was offered to anyone who could remain in the ring with the circus ""strong man"" for five minutes.
Albert did more than simply tough out a fiveminute pummeling and thrashing administered by the traveling tough — he lifted the strong man up and heaved him out of the ring.
Alice was perhaps not convinced that this feat qualified Albert as good husband material.
Theodore Shannon, by contrast, apparently didn't have the same flair for the dramatic that Albert exhibited.
According to family lore, he was turned down when he asked a certain girl's father for her hand.
Reportedly, the man felt that the Shannons were socially ""below"" his family.
Although that rejection was doubtless a blow to his heart and ego, Theodore's descendants can be thankful it occurred — for without it, Theodore would not have married Esther.
And that would have been a disaster of the highest magnitude, for in that case their children, and their children's children, and so on, would never have been born.
Albert did not have to face the gauntlet of asking Alice's father for her hand in marriage, as Tommy had been dead some fifteen years when Albert and Alice tied the knot.
The ""dust bowl"" was upon western Oklahoma , and the Branstuder's wheat and oat farm in the Verdigris river bottoms, between Claremore and Tulsa in the eastern part of the state, was probably not going so well, due to the prolonged drought the region was suffering.
The Branstuders may also have grown hay, too— dust bowl ranchers in Kansas got hay trucked in for their livestock from eastern Oklahoma.
Although eastern Oklahoma did suffer drought (or ""drouth"" as the people in the area invariably termed it) during the ""dirty thirties,"" they did not bear the brunt of the wicked ""dusters"" those in the panhandle to the west did.
That having been said, those living in those regions were not the only ones to ever suffer from the dust storms.
On May 9 th , 1939, a storm 48 emanating from the plains carried three tons of dirt for every person then living in America first to Chicago and finally to the eastern seaboard.
It covered Chicago at night, dumping an estimated six thousand tons, the dust slinking down walls as if every home and every office had sprung a leak.
In Manhattan, the streetlights came on at midday and cars used their headlights to drive.
A sunny day, which had dawned cloudless, fell under a haze like that of a partial eclipse.
From the observatory at the top of the Empire State Building, people looked into a soup unlike anything ever seen in midtown.
People coughed, rushed into hospitals and doctors' offices asking emergency help to clear their eyes.
The grass of the parks and the tulips rising to break the Depression fog were coated in fine sand.
From Governors Island, visibility was so bad that a person could not see the boats just beyond the shore.
Dust also reached the White House, where FDR was discussing drought relief.
People from the east, who now had a taste of what the plainspeople had been experiencing, still didn't fully appreciate the sheer immensity of the plains, or what it would take to stop the soil from flying away.
One man suggested blacktopping the prairie ; another idea was to transport junk cars to the plains, to use them as weights to hold down the dirt.
September, 1931, goes down as the lousiest month on record at the Iola Weather Bureau.
The mean temperature for the 30 days was 79 degrees, the highest recorded for the month in the 27 years since the bureau was established here.
Rainfall was only 1. inches, in comparison to a normal reading of 4.93 inches.
Trains were halted, schools closed and business paralyzed over a large section of the Southwest by a new dust storm today.
The dense swirl of fine soil reached the Kansas-Missouri border by noon and was sweeping 49 rapidly farther east.
As far east as Topeka, Ottawa and Lawrence, highway patrolmen blocked roads against traffic and in many places visibility dropped to absolute zero.
It is likely that the Branstuder's farm had formerly been a Creek Indian farm.
The Creeks had farmed in that area for a time after being assigned that part of Oklahoma during the Indian Removals of the previous century.
The fictional Joad family of John Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath were from Sallisaw, Oklahoma, which is only about one hundred miles south of Verdigris.
Neither Albert nor the Branstuders became ""exodusters"" — those who moved away, usually to the West and California in particular, during the Dust Bowl period.
Then comes ""Rosasharn"" Joad, compared with Lula Mae Branstuder; Ruthie Joad matched to Ruie Branstuder; and finally Winfield Joad and Juanita Branstuder.
On the census record, Ruie is listed as Ruth, probably due to the census enumerator misunderstanding the girl's name.
Lizzie's children Joad children Albert Al Charles Tom Lula Mae ""Rosasharn"" Ruie Ruthie Juanita Winfield Many blamed God or drought for the hellacious conditions brought on by the Dust Bowl.
The region that was hit hardest by the ""dusters"" had been grassland since time immemorial.
Later, as the buffalo were slaughtered as a way of indirectly destroying the red man, ranchers brought in cattle and fed their beeves on the seemingly endless miles of grass.
Europe's supply of bread was cut off when Russia's wheat crop became unavailable.
Grassland by the millions of acres was ripped out of the plains, and wheat was planted in its place.
The plains experienced an above-average amount of rainfall for the first few years, and the wheat bonanza continued.
By the time the weather returned to its normal pattern , the soil's nutrients had been depleted by years of wheat cultivation.
To make matters worse, with the onset of the Depression, many farmers simply abandoned their fields, without planting anything on their uprooted land to bind the soil together.
The combination of dry conditions, dirt held down by nothing, and wind (for which the prairie is famous) was a begging for trouble, a recipe for disaster.
It comprised a ""perfect storm"" scenario for the violent transfer of soil from the plains to wherever the wind cared to carry it.
The dust storms which plagued the region in the 1930s were ominous in appearance, sound, and effect.
Produced static electricity so powerful that it could short out automobiles, stranding motorists, and knock people over if they kissed, or even shook hands; Embed so much grit and grime in the eyes of people and animals that these sometimes went blind; Precipitously drop temperatures (in one twenty-four period, the temperature fell 70 degrees); Brought accompanying winds commonly at and above 40 miles per hour.
The tiny dust granules were so invasive that they could get through windows and doors even when these were sealed shut, and into automobile carburetors, clogging them.
Beyond invasive, the dust was extremely abrasive— so much so that it scraped paint off houses.
People even died from the respiratory problems brought on or exacerbated by the dust.
To guard against the static shock suffered by directly touching metal objects during these storms, homeowners covered doorknobs and oven handles with cloth.
Chains were attached to cars to serve as a ground for the electricity in the atmosphere as the cars were driven.
Hospitals had to postpone surgical procedures due to the impossibility of maintaining the necessary standard of cleanliness in the operating rooms.
Similar to the necessary precautions taken during times of blizzard, farmers tied strands of rope from their houses to their barns, so that they would not lose their way between the two in the howling, vertigoinducing brownouts.
More than one person was later discovered dead between where they were when a duster hit and their aimed-for place of relative safety.
And on the rare occasions during the 1930s when precipitation did occur in dust bowl country, the atmosphere was so choked with dust that rain often fell as mud, hail as dirt clods, and snow in dark flakes.
Such storms were called ""snusters"" by those who experienced them firsthand.
The Dust Bowl lasted the entire decade of the 1930s, following abruptly on the heels of the freewheeling and uproarious 1920s.
Elsewhere in Oklahoma this year, a dispute with Texas concerning the boundary lines between the states was decided in Texas' favor by the United States Supreme Court.
The economic downtown that began with the stock market crash the previous year showed no signs of improving.
Farms can be bought all over eastern Kansas for $25 to $35 an acre — as cheap as they were 40 years ago.
Lee Wiener, 55 year-old veteran Iola merchant, committed suicide by hanging this morning in the rear end of his store, The Hub, 10 West Jackson.
The Salvation Army is maintaining a wood pile at which they may saw or chop enough fuel to earn their meals during the 24 hours they are permitted to spend in town.
Meal tickets of 15 and 30 cents value are given according to the amount of work done.
Police usher floaters with whom they come in contact out of town after 24 hours.
Dorsey, secretary of the Chamber of Commerce, reported that the other day he was accosted by seven panhandlers while walking but half a dozen blocks on the square.
The final census to which we have access was taken this year.40 census data will not become available to the public until 2012 at the earliest.
Based on the way legislation regarding such seems to be heading, though, those records may never become available.
As for the Branstuders, the census enumerators made many mistakes this time around.
Juanita's name is misspelled as Wannita (northeastern Oklahomans perhaps being unfamiliar with Spanish names), and Lula Mae's as LulaMay.
Elizabeth's oldest boys are listed simply as Albert K and Chester D Perhaps Lizzie unofficially changed Charles' name (he is 52 listed as Charles in the 1910 census) to Chester so that he wouldn't have the same name as his father.
The census placing the Branstuders in Verdigris may have been a mistake, or may have been simply a vagary of the census process, such as the Green's being categorized as living in Osage Township, Benton County, Arkansas, whereas they had always considered themselves to be living in Dug Hill.
Since Osage township is today part of Bentonville, near Bella Vista, the census is probably correct— they did officially live in Osage township; it's just that their own name for their locality, perhaps more specific than Osage, was Dug Hill.
According to the official documents, those living with the widow Virginia Belle Myers were her daughter Effie and son-in-law William ""Cogstone,"" as well as Lillian, Ruth, ""Vila,"" Alice, and Andy.
On the northwest coast of California, in Humboldt County, Emma Silva is listed as head of house, married 20 years.
The same three children that were in the 1920 census are listed, but the boy is this time correctly identified as Gerald rather than Donald.
Emma is a housekeeper in a private home, and her daughter Esther is a janitoress at a church.
He may have drank some lager on occasion to boot, notwithstanding the ongoing prohibition of such.
The plenitude of Portuguese fishermen in the area practically guaranteed that at least a little wine would be available — port, to be precise.
The family believes he worked for and eventually retired from the railroad while in that state.
Living in the same county, the census freezes Myrtle Buster in time as living in ""Township 3"" and employed as a laundry worker.
Her sons Charles L and Roy E Kollenborn are listed as ""operators"" at a service station in or near Bakersfield.
With the Shannons in Township 3 and the Kollenborns in Township 9, they may well have crossed one another's paths from time to time, or possibly even been acquainted with one another.
While James was 18, and thus four years older than the oldest Shannon child still living at home, Emma Kollenborn was 15, and her sister Thora was 10.
Thus, Emma may have known fourteen year old Robert Shannon, and Thora Kollenborn may have known eleven-year-old George Shannon and nineyear-old Eda Shannon.
For millions of people, taking the world over, it has been a hard year, a year of disappointments, loss, hardships, discouragements.
Surpluses of everything, money, food, all manner of products and commodities, clothing, wood, cotton, lumber.
No war, no flood or fire, no wide-sweeping pestilence, no cataclysm of nature, and yet the times all out of joint.
January 5 th : Douglas Schomerus, city manager, will manage the city program to give part-time work to men owing utility bills.
Schomerous is working on a way to stagger the jobs available, about 25, among the men who owe bills.
Hundreds of dollars worth of accounts have been paid with wood this winter, it is reported.
So far as possible, men 55 will be used on the new job who were not employed on the last one.
Only men owing utilities bills and unable to pay them because of unemployment will be hired.
The county commissioners will make an $18,000 tax cut at the township level possible this year by suspending paving projects ""until times get better.
Although the economic depression was ongoing, the normal routines of life— eating, drinking, buying, selling, marrying and being given in marriage— continued.
Theodore Roosevelt Shannon, known to his family, friends and acquaintances as ""Pop"" throughout his adult life, married Mayflower descendant and one-eighth Indian Esther Sylvia Nelson on June 27 th in Garberville, California.
It was a Saturday, and Pop had to report back to work the following Wednesday, so they honeymooned nearby, in Gold Beach, Oregon.
Theodore and Esther eventually made their home at what came to be known by the extended family simply as ""The Ranch,"" which for some time served as a sort of home base, one might also say anchor, touchstone, and benchmark, to the family.
At the start of their life together, though, they lived in Samoa, a small Humboldt County town.
Even today, logging is not an occupation for the faint of heart or weak of spirit.
Stihl's gas-powered chain saws were not mass-produced until the 1 930s, and not used widely until after 1945, so axes and oneand two-man felling saws were the common tools.
A falling tree sometimes went where it was inclined to go, regardless of sawing angles and driven wedges.
The benign and peaceful tree trunk became a projectile of huge weight and momentum when it snapped off its cutting hinge.
Sawn trees hung up on those still standing were called ""widow-makers"" for good reason.
At better than six feet, Theodore was noticeably taller than his father.
It is unknown whether he also attributed this characteristic to Trinity County's mountain air.
Many of the families in remote and sparsely populated Trinity County have been there for untold generations.
Will and Gertie Shannon's homestead had been located in Hoaglin Valley.
Theodore employed an Indian ranch hand named Bill Hoaglin, doubtless a descendant of the valley's namesake.
The perpetrators were not just the Young brothers, but also a certain Charles Arthur Floyd, better known as ""Pretty Boy"" Floyd.
They killed six Springfield and Greene County law enforcement officers.
On March 26 th , almost exactly nine months after their wedding, Theodore Roosevelt Shannon and Esther Shannon welcomed a new member into the household— a son they named William Frederick Shannon, for his paternal grandfather.
Theodore and Esther married and had their first four children during the Great Depression-William in 1932, Laura in 1933, Theodore Russell in 1934, and Gertrude in 1936.
As far as the United States was concerned, anyway, 1940 gave a bit of a respite between disasters.
Theodore bought the old homestead from his father this year, who had been gone from Trinity for thirteen years at this point.
Tempers often flared on both sides of the idealogical aisle, between capitalists and socialists.
In the midst of the depression, a large group of them (called ""Bonus Marchers"") converged on Washington, D.C., demanding immediate disbursement of the funds.
Instead of an early retirement of the debt, they got a brutal eviction.
General Douglas MacArthur led a contingent of soldiers who burned the marchers' camp and drove them forcibly from the city.
Also among the soldiers with MacArthur were his aide Dwight Eisenhower and future General/then Major George S Patton, Jr.
During the violent repulsion, many people were injured, several seriously, and two World War I veterans were shot to death.
She would ascend to greater heights yet before disappearing over the Pacific Ocean on July 2 nd , 1937.
Less than a month after work on the Golden Gate Bridge began, on January 30 th , Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of economically ravaged Germany.
Before The Great War, a Deutsch Mark was worth the equivalent of approximately twenty-five cents, or four Marks to one Dollar.
By 1929, it took three hundred million Marks to equal the value of one United States dollar.
Soon after Hitler's rise to power in Germany, Franklin Delano Roosevelt would begin his first term of office in the White House.
Both men would play huge roles, not only in their own countries' economies, but also in world affairs for the next baker's dozen of years, and die within a few months of each other.
As Hitler would change the face of Germany, Roosevelt's influence in the United States would also be far-reaching.
This idea was not unique to Albert and Alice; many babies, especially in the South, are given ""standalone"" single-letter middle names.
At any rate, the parents rejected the tradition of naming their first son after family members — there was no David in either Albert or Alice's family.
Early on in their marriage, the Kollenborns worked in the fields picking fruit.
Many from the AMOK states were relocating to California, where there were reports of much work and big wages working the crop harvests.
Albert and Alice would resist the lure of California for another decade and a half, though.
Alice would lay David down in the shade under a tree when he was a baby, and go about her work in the fields with Albert.
When David got older, Alice would tie him with a length of rope to a tree or pole while she worked.
Eventually David apparently became too old to cope well with this sort of treatment — but not yet old enough to help in the fields.
And so, for a time David lived with the Logstons, his aunt and uncle (Alice's sister and brother-in-law) in Benton County.
David no doubt spent a lot of time with his paternal grandparents at that time, too, as the Branstuders also lived in the area and were good friends of the Logstons.
David remembered those early years with his grandparents, apparently, as he attended Lizzie Branstuder's funeral in Arkansas in 1959, and possibly Jim's there also, in 1970.
The baby girl was apparently named for Esther's mother Emma Laura Nelson.
The 21 st Constitutional amendment canceled out the 18 th amendment of 1919 which had made consumption, production, and trading in alcohol a crime.
In contrast to Hoover's laissezfaire approach to solving the nation's financial and social troubles, Franklin Delano Roosevelt took bold and decisive steps to jump-start the moribund economy.
Among the elements of this multi-faceted ""New Deal"" were many public works programs.
Serve as a wind-break; check soil erosion; provide jobs for the unemployed.
In addition to those things, FDR also introduced revolutionary ideas which are now taken for granted and are represented by everyday acronyms such as SEC , to oversee the stock market, and FDIC (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), which insures bank deposits.
Perhaps most significantly to many today, the Social Security Act was also passed as part of the ""New Deal"" package, establishing old-age pensions as well as unemployment, workers compensation, and welfare benefits.
Branded by many as socialistic, it remains unknown and unknowable whether these maverick maneuvers by the new President opened the door to more and more socialisticallyslanted government programs, or whether these simply provided just enough relief to the masses at just the right time so that even more drastic socialistic inroads, even if by means of revolution, were thereby averted.
The writer is everybody's best friend and only true enemy the good and great enemy.
With organized crime and smalltime scofflaws no longer cornering the market on liquor— which people will consume in good times and bad, in sickness and in health, whether legal or not (some contrarians probably taking to it during the prohibition out of curiosity or because of the excitement of engaging in something previously mundane but now thrilling due to its illegality)— the big names of the underworld were scrambling to find other ways of earning a dishonest buck.
Al Capone was already in jail, having been nabbed for income tax evasion three years earlier, in 1931.
The FBI was organized this year to combat gangsterism, a social plague that had been fertilized by prohibition and exacerbated by the Depression.
Bonnie Parker and Clyde Champion Darrow were killed by FBI agents May 23 rd in Sailes, Louisiana.
Also killed in separate incidents this year 63 were anti-heroes Charles Arthur ""Pretty Boy"" Floyd, Lester J Gillis , and John Dillinger.
Many of these outlaw gunman happened to be from the Midwestern states— ""Pretty Boy"" Floyd was from Oklahoma, Bonnie 85 Clyde from Texas, Dillinger from Indiana, and the Barkers from Missouri.
Perhaps they were drawn to crime partially due to the lack of economic opportunity in their respective areas at the time.
The farming areas from which these gangsters hailed were especially hard hit, with the double whammy for some of them of the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl.
This is not an excuse for their actions (the vast majority of people not following suit), but may have provided a nudge in that direction or provided them with a convenient ""rationalization"" for their misdeeds.
While the nation's police forces were cleaning up some of the vestiges of the ""Roaring '20s,"" the American populace chose a return to less suggestive entertainment, at least among the mainstream movie stars.
In Hydesville, California, on September 3 rd , Theodore Roosevelt Shannon and Esther Shannon had another son.
They were apparently still living in Korbel, where they had moved in May.
Official records state Junior was born in nearby Eureka, but in her ""biographical sketch"" (see Appendix III), Esther states that Theodore was born in Hydesville.
Pop and Esther's first son William had been named for his paternal grandfather.
Exactly one week after Theodore Jr. was born, both journalist/ broadcaster Charles Kuralt and baseball player Roger Maris were born.
When this third child of Pop and Esther's was born, Upton Sinclair (author of ""The Jungle,"" which had prompted the Meat Inspection Act 64 and the Pure Food 85 Drug Act) was running for Governor of California on the Democratic ticket.
Sinclair was actually a Socialist, but ""converted"" to the Democratic party so as to stand a better chance in his bid for the State's preeminent political post.
The near-fascist Republican incumbent, James ""Sunny Jim"" Rolph, was beaten by Frank Merriam, who won the vote on November 6 th by a 5:4 margin over Sinclair.
What John Steinbeck was to the Salinas and Monterey area, Saroyan was to the Fresno environs.
Two of Saroyan 's novels were made into movies, namely The Time of Your Life and The Human Comedy.
The 1930s were a time of great unrest in the labor market.34 saw a massive San Francisco longshoreman strike, followed by a general strike in that city.
Sometimes the price paid is not worth the accolades and the material amenities.
Charles Lindbergh and his wife learned this vicious lesson the hardest way imaginable.
This year, though, the lives of Charles and Anne Morrow Lindbergh were shattered.
Although asserting his innocence to the end, Bruno Hauptmann, a German immigrant arrested six months after the misdeed, was eventually convicted of the crime and executed.
The Hearst newspaper syndicate, known for its yellow journalism, knew a sensational story when they saw one.
They first persuaded Bruno's wife to fire their original lawyer, who was convinced of Hauptmann's innocence, and paid for a replacement lawyer, who was an incompetent alcoholic.
With their man in place, they were assured exclusive scoops to sell papers.
An apparent snow job suppressed evidence of Hauptmann's guiltlessness in the matter, while ""proof against him was manufactured and bought.
But whether Hauptmann was the guilty party or not, the text of a ransom note the Lindberghs had received— purportedly from Hauptmann— raises some questions.
The diction and spelling used in the letter seem almost like a parody of an evil and rather dull-witted German.
We have warned you note to make any ding public also notify the police now you have to take consequences — means we will have to holt the baby until every ding is quite.
It is redly necessary to make a world affair out of this, or to get your baby back as soon as possible to settle those affair in a quick way will be better for both — don't by afraid about the baby — keeping care of us day and night.
And ransom was made ausfor 50000 $ but now we have to take another person to it and probably have to keep the baby for a longer time as we expected.
So the amount will be 70000 20000 in 50 $ bills 25000 $ in 20$ bill 150000 $ in 10$ bills and 10000 in 5$ bills Don't mark any bills or take them from one serial nomer.
But we will note do so until the Police is out of the cace and the poppers are qute.
Rather than appearing genuine, this reads more like a letter written by someone who knows a little German and wants the reader to think he is a native German-speaker having difficulty writing in English.
This all seems reasonable enough, but anyone knowing even just a smidgen of German would be able to come up with these type of affectations.
As an example, the use of ""nomer"" instead of number or the corresponding German word Nummer.
This too is odd, because the German language, which is very consistent and precise in pronunciation, does not normally add silent letters to the end of words.
The letter ""c"" is not used in German to reproduce an ""s"" sound, as it often is in English.
The letter ""K"" is always used for a ""hard c"" sound, and ""s"" is always used for a ""soft c"" sound.
So it seems bizarre that a German would spell case ""cace""; ""kase"" would be a much more likely misspelling.
Also, the spelling of the word ""papers"" as ""pappers"" doesn't correspond with German spelling or pronunciation.
Again, it seems strange that a German would add a silent letter to a word.
It would be more likely that he would use the German word ""still"" , which has a similar meaning in English and could have been used in conversation with an American without causing undue confusion — in other words, using ""still"" for ""quiet"" would probably simply sound to an American like slightly odd diction, but would have nevertheless been understood by them.
Strangest of all, the part about the letter that simply does not ""ring true,"" is that the sentence structure is that of a native speaker of English.
This could be understood with the meaning of the English word ""also,"" but makes more sense considering the German meaning.
Based on the contents of the letter alone (disregarding any other evidences establishing guilt or innocence), I can only say that while I 67 don't know who kidnapped and killed the Lindbergh baby— or why— I am not convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that it was Bruno Hauptmann.
The Seminole Indians, who had claimed Osceola as one of their forebears and inspirations, fiercely fought against deportation during the Indian Removals of the 1800s, retreating into the inhospitable swamps of Florida— where no salaried government man cared to follow.
The last of the Seminole holdouts didn't sign a treaty with the United States until this year.
As for individual Indians, two-thirds of them either had no land at all or did not have enough to derive a living from.
The so-called ""Indian Reorganization Act"" (officially the WheelerHoward Act, AKA ""The Indian New Deal"") was passed this year.
The Dawes Act had abolished the Reservation system; the Indian Reorganization Act re-established it.
This was prompted, at least partially, by the results of the Merriam Report, which documented the impact that the Dawes Act had had on Indians.
The results had proven to be a dramatic increase among them of poverty, disease, and untimely death.
Ostensibly, the Indian Reorganization Act restored to Indians the right to live and worship in a traditional manner (see the 1887 and 1890 chapters for details on how these had been taken from them), as well as a certain measure of self-government.
Dust storms on the plains increased in frequency and intensity this year.
Their were four dust storms in January, seven in February, the same number in March, and then fourteen in April one of them lasting twelve hours.
Even sooner than that, a duster so bad that the day on 68 which it took place came to be known as ""Black Sunday"" was to take place in 1935.
Even in this early stage of dust storms on the southern plains, though, conditions were more than bad enough.
One man, summoned to the hospital as his pregnant wife's labor pains intensified, got his car stuck in a drift on the way.
His car was eventually extricated with the aid of the farmer and his tractor.
The man continued his journey to see his wife and baby when, visibility being what it was , he entered a corner too fast and tipped his car over.
At first, he thought he was pinned in the wreckage, but was finally able to free himself, crawl up and out through the passenger-side window, pull the car back over onto its wheels, and continue his sojourn.
He walked into the delivery room, bruised and battered and bleeding from the accident, eyelids mud-clogged, fingers stained with oil, just in time to see his wife give birth to their firstborn.
Doubtless he felt the travails he had been through to get there had been amply compensated by the joy of seeing his wife and newborn.
This time, the father was not able to make it to the hospital until an hour after his child had died.
Nothing unusual was noted at the time as respects his pelvis, and he was born without a crown or royal entourage.
The moving mob of dirt measured two hundred miles in width, reached an estimated two thousand feet into the sky, and was propelled by sixty-five mile-perhour winds.
It was just one of hundreds of dusters in the decade, but one that etched itself ignominiously in the memories of those who endured its onslaught.
He built a large model airplane while still a young man in northern Missouri.
While living in southwestern Missouri, near the Kansas border, in Joplin, early in his married life, Albert learned to fly.
In fact, he claimed to have learned the skill from none other than World War I ""ace"" Eddie Rickenbacker.
Albert progressed to the point where he earned money taking up passengers for short sightseeing flights.
Charles Lindbergh doubtless caught Albert's attention, as he had everyone else's.
Albert may have even known Louise personally, living, as he did, in her home county on and off for a number of years.
In another aviation event this year, well-known wit and movie actor Will Rogers died near Point Barrow, Alaska in an airplane crash on August 15 th at the age of fifty-five.
The pilot and only other occupant of the plane, fellow Oklahoman Wiley Post — who two years earlier had become the first person to fly solo around the world— also died in the crash.
As Albert Kollenborn was involved in flying himself, and since he had lived in Rogers County, Oklahoma, which was named for Will's father Clem, Will Rogers was doubtless another well-known personage to Albert.
In the midst of the Great Depression, with many people concerned about their financial future, the Social Security Law was passed.
Depending on which authority you lend more credence, the first benefit was paid either less than three years later, on April 27th, 1937, or on January 31st, 1940.
Just as Hetch Hetchy ""had"" to be dammed in order to provide water for the San Franciscans, water from the northern and eastern parts of the state began to be diverted this year to Southern California to support the growing monster called Los Angeles.
In an event which was perceived by many as determining racial supremacy, Max Schmeling gained Boxing's Heavyweight Championship by knocking out Joe Louis in a their June 19 th bout.
Black American Jesse Owens won four medals at the Olympics in Berlin this year.
Benton County, Arkansas native Louise McPhedren Thaden won the Bendix Transcontinental Air Race this year.
She was doubtless a ""local hero"" to the Benton County Kollenborns and Branstuders — probably most of all to the womenfolk, for whom— before the advent of aviatrixes such as Amelia Earhart and hometown heroine Louise— such feats may have seemed as unexpected as an invasion of Martians.
As the Ozark mountain community— like Trinity County, California— was sparsely populated in those pre-Wal*Mart times, the Green and McPhedren families may well have known each other.
Based on historical documents of the area, Alice was a very popular name in Benton County at the time.
One of the other Alices in the area was Louise's sister Alice McPhedren, who was four years older than Alice Green.
Their next child, a daughter, had apparently been named for Esther's mother.
So you might expect that child number four, daughter number two, would be named for its mother Esther.
Instead, Gertrude Irene Shannon was named for her paternal grandmother.
A possible inspiration for their second son's second name may have been the patriarch of Rogers County, Oklahoma, where — as has been mentioned— Albert had lived for a time.
Prior to statehood, the area in Oklahoma where the Branstuders had farmed was known as the Cooweescoowee district of the Cherokee Nation.
After statehood, it was dubbed Rogers County in honor of Will Rogers' father Clem, an elder member of the Oklahoma Constitutional Convention.
The Albert Kollenborn family was probably living in Oberlin, Kansas, at this time.
They were there by February 1937 at the latest, as that is where they were living when Albert applied for social security that month.
As Oberlin is located between Omaha, Nebraska (headquarters of Union Pacific Railroad) and Denver, Colorado, and is also situated between Kansas City, Kansas and Denver— which are both important railroad hubs— Albert was probably working for the railroad at this time.
Like many young married couples, Albert and Alice had a rough row to hoe at first.
After at most a few years, Albert landed a job with the 73 railroad, which was doubtless a big step up for the family financially.
However, Alice did not like the frequent absences from home that were necessary with Albert's railroad job.
Although Albert loved being a railroad engineer, Alice persuaded him to give it up so as to be home with the family every night.
Perhaps partly due to sentimental reminiscing about her father and childhood, Alice wanted Albert to be a farmer.
He may have developed an aversion to farming while working for or with his stepfather Jim Branstuder on farms when he was growing up.
Albert loved transportation machinery, such as trains, planes, and automobiles.
Albert's grandfather James Wesley Kollenborn was at this time in his mid-70s.
He did want to visit his grandchildren who had moved to California, and asked permission of their mother Myrtle to come out from Kansas to do so.
Myrtle did not object, and when James came he brought his daughter Nellie, his son George Wesley, and his daughter-in-law Verva.
James' only other son besides Harry, namely George, had no biological children of his own.
Thus, Myrtle's sons were all James had to carry on the Kollenborn name through his line.
Fields ""Good heavens, something 's wriggling out of the shadow like a gray snake.
The mouth is Vshapedwith saliva dripping from its rimless lips that seem to quiver and pulsate.
I can 'tfind words..."" — Quote from ""War of the Worlds"" radio broadcast ♦ Rosie Lee Kollenborn born Arkansas ♦ Juanita Branstuder and her twins die ♦ 40-Hour Work Week ♦ Joe Louis Regains Heavyweight Title ♦ Seabiscuit Wins the DelMar ♦ War of the Worlds is Broadcast ♦ New England Hurricane ♦ John Steinbeck Researching Migrant Worker Situation in California The Buffalo or ""Indian head"" nickel was retired this year, and replaced by a nickel bearing Thomas Jefferson's visage.
Superman, the Kryptonite-challenged Metropolitan, also made his debut this year.
More than half of the movie ""Gold is Where You Find It,"" starring Olivia de Havilland, was filmed in Trinity County, and premiered there this year.
In the latter part of the year, they relocated again, this time to American Tank, near Carlotta in neighboring Humboldt County.
The Albert Kollenborn family had moved temporarily back to Arkansas from Oberlin, Kansas, probably sometime between May of 1937 and the end of the year.
Alice apparently wanted to go back to the family farm so that she could be with her mother during her third pregnancy.
Alice may also have felt that her family had already left that part of Kansas once for Arkansas, and never looked back, and felt she was taking a step backwards in going from fertile and hilly northwestern Arkansas to flat Oberlin, which is only sixty miles from her parents' first homestead in Morland.
Additionally, Oberlin was located in the region hardest hit by the dust bowl, and the Kollenborns may have taken the health of the family, especially that of the children they already had and the one about to be born, into account.
Northwestern Arkansas was certainly a more salubrious clime than the dust-choked over-plowed plains of that time.
In fact, the first of three Kollenborn daughters was born in the very same room where Alice had been born twenty-seven years previously.
It was common for babies to be born at home at the time, especially in northwestern Arkansas — the first modern hospital didn't open in that area until 1942, when one was built in Bentonville.
In fact, it was just at this time that it had became the norm in the United States— rather than the exception— to be born in a hospital rather than at home.
Another possibility, though much less likely, is that the ""Rosie"" was for Albert's step-grandmother, Rosa Kollenborn, who had married Albert's grandfather James in 1902.
If James and Albert had kept in contact with one another, Albert would have known Rosa, who had died five years previously, in 1933.
The names her father had given her were combined to form a new middle name.
Although that would certainly seem natural, Rosie Lee was told by her parents that she was named for the 1937 Cole Porter song ""Rosalie,"" which was featured in the movie of the same name.
Cole Porter's version of ""Rosalie"" reached # 1 on the charts; later, Horace Heidt's version reached #6.
If one wants to get technical about it, another bone can be picked regarding what is stated on the birth certificate as to location of the birth.
The certificate states Bentonville, apparently because that was the closest ""city"" to the Green family farm in Dug Hill.
Instead of looking out on fertile fields and verdant valleys, the old Green family homestead — if it still stood! — would look out upon a playground of the polyester set, a land-usurping, water-guzzling golf course.
After their daughter's birth, the Kollenborns took up residence in Joplin, Missouri, on the Kansas border, hometown of Harlem Renaissance poet Langston Hughes and actor Dennis Weaver.
In fact, the Branstuders had to try to cope with three deaths in the family in quick succession.
Albert's unmarried half-sister Juanita, described as a beautiful girl with dark hair and naturally red cheeks, got pregnant at the age of seventeen.
In due time, Juanita gave birth to twins at the family home in Hiwasse, near Bentonville and Dug Hill.
Both twins died shortly after they were born; 77 Juanita, too, possibly too despondent to fight for her own life, also died, shortly after her twins had.
Jim Branstuder, Buck Davidson, and Bill Logston all worked together in Earl Keith's apple orchards and on his ranch, where Keith raised prize bulls.
The Greens and Logstons shared the Branstuder's grief and comforted them as best they could in their hour of need.
On hearing of the tragedy, Albert, who was then living in Joplin , went to Arkansas to be with his family and attend the funeral of his sister and nieces.
After spending three days there, and before the funeral had actually taken place, Alice called and told him to come home— the neighbor's house had burned down.
He would also be unable to attend his mother's funeral twenty-one years later.
This year, the forty-hour work week gained the same status, when the Fair Labor Standards Act, passed in 1938, went into effect.
These figures became the standard length of time to work, and since that time those who exceed them in a day and/ or in a week are customarily (but by no means always) paid overtime.
It took stepwise refinement for workers to gradually achieve this milestone of a forty-hour work week.
It first had to be reduced from seventy-two to sixty, and then fifty, before it could settle at forty.
When this was reduced to six 10-hour days for the lumber mill workers in Humboldt County in 1892, they rejoiced.
The Real Western Frontier Tells its Own Story reported on this in a story entitled ""Advent of the Short Ten Hour Day"" as follows: Back in May 15, 1892, things around the edge of Humboldt Bay had a brighter hue, for the mill workers had agreed to extend the qualities of the ten hour day, six days per week, without a complaint.
In a rematch of the 1936 bout, Joe Louis regained the Heavyweight Boxing Title on June 22 nd by defeating the man who had bested him two years prior, the Aryan muscleman and ""Great White Hope"" Max Schmeling.
The underdog Seabiscuit won the DelMar race in southern California this year, although the big blueblood Eastern horse Ligaroti was favored to win.
Well, you can go to the well once too often, even when it's a job well done.
Wells' story The War of the Worlds was apparently too well done, or at least too realistically portrayed.
The story of a Martian invasion of the earth was presented in such an authentic manner— as if the events were actually happening and being reported live by radio newscasters— that many listeners actually believed that Martians had arrived on earth and were attacking the planet.
Before we accuse Welles of being callous, cruel or irresponsible, though, note that there were not one, not two, not three, but four 79 explanatory announcements before, during, and after the broadcast clarifying the fictional nature of the presentation.
Besides this controversial sensation, Orson Welles also became famous as an actor and perhaps most of all as a producer, especially of the movie Citizen Kane, which portrayed, it was supposed, yellow journalism magnate William Randolph Hearst.
John Steinbeck, who would write a series of articles and then a Pulitzer Prize-winning novel on the situation , was researching the living conditions of migrant workers moving into California from Dust Bowl states this year.
The climatic catastrophe in the Midwest was causing 10,000 new settlers per month to pour into California.
Many of the landlords in the states most heavily affected by the Dust Bowl were very similar to the landlords in Ireland during the potato famine.
That is to say, they heartlessly evicted their tenants, although these people, in most cases, were doing the best they could to pay their rent but were simply unable to do so.
An explorer named Caveth Wells said the only place he knew as bitterly hot as Wichita was Cairo, Egypt— and in Cairo they dressed for it.
Wichita, the most populous city in Kansas and the closest metropolis to rural Allen County, lies about one hundred twenty miles to the west of Allen County, where James' son Harry lived at the time of his disappearance in 1920 and where his father William lived until his own death in 1925.
Still the largest city in Kansas today, Wichita was even in 1939 a thriving metropolis.
Although not incorporated until 1870, by 1887 this site of Indian wars and an 1865 treaty signed by Osage Chief Black Kettle was the fastest-growing city in the nation.
By the Turn of the Century it was the most industrialized city in Kansas.
Walter Beach and Clyde Cessna both lived there and operated their aircraft companies in the city.
Other household names with headquarters in Wichita include fast food franchise White Castle, camping equipment supplier Coleman, and pasta purveyor Pizza Hut.
With his farming background, this may have been the industry in which James was involved.
It's possible that he and his grandson Albert had seen each other — knowingly or otherwise— in the stockyards when Albert was working for the railroad out of Oberlin.
Although later joining his grandfather William in Allen County, the 1910 census pinpointed Harry Kollenborn, twenty-two years old that year, as living in Prospect, Kansas, on the outskirts of Wichita.
So it seems that Kollenborns had lived in and around Wichita, off and on, for around thirty years at the time of James' death.
William was buried in Moran, and James seven miles away in La Harpe, where his second wife Rosa Pennington was also buried in 1933.
SHORT ILLNESS FATAL James W Kollenborn, 76, 5148 N Broadway, died late Saturday in a local hospital following a short illness.
He was a retired farmer and had lived in and near Wichita most of his life.
Nellie Widner, Chloride, Ariz.; two sons, Mitchell, Wichita, and George, Coolidge, Ariz.; three sisters, Mrs.
Lillie Ball and Miss Lottie Kollenborn, both ofClovis, N.M., and two brothers, R.L. and Charles, both of Genesee, Idaho.
All of James' siblings had also headed west— for Texas, New Mexico, and Idaho.
One of them, Albert Kollenborn, was residing at this time just across the state line in Joplin, Missouri — less than two hundred miles from Wichita.
Being out of touch with that part of the family, Albert was probably not aware of his grandfather's death.
The novel which chronicles the plight of the ""Okies"" coming to work the crops in California during the Dust Bowl and Great Depression era, The Grapes of Wrath, for which John Steinbeck would win the Pulitzer Prize, was published this year.
Neither eastern Oklahoma, where Steinbeck's fictional Joad family had lived, nor Arkansas, where the Branstuders and Kollenborns lived, were part of the Dust Bowl area per se, but eastern Oklahoma was suffering from drought, and cotton farming in both Arkansas and Missouri had tanked.
Thus, the general exodus to the west included many from these areas in addition to the dust bowl area proper.
Thousands of banks failed, whereupon the life savings of many families vanished.
People in such desperate straits yearn for an escape, even if but a temporary one, from their worries and misery.
Movie ticket prices were low enough that sixty percent of the populace were able to attend at least one movie per week.
Gone with the Wind, the pro-southern story of Reconstruction in the South, starring Clark Gable and Vivian Leigh; The Wizard ofOz, starring Judy Garland; western director extraordinaire John Ford's Stagecoach, starring John Wayne; and Goodbye, Mr Chips, from James Hilton's novel of the same title.
DC Comics followed up on it success of the previous year with the man of steel who came from space and landed in a grain field in Illinois with the debut of Batman.
The first safe and practical automatic washer and dryer came into existence this year.
Washday drudgery, although still with us, is not nearly as strenuous or time-consuming as it had been before.
Albert Einstein wrote a letter to President Roosevelt this year, in which he presented his arguments for the scientific feasibility of atomic weapons.
Einstein urged the President to pursue rapid formation of a United States atomic program.
Seabiscuit's well-wishers were not the only ones feeling frisky this year, though.
Some have referred to 1940 as a ""time-out year"" between the Great Depression, which ended in 1939, and America's involvement in World War II, which began in 1941.
People could catch their breath, so to speak, as things began to pick up economically.
Many had no inkling, however, of what the next year would bring, or how American would eventually be affected by the war in Europe.
WASHINGTON, D.C. — The first peacetime conscription bill in American history was completed today by the Senate military committee for consideration by the Senate early next week.
Carleton Howard Shannon was born January 16 th to Pop and Esther Shannon.
If Carleton had waited another two days to be delivered, he would have made his appearance on his father's thirty-eighth birthday.
Whereas Pop's mother gave birth over a span of twenty-seven years, his wife Esther gave birth to all five of her children in less than eight years.
The great events of the world have been tragic pageants, not personal involvements.
Pop had been on the outskirts of eligibility during the previous World War, also — he was sixteen at the conclusion of that war.
In March, the United States embarked on a program they called lendlease.
This was a way to lend war materials and other supplies to any nation whose victory in the war America felt was vital to its own interests.
Chief of these recipients of American aid was Britain, but the other allied nations were also rendered aid, including China and Russia.
As the war continued, the breadth and depth of the aid expanded — by war's end, 50 billion dollars had been doled out by the United States to 38 nations.
The assistance was given to help these nations in their prosecution of their war against Germany and the rest of the Axis powers.
A large minority, if not an outright majority, of Americans still opposed direct 87 involvement in the war.
Practically the entire United States Pacific fleet — ninety-four warships — was wiped out, along with almost four hundred warplanes.
According to his daughter Laura , Pop ""melted"" to the floor out of shock and distress on hearing the news about Pearl Harbor.
Despite his age and the number of dependents he had , Laura says that Pop then attempted to enlist in the service.
He was told, though, that he was needed more on the home front, where he continued in the logging business.
In September, the Shannon family moved again, this time to Camp 3, Ten Mile Camp.
Albert Kollenborn also contemplated joining the Air Force at this time.
With several children to care for, though, he ultimately decided against it.
There was a Kollenborn from Idaho who did fly in WWII, namely Mac Kollenborn.
One thing that all would agree on, though, is that the ""day that will live in infamy,"" December 7 th , ultimately changed America and the rest of the world.
It set into a motion a sequence of events which are still very much on the surface of our national and global consciousness today.
One day later, on the 9th of December, China also declared war on Germany and Italy as well as Japan.
The next day, Japan invaded the Philippines, concentrating first on the capital, Manila.
By the middle of May, Japanese forces had taken control of all the Philippine Islands.
And then, one after the other, Hong Kong, Burma, Java, Singapore, Thailand, Indochina, British Malaya, Sumatra, Borneo, parts of New Guinea, Netherlands East Indies, as well as scores of Pacific islands, fell into Japanese hands.
The Asiatic blitzkrieg was thus not one whit behind its European counterpart.
Meanwhile, in Europe, The German Catholic bishops' conference announced its support for war against the Soviet Union this year.
Also, the first mass gassings in Auschwitz concentration camp took place.
In 1944, the pope would ask the warring nations to spare his home of Rome.
He apparently didn't consider any other city worthy of special consideration.
Following the attack on Pearl Harbor and the declaration of war between the United States and Japan, the Pacific coast became vulnerable to attack from the sea, and all coastal communities were placed on alert, Humboldt County included.
Because Areata, near Eureka in Humboldt County, was visible from the ocean, life in the town changed.
Each block had a Civil Defense captain whose responsibility was to check every residence and building for visible light showing during the declared blackout alerts.
Street lights were turned off for the duration of the mandatory blackout, and automobiles driven after dark were restricted to using just their parking lights.
On the hill above the town, Humboldt State College was officially declared a highly visible target.
In response thereto, it was painted a camouflage pattern of olive drab and brown.
Well, it's not really a conspiracy theory, necessarily, but a bit of background information to show why the attack on Pearl Harbor should not have been so shocking to everyone.
Isoroku Yamamoto, Admiral of the Japanese Navy, used a predicted surprise attack scenario on Pearl Harbor as his blueprint for how to proceed against America.
Kevin Starr has written a series of books that provide an in-depth and interesting coverage of California history.
Brilliant in his depictions of the land war in California, Homer Lea was rather sketchy when it came to details of the Japanese naval strategy in the Pacific.
This scenario was left for Hector By water, an English civilian naval intelligence specialist based in London.
A Study of the American-Japanese Naval Problem, By water outlined a complete naval strategy for Japan in the Pacific in the event of a war with the United States.
Almost matter-offactly, By water suggested that the war would begin with a surprise attack by Japan on Pearl Harbor.
For the United States to contain Japan in the Pacific, By water wrote, it would have to establish a naval base and fleet in the Philippines, with secondary bases at Midway and Wake islands.
As matters stood, the Philippines presented the United States with its only foothold in the Far East in its only base of operations for a blockade against Japan.
Although he doubted Homer Lea's contention that the 89 Japanese could launch a major assault on the Pacific Coast, Bywater's Pearl Harbor scenario greatly impressed a young Harvard-trained Japanese naval captain, Isoroku Yamamoto, then serving as a naval attache in Washington.
Yamamoto submitted a detailed report on Bywater's scenario to naval officials in Tokyo and lectured on Bywater's book when he returned to Japan.
Fifteen years later, Admiral Yamamoto put many of Bywater's strategies into practice, beginning with an attack on Pearl Harbor.
On the last day of October, the Mount Rushmore National Memorial was completed, after 14 years of blasting and chipping, polishing and sanding.
From left to right, the luminaries depicted, standing stone-faced against the windy plain, are George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln.
Although the others hailed— comparatively anyway— from ""ancient history,"" Roosevelt was only eight years in his grave at the time.
The Albert Kollenborn family relocated to Idaho from Arkansas this year.
The Kollenborns had not gone to California from the AMOK states during the Dust Bowl, as many others from that area had.
They didn't go during the great migration there in the early 40s to work in the defense industry, either.
The Kollenborns doubtless had some acquaintances back in Arkansas who had, though.
Once America got directly involved in the war following the attack on Pearl Harbor, many from Benton County moved to California to work in the defensive industry.
It had been talked up by relatives— Charles and Bill Logston's sister Grace and her husband George Cottrell— who had moved to southern Idaho from Oklahoma.
The Cottrells were able to convince the Green ""girls"" in particular that Idaho was great farm country, and that they could make a better life for themselves there than they could in Arkansas.
Once irrigated, the ""sagebrush,"" as the desert -y part of southern Idaho was called, had indeed proven to be a very fertile crop-growing region.
This was an apt sobriquet for the area not only because of the transformation that irrigation had brought but also because of the great change wrought by the promotional pamphlets that had drawn many into the area.
Idaho may very well be the least thought of and most misunderstood State in the Union.
They do grow potatoes there, yes, but Idaho is not one giant potato patch.
When the Kollenborns lived there, Idaho's spuds played second fiddle to those of Maine.
It wasn't until the late 1950s (thanks in part to chain fast food restaurants and their ubiquitous french fries, as we shall see) that Idaho became the nation's foremost potato pantry.
Idaho's reputation for its ""famous potatoes"" (which is the motto on their license plate) began near where the Kollenborns lived.
Today the Simplot Company supplies McDonalds with more than half of its French fries.
This was a better business than simply filling a demand — a demand was actually created, as per capita consumption of French fries grew sevenfold from 1960 to 1984— from two pounds per year to fourteen.
French fries were introduced to the United States by none other than Thomas Jefferson, who had enjoyed the strips of fried potatoes while serving as Ambassador to France.
For this reason, apparently, they became known as ""French fries"" here, while in actuality ""pommes frites,"" as they are known in Europe, are of Belgian origin.
Rupert, which is in Minidoka County, and Burley and Declo, which are located in Cassia County.
This area may have reminded Albert, in a way, of Carroll and Chariton Counties in northern Missouri.
Whereas those counties are bounded by the Missouri River, Cassia and Minidoka are divided by the Snake River.
Before the Snake joins the Columbia River in south-central Washington State this 1,000 mile river slithers its way across southern Idaho.
The Snake River originates just south of Yellowstone Park; as it approaches the Oregon border, it plunges into the continent's deepest gorge— thirty miles in length and up to one half mile in depth.
Although Indian attacks were usually unlikely on the Oregon trail, especially prior to the mid1850s (far more travelers died from other causes than from Indian attacks), there was more danger of such in the Snake River Plain than elsewhere along the trail.
Idaho, home of the Nez Perce, Coeur d' Alene, and many other tribes, was the last of the fifty states to be entered by Euro-Americans.
The Green women and their families were by no means the first to come to Idaho from the Ozarks.
In 1863, large wagon trains from Missouri and Arkansas brought families desperate to escape the guerrilla 91 warfare perpetrated by ""bushwhackers"" (such as Jesse James and his ilk) that was raging in their home states.
These passed into history as the automobile, invented in Germany in 1886 by Karl Benz, took over as the prime method of transportation for families relocating to the Western United States.
The Kollenborns and Logstons would eventually be confronted with that decision here, too, although they stayed in Idaho for most of the 1940s before moving on.
The Kollenborns would (at first, anyway), decide on California, whereas the Logstons would opt for Oregon.
Idaho is no insignificant state, at least when its sheer size is taken into consideration.
It is as large as the six New England states of Connecticut, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts— as well as New Jersey, Maryland, and Delaware thrown in for good measure— combined.
Forty percent of Idaho is National Forest, and contains some of the most rugged terrain in the country, such as Ruby Ridge, near the Canadian border, and jagged mountain country in the central part of the state where mail is still delivered by airplane.
In one of those head-shaking trivialities of history, Idaho was almost named Montana, and Colorado was almost named Idaho.
Its owner apparently got the name from a Colorado mining man who said that it meant Gem of the Mountains.
Indeed, Colorado had almost been named Idaho, and it was a Coloradan who coined the word Idaho, claiming that it was of Indian derivation.
After hearing the glowing report of the area from the Cottrells, three of the Green women went to work on their husbands.
Ruth's husband Charles Logston was the first of the men to see the wisdom of the move.
The Logstons, the senior of the three couples, were then able to persuade Ruth's sister Mary and her husband Marion McCool, as well 92 as Albert and Alice Kollenborn that the three families should all make the move together.
Belle Green, who loved her Ozark farm, couldn't bear the thought of losing so many of her children, as well as grandchildren, but was forced to reconcile herself to the idea when her girls proved intractable in their desire to build a new life in the West.
Though they didn't tell her at the time, her daughters later admitted that a key factor in their decision to leave the Ozark mountain community was that they didn't want their children to end up marrying their own cousins— apparently a common occurrence in that area in those times of sparse population and relative isolation and insulation.
Moving with in-laws to a new area was nothing new for the Kollenborn clan.
Albert's grandparents had moved together with the Hilly family from Jersey County, Illinois, to Jasper County, Missouri about a century before.
J.J. was probably William's brother, and Nancy was probably Charlotte's sister.
Whether it was wanderlust, a quest for a better life, concern over the health of their grandchildren, or a combination of these considerations, the Kollenborns, Logstons, and McCools all packed up and headed fifteen hundred miles northwest.
Despite the stated attraction of the area, Albert had an aversion to farming, which was perhaps due at least partly due to his Dust Bowl farming experiences in Oklahoma or the hard times he experienced in Missouri following the great flood of 1927.
Since it wasn't ""in his blood,"" Albert only grudgingly and sporadically farmed, and only then because Alice always wanted him to.
It is ironic when you consider his birthplace, but Albert Kollenborn, along with the rest of his family, attended the Mormon church while living in Idaho.
DeWitt, Missouri, where Albert was born, had forcibly driven out the Mormons when they attempted to settle there.
After trying and failing to rid himself of the tobacco habit, he quit attending the church instead.
Albert probably didn't know it, but some Kollenborns had long since migrated to Idaho.
For example, Archie Louis and Clarence Roy Kollenborn were both listed in the WWI draft records as living in Canyon, Idaho.
And many other Kollenborns can be found in census records in Idaho in decades previous to the Albert Kollenborn family moving there.
These Idaho Kollenborns are probably all distant cousins, aunts, and uncles of Albert's.
As for Alice, she wrote faithfully to her sister Effie back in Arkansas.
Effie passed Alice's letters on to Albert's mother Lizzie, to whom Alice didn't write.
Albert's fourth-grade education may or may not have had something to do with his not writing.
Lizzie would cry as she read about her grandchildren that she would never see again.
Of course, Alice's mother Belle never saw her grandchildren again, either.
The same was true for the grandchildren, too — they never got to see their grandparents, on either side.
Their loss was perhaps even greater, as the grandparents had some of their grandchildren there in Arkansas with them, but the grandchildren in Idaho didn't have but two grandmothers and one grandfather, and they were all in Arkansas which was, for all practical purposes, as distant as the moon.
The house in which the Kollenborns lived in Declo (where they had moved from Burley) had an attached blacksmith shop, which Albert used as a mechanic shop.
You could only play ball if your bellies had stars, and the Plain-bellied children had none upon thars. "" — from the story ""The Sneeches"" by Theodore Geisel ""If the misery of the poor be caused not by the laws of nature, but by our institutions, great is our sin.
The friction between Japanese-Americans and Euro-Americans was not so dissimilar to that between Germans and Jews in Germany during this time period.
In California, it was not necessarily so much a case of Japanese men consorting with Euro-American females, but rather that they were excelling in business, particularly in agriculture.
By 1920, there were more Euro-Americans working for Japanese employers in California than vice versa.
Tens of thousands of Japanese families were turned out of their homes and businesses and forced to spend the duration of the war in concentration camps throughout the country.
It was, ostensibly at any rate, fear that these Japanese-Americans would collaborate with the Japanese military that prompted these violations of their rights.
Similar to the ""one drop"" rule which relegated anyone with any African-American ancestry to a life of slavery in the old South, anyone with as little as one95 sixteenth Japanese blood was a candidate to be incarcerated in these camps.
Native Americans were also taken advantage of during the war as a result of government action.
One and a half million acres of their land in Arizona, South Dakota, and Alaska was taken from them for use in the war effort.
As gunnery ranges, for nuclear test sites, and... internment camps for these very JapaneseAmericans.
As of October 12 th of this year, though, Italian nationals would no longer be considered enemy aliens.
A year and a day later, Italy would reverse its alliances and proclaim war on Germany, its former Axis power partner.
One of the Japanese internment camps was located in Minidoka County north of Twin Falls and near the town of Hunt.
Minidoka County has been described as having hot and dusty summers and frigid winters.
Oddly enough, Japanese-Americans already living in Idaho were not relocated to any of these camps.
For that reason, some Japanese-Americans from other areas voluntarily relocated to the state.
Doing so saved them from removal to the camps— but not necessarily from prejudice and distrust on the part of some of their fellow citizens.
The Japanese did not intend their attack on Pearl Harbor to be a singular event, but just the first salvo in a series of attacks on the United States.
After conducting a screening operation off the island of Oahu, Japanese sub commander Kozo Nishino's next assignment was to move with eight other submarines of his squadron to the Pacific Coast of the United States They were to disrupt shipping and communication.
From off the coast of Washington state, Nishino went south to Cape Mendocino (near where Pop Shannon and his family were living), then proceeded further south to San Francisco.
Operating off San Francisco, Nishino sank an American freighter in mid-January.
In February of 1942, Commander Nishino received orders to head for the coast of Southern California.
From San Diego, he turned north towards Santa Barbara, running submerged by daylight, and cruising on the surface past the lights of the California coast in the evening.
On February 23 rd , shortly after sevenm., Nishino stood in the conning tower of his submarine and raised his binoculars to his eyes.
Commander Nishino could have torpedoed this American city at the very moment that FDR was conducting a radio address to the nation.
Occurring just two and one half months after the strike on Pearl Harbor, such an attack on a mainland American city would have instantly earned its place in American history.
This would have been the first time since the War of 1812 that a foreign power had directly attacked an American mainland city.
In fact, the military was already claiming that the Japanese had been operating in California airspace.
The day after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Brigadier General William Ord Ryan, commanding officer of the 4 th Interceptor Command, had confirmed that a large number of unidentified aircraft had approached the Golden Gate in the late hours of 7-8 December but vanished after searchlights from the Presidio of San Francisco flooded the sky.
I don't know how many planes there were, but there were a large number.
They got up to the Golden Gate and then turned about and headed northwest.
Every surviving Japanese-American internment camp victim received a belated twenty thousand dollars.
Some had lost millions of dollars in property during the two and-a-half years of internment.
A century after losing California to the United States, Mexico was sent an offer from Germany to receive it back, provided Mexico would join forces with the Axis powers against the United States.
And not just California— Germany also promised Mexico the other land in the southwest that she had lost to the United States in the 1840s.
However, the communique proposing this scheme was intercepted by United States intelligence, and thus did not reach its intended recipient.
Although he already had four children by this time, thirty-five year old Albert Kollenborn wasn't completely assured of not being drafted.
It was only this year that men thirty-seven and older were excluded from the draft.
In actuality, as previously mentioned, Albert had given thought to joining the Air Force, but it was probably family responsibilities which in the end prevented him from doing so.
During the war, California needed more workers because so many of its men had joined, or otherwise become a part of, the military.
Not only did people from other states flock into California to take relatively highpaying defense industry jobs, but workers from Mexico came also, to work at those jobs which whites no longer wanted.
An agreement with Mexico allowed Mexican workers called braceros to come to California and work the fields.
In the 1960s, labor leaders such as Cesar Chavez, Dolores Huerta, and Larry Itliong would fight for these farm workers' rights, establishing unions to improve the living and working conditions of the laborers.
In the United States this year, on November 13 th , the minimum draft age was reduced from twenty-one to eighteen.
I said, ""If you 11 remember, I fastened my return with a paper clip, which according to your very own latest government pentagon spending figures will more than make up for the difference.
Dah-ling I love you but give me Park Avenue —from the song ""Green Acres"" by Vic Mizzy ♦ Pentagon Completed ♦ Green Farm sold The Pentagon, headquarters of the United States Department of Defense, was completed this year.
Each person was restricted to purchase at most three pairs for the remainder of the year.
In Dug Hill, Arkansas, Belle Green offered the family farm to each of her children, most of whom had moved away to the West.
None of them wanted the farm, or to farm, for that matter, and so she sold it.
In spite of what may seem obvious, Port Chicago is not in or anywhere near Chicago, Illinois — unless you consider the West Coast and the Great Lakes to be in the same neighborhood.
The blast was not the result of an enemy attack, nor was the cause sabotage.
As the tempo of shipments of ammunition from Port Chicago to the Pacific increased, so did the risks.
On the night of Monday, 17 July 1944, shortly after ten o'clock, a horrendous explosion rocked Port Chicago as two Liberty ships, afire barge, and a loading pier disappeared in a blast that was equivalent to five kilotons of TNT, which is to say, an explosion comparable to that of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima thirteen months later.
An Army Air Force crew flying overhead at the time reported a fireball that covered approximately three miles and sent metal fragments nine thousand feet into the air.
We raised six of our children in Trinity Co... three sons still living there.
Theodore was on the job with his cats, keeping the fire clear of his place when the forest service came over, and asked him to leave his place to help them.
He said he couldn't leave and they placed men at his place but the men thought the place was safe, and they went to sleep and it burned to the ground.
Bill, Laura, Theodore Russell, Trudy, and Carleton Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who had been President throughout the Great Depression and World War II, was re-elected to an unprecedented fourth term at the end of the year.
Such an unusual showing will also remain unmatched, as consecutive Presidential terms are now limited to a maximum of two.
Buildings ""You can 't say that civilization don 't advance, however, for in every war they kill you in a new way.
Then the surrender of the Japanese and the sounds of a jubilant nation that World War II had ended.
Those clever fellows study all the facts and they see the war as a large thing, one of the biggest events in the legend of the man, something general, involving multitudes.
I see it as a large thing too, only I break it into small units of one man at a time, and see it as a large and monstrous thing for each man involved.
I see the war as death in one form or another for men dressed as soldiers, and all the men who survived the war, including myself, I see as men who died with their brothers, dressed as soldiers.
I see death as a private event, the destruction of the universe in the brain and in the senses of one man, and I cannot see any man 's death as a contributing factor in the success or failure of a military campaign.
We know more about war than we know about peace, more about killing than we know about living.
The controller informed the pilot that he could not see the top of the Empire State Building.
The pilot, on his way to pick up his commanding officer in Newark, New Jersey, wanted to continue the flight anyway, and got permission from the military to do so.
The fog was so thick that the pilot descended in an attempt to regain visibility.
Once he saw where he was— right in the middle of Manhattan, surrounded by skyscrapers — the pilot had to make some quick maneuvers.
First he avoided one skyscraper, and then another; he tried to pull up and away from the Empire State Building, but was unable to.
The plane's high-octane fuel exploded, hurtling flames down the side of the building and through hallways and stairwells all the way down to the 75 th floor.
One engine, along with some of the plane's landing gear, tore loose from the bomber and hurtled across the floor, breaking through partitions and firewalls, bursting through the opposite side of the building, finally coming to rest on top of a twelve-story building.
The other engine skidded across the floor, and plummeted down the elevator shaft.
The engine landed on top of the elevator car, driving the car in a free fall to the bottom of the shaft, igniting a fire in the basement.
Amazingly, the two women who were in the elevator car at the time survived.
Eleven of the office workers were not as fortunate, many of whom burned to death while still sitting at their desks.
The three crew members also died, and many people on the ground were injured by falling debris.
It was fortunate that the accident, if it had to occur, did so on a Saturday, when fewer people were in the building than would have been on a weekday.
It was quite unfortunate, though, that the very floor into which the plane crashed was one of those in which people were working.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt had died April 12 th , shortly after beginning his fourth term as President.
Within three weeks of FDR's death, Italy's Mussolini and Germany's Hitler were also dead.
And so it was that the man who brought a ""New Deal"" to America was dead, and the diabolical psychopath who had brought destruction and devastation to Europe was, also.
By the end of the year, another key figure in the war, George Patton, would be dead.
FDR had been the only President to be elected to more than two terms of office.
A telltale sign of its stupendous force was a crater over a thousand feet in diameter that the explosion left behind.
Oak Ridge, Tennessee; Hanford, Washington; and Los Alamos, New Mexico, near where the test took place.
It was too late to use the new super-destructive awesome force on the Germans, who had already capitulated, but Japan was not yet fully down for the count.
Two hundred thousand people were killed as a result of these bombs, many instantly, others as a result of injuries and radiation poisoning.
Innumerable others had their lives curtailed as a result of the radiation to which this exposed them, contracting various forms of cancer in the years that followed.
The astronomical degree and extent of the resulting anguish— physical, mental, and emotional— is immeasurable.
Statistics do tell some of the story, or at least provide some indication of the immensity of the devastation.
The atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, bearing the cuddly name ""Little Boy,"" detonated with the force of seventeen thousand tons of dynamite.
Those who died later suffered greatly — the radiation induced nausea, fever, and hemorrhaging.
The plutonium bomb, this one dubbed, cutely, ""Fat Man,"" killed tens of thousands more civilians in Nagasaki.
Some argue that the dropping of these bombs was justified, on the basis that they probably saved hundreds of thousands of lives in the long run.
Others have suggested, however, that a test explosion over an unpopulated area might have been sufficient to force Japan into surrendering.
The tension created by three years, eight months and seven days of history's cruelest war snapped in Iola at 6m. today.
Within a matter of minutes following President Truman's announcement, sirens were screaming and Iola's streets were jammed with pedestrians and cars, and trucks filled with people bent on giving vent to their joy.
A younger woman was smiling as she fought back her tears, she now awaits her husband who has never seen their 20-month old son.
In contrast to those driving furiously around the square, in anticipation of the end of gas rationing, was Cap Newman marching with stately tread, beating a tom-tom from an oil can.
The Soviet Union had started the war aligned with the Axis powers, but after Germany turned on and attacked them, they quit that band of cutthroats and formed an uneasy coalition with the Allies.
As the war was ending, the Soviet Union and the United States were maneuvering themselves into positions of power for the post-war world.
Probably as a move in this political chess match, hoping to get in on the action and share some of the credit, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan two days after the bombing of Hiroshima and one day before the bombing of Nagasaki.
Not unlike the dog who only begins barking and growling and pursuing after the subject of his attention has turned away, in the final months of the war, thirteen countries declared war on Germany.
The shock and awe generated by the atomic bombs that had been expelled from the belly of the Enola Gay crippled Japan not just militarily.
The worst war in human history, in terms of lives lost, was finally over.
Within hours of the Japanese surrender, Communist leader Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the independence of his country, naming it the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
Twenty-four years to the day later, in the midst of a war fought there, Minh died.
In September, Pop Shannon's brother Calvin returned from his overseas stint with the navy.
Nevertheless, president Harry S Truman did not officially proclaim an end to the hostilities until the last day of 1946.
The stated intent of the United Nations is to maintain international peace and security.
Same as the Old Boss ""Man is the only creature that consumes without producing.
He does not give milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, he cannot run fast enough to catch rabbits.
He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum that will prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. "" — from ""Animal Farm"" by George Orwell ""ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL, BUT SOME ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS. "" from ""Animal Farm"" by George Orwell ♦ George Orwell publishes ""Animal Farm"" ♦ Calvin Coolidge Shannon musters out of the Navy George Orwell's ""Animal Farm,"" an allegorical tale of how revolutionaries, even when justified in their criticism of the current regime, often end up as bad or worse than the regimes they displace and supplant, was released this year.
Calvin Coolidge Shannon was mustered out of the Navy on April 23 rd in San Pedro, California.
On re-entering civilian life, Calvin purchased an airplane and got engaged to be married, not necessarily in that order.
Calvin's decision to fly, an avocation that was pursued not only by Albert Kollenborn but also by many of the Shannons (Pop's brothers and sons) would prove to be a fateful one for Calvin.
If you 're going to spend your whole life in the grandstand just watching what goes on, in my opinion you 're wasting your life.
More significantly, and the reason why we remember him so fondly, is that he was a special person.
Although a standout baseball player, it was not just his considerable skill on the baseball diamond which led to him being asked if he was willing to be the forerunner— or some might say guinea pig or sacrificial lamb— to integrate the Major Leagues.
Jackie would be stubborn enough to stick it out, but also exhibit the self-control necessary to refrain from physically retaliating against those who would provoke him.
Jackie agreed to be the man who would go down in history as the one with the courage to pioneer the way for those who would come after him, and the guts to tough it out.
Baseball was very much an integral part of American culture at the time, a central theme in the warp and weave of daily American life.
A broader program of integration would become official policy the next year.
Fearing Russia taking over other countries, leading to a domino or virus-like effect on the balance of power, President Harry Truman this year issued what is known as the Truman Doctrine.
Its immediate catalyst was fear that Greece and Turkey could otherwise become communistic.
The victorious, vibrant, virile returnees needed housing, and the GI Bill provided them with the money they needed.
Quickly-built, modestly-priced cookie-cutter homes laid out in planned communities on the outskirts of cities became de rigueur.
And she knew this was the great time in her life so far. "" from ""Grapes of Wrath"" by John Steinbeck ""Eastward I go only by force, but westward I go free.
When the William Kollenborn family was living in Illinois, that area, located in what is now the middle of the country, was considered to be the West.
As generations passed, William and Charlotte and their descendants kept up the westward march, at first with baby steps, from Illinois to Missouri, and then from Missouri to Kansas, but eventually would make kangaroo jumps into the states of Idaho, Oregon, Washington, Arizona, New Mexico, and finally California.
For several generations, the Kollenborns had resisted the lure of California.
After first circling around the AMOK states, they had leaped all the way across the great Divide, landing in Idaho.
But now the Kollenborn family would finally succumb to the draw of the Golden State.
After their second move to California, Albert would spend the final decade of his life there.
Albert and Alice Kollenborn had moved to Idaho from Arkansas because they had been told that it was a better place to farm and otherwise make a living and a life.
After spending most of the 1940s there in south-central Idaho, the Kollenborns moved again, this time from Idaho to California.
Alice's brother James ""Man"" Green, who had preceded them there, told them that California was a better place to live.
After working there for a time, Albert struck out on his own and started his own mechanic shop.
As different as the two states are (for instance, the highest point in Missouri, Mt.
Timm, would scarcely qualify as a hill worthy of mention or thought in California), there are many connections binding Albert's birth no state and death state to each other.
As some examples of these MissouriCalifornia connections, the Pony Express went from St.
Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, California; the Overland Route started in and around St.
Joseph and Independence, Missouri, and terminated in the Sacramento area; and the California Trail began in Independence, Missouri, and ended in San Francisco.
Mark Twain's journey went that way, too, as he moved from Missouri first to Washoe with his Territorial Secretary brother Orion, and then on to California in the 1860s.
For the last time, Pop Shannon moved back to the ranch he owned in Trinity County, in order to develop it.
He would live there for the rest of his life. ill 1949 Big Brother, Little Brother ""No mercy, no power but its own controls it.
Calvin Coolidge Shannon of Westport was killed when his airplane was blown off a runway near the ocean while landing at Union Landing March 10, 1 949.
The plane was smashed on the rocks and his body carried out to sea to be recovered later.
Theodore of Westport, Kenneth of Carlotta, Howard of Areata, Robert of Westport, George of Tulare, Gary Shannon of Westport, Mrs.
Not as badly injured as was Calvin, Robert was able, after searching for Calvin in vain, to fight his way back to shore.
We can plainly recall going to bed one night feeling so warm and so cozy, and Dad was listening to the news before going to sleep when he said that Calvin had been killed.
I couldn't believe it as I just received a letter the day before from Belle & she told how Gary and Calvin were having the time of their life.
I left the next morning with Gary, Kate, and Howard to spend some time with my son Theodore and his family.
Dad wouldn't go because of the way we had to bury Girlie and people thinking more of their fun than her.
Like the other Belle in the family, Virginia Belle Green, she preferred her middle name to her first name.
Although she was not mentioned in the obituary, Calvin's fiance, Jeannie F Larssen of Westport, was also among those left behind.
Whereas mountainous Idaho is sometimes confused with corn and pigrich Iowa, many confuse this small West Coast city with an Army base of the same name in North Carolina.
The Fort Bragg in California did begin as a military post, established in 1857.
Lippitt, Commander of the Humboldt Military District, suggested a name change to Ft.
The name change didn't take place, and the nearby town was named for the abandoned fort.
Mendocino County, wherein Fort Bragg finds itself— although tending towards fog and dampness— is a very photogenic area.
A few examples are the cold war comedy The Russians are Coming (which was filmed partly in a house in which Pop Shannon lived in Westport); the World War II tale The Summer of '42; and Jim Carrey's The Majestic.
Also, the television show Murder She Wrote, set supposedly on the opposite coast (as was The Summer of '42) was filmed in Mendocino.
California itself is often portrayed in a stylized caricature reflecting, on the one hand, untruths, and on the other, gross exaggerations, and focusing almost exclusively on Southern California, which is as different from Northern California as New Hampshire is from New Mexico.
A tour of Alpine, Inyo, Siskiyou and Modoc Counties would set such ones straight, too.
As is usually the case with much-maligned people, places, and things, there is much more to California than the oversimplified stereotypes would lead gullible armchair travelers to believe.
California, the jewel of America, always seems to have one more trick up its sleeve, one more secret spirited away.
Following up on the success of his short novel ""Animal Farm,"" Eric Arthur Blair this year published ""1984,"" one of the most influential novels in English literature.
Leave it alone, and eventually it will right itself— this year recommended that the government open up Indian lands to mineral exploitation, terminate government services to Indians, and remove the nontaxable status of their lands.
When things were bad for the white people, Hoover wouldn't lift a finger to help.
When things were bad for the Indians, he wanted to raise a gloved fist and an iron heel to smash and stomp them.
He hopes that for some future edition, at a time when it would not subject them to danger and reprisal, to be able to name these people and extend personal thanks to each in turn. "" from the novel ""Spartacus"" by Howard Fast, published 1951 ""WAR IS PEACE FREEDOM IS SLA VERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH"" from ""1984"" by George Orwell ♦ McCarthyism ♦ Korean War ♦ Will and Gertie Shannons' 50 th Anniversary It was first in 1920 that more Americans lived in cities than in rural areas.
Just thirty years later, this had increased to 64% (almost twothirds) of Americans living in cities.
In 1950, the average home cost $8,000, the average car cost $1,500, rent was typically $75 per month, and a uniformed attendant would pump a gallon of gas into your car for 18 cents.
He would also wash your windows, check your cars' fluid levels, and possibly give you stamps that could be saved up and redeemed for items such as towels and dishes.
Joseph McCarthy was a Senator from Wisconsin who acted more like he was a superstitious and vengeful resident of old Salem, Massachusetts.
In the height of the Cold War, when Americans were afraid of communism, McCarthy played on this fear by accusing over two hundred people in the United States State Department of being communists.
The Korean War began on June 25 th , when troops from the Northern, communist half of that divided nation invaded the Southern portion.
Five days later, President Harry Truman authorized military intervention to help protect proUnited States South Korea.
Albert and Alice's firstborn son David A Kollenborn would serve there during that conflict.
Whatever you call the involvement the two sides had with each other, it was not officially terminated until 1991, or 38 years after fighting had ceased in 1953.
It was not until then that North Korea and South Korea finally signed a treaty of reconciliation and nonaggression.
Of course, many would consider the activities in Korea a war, regardless of its official designation.
Up to this point, this was the most intense burst of heat the Cold War had given off.
The Americans feared a ""domino effect"" if they lost South Korea to the communist camp.
They were afraid that one ""conversion"" to communism would lead to another, then another, until they were outnumbered and out-gunned by the opposition.
Th Korean conflict coincided with, and foreshadowed, another Asian conflict the United States would involve itself in.
France, which had lost many colonies since World War II, such as Algeria, wanted its old colonies of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia back.
Knowing the United States was also intensely interested in keeping communism in check, they asked for help from the United States in fighting communist rebels in Vietnam.
America responded by sending ""military advisers"" and supplies, and contributed millions of dollars to the cause.
This was just the beginning of American involvement in the quagmire there, though.
America would remain entangled in one way or another with the problems in Vietnam from Truman's Presidency at this time and on through Eisenhower's, Kennedy's, Johnson's , and finally end in Nixon's era.
At the end of the year, Will and Gertie Shannon reached the milestone of 50 years of married life.
Although there would be a big family gettogether for their 60 th anniversary, this one may have come too close to Calvin's death for them to feel much like celebrating.
Eight of their eleven children were still alive, ranging in age from Theodore, who was 48, to twenty-one-year-old Gary.
Every time somebody turns on the set, I go into the other room and read a book "" — Groucho Marx ""A full belly is little worth where the mind is starved.
Nevertheless, and regardless of what we today might think of the state of the technology at the time, the general populace was certainly impressed.
Perhaps more specifically, many were enthralled and practically mesmerized by the contraption.
The process of converting multitudes of fiercely independent Americans into homogenized nincompoops seemingly unable, or at least unwilling, to think for themselves was well under way by 1951.
In that year, the number of television sets grew tenfold, from 1. million the year before to 15 million.
This is not to say that television does not have a great potential for good.
The effect of television on families, today taken for granted by people who have never known life without the device, has been inestimable.
They saw commercials that created a desire for things they hadn't even known they wanted.
Perhaps most importantly, television gave Americans more of a common culture.
And so, family communication suffered in direct relationship with the amount of time families spent viewing television.
Purchasing of goods gradually morphed from needs-driven to wants-driven, with the wants awakened, intensified and even artificially created— jumpstarted, so to speak— by crass commercialism.
Salinger's classic novella Catcher in the Rye, featuring the unforgettable protagonist Holden Caulfield, was released this year.
My business of keeping the children in school, keeps us in Mendocino County.
For the first time, the Shannons and Kollenborns were living in the same general area this year.
This move was prompted by two families with whom the Kollenborns had become close friends.
Bud and Lucia Raines, and Jim and Adabelle Ritter had moved to Fort Bragg, and the Kollenborns followed.
Lucia Raines, whose mother already lived in Fort Bragg, eventually became head nurse at the Fort Bragg hospital.
Ozzie and Harriet, a television show depicting a ""typical"" American family, began its fifteen-year run this year.
It starred the real-life Nelson family, which included teen heart-throb rock 'n' roll singer Ricky.
His most popular songs of the era were Travelin' Man and Hello, Mary Lou.
It is spending the sweat of its laborers, the genius of its scientists, the hopes of its children.
Everest ♦ Cease-Fire in Korea On May 29 th , Edmund Hillary and Tensing Norgay reached the summit of Mt.
Everest, at 29,028 feet, is not only the peak of the Himalayas, but the tallest mountain in the world.
North Korea's capital of Pyongyang was captured by the United States -led United Nations forces at one point, and the South Korea capital of Seoul was overtaken by the communists at another point in the War.
First the communists would push the United Nations forces south, then the United Nations forces would regroup, retake the momentum, and push the communists back north.
Finally, after three years of this exercise in frustration and futility, not to mention death, destruction, and mutually assured heartache, both sides decided to call the whole thing off.
Twenty-three thousand American soldiers died (almost as many as would die in Vietnam), and tens of thousands more were wounded.
Additionally, at least a million North Korean civilians died, and probably a like number of civilians from South Korea died, too.
The first ending in divorce this year, the second ending with his death in 1979.
The Kollenborns had considered moving to Areata, but decided against it when a strong earthquake struck that Humboldt County town.
Bragg was to have a major impact on both the Kollenborn and the Shannon families.
The rundown all-black school, where Brown's third-grade daughter was expected to attend, was all the way across town.
Brown attempted to enroll Linda in the nearer school, but was informed by the school board that he could not do that.
As similar lawsuits were being simultaneously brought elsewhere throughout the country, they were tried together, and before the Supreme Court, no less.
Because the surname Brown came first alphabetically among the litigants, the composite case was known as Brown Board of Education ofTopeka.
Brown had attempted to enroll his daughter three years earlier, in 1951.
The Supreme Court justices were split until the Court's chief justice Fred Vinson died.
Former California Governor Earl Warren took his place in that position.
Warren felt it was necessary for the court to present a united front on this issue.
He was able to gradually persuade all the justices to his way of thinking, and his goal of a unanimous decision was, in the end, achieved.
As parents everywhere know, though, it is one thing to enact a law, and another thing altogether to enforce it.
Within the next few years, public transportation and restaurants would be integrated, albeit only after much suffering.
A Memoir of the Movement,"" which chronicles the Civil Rights movement, John Lewis, a very active participant in that movement, wrote of his reaction on finding out about the court's decision in the Brown case: Near the end of my freshman year, on a May morning in 1 954, I read something that stunned me, just absolutely turned my world upside down.
The United States Supreme Court had finally handed down its decision in the school desegregation case of Brown the Board of Education ofTopeka.
I remember the feeling of jubilation I had reading the newspaper story all the newspaper stories that day.
No longer would I have to ride a broken-down bus almost forty miles each day to attend classes at a ""training"" school with hand-me-down books and supplies.
Come fall I'd be riding a state-of-theart bus to a state-of-the-art school, and integrated school.
All that spring I searched the papers for news of Alabama's plans for desegregating its schools.
Instead, what I saw were stories quoting state politicians derisively referring to the day of that Supreme Court decision as Black Monday and making clear that they had no intention of obeying the ruling.
I read about branches of something called White Citizens Councils coat-and-tie versions of the Ku Klux Klan -forming in Georgia and Mississippi.
As for the Klan itself, there were reports of hooded marches and midnight cross burnings across the state of Alabama.
I heard talk that summer of black men being beaten and even castrated not in Pike County, but in places just like it.
Brown The Board of Education notwithstanding, nothing in my life had changed.
This year is, in fact, considered the beginning of the modern Civil Rights moment, which ran, according to the producers of the book and video series ""Eyes on the Prize,"" from 19541965.
It was doubtless an impetus to the Montgomery bus boycott, which would begin three months after the Brown Board of Education ruling was handed down.
Joe McCarthy went too far in 1954 when he accused the United States Army of being riddled with communists.
To President Dwight D Eisenhower— a career military man — this allegation seemed fishy, to say the least.
From April to June, the ""Army/ McCarthy Hearings"" were broadcast on television.
As McCarthy didn't have a leg to stand on, he was exposed as a vicious fraud.
He succumbed to alcoholism and died three years later, in 1957, at the age of forty-nine.
And I would die, and die gladly, if that would make a better life for them.
On many occasions in the past, Rosa Parks had given up her seat in the front part of the bus to white passengers, as was expected of her.
On December 1 st , she had reached the breaking point, the point of no return.
She was tired from working all day, and tired of such degrading shenanigans.
The humiliation she had had to suffer included not just having to sit towards the back of the bus, and give up her seat to whites when seating was scarce, but also having to exit the bus after paying her fare and then entering the bus from its rear door.
Rosa decided it was time to take a stand this day, or rather not to have to stand so that a person of lighter skin tone could have her seat.
Her seemingly insignificant act of defiance led to lines being drawn in the sand.
At first, black cab companies agreed to provide transportation to the boycotters for the same ten cents they paid when they rode the bus.
They were eventually legally prevented from continuing this practice, though, as they were required to charge a minimum of forty-five cents per fare.
In some cases, the white employers themselves picked up their employees.
Three white men from a nearby Air Force base did their part, too, in shuttling the blacks to and from work in their automobiles.
Although forcibly removed from the buses when they insisted on equal treatment, they were in some cases forced to board the buses during the boycott, even being beaten when they expressed their preference to walk or carpool with friends.
After a long and bitter struggle , the African-American community won the right to be treated fairly.
Justice can not be legislated; people must want to change before a genuine change of heart can take place.
Animosity towards the ""agitators,"" particularly those considered the leaders in the push for equal treatment— such as Martin Luther King, Jr., Medgar Evers, and James Meredith— would manifest itself all too plainly in the years to come.
Disneyland opened in an erstwhile orange grove in Anaheim, California this year.
Today it is smack dab in the middle of that great gray monstrosity, which has spread outward to engulf everything within miles.
Rock Around the Clock, the song that many consider the harbinger of rock 'n' roll, delighted most kids and outraged many of their parents this year.
Full of youthful exuberance and an aggressive beat, the erstwhile jazz band upended the world right onto its ears.
Featured in Blackboard Jungle, a movie about teenage delinquents starring Sidney Poitier and Glenn Ford, the rollicking rave-up's meteoric rise up the charts provoked much hand-wringing among the older generation.
From Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry, and Sam Cooke to the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, and the Who down to the various derivations of rock extant today, starting from this year it can be said that rock 'n' roll was here to stay.
There you can know your man inside and out— in a city you but know his crust; and his crust is usually a lie.
Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee (known as Alice Rosalie) Kollenborn honeymooned in Yosemite.
The twenty-two year old groom wasn't the only Theodore Shannon to get married in the family this year, though.
I worked for the USDA Soil Conservation Service and visited a Shannon in Trinity County at his ranch out near Ruth.
His wife was a wonderful cook as we stayed at their ranch while working in that remote part of California.
What her secret was, whether in preparation or ingredients or both, I don't know, but they were most certainly in a class by themselves.
The day after the Shannon/ Kollenborn nuptials, Elvis Presley really hit the big time.
Elvis was already all over the radio, but on September 9 th , he made his television debut.
He became the talk and shock of the nation, though, when he made his famous shown-only-from-the-waist up (due to his supposedly sexually suggestive dance gyrations) appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show—a. forum on which the Beatles also would make a historic appearance eight years later, when they ""invaded"" America, to the delight of hordes of adoring adolescents.
Hartley ♦ Little Rock Nine ♦ Frisbee ♦ The Cat in the Hat In 1954, the United States Supreme Court had made it clear that segregation of schools was illegal.
Some hard-boiled racists were willing to die or kill rather than let that happen, though.
In Arkansas, nine black students enrolled in an up-until-then allwhite high school in Little Rock.
Imagine the intestinal fortitude required to be one of those nine youngsters, forging ahead to pioneer an easier path for your younger siblings and the next generations.
Imagine, too, the cold-heartedness and unfounded arrogance of those who wanted to prevent these courageous youths from integrating the school.
In actuality, Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus, in contempt of the Supreme Court and disregarding all sense of decency and morality, had ordered the troops there to prevent the students from entering the school.
They protected the nine students, remaining in the school for the entire school year.
Little by little, one battle at a time, the idiotic and pathetic bigots were being forced to do what was right.
What conscience should have dictated from within had to be imposed on them from without.
The Frisbee would be a mainstay in American culture for decades to come, some even using it to play fetch with their dogs.
Seuss published perhaps his most famous book this year, The Cat in the Hat.
After recovering, he and Gertie moved onto their son George's place in Tulare.
In or about March of 1 958, on a chilly and blustery morning, Dad came into the house and I knew that he was very sick.
Then one of our neighbors came by and insisted he take Dad to the doctor.
The Doctor put him into the hospital as he had suffered a heart attack. . . remember when Dad was telling Laura of the cost of the hospital, it tickled her so when he used his Black Angus in terms of cost, instead of Dollars and cents.
George and Gary took care of selling the live stock and property and we purchased a trailer house, and as soon as Dad was well enough, we took it to Tulare, parking it on George's place.
Dad seemed to get better in Tulare, soon finding enough ground around our trailer for him to farm a small garden.
This was the type of man he was, he had to be farming land, and now he did, even though it was a small piece.
Berry's guitar playing would heavily influence rock guitarists for decades to come.
Besides the Dodgers and the Giants, there are the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim (formerly known as both the California Angels and the Anaheim Angels), the San Diego Padres, and the Oakland Athletics.
Albert's auto shop in Fort Bragg had failed, not because he was not a skilled and dedicated mechanic, and a personable businessman, but because he accepted work on credit and his creditors did not always feel it was necessary to pay him.
This state of affairs eventually prompted another move for the Kollenborn family, this time further north up the Pacific coast to Coos Bay, Oregon.
Coos Bay had originally been named Marshfield, possibly for Marshfield, Massachusetts, where some of the Gorhams had lived in the 1600s.
There in Coos County, Albert would retire from Weyerhauser, for whom he plied his mechanic trade without having to worry about the bill-collecting side of matters.
Perhaps the chief difference between northern California and southern Oregon are to be found in the intent and purpose of the EuroAmerican inhabitants who came to these states in the 1800s.
Whereas many of those who came to California were gold prospectors and for the most part were single men who didn't intend to stay — making a fortune and going back home was their dream — the majority of those who set their sights on Oregon had other plans.
The Oregon Trail was primarily peopled by families, intending to stay and make a new home in Oregon.
At the time the Kollenborns moved to southwestern Oregon, it was timber country.
By the mid-1970s (when the Kollenborns would move for the last time), mill closures and layoffs in and around Coos Bay made life hard and wreaked havoc with the local economy.
In Coos and other logging counties, the last quarter of the 20 th century brought a series of economic disasters.
The oldest boys, David and Lyle, were out of the house by this time, and the eldest daughter Rosie Lee was married and already had two children of her own.
The Kollenborn household consisted, at this time, of Albert and Alice, their youngest son Benny, and their other two daughters, Sharon and Patsy.
For the purposes of this book, John Patton is considered a full-fledged member of the Kollenborn family.
In fact, the destruction of the original culture has been so fractured that centuries long traditions of ""family"" have been broken down.
It is now at a point where DNA testing is being used to 'exclude' some people from 'tribal entities', even though the family members have been/ always were recognized as tribal members.
In the pre-invasion times, and for decades after the invasion, family' meant anyone who lived in the household or the 'clan' unit, even if that person had been 'adopted' in.
Today, greed and modern technology have come together to further the destruction of the old culture.
People who had been raised and always lived with the ""tribe, "" are now excluded by DNA testing.
Our ancestors would be mortified if they thought that a family member could be 'thrown out' for reasons other than a breech of a grievous moral taboo.
The result is that, what the white culture was not able to finish' in regard to destruction of the Indian Way, is being taken care of through modern practices and by the descendants of our forebears.
In Coos Bay, Albert (who, it might be recalled, had built a model airplane as a young man in Northern Missouri) built in his shop an extensive model railroad ""town"" replete with houses, businesses, water towers, a roundhouse, trees, bushes, hills, and a variety of train locomotives and cars.
Perhaps, nearing the end of his working life, the old engineer was indulging in sentimental reminiscing of what had been, or what could have been.
Pleasant cemetery, between Gravette and Hiwasse, next to Jim Branstuder, her husband of forty-five years and father of her three daughters.
Lizzie was seventy; Jim, who is buried next to her, would live to be ninety, until 1970.
On January 3 rd , Texas lost bragging rights as the largest state in the Union.
When acquired, many thought Alaska was a waste of money— a frozen, worthless, wasteland.
It was called ""Seward's Folly"" because Secretary of State William H Seward paid a whopping $7. million for it in 1867.
In hindsight, this largest and northernmost state was quite a bargain, even if considered strictly from a financial standpoint.
The television show ""Bonanza"" debuted this year and remained on the air until 1973.
The Cartwrights had their hands on their 600,000-acre spread, but always found a way to survive with their integrity and family intact.
Most people who grew up in the 1960s (the show ran from 1960 to 1968) remember the widower Sheriff Andy Taylor, bumbling deputy Barney Fife, Floyd the fix-it man, Emmett the barber, Howard the scrivener, Goober the gas station attendant, Andy's love interest Helen, Andy's young son Opie , Ernest T Bass, Sam Jones, and— last but not least— ""Ain't"" Bee, who fussed over Andy and Opie, keeping their house clean, their hearts warm, and their bellies full.
Like the Cartwrights of ""Bonanza,"" the Taylors of North Carolina took care of one another— and their friends.
Tired of being treated as second-class citizens, and following in Rosa Parks' footsteps, four African-American college students staged a sit-in at the all-white Woolworth's lunch counter in Greensboro.
The idea spread; more than fifty Woolworth's lunch counters throughout the south were targeted for such courageous action.
On July 25 th , less than six months from the first sit-in in Greensboro, all Woolworth's lunch counters were declared open to all races.
The first oral contraceptive, Enovid — popularly known simply as ""the pill,"" was introduced this year.
It is necessary for the marriage to be a union of good forgivers, because in such a close relationship, each one will have reason to feel hurt from time to time and also have occasion for giving offense, too.
We had quite a celebration with most of our family and friends present.
I was so happy to be here with William and to have had our life together, with all the happiness, sorrows, trials, and tribulations.
I was thankful that we had each other, and kind of stunned to look around and see so many descendants from just two people which started their life together way back in the first year of the century, 1900.
There was a newspaper lady who came to interview us and she asked Dad what most contributed to their long married life, and his sudden smile along with his slow and studied answer, amused all of us.
Martin Luther King and give him what he 's asking for and give it to him fast, before some other factions come along and try to do it another way.
Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together. "" — from Dwight Eisenhower's farewell address of January 17, 19 ♦ Boynton Virginia ♦ Freedom Riders ♦ President Kennedy Recommends Bomb Shelters Slowly but surely, segregation was being torn down, at least from a legal standpoint.
This year's Boynton Virginia case extended the federal ban on segregation to all public transportation terminals for interstate travel.
What this meant was that bus stations, in order to comply with this law, would have to remove their signs segregating users of rest rooms, water fountains, and snack bars— no more signs designating one facility as ""colored"" and others as being reserved for ""whites only"" would be allowed.
For the law to become reality, though, for the theory to be put into practice, it had to be tested.
People would actually have to force the issue to provoke a confrontation between the federal government, which had enacted the law, and the individual southern states, which would try to ignore it.
This is where the groups of volunteers who came to be known as Freedom Riders came in.
The core intent of the action was to dramatize segregation in the South and to see to it that the new law did not exist solely on paper but would indeed be enforced.
This was actually not the first ride of its type, or with the same purpose.
That first trip, which planned to make a tour of the ""Upper South"" states of Virginia, Kentucky, and North Carolina, ended when twelve of the riders were arrested in North Carolina for violating a state segregation law, for which they were sentenced to serve twenty-two days on a chain gang.
The federal government was not enforcing its own laws in that section of the country because of fear of political backlash from those states.
If in some way, it might become more politically dangerous for the federal government not to enforce those laws than to enforce them, things would begin to change.
If, for example, those states were forced to visibly even violently defy the law, with the whole nation looking on, then the federal government would be forced to respond in ways it had not so far.
The plan was that after three days of training, those who were selected to be a part of the momentous event would board buses in Washington, D.C. and make stops in Virginia, the Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana.
They were scheduled to arrive in New Orleans on May 17 th , the seven year anniversary of the Supreme Court's Brown Board of Education decision.
Things went even worse for many Freedom Riders than they had gone for those on the Journey of Reconciliation in 1947, who had toiled on the chain gang.
A Greyhound bus carrying nine Freedom Riders was bombed in Anniston, Alabama.
Those were American men who had clutched pipes and clubs and bricks as they surrounded that bus when it had pulled into the Anniston terminal that day.
It was all the driver could do to gun the engine and hurriedly hack the vehicle out.
And even then, someone got to the rear tires and slashed them before the bus managed to pull away.
It had sped west, its back tires flattened, with an army of fifty cars and pickup trucks in hot pursuit.
After six miles the bus had rolled to a stop, its tires worn down to the rims.
The driver threw open the door and ran, as one witness later described it, ""like a rabbit.
They screamed at the riders, who were sprawled on the floor of the bus, avoiding the flying glass.
Then someone in the crowd hurled a firebomb, a Molotov cocktail, through the back window.
As thick smoke and flames began to fill the bus, the riders rushed to the door and found they couldn't open it.
At that point a passenger in the front seat of the bus pulled a pistol and waved it at the crowd outside.
He was an Alabama state investigator who had been traveling undercover to keep an eye on the riders.
Out the emergency exit door, led by Al Bigelow, tumbled the riders, choking and coughing.
One by one they fell to the grass, the last one climbing out just as the bus was rocked by a blast the fuel tank exploding.
Now the mob moved in, still cautious because of Cowling's pistol, but pecking around the edges, like birds darting at a wounded animal.
Henry Thomas, whose large size was usually a deterrent, was clubbed as he staggered away from the bus; somebody swung a baseball bat into the side of his head.
Rocks and brick s were heaved from people in the crowd too afraid to come closer.
A Trailways bus, which pulled into the terminal an hour later, was also attacked.
President Kennedy this year advised Americans to buy or build bomb shelters to protect themselves from the atomic fallout that would result if there were a nuclear ""exchange"" between America and the Soviet Union.
He knew that man 's heart, away from nature, becomes hard; he knew that lack of respect for growing, living things soon led to lack of respect for humans too.
All the defense workers— the Rosie the Riveters and the transplants from other parts of the country— needed to eat.
The pay was better in the factories than the fields, though, and some of the same people who a decade before had been clamoring to get any kind of work then turned up their noses at picking turnips and such.
Mexicans provided the solution to the grower's need for labor— and their desire for cheap labor.
In most, if not all, cases, the field hands were paid very little and given poor accommodations in which to live.
In other words, things had not improved for the workers — although the origin of the workers had changed, and the situation for the employers had gotten much better.
The names of the migrant farmworkers had changed from Joad and Flowers to Chavez and Flores, but the situation was still the same.
Appealing to the growers' sense of fairness had not succeeded, so the workers, seeking the strength inherent in numbers, formed the UFW union this year.
Seeing no other way to improve their lot and that of those who would come after them, the farm workers banded together to try to win concessions over wages, as well as working and living conditions.
Cesar Chavez— along with Dolores Huerta and Larry Itliong and others— was one of the leaders in this movement.
The establishment-controlled press did their usual hatchet job on anyone who opposed the plutocracy, painting the UFW as an anarchistic bunch of scruffy, ignorant malcontents.
You must understand — I must make you understand — that our membership and the hopes and aspirations of the hundreds of thousands of the poor and dispossessed that have been raised on our account are, above all, human beings, no better and no worse than any other crosssection of human society; we are not saints because we are poor, but by the same measure neither are we immoral.
We are men and women who have suffered and endured much, and not only because of our abject poverty but because we have been kept poor.
The colors of our skins, the languages of our cultural and native origins, the lack of formal education, the exclusion from the democratic process, the numbers of our slain in recent wars — all these burdens generation after generation have sought to demoralize us, to break our human spirit.
But God knows that we are not beasts of burden, agricultural implements or rented slaves; we are men.
And mark this well, Mr Barr, we are men locked in a death struggle against man's inhumanity to man in the industry that you represent.
And this struggle itself gives meaning to our life and ennobles our dying.
But if it says nothing else it says that we do not hate you or rejoice to see your industry destroyed; we hate the agribusiness system that seeks to keep us enslaved, and we shall overcome and change it not by retaliation or bloodshed but by a determined nonviolent struggle carried on by those masses of farm workers who intend to be free and human.
Rather than remaining in the Army, perhaps to be sent to Vietnam, though, Hendrix pretended he was gay.
While visiting the base psychiatrist at Fort Campbell, Kentucky in the spring of 1962, Hendrix claimed to be in love with one of his squad mates.
Convincing the army that the guitarist extraordinaire was ill-suited for military life, Capt.
Jimi later claimed that he was discharged after breaking his ankle on a parachute jump, but his medical records mention no such injury.
White Oxfordians were still apparently seething with bitter resentment over tales of the original ""War Between the States""— Oxford had been burned by Union forces in 1864.
Many if not most residents of the city still held the same perverted views of race as had their forefathers of the previous century.
With resistance to the integration of the university there by African-American James Meredith growing ever more violent, President John F Kennedy had to call in the paratroopers.
Kennedy, who had won the Presidency over Richard Nixon by less than one percent of the vote, owed his office to the black vote — 68% of them had voted for him, tipping the scales his way.
Besides a large number of rabidly racist locals, the tinderbox had been ignited by the Ku Klux Klan, who had sent out a nationwide call to its faithful to gather in Oxford for a showdown.
As the situation escalated, feelings of loyalty to the United States vied with loyalty to the State in the minds of many Mississippians, including members of the National Guard there.
In the end, 31,000 National Guard troops, many of them African-American, were sent to Mississippi — more than the United States had sent to Korea during the conflict there.
First of all, he was killed in Vietnam in 1967, and thus is unavailable for comment; second, the matter was hushed up as much as possible at the time.
It was an embarrassing incident for the United States, especially during the height of the cold war.
When commanding officers later requested that some of their men receive medals for their actions in Oxford (and in some cases their non-actions — the self-control they exhibited in the face of extreme verbal and physical abuse, putting the lobsterbacks of 1770 Boston to shame), these requests were denied, as the government did not want to give medals for soldiers fighting fellow American citizens.
This makes one wonder whether MacArthur, Eisenhower, and Patton received any accolades for their violent expulsion of the Bonus Marchers from Washington in 1932.
Throughout United States History, the island of Cuba has been an object of national desire.
The government has attempted to buy it, and has also attempted to acquire it by force.
In April of 1961, the infamous Bay of Pigs Invasion had met with resounding failure.
Adding insult to injury was the fact that President Kennedy, fearing Soviet reprisal, had at the last minute reneged on a promise to provide support from the United States Air Force to the operation.
Eighteen months later, the Soviet Union was nearing completion of these facilities.
Before they could be completed, though, the United States found out about them.
It may be, in fact, that Russia's actions were just as much defensive as they were offensive.
Even after discussing the evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba on October 1 6, Robert Kennedy held a mongoose meeting later that same day in which he pushed for more aggressive action and pleaded for new ideas of actions that could be taken against Cuba.
The Cubans and Soviets were aware of much of this plotting, though certainly not all of it.
They definitely knew more than the American public, and it would certainly have influenced their behavior.
Had they known that the Cuban regime had good reason to wish to defend itself against United States -supported subversion and potential aggression, Kennedy's hard line might have been viewed with considerably less sympathy, both in the United States and abroad.
After a very tense standoff in which a third World War, a nuclear-punctuated one, was a real and imminent threat, the crisis was finally defused.
On Oct 28 th , Khrushchev ""blinked"" and agreed to dismantle his bases in Cuba, and the United States secretly agreed to reduce its own threat to the Soviet Union by removing fifteen Jupiter rockets that had been based in Turkey, as well as some in Italy.
Carson was not the first to notice the connection between chemicals and bird mortality, though.
The farmers say that when it rains after the poison is spread, the poison washes off and runs down to the water holes, and poisons the cattle and birds.
They say that quite a few cattle have been killed, and that you hardly ever see birds anymore.
Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, The Bronx, and Staten Island), but from this year on California had more people calling it home than any other state.
Full disclosure calls for mentioning, though, that some say California did not become the top state population-wise until three years later, in 1965.
Ironically, the year that California became the most populous state coincided with the year the last native Wiyot speaker— which people were among the original inhabitants of the region— died.
Will Shannon also died this year, on November 21 st in Visalia, California, at the age of 86.
My son George took care of the arrangements, and he did a wonderful job.
I realize that he couldn't have done what was done for us without the assistance and backing of his wife Estelle, who was always good to dad and I She would do anything for us.
I'm so thankful for them and hope this short book will help all of my family come to know and understand us.
I want them all to know and understand my William for the human being that he was.
He was a man with good breeding, intelligence, and pride, something which a lot of people in today's fast moving, and grabbing world, just don't understand, let alone have.
I sincerely hope that all of my family will read these pages with pride and recall and pass along so many incidents I have slipped up on.
So I'm dedicating this book in the memory of William Frederick Shannon, and to all of his children, grand children, and future generations.
In Gertie's recollections, she also relates how Will was thinking of her when he was sick and on the verge of death.
I brought light to the Dominican Republic for American sugar interests in 1916. 1 helped make Honduras ""right"" for American fruit companies in 1903.
Looking back on it, I might have given Al Capone a few hints. "" former United States Marine Corps General Smedley D Butler ♦ March on Washington ♦ JFK Assassinated ♦ Zip codes introduced ♦ Bombs of Birmingham Bigots On the morning of November 22 nd , a year and a day after Will Shannon died, John Fitzgerald Kennedy was shot in Dallas.
It is one of the events in recent history that is etched in the mind of practically every American who was alive at the time.
Along with the first moon landing in 1969, the shooting of John Lennon in 1980, the Challenger Disaster in 1986, and, of course, 9/11, even those who were young children at the time can usually recall where they were when they heard that their fearless leader, their Knight in Shining Armor, had been killed.
Not who pulled the trigger on the rifle, but who was behind the plot and what their motive was.
There are almost as many speculations on who engineered the assassination of John F Kennedy as there are crackpots in Congress.
The gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald, was an ex-marine sharpshooter who had at one time attempted to defect to Russia.
In late 1959, Oswald had announced from Moscow that he would never return to the United States.
Oswald's dissident background would seem to lend weight to the theory that Cuba's Castro was behind the Kennedy assassination, especially when taking into consideration that the United States had allegedly attempted to have Castro assassinated.
A reason for drawing them into the circle of suspects is that Kennedy, had he lived, may have gotten America out of Vietnam.
There is little that some people will not stoop to when their ""livelihoods"" (read ""fortunes"") are involved.
LBJ, as was surely known beforehand by many, did not agree with a policy of ""appeasement"" regarding the Vietnam issue.
It is an odd coincidence that it was in Texas, Johnson's home state, where Kennedy was assassinated.
Oswald was himself killed by Dallas nightclub owner and reputed underworld figure Jack Ruby two days later.
Lincoln in 1865, Garfield in 1881, McKinley in 1901, and Kennedy this year.
The phone hot line between the White House in Washington, D.C. and the Kremlin in Moscow became operational this year.
To expedite the ever-increasing flow of mail to a burgeoning population of multiplying hundreds of millions, they introduced zip codes to help route the mail.
A March on Washington coordinated by various African-American groups took place on August 28 th of this year.
Its purpose was to ""pass the Bill,"" to push through the Civil Rights legislation John F Kennedy had promised during his Presidential campaign.
Thirty special trains and two thousand chartered buses brought a great many of the participants to the scene of the march.
Nervous about what might happen with a crowd of such magnitude attending the March, the government banned sales of liquor for the first time since prohibition.
The Washington Senators (an erstwhile baseball team) canceled two home games.
John Patton was probably one of these ready to respond to the scene at a moment's notice.
Others present included Jackie Robinson, Paul Newman, Marlon Brando, Sidney Poitier, and various musical personages who provided entertainment and support.
Among these last were Bob Dylan and Joan Baez, as well as Peter, Paul & Mary.
The massive demonstration culminated with one of the best known speeches in American history, delivered by Martin Luther King, Jr.
I have a dream that my four children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.
This nation is still a place of cheap political leaders who build their careers on immoral compromises and ally themselves with open forms of political, economic and social exploitation.
The speech as actually delivered by Lewis was only slightly less confrontational in tone.
After much pressure had been applied by many who had seen an advance copy of the speech, Lewis (currently a Congressman from Georgia) struck the word ""cheap"" from the above draft.
Du Bois, author of ""The Soul of Black Folks"" and other seminal African-American works, died of natural causes in his adopted home of Ghana.
The peaceful demonstration called for the passing of civil rights legislation, including banning discrimination in public accommodations.
Before being assassinated a short four years later, King would win the Nobel Peace Prize, and see the sweeping Civil Rights Act signed into law the next year.
Just a few days after the March on Washington, four little girls were killed in Birmingham, Alabama, when a black church full of children was bombed.
On September 15 th , three weeks after delivering his ""I Have a Dream"" speech before an open-air crowd of half a million, Martin Luther King, Jr. traveled south to Birmingham to give the eulogy for the girls.
Besides being a bigot, Alabama Governor George Wallace also appears to have been none too bright, as he learned nothing from his fellow white supremacist Orval Faubus' come-uppance in Arkansas in 1957.
Alabamans had been egged on, or at least been given tacit approval for their acts of terrorism, by the attitude that Wallace had displayed this year as he blocked the integration of Tuskegee High School by surrounding its building with state troopers.
The prime perpetrator in the bombing, Robert Chambliss, was not brought to justice until fourteen years later, in 1977.
His successor, Lyndon Johnson, followed through by shepherding the bill himself — Johnson said that was the best way to honor Kennedy's memory.
At this point, many in the Civil Rights movement thought their goals had been achieved and their work was done.
Like the Indians before them, and the environmental groups after them, the various Civil Rights Groups, such as SNCC (Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee), SCLC (Southern Christian Leadership Conference), CORE , SDS , etc., never seemed able to coalesce and cooperate.
Thus, rather than being synergetic, they dissipated much of their potential combined energy and power by fragmenting into fractious factions.
Infighting, egos, and ambitions— as tends also to happen in popular musical groups, sports teams, and the halls of government— sunk a lot of their ships and dammed them to gradual disintegration.
Fighting for integration in society at large, they — for the most part— failed to integrate within their own like-purposed groups.
Many members of the SNCC, in fact, ultimately rejected the ""N"" (Nonviolent) part of their name.
Whereas integration had formerly been their goal, they now espoused segregation themselves, wanting nothing to do with a biracial society.
Thus, they selfdestructed and were, in effect, ""conquered"" by white racists by becoming just like them.
This contrasted sharply with the unofficial presence of military ""advisers"" that had been in the country up until this alleged provocative act by the communists in the north.
Even superhawk Robert McNamara (who later tried to rewrite history by claiming that he had, in fact, been a dove) admitted in 1995 that there had been no attack in Tonkin Gulf on the 4 th of August, 1964.
In 1 965, while I was visiting with my family in the north, and staying with my granddaughter and her family, Laura and Russ' house caught on fire and was completely destroyed, taking Theodore's home at the same time.
I went over and stayed with Robert and Belle, Theodore and Dollie were settled in the old school, and the Gibney s had purchased a trailer to live in.
Previously, an outhouse and separate shower house had served the calls of nature and hygiene.
They still got their electricity by means of a large generator housed in a separate building.
Communication with neighbors was via CB radio, as telephone service had not yet reached as far as them.
Other outbuildings at The Ranch included bunk houses for occasional hired hands (which also served as guest houses for visiting relatives), tool sheds, and barns.
The man born Malcolm Little is better known as Malcolm X He rejected the surname ""Little"" as that was not a name passed down by his earliest ancestors, but rather a name assigned to his slave ancestors — Little actually being the name of the slave-owning family.
Malcolm X was killed on February 2 1 st this year, apparently by a rival faction of Muslims led by Louis Farrakhan.
Malcolm X, who was also known by the Muslin name El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz, was a highly-intelligent ""self-made man,"" and a powerful motivator as a public speaker.
After accepting Muslim teachings, this man who had previously been a notorious womanizer exercised self-control by thereafter refraining from sex until he married.
Regardless of what you think of Malcolm's beliefs or approach, you must admit that he was sincere.
He broke away from the Muslim movement led by Louis Farrakhan when he discovered that Farrakhan was not living a morally upright life, as required by Muslim teachings.
He once said that the only white person he might possibly accept was the violent abolitionist John Brown — and maybe not even him.
Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. did not see eye to eye on just how the battle for civil rights for their race should be conducted.
Towards the end of his life, though, Malcolm began to moderate his stance.
He was beginning to see humankind as a united whole, rather than in terms of black and white.
Just at that point, when he was perhaps on the verge of an epiphany, Malcolm was executed.
Post-Mecca Malcolm seemed to have metamorphosed into a different person from pre-Mecca Malcolm, or was at least in the process of morphing.
As the marchers approached the far side of the bridge, Major John Cloud ordered them to turn back.
Fifty policemen moved forward, knocking the first ten to twenty demonstrators off their feet.
People screamed and struggled to break free as their packs and bags were scattered across the pavement.
Tear gas was fired, and then lawmen of horseback charged into the stumbling protesters.
Segregationists actually hurt their cause and hastened on legal redress.
In a sense it represented a high point in modern American, probably the nation's finest hour in terms of civil rights.
One writer called it the ""nova of the civil rights movement, a brilliant climax which brought to a close the nonviolent struggle that had reshaped the South.
Hatred, prejudice, and violence cannot be gaveled out of cold, unreasoning hearts.
We could order that hamburger now. . .if we had the dollar to pay for it.
Now that we had secured our bedrock, fundamental rights the rights of access and accommodation and the right to vote the movement was moving into a new phase, afar stickier and more complex stage of gaining equal footing in this society.
The problem we faced now was not something so visible or easily identifiable as a Bull Connor blocking our way.
Now we needed to deal with the subtler and much more complex issues of attaining economic and political power, of dealing with attitudes and actions held deep inside people and institutions that, now that they were forced to allow us through the door, could still keep the rewards inside those doors out of reach.
Dealing with racism is another. 1965 is considered to be the end of the modern Civil Rights era.
What began with a Supreme Court victory in 1954 (Brown Board of Education) culminated with the Voting Rights Act just delineated.
Although Congress had passed the Civil Rights Act in 1964, some states moved to circumvent certain aspects of those laws.
California, for instance, responded with Proposition 14, which moved to block the fair housing components of the Civil Rights Act.
This, and other acts, created a feeling of injustice and despair in the inner cities.
A seemingly routine traffic stop in south-central Los Angeles provided the spark that provoked the six-days of unrest.
The final tally was thirty-four dead, more than one thousand injured, and almost four thousand people arrested.
The high jobless rate in the inner city, along with sub-par housing and schools.
This conclusion was apparently not given much credence, as no real efforts were subsequently made to remedy this situation.
Or perhaps the conclusion was accepted, but those in power didn't really care enough to try to do anything about it.
Meanwhile, America's involvement in the Vietnam war (called ""The American War"" by those in Vietnam) continued to escalate.
If you take the game of life seriously, if you take your nervous system seriously, if you take your sense organs seriously, if you take the energy process seriously, you must turn on, tune in, and drop out.
Kansas City defensive back Fred ""The Hammer"" Williamson (who went on to become a Hollywood actor after his professional football career was over), boasted that Green Bay Packer receiver Carroll Dale, elevated to the Packers' primary receiver threat due to an injury to Boyd Dowler, would join Dowler in the ranks of the injured, and in fact would have to be carried from the field on a stretcher.
As evidence of that, witness the hype and hoopla surrounding the advertisements interspersed between the actual playing of the game.
Some people without much or any interest in football watch the half-day extravaganza due to their curiosity regarding the heights of creativity and depths of inanity to which the marketers will respectively ascend and descend.
The war in Vietnam, where men were not only being carried from the field on stretchers, but were also dying horrible deaths by the thousands, put the relative importance of a mere football contest in perspective — or at least it should have.
John Perry Patton was born in Woodland, California on February 28 th , 1941.
While attending high school in the northern California coastal town of Fort Bragg, John began spending less and less time at his foster home and more and more time at the home of his schoolmate Benjamin ""Benny"" Kollenborn.
In fact, the Patton children had lived with a succession of foster families.
Before long, the Albert and Alice Kollenborn family unofficially adopted John, and he was accepted by the entire Kollenborn family as their son and brother.
There was no official change of custody, but for all practical purposes John became a Kollenborn.
Presumably, the foster family with whom he had been living continued to receive government money for his support— the Kollenborns neither sought, nor got, any such stipend.
He used this term of endearment, not because she was especially old or acted in any way antiquated, but because for him the designations ""mom"" and ""mother"" bore a negative connotation.
In 1959, the Kollenborns relocated to Coos Bay, Oregon, and John made the move up the coast with them.
With him were his buddy Benny Kollenborn as well as Sharon Kollenborn 's future husband Larry Noland.
Larry staunched the bleeding by holding John's face together with his hands until medical personnel arrived.
John's scar can be seen in one of the photographs in particular near the end of this chapter.
Soon after graduating from high school, in June 1959, John Patton enlisted in the army.
John's older brother Barrett had already been in the military for seven years and was a paratrooper.
John had been stationed in Germany at the time he volunteered for combat duty.
Nothing on the streets of Fort Bragg, California, or Coos Bay, Oregon, nor in peacetime Germany, could have prepared John for what he would encounter in Vietnam.
For that matter, nothing in Fort Bragg, North Carolina— or in John's case Fort Benning, Georgia, where he attended three weeks of intensive jump training— could have really prepared him for all that he would face, either.
Hours of routine drudgery and boredom punctuated by moments of sheer terror.
And the mistakes which can cost you your life are not always of your own making.
Combat is sometimes portrayed as adventurous and glorious fun, not unlike children playing Cowboys and Indians with their neighborhood friends, or ""weekend warriors"" engaging in paintball contests with their buddies.
For those in the infantry in Vietnam, combat was anything but glamorous, or fun.
They couldn't call ""time out"" and come in for lunch when their mother called them, nor could they look forward to downing a few cold ones after wiping paint splotches off their clothing and skin.
Recreational backpackers today are cautioned against carrying more than 25% of their body weight, lest their trek become an ordeal.
The life of an infantryman in Vietnam consisted of humping day after day in the monotonous mountains and valleys.
In the rainy season, nearcontinuous monsoon rains, two to three inches per day, soaked them to the point that their fatigues rotted off their bodies.
The jungle floors were a quagmire, making each step forward a major effort.
In addition to the heavy weight of the ammo, food, water, and other necessities they had to carry, the infantrymen had to endure extreme heat, humidity, and trails so muddy and slippery that simply marching along resulted in many sprained and broken ankles.
These bloodsucking annelid worms, which live in water or wet earth, can attain a length of three inches, and are equipped with well-developed suckers at each end.
They would even take up residence in the ears and noses of the soldiers while they slept.
Rare was the man who found no leeches on his body at the end of a day's march.
Adding to the negative psychological aspects of being physically uncomfortable, the grunts usually operated under triple canopy jungles, which made everything around them appear dark and dreary.
Officers selected to attend stateside career-enhancing courses sometimes declined them in order to remain a Sky Soldier.
General William Westmoreland used the ""Sky Soldiers"" as a fire brigade, sending them wherever the fighting was heaviest.
Whereas in other wars the objective had normally been to control important strategic areas such as road junctions, bridges, hills, ports, and such, General Westmoreland pursued a strategy of winning a war of attrition.
He determined to make ""contact"" with the enemy, engage them in combat, and kill more of them than the number of United States soldiers they were able to kill.
Westmoreland figured that the North Vietnamese would thus either eventually run out of M-16 fodder or lose the will to fight.
It probably surprises nobody that this could be a very dangerous proposition for the hunters as well as the hunted.
The place is Ben Hoa I'm in the 1 73 airborne division I just got through with some jungle training.
This battle took place in Kontum Province in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam, near the tri-border area with Laos and Cambodia.
The natives no doubt use a different name for the hill, but on the contour maps the military used, hill masses were designated by a number that corresponded to the most conspicuous hill's elevation above mean sea level, in meters.
Its north face presented itself to the American base camp at Dak To, about three miles distant.
On June 18 th , 1967, Alpha Company was helicoptered into an LZ north of Hill 1338.
They knew that members of the NVA were in the area, as the Dak To base camp had been attacked by mortar and rocket fire the day before.
For the next two days, Alpha Company humped across the north side of the huge hill searching for the enemy.
They did find a well-developed trail on the hillside and set up ambushes along it, but to no avail— no NVA moved down the trail.
Up until the 21 st of June, things had been relatively quiet — although Alpha and Charlie had been the targets of occasional sniper fire, no enemy forces had been confronted head-on, and Alpha had suffered no casualties.
At 5m. on June 21 st , Alpha received orders to return overland to the base camp at Dak To.
It was considered gospel among the grunts that they should avoid repeat use of trails.
This rule was a precaution against the possibility that the enemy could have set booby traps or might be lying in ambush along the trail.
Due to the topography, however, Captain Milton didn't have much other choice.
To deviate from the existing trail would have meant cutting a new trail on the steep slopes, which was covered with the typical dense jungle growth.
Doing so would have meant spending several days on the return trip, as opposed to a few hours if they used the existing ridge trail.
After camping for the night, Alpha Company rose early the next morning, June 22 nd , to continue their trek towards the base.
Alpha's Point Squad began the hump towards base camp, moving down the hill.
Before going far, at 6:58 am, they came upon ten to fifteen NVA soldiers crossing the trail, who opened fire on them.
The relative quiet of Alpha Company's early-morning march abruptly changed into a chorus of automatic weapon fire.
Some of his men had been hit; he had placed the remainder in a defensive position.
Milton then radioed the TOC , and reported Alpha's contact with the enemy.
The officers at the TOC command were not, at first, overly concerned with Alpha's predicament.
They apparently didn't perceive the gravity of the situation, not realizing the strength of the entrenched NVA unit.
General Deane, when hearing of the matter, concluded that Alpha had stumbled across a moving number of NVA, rather than that they had walked into an ambush.
As they were on their way to do that, though, they too were attacked — from the front and from both flanks.
Sizing up the situation, Milton ordered the 2 nd platoon to withdraw and requested heavy artillery fire to cover their movement back up the hill.
However, the NVA were at this point so close to the Sky Soldiers, ""hugging them,"" that the artillery fire was ineffective — precisely targeting the NVA would have also meant endangering the 2 nd platoon.
They were ordered to link up with the 2 nd platoon and help them move to a more defensible area.
After half an hour of heavy fighting, Captain Milton reported to the TOC that his men were under heavy fire.
This by necessity made the supporting artillery fire temporarily unavailable.
As airstrikes are less accurate than artillery bombardment, they need to provide a bigger cushion between the area they attack and where their own men are located.
This being the case, the airstrikes actually afforded the enemy an opportunity to close the gap with the GIs — the safest place for them to be, as far as avoiding the aerial attack, was to move as close to the Americans as they could get.
Major Watson, realizing the airstrikes would be a mistake, initially refused to move the artillery when ordered to do so.
But General Deane broke in on the radio and overrode Watson's refusal, confirming the order to shift the artillery.
For five minutes, from 8:20 to 8:25m., the fast movers dropped bombs along the east side of the ridge.
American soldiers in Vietnam used two types of grenades: Smoke grenades, and fragmentation grenades.
Frag grenades are the type that are destructive, and are used against the enemy.
To mark wind direction for aircraft, and to mark the location of the American soldiers, so gunships would not strafe that area.
This did not aid the American air support in identifying the position of their countrymen, because the dense jungle dissipated and dispersed the smoke so widely that it was impossible for the gunships to get an accurate fix on the Paratroopers' position.
However!— from the ground, their location was plain enough to see, and the NVA used that to the disadvantage and regret of the Americans.
The NVA now had a fairly precise bead on the American Companies' position.
Within seconds, NVA mortar rounds began crashing into the area occupied by Alpha Company.
The damage had been done, though — the NVA had them trapped, like fish in a barrel.
At 9m., Captain Milton committed his first platoon to try to save his besieged 2 nd and 3 rd platoons.
As the NVA had the 2 nd and 3 rd platoons surrounded, the 1 st Platoon had to plow right through their lines to get to their embattled buddies.
Bravo Company, which had been providing security at the base camp, had by this time been ordered to move out in assistance of Alpha.
They were carrying two of their number who had been KIA and others WIA ; because of heavy enemy presence in front of them and to their flanks; and due to having to cut their way through the jungle as they went.
Charlie Company's commander, Captain Ron Leonard, believed that the NVA had set a trap and were waiting to ambush his Company as they went to Alpha's defense.
For this reason, Leonard sent out point squads in cloverleaf reconnaissance patrols, both in front and behind his main body of soldiers.
Charlie Company was being berated by the officers at the TOC for their slow progress, but Leonard would not put his men at risk needlessly.
Unlike Alpha Company, Charlie Company was blazing a new trail rather than re-using their old trail; this, too, was significantly slowing down their progress.
Shortly after 1 1m., radio contact with Alpha's forward elements was lost.
Sometime before this, Bravo Company had arrived on the scene, joining the fight.
Soon half of Charlie's men were on their knees, retching and crying, and with running noses.
Charlie Company's gas masks, having become wet in the earlier downpours, were not effective in filtering out the noxious fumes.
Some members of Bravo Company were sent to meet Charlie Company there and lead them to the site of the furious battle in which Alpha was engaged.
Originally, Lieutenant Judd had hoped to have Alpha Company back at the Dak To base camp by 3:00m.
Most of his men would arrive there much later than that, and many would never make it at all — not alive, at any rate.
Although they were met with heavy sniper fire from the trees and surrounding area, Charlie Company pressed on, and managed to get many of the WIA and what was left of Alpha Company to the CP by 6:50 m.
As they camped there for the night, artillery was directed against potential NVA withdrawal routes, and one platoon was placed in ambush.
Bravo and Charlie Companies worked together clearing the battlefield and looking for remaining WIAs and KIAs.
Of the seventy-six KIAs from Alpha Company, fortythree of them had been executed.
This was surmised by the exit wounds the forty-three had in their heads.
Although his head was split open, and his skull exposed, the coup de grace had only stunned him.
General Westmoreland flew in to address the survivors and praise them for their courage.
Standing on the hood of a jeep, he congratulated them on their victory, saying that they had ""whipped"" the enemy.
John Patton was among the seventy-six killed, but he was apparently not one of the forty-three executed.
The June 29 th , 1967, issue of the Oakland Tribune carried a story about John's death as well as that of a ""Private Valdez"" who, rather oddly, is not mentioned at all beyond simply stating his rank and surname.
And in Oakland and Antioch today two families each knew they had lost a loved member among those 75 dead.
Linn A Patton, in their home at 1821 Sixth Avenue here, were waiting for the body of their son, Sgt.
We had a call again in the morning, and we believe our boy is on his way home.
Both were career Army men, Barrett with 13 years of service and John with just short of eight.
Patton heard of his son's death when officers contacted him at the Oakland Naval Supply Center, where he is a warehouseman.
Patton and Private Valdez were attached to an airfield out of Saigon, part of a special airborne battalion in the 1 73 rd Airborne Brigade.
Sergeant Patton, 26, went to grammar school in Oakland, and high school in Fort Bragg.
Following the ambush, three men spent the next two days positively identifying the dead American soldiers.
This painstaking duty was necessary because the NVA were known to sometimes switch dog tags on the corpses of their victims.
The Americans had — by their own official count, anyway— killed more of the NVA than they had lost themselves.
To be fair, the severity of Alpha's losses did cause figurative ""heads to roll"" — one head, anyway.
A fiasco of that magnitude had to be somebody's fault; a scapegoat was needed.
Although it was General Westmoreland who had denied additional men for Alpha Company when they had earlier requested an increase in troop strength, and although some of the tactics used in the battle were suspect, the blame was pinned on Charlie Company's Captain Leonard, who had supposedly moved too slowly in coming to Alpha's assistance — this even though it was realized after the battle that Leonard's situation was much more difficult than those at the TOC had realized.
The MACV (Military Assistance Command, Vietnam) issued a press release trumpeting the great victory.
The surviving participants knew better, though — although the Americans had driven the NVA from the region, they realized that situation was only temporary.
For the moment, the Americans controlled some strategic hilltops, but they would soon leave, returning those hardwon hills to the jungle and the enemy.
In a poignant tribute to those from their ranks who had fallen in the battle, the Sky Soldiers held a memorial service with a pair of jump boots placed in rank to represent each fallen paratrooper.
The sight of dozens and dozens of boots arranged in neat rows packed an emotional wallop; it was a ceremony the participants would never forget.
America's largest anti-war protests took place four months later, in October, as tens of thousands marched on Washington.
Somehow word of that did not seem to reach those engaged in combat in the jungles of Asia.
On a single day, in a single battle, in a solitary company of soldiers, in the midst of that peaceful-sounding, sunny season, seventy-six young men lost their lives.
John Patton's name is located on the Vietnam Memorial Wall in Washington, D.C., at section 22E 047.
Individuals may see the moral light and voluntarily give up their unjust posture ; but as Reinhold Niebuhr has reminded us, groups are more immoral than individuals.
I just looked around and he 's gone. — from the song ""Abraham, Martin and John"" by Dion ""When the Kennedys and King were assassinated people wailed and moaned over the ""sick"" society.
Most people took the assassinations as a symptom of a deep inner rot that had suddenly set in.
An Indian Manifesto"" ♦ Martin Luther King assassinated ♦ Robert Kennedy assassinated ♦ Police Riot at Democratic Convention Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated April 4 th in Birmingham, Alabama by James Earl Ray.
Whether Ray was acting alone or he had accomplices is not known; at least not by anyone who's saying.
The letter allegedly had as its intent embarrassing King into resigning from the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
King had planned to galvanize blacks and whites alike at a massive camp-in scheduled to take place in Washington, D.C. later in the month.
The most common allegation among conspiracy theorists in this case is that the CIA hypnotically brainwashed Sirhan.
Although he claims he acted unconsciously, Sirhan had written about his desire to kill Kennedy for his support of Israel in the Six Day War fought in the Middle East, which had begun a year earlier.
Anti-Vietnam war demonstrations took place at the Democratic Convention in Chicago this year, leading to a violent confrontation between the demonstrators and the Chicago police force.
A federal commission investigated the matter and labeled it ""police riots,"" claiming Mayor Richard Daley had incited his police force to use excessive and unnecessary force against the demonstrators.
As to the business concluded at the convention, Hubert Humphrey was nominated as the Democratic candidate over Eugene McCarthy.
Woodstock, billed as ""three days of peace and music,"" is a touchstone of Hippie culture.
The ""Happening"" ended up being four days of mainly music, drugs, and mud.
In the post-apocalyptic movie ""The Omega Man,"" Charlton Heston (of all people) plays the apparent sole survivor of San Francisco.
He is depicted entering a movie theater and projecting for himself the movie that chronicled this event.
His character had seen the movie so many times that he is able to ""sing"" along with Country Joe and the Fish during their performance.
Country Joe McDonald, a San Francisco native himself, and former soldier, was the leader of a jug band turned folk-rock ensemble (""The Fish"") that was very outspoken in its political views.
The mission was called Apollo 11, the command ship was named Columbia, and the lunar vehicle the Eagle.
Armstrong and Aldrin spent almost a full day on the moon, setting up scientific experiments, collecting rock samples, and marking their territory with a flag and a plaque.
Along with events such as the assassination of John F Kennedy and 9/11, it is one of those events that virtually every American alive at the time clearly recalls.
Four dead in Ohio. — from the song ""Four Dead in Ohio"" by Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young ""Sayin ' it 's your job don 't make it right, Hoss.
The Ohio National Guard was sent in to prevent such interference from continuing.
Somewhat similar to the situation eight years earlier at Ole Miss in Oxford, Mississippi, tensions escalated over the question of who should be allowed on campus.
It is quite possible that many of the Guardsmen did not want to be there and felt no animosity toward the students.
As was the case with many members of the Mississippi State Militia called in to quell the disturbance at Ole Miss in 1962, these guardsmen didn't necessarily agree with their orders but followed them nonetheless.
Despite any sympathy some of the Guardsmen may have felt for the students or their cause, certain of their number opened fire on the students protesting the Vietnam War.
The most widely known photo of the event depicts a visibly distraught young woman bending over an apparently dead young man.
Most assume, no doubt, that the young woman was a student at Kent State.
The despair and disbelief her posture seemed to evoke represented the way most people reacted to the situation.
Albert Kollenborn's stepfather Jim Branstuder died in Hiwasse, Arkansas on February 5 th of this year at the age of ninety.
James is buried with his wife of forty-five years and mother of his three daughters, Ruie Lee Elizabeth ""Lizzie"" Kollenborn Davidson Branstuder at Mt.
Pleasant Cemetery between Hiwasse and Gravette, not far from Bentonville, Bella Vista, and Dug Hill.
Since all three of Lizzie and James Branstuder's children were girls whose surnames changed when they married , Jim's stirp of the Branstuder line passed away with him.
Albert and Myrtle Kollenborn did not know each other, but they did have something significant in common— Harry Kollenborn, Albert's estranged father and Myrtle's ex-husband.
KOLLENBORN, Myrtle J Services will be held at Hillcrest Mortuary Chapel Wednesday at 3m. for Myrtle J Kollenborn, 85, of 2712 North Inyo, who died Sept. in a Bakersfield hospital.
Kollenborn was born in La Harpe, Kan., and had resided in Bakersfield for the past 51 years.
Kollenborn is survived by two sons, Charles Kollenborn of Bakersfield and James Kollenborn of Seattle; two daughters, Mrs.
Anna Barnett of Tulsa, Okla.; 1 5 grandchildren, and 29 great-grandchildren.
Pallbearers will be Jack Roberts, Gary Wheeler, Charlie Wheeler, Leonard Koll, Donald Koll, Leroy Koll and Lloyd Koll.
Honorary bearers will be Larry Neal, Ed Norris, Trayfo Eagle, Charles Martin and Johnny Travao.
The surname ""Koll"" among the pallbearers is suspiciously similar to Kollenborn.
Cecil LaRue Kollenborn (who was himself a son of Richard Lee Kollenborn) had a son named Donald.
Cecil's Donald was thus a 1 st cousin once removed of Henry Harrison ""Harry"" Kollenborn, Myrtle's erstwhile husband.
Donald was probably born around 1930, as his father Cecil LaRue had been born 1906.
Perhaps Roy's feelings toward his father were bitter enough that he effected a change in name for his son — or Leroy could have made that change himself.
Leroy was likely born in the 1930s, as his father Roy had been born 1910.
This Donald and this Leroy were, then, probably about forty years old at this time, and so this possibility is certainly feasible.
These ""papers"" revealed how the government had systematically deceived the public about what was really going on in Vietnam.
The documents revealed how the CIA conspired to overthrow and assassinate South Vietnamese President Diem (a United States ally, and like President Kennedy, a Catholic), and the fact that the Tonkin Gulf Resolution had been drafted months before the supposed attack on United States vessels by North Vietnamese forces there — in other words, it was a setup and a pretext for a war the United States wanted to wage.
Daniel Ellsberg, an MIT professor and government consultant who was one of the authors of the papers, leaked them to the press after becoming disgusted and disillusioned over the government's actions.
The two, in fact, were prosecuted for treason by the United States government.
When I learned what Ellsberg had done, I quickly realized that his was not only an act of great courage, but also a necessary step to ensure that the papers which is to say, the record of government deceitfulness would become part of the national debate.
Without that step, I feel certain we would have nothing to celebrate today.
Faith in leaders, especially political leaders, to be honest and act in good faith, was mightily shaken as a result.
Not even the likes of an Evel Knievel, straddling the hottest rocket he'd dare mount, could hope to jump the credibility crevasse that yawned opened with that revelation.
It was a social earthquake that ripped open a fissure between the leaders and the led on a Grand Canyon-sized scale.
The release of the papers broke a kind of spell in this country, a notion that the people and the government had to always be in consensus on all the major issues.
At the beginning of that episode, no one could really know if any newspaper would summon the courage to publish the papers.
The press showed none of the skepticism that they should have learned in the years since the end of Vietnam.
But it has learned much more, how to circumvent the press than it ever did before.
The battle of the day was over whether to continue the Vietnam War or end it.
Notwithstanding the groom's surname, beverages a touch stronger than grape juice were imbibed at the reception.
It was a naked attempt to use power for the perpetuation of power, and down that road dictatorship thrives and democracy cannot survive.
It was a naked attempt to circumvent the democratic system of law that its perpetrators had sworn to uphold.
We live not as our ancestors had planned, but as their worst nightmare, a nation of bureaucrats of the worst kind.
We have become so imbalanced in our world that the chances of getting punished for doing a good job are higher than for doing a bad job.
If each one should speak out, we could begin to trust each other once again and respect each other for having the courage to try and change.
Reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein from The Washington Post tenaciously tracked down leads and discovered the White House was involved in the Watergate break-in.
They also planted bugs at Democratic headquarters, so they could listen in on strategy sessions held there.
One of the ""plumbers"" who was nabbed was carrying an address book which contained E Howard Hunt's contact info.
Hunt had been a CIA agent; he had been head of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Hunt and G Gordon Liddy, CREEP'S general counsel, were indicted on charges of burglary, conspiracy, and wiretapping.
Vice President Spiro Agnew admitted to filing a bogus tax return and accepting bribes while he was Governor of Maryland.
When Nixon finally complied, and turned over the tapes to prosecutors, one of the tapes had an eighteen minute gap — whatever had been on the tape had been erased.
Showing just how strong his position as incumbent was, even after the break-ins, Nixon defeated George McGovern and won reelection.
Soon after his second term began, though, more and more of the dirty laundry, some related to Watergate, and some random other shenanigans, came to light about the Nixon administration.
When I was a boy the Sioux owned the world; the sun rose and set on their land; they sent ten thousand men to battle.
In 1976, North and South Vietnam combined to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
In what came to be known as ""Wounded Knee II,"" a group of Indians spearheaded by the American Indian Movement occupied the Wounded Knee reservation this year.
Their aim was to bring attention to the long litany of treaties the government had broken.
In particular, AIM wanted the United States government to honor the 1868 Fort Laramie treaty they had made with the Sioux, giving them the Black Hills in perpetuity.
Great mineral wealth had been discovered in the Black Hills, though, including uranium, which is needed for the production of nuclear power and weaponry.
There was no way the government would give back land — valuable land— that it had taken over a century earlier.
Besides government-sponsored Indian lackeys and local white ranchers, the reservation was also besieged by the military.
Tensions between AIM and the United States government, particularly the FBI and BIA continued, and would boil over in 1975.
Arab nations attacked Israel this year in retaliation for land Israel had taken during a war with Egypt in 1967.
The U.S., which had become ever more dependent on foreign oil, was drastically affected when OPEC stopped shipping oil to the U.S., Israel's top ally.
By 1981, the price of oil had gushed from about $4 a barrel in the early 1970s to $35 in 1981.
At the time of writing in 2005, a barrel of oil commands more than $60.
The U.S., although comprised of just six percent of the world's population, uses one third of all energy produced, much of it in the form of petroleum.
The embargo caused the price of gasoline in the United States to rise from 38 Va cents per gallon in late 1973 to 55. 1 cents per gallon by the middle of 1974.
This sounds like an amazing bargain now, but it represented an increase of almost 50% in just eight months.
Rationing and long lines led to much frustration; in the summer, especially, tempers often flared against those who ""took cuts"" in line or pumped more than their allotted share of gas.
Eventually, some members of OPEC refused to continue limiting their production, and this, coupled with the effects of the conservation measures, caused some price rollbacks by the early 1980s.
Time will tell whether the draft was permanently eliminated, or just temporarily suspended.
Proand anti-abortion factions still wage battle with one another, some times all too literally.
This despite the fact that abortion was made legal in the United States this year by the ruling of the Supreme Court in the Roe Wade case— provided such abortion take place in the first trimester, that is to say within the first three months, of pregnancy.
During that time period, the ruling applies throughout the United States.
What is allowed, or not, regarding abortion during the remaining two-thirds of the pregnancy, though, was left up to each state to decide.
Wherefore what things you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in private rooms will be preached from the housetops.
Abuse of his presidential powers Obstruction of justice, and Disobeying subpoenas.
Vice President Gerald Ford served out the remaining two and a half years of "" Nixon's"" presidency.
Nixon's misdeeds fell most neatly into the first and last of those three.
Among the infractions incorporated within the latter broad category are abuse of power and serious misconduct in office.
Richard M Nixon has acted in a manner contrary to his trust as president and subversive of constitutional government, to the great prejudice of the cause of law and justice, and to the manifest injury of the people of the United States.
One of Gerald Ford's first official acts as President was to pardon Nixon.
His excuse for this injustice was that by doing so the American people could put this dark period behind them.
Following that ""logic,"" the guilty party should be set free every time a heinous crime is committed, for the well-being and peace of mind of the victims.
Whatever the case, the Watergate affair certainly left an impact on the American psyche.
Any account of government corruption brings the watershed events of this year to mind.
The Watergate affair left a strong imprint on the language of the 1 970s.
The word spawned various coinages and the combining form -gate, used to denote scandal or corruption.
Interim President Gerald Ford was not elected to a term of his own when he ran for President in 1976.
The Albert Kollenborn family, now back down to the original two with which it had started in 1930, made their last move this year, to Mokelumne Hill, California.
Although Mokelumne Hill, located in the gold rush country of Calaveras County, is located in northern California, this is the furthest south in the state the Kollenborns ever lived — much further south than Eureka and Fort Bragg, and even further south than Colusa.
In the eastern portion of the county, there are areas— such as Bear Valley— that get a lot of snowfall.
Famous people have passed through the county, such as ""Black Bart"" , who was tried, convicted, and sentenced in the county seat of San Andreas for his stagecoach robberies throughout the area; Mark Twain, who, while living near Angels Camp, wrote the story which catapulted him to fame, namely ""The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County""; and Bret Harte, who wrote ""The Outcasts of Poker Flat"" and other short stories set in the county.
There are conflicting opinions on whether Joaquin Murieta actually existed, that is, if the myths about him are true, or whether the stories are a glamorization/ exaggeration of a combination of men named Joaquin.
Whatever the truth may be, at least one of these Joaquins (or perhaps the Joaquin) doubtless also spent time in Calaveras County.
According to the tale of his beginnings in outlawry, his wife was raped in neighboring Tuolumne County.
It is said that Joaquin, after recovering from the wounds he suffered while trying to ward off that attack, eventually tracked down and killed all of the perpetrators.
The river was given that name because of the many Indian skulls found on its banks by an early explorer.
The cause of the demise of the former owners of those skulls is unknown.
Calaveras County became known for collections of skulls again in the 1990s when human bones were discovered on the West Point property of Leonard Lake and Charles Ng.
It turns out that these two bachelors had kidnapped and killed many women over the preceding several years.
Lake committed suicide at the time of their capture by ingesting poison.
Ng escaped into Canada, was arrested there for another crime, was eventually extradited to California, and finally convicted after long court delays.
These interruptions in justice were brought about partly by Ng's real or feigned illnesses, and the replacing of one lawyer with another, which resulted in the starting of the legal process anew.
Mokelumne Hill, population 560, where Shannons (and two of the married Kollenborn daughters) still live today, was once in the running to become California's state capitol.
These soldiers had been organized in mid1846 under the command of Colonel Jonathan Stevenson.
The soldiers were to do this by provoking hostilities against these ""foreigners"" whenever and wherever they could.
On their arrival into the Calaveras County area, the Stevenson Regiment encountered neither hostile forces nor ""foreign influences""— other than some peaceful indigenous tribes.
Much more threatening to the good order and discipline of the regiment was the gold fever which had been raging since James Marshall's discovery of the shiny metal in Coloma in January of 1848.
News of this discovery sent many of the troops scrambling into the outlying creeks and canyons of the countryside in search of nuggets.
Many members of that early regiment have lent their names to towns which still exist in the area.
For example, George and Henry Angel gave Angels Camp its name; James H Carson gave his name to Carson Hill — which became the location of the largest nugget ever found in California— and, although not formal members of the regiment, John and Daniel Murphy gave their name to Murphy's Diggings, today known simply as Murphys.
I was soon in the street in search of the necessary outfits; piles of gold rose up before me at every step; castles of marble dazzling the eye with their rich appliances; thousands of slaves bowing to my beck and call; myriads of fair virgins contending with each other for my love.
He encountered such characters as ""Dutch John,"" a Yiddish-cussing barkeeper who brought his own twist to the custom of dipping thumb and forefinger into a miner's pouch to extract the price of a shot of whiskey.
Instead of reaching straight into the pouch, John would first slide his hand into his mouth.
Rather than gathering the customary $1 pinch of dry dust, $4 to $8 worth of gold flakes collected on his moistened fingers.
Another memorable gent was a strapping Oregonian who swung his pickax night and day.
Each time the earth disgorged another nugget, he would cry for joy over the material comfort he had just secured for his parents back home.
Despite the repudiation of his old lifestyle and the disreputableness of his new one, he was called upon to officiate at the funeral of a certain miner named George.
He motioned the mourners to kneel beside the freshly dug grave, and he commenced praying.
The preacher, who kept his eyes closed, thought the ruckus was simply ""the spirit of Jesus"" that was infecting the boys.
Thinking he was moving them to great depths of religious emotion, he ""warmed up"" to his task.
But then he suddenly stopped, opened one bloodshot eye, and caught a glimpse of the real reason for all the hubbub.
It was another member of Stevenson's regiment, Sam Pearsall, who discovered gold at what is today called — no, not Pearsall's Hill, but the aforementioned Mokelumne Hill.
The gold discovery there led to the erection of what quickly became a busy and prosperous community.
Mokelumne Hill was soon recognized as one of the state's more important trade and financial centers, and as such was — as mentioned earlier— even in the running at one time for the permanent location of California's capitol.
It is difficult to imagine sleepy little Mokelumne Hill, ""The Miami of the Sierras,"" as one imaginative real estate agent branded it , as the chief population center of this great state so ""lousy"" with people.
Everybody in ""Mok"" Hill has heard of Sacramento , sixty miles to the northeast, but the reverse cannot be stated with any degree of certainty.
But that is as the Shannon and the Kollenborn families, down through the ages— almost to a person— would have it.
A small, slow-paced town nestled in the hills is just what they want — not the hustle and bustle, noise and confusion of a ""big city"" like Sacramento.
But continually over the years more and more of our land has been stolen from us by the Canadian and United States governments.
In the 19 th century our land was stolen from us for economic reasons because the land was lush and fertile and abounded with food.
Today, what was once called worthless land suddenly becomes valuable as the technology of white society advances.
White society would now like to push us off our reservations because beneath the barren land lie valuable mineral and oil resources.
It is not a new development for white society to steal from nonwhite peoples.
When white society 's efforts to colonize people are met with resistance it 's called war.
But when the colonized Indians of North America meet to stand and resist we are called criminals.
The lives of two FBI agents, Jack Coler and Ron Williams, were lost, and the lives of many of the Indians have also been adversely altered ever since, most particularly that of Leonard Peltier.
The harassment the inhabitants of the Oglala Indian reservation in South Dakota experienced at that time may have been a diversionary tactic to keep the Indians from realizing that more of their mineral-rich land was being taken from them.
On the day before the shootout, on the 99 th anniversary of ""Custer's Last Stand"" at the Little Bighorn, tribal chairman Dick Wilson ceded l/8 th of the Pine Ridge Reservation to the United States government.
This was in conflict with the 1868 Fort Laramie Treaty, whereby any land transferred by the tribe had to be agreed to by 3 /4 th of the adult males.
In fact, they accepted and even embraced that terminology, using at as an acronym for Guardians Of the Oglala Nation.
FBI agents were purportedly on the trail of a teenager named Jimmy Eagle, who had allegedly stolen a pair of cowboy boots.
They tried to locate him at the Jumping Bull ranch on the reservation, a known gathering spot of AIM members.
The exact sequence of events are difficult to know, as the accounts of the eyewitnesses differ, but the upshot of it all is that a shootout ensued between the FBI agents and some at the compound.
At the end of the shootout (Indians say the FBI agents fired first, while the FBI claim the Indians fired on them first), two FBI agents were dead.
Although no evidence exists that Leonard Peltier was guilty of killing either of the agents, he was found guilty and sentenced to two consecutive life terms in federal prison.
The two other men who were originally charged with murder along with Peltier have long since been acquitted.
After spending decades in Leavenworth, Kansas, in 2005 Peltier was transferred to the federal penitentiary at Terre Haute, Indiana.
No evidence has been found for it, but family legend has it that Albert Kollenborn was a guard at Leavenworth for a time.
Another family story is that Albert once beat a man so badly that the man was crippled for life.
According to the handed-down account, Albert was defended in court by the government.
If the story is in fact factual, it would make sense that it happened during the time he was working as a guard — as a government employee, it is logical that they would defend him in court.
Many people fail to remember that an Indian, Joe Stuntz, was also killed during the Wounded Knee shootout.
Reminiscent of scenes from a century and more earlier, following the shootout his body was thrown in a ditch by FBI agents who had by then arrived on the scene.
Stuntz's body was also otherwise disgraced by these agents — who also shot up the house of an elderly couple on the property, including shooting pictures of relatives that they had hanging on their walls.
Testifying against Peltier at his trial was an Indian woman named Myrtle Poor Bear, who apparently had been intimidated by the FBI to claim that Leonard Peltier was her boyfriend and that she had seen him kill the two agents.
The poor woman was later found to be delusional — even the prosecution eventually declined to put her on the witness stand, aware that the defense attorneys would rip her testimony to shreds.
In spite of the lack of evidence, though, Peltier nevertheless was somehow convicted.
A man known as ""Mr X"" came forward years later to admit he was the guilty party, but made his confession on videotape while wearing a mask and disguising his voice.
Peltier, who is considered by Amnesty International as well as Desmond Tutu and many others to be a political prisoner, is in poor health, suffering from diabetes, high blood pressure, and heart troubles.
Adding insult to injury, Peltier has been kept from his children and grandchildren for three decades now.
The FBI was apparently satisfied to get a man rather than the man in this case — yet another disgraceful episode in the history of the United States government's treatment of America's indigenous population.
Under your system, you are taught greed, racism, and corruption — and most serious of all, the destruction of Mother Earth.
Under the Native American system, we are taught all men are Brothers and Sisters; to share the wealth with the poor and needy.
But the most important of all is respect and preserve the Earth, who we consider to be our Mother ...the main thing we are taught is to preserve her for our children and grandchildren, because they are the next who will live upon her ...the white American establishment... has consistently said, In God We Trust, ' while they went about the business of murdering my people and attempting to destroy our culture.
Time is a cannibal that devours the flesh of your years day by day, bite by bite.
The day she died was the sixty-sixth anniversary of the day her first daughter Debra ""Girlie"" had been fatally bitten by a rattlesnake.
A dozen children born over a span of twenty-seven years, eight of whom survived to adulthood, dozens of grandchildren, and the document, the ""story of her life,"" which provided much of the information contained in this book.
What were initially called ""Personal"" computers (as opposed to ""Business"" computers, which up until then were mostly mainframes housed in an entire room) became so popular that they were soon used more in business settings than by hobbyists for personal use at home.
Forward-thinking owners of small businesses that would never have purchased ""big iron"" did purchase these ""minicomputers,"" which have long since become almost ubiquitous in both home and office settings.
The book of the same name had won a special Pulitzer prize the previous year.
They have run over our country; they have destroyed the growing wood and the green grass; they have set fire to our lands.
Fathers, your young men have devastated the country and killed my animals, the elk, the deer, the antelope, my buffalo.
They do not kill them to eat them; they leave them to rot where they fall.
They raise the standards of living for themselves by lowering quality of life for everybody else, and they do it by evading the discipline of the free market.
Strangely enough they have a mind to till the soil and the love of possessions is a disease with them.
These people have made many rules that the rich may break, but the poor may not.
They claim this mother of ours, the earth, for their own and fence their neighbors away; they deface her with their buildings and their refuse.
That nations is like a spring freshet that overruns its banks and destroys all who are inn its path.
He wanted to alter nature by joining two rivers and erecting a city on the banks of these conjoined streams.
Some of the rocks at the dump at Love Canal would make a bright flash when thrown against concrete.
Even more menacing was the way the dirt would change colors, going from pink to red to purple to orange to green to blue.
As if that were not enough to raise alarms, choking odors and black mold that seeped through walls were also part of life there.
Most obvious of all signals, though, was the way people got sick more often and more seriously than normal.
On August 2 nd , 1978, the United States Commissioner of Health declared the situation at Love Canal a health emergency.
Ultimately, the government offered to buy the houses from the residents, but the price offered was not enough to pay off their mortgages.
They needed to get their family out of the danger zone, but they couldn't afford to do so.
TCP itself is not something you'd want to pour on your breakfast cereal, but even worse, a common by-product of it is dioxin.
After covering over the witches brew of chemicals with dirt, allowing the toxins to mix and ""cook,"" Hooker Chemical sold the land to the Board of Education of Niagara Falls for one dollar.
This was not the brightest thing to do, even though it had been years since the last dumping of chemicals had taken place.
Love Canal was not the only pestiferous location in the United States, by any means.
In fact, there are still tens of thousands of chemical dump sites in the United States.
Not all of them contain leaking, rotting barrels of toxic chemicals, but many — thousands of them, in fact— do.
No journeys, save those which memory can take, will bring you to it now.
Garrison presented to Theodore Russell Shannon ""We expect and demand a lot from our personnel and we have a tradition in our department for excellence, but on this occasion Ted Shannon has given well beyond what we have a right to expect or demand.
Officer Shannon is a credit to his community, to the California Highway Patrol, and to humanity.
Seen as an inexpensive and safe way to produce energy by some, others questioned its safety.
A bizarre coincidence was the fact that a movie depicting a nuclear plant accident, The China Syndrome, had been filmed just prior to the accident.
Radiation had been released into the atmosphere, and Pennsylvania governor Dick Thornburgh warned all residents to remain indoors, and pregnant women to evacuate the area entirely.
Fortunately, backup safety features in the plant did prevent an even more major disaster, on the scale of the one that would strike Chernobyl, Ukraine in 1986.
Although no one was directly hurt at the time of the accident, radioactivity was released into the atmosphere over the next several days.
Some scientists estimated that the radioactivity would ultimately cause thousands of cancer deaths.
Theodore Roosevelt ""Pop"" Shannon died on June 20 th at The Ranch in Trinity County, California, outliving his mother by a little less than two years.
The Ranch would never be the same again; it could never be quite the same without Pop.
Pop left his companion of the last twenty-three years, Dollena ""Dollie"" Shannon, as well as his first wife Esther, who had remarried a man named Welch.
Other survivors included Pop and Esther's five children, all of whom survive to this day, and a dozen grandchildren.
Pop is buried in the Hoaglin Valley Cemetery near The Ranch and his sister Debra May ""Girlie,"" who had died sixty-eight years earlier.
At the funeral service, performed under a tree in the front yard at The Ranch, Pop's favorite horse, Pal, carried his owner's ashes in his saddlebag.
Strange as it may sound to some, Pal, subdued and dignified in his demeanor, seemed to be well aware of just what sort of ceremony was being conducted.
The obituary, which appeared in the Fort Bragg Advocate, reported names and places.
Born in Carlotta in 1 902, he was a retired Mendocino Coast logger and cattleman.
On December 15 th , 1979, a horrific traffic accident took place in rural Calaveras County.
Pop's second son Theodore Russell Shannon, a California Highway Patrol officer, was patrolling in the area where the accident occurred.
Had he not been in the immediate vicinity, the next people to come upon the scene would have no doubt come upon the macabre sight of two completely burned out vehicles containing five charred occupants.
A head-on collision occurred between a thirty-year old man in a pickup (who, it later turned out, was driving under the influence of alcohol) and a car full of three teenagers.
The adult, Timothy Michael Pullen, had driven off the road on his right, and then over-corrected, crossed the center line, and smashed full force into the Vega traveling in the opposite direction.
Apparently both drivers, as well as both passengers in the Vega, were knocked unconscious.
Officer Shannon had just begun tailing the Vega, which had passed his parked vehicle at what seemed to be an excessive rate of speed, when the accident occurred.
A fire was already raging in the cab of the pickup, and he first attempted to pull the unconscious driver, Timothy Pullen, from that vehicle.
Pullen was lying on his back with his head on the passenger side floorboard.
His legs were wedged in the wreckage, and Shannon — although pulling with all his might— was unable to extricate him.
As the fire increased in intensity, flames and smoke filling the car, Ted Shannon returned to his patrol car to retrieve his fire extinguisher.
After knocking the blaze down, the former fireman again attempted to remove Mr Pullen from his burning pickup.
In the horrendous crash, the pickup's gas tank had been pulled away from its normal location, and gas was gushing onto the ground, downhill and under the Vega.
A small rivulet of burning gasoline had spread from the pickup down the slope to the Vega.
Ted proceeded to the right front door of the twodoor Vega and pulled out the unconscious passenger seated there, Elliott Bissell, and dragged him away from the car.
He then immediately returned to the car and, with the assistance of two passersby who had stopped to help, pulled Cynthia Mann from the back seat, also dragging her away from the burning vehicle.
At this point Officer Shannon crossed over to the driver's side of the Vega, and attempted to extricate Mark Thein from the burning car.
As was the case with Timothy Pullen in the pickup, though, Thein 's lower body was trapped in the twisted metal of the car's wrecked front end.
He finally had to abandon the recovery effort when the fire became so intense that it singed off his eyebrows and melted the lens of his flashlight.
Within minutes both pinned drivers of the vehicles were burned beyond recognition.
Passengers Bissell and Mann had suffered massive injuries to the chest and head, respectively.
Bissell survived the crash, but died several hours later at the hospital.
For his role in the rescue attempt, Ted Shannon received the state's highest honor, the Medal of Valor.
Appendices IX through XII contain supplementary documentation on this accident and the awarding of the medal, including Shannon's own accounts of the incident — both the ""official"" one that he wrote immediately following the event, and an ""informal"" account written more than a quarter of a century later.
United States -Iran relations had been deteriorating since the West-friendly Muhammad Reza Shah Pahlevi had been replaced by a fundamentalist Islamic government, led by Ayotollah Khomeini.
After Pahlevi was admitted to the United States for medical treatment, antiUnited States feelings escalated and the siege of embassy and the hostage-taking took place.
President Carter tried everything he could think of to secure the release of the hostages, some of whom the Iranian captors claimed were spies, but all efforts were for naught.
Carter stopped buying oil from Iran, and froze Iranian assets held in the United States The next year, a dramatic rescue attempt would be undertaken.
Helens blew its top ""The moon looks like a golf course compared to what 's up there.
Helens devastation ""I don 't think that word means what you think it means. "" from the movie ""The Princess Bride"" You might think I'm wastin ' time But I 'mjust a good ol ' boy who 's learned to wait. from the song ""It'll Shine When It Shines"" by the Ozark Mountain Daredevils ♦ Mt.
Helens Erupts ♦ Aborted Hostage Rescue Attempt ♦ American Gothic II Mt.
People soon found out what wildlife apparently already knew was going to happen.
The mountain erupted in a stupendous cataclysm five hundred times more powerful than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
Fifty-seven people who had not heeded the mountain's clear warnings died.
The giant mass of dirt, rock, vegetation, and lava had actually already erupted several times in the days and weeks leading up to May 18 th , but this was ""the big one""— the deadliest volcanic eruption in United States history.
The cloud of ash the eruption unleashed completely darkened the skies as much as eighty-five miles away.
At least a dozen fires were ignited as a result of the superheated gas and ash and hot mud.
The mountain belched forth massive amounts of hot gas in addition to the cubic tons of ash, which turned the mountainsides into rivers of hot mud.
Portland Harbor was jammed with mud, and the Columbia River was blocked for twenty miles with trees that had been flattened and then carried into the river.
Across the entire northwest, almost six thousand miles of roads were covered with ash which had the consistency of wet cement.
Those who perished in the ensuing blast and hellacious outpouring of lava and gas included Harry Truman.
No, not that Harry Truman, the one who had himself given the go-ahead for conflagrations of a different type to rain down on Japan in 1945.
This Harry Truman was an eightyfour-year old gent who lived with his seventeen cats on Mount Saint Helens five miles from the volcano.
Harry said he would never leave, regardless of the danger or the consequences of his obstinacy.
He is entombed deep beneath an accumulation of solidified mud that completely covers his former home, himself, and — presumably — his seventeen cats.
These paid the ultimate price for their pursuit of glory, cash, art, historical artifacts, or whatever it was they were so intent on accumulating.
Besides the human lives lost, fifteen hundred elk, five thousand deer, and an estimated eleven million fish died.
Helens literally blew its top, its height was reduced from 9,677 to 8,364 feet.
Ash that had been belched out of the mountain's depths spread upwards and outwards, drifting for hundreds of miles, darkening the sky, dropping temperatures, and creating a muddy mess in areas where it was simultaneously raining.
The sky was hazy and cars were covered with up to several inches of the gray ash.
A disaster to a relatively small number of people, it was a nuisance to manifold more.
The nutrient-rich ash proved to be a boon to farmers in the coming growing seasons, though.
The natural disaster was another reminder to mankind that he can only rein in ""Nature"" to a very limited degree — when it wants to release pressure, it will, and you had best just get out of the way.
On April 24 th , United States President Jimmy Carter attempted to rescue the American hostages held in Iran by sending in a group of helicopters to storm the embassy in Teheran.
A desert storm proved fatal to this attempt, though — three of the eight helicopters sent were disabled as a result of the sandstorm, and the mission had to be aborted.
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who had opposed the action, resigned in the aftermath.
The failure also played a role in Jimmy Carter not being re-elected at the end of this year.
Albert and Alice celebrated the 50 year anniversary of that painting as well as their marriage this year.
I was labeled a troublemaker, and my mom an unfit mother, and I was not welcome anywhere.
People would get up and leave, so they would not have to sit anywhere near me.
As they now had their hands full with a war they were waging with their neighbor Iraq, Iran was more receptive to bringing the matter to some sort of resolution.
Iran now had other, if not bigger, fish to fry, and needed the money to prosecute their war with Iraq, a war which many Iranians came to call ""the American War"" (as the Vietnamese called the war there) due to the assistance America gave to Iraq.
AIDS, or HIV, is not a disease in and of itself but is a weakening of the body's natural defense capabilities, making the carrier susceptible to life211 threatening diseases.
AIDS attacks the human immune system — the body's mechanism for warding off disease.
It renders its victims defenseless against rare cancers and other fatal illnesses.
People who are now young adults have heard of AIDS all their lives, and may think it an old disease.
Hardest hit of all areas on earth is Sub-Saharan Africa, whose populace suffers with more than two-thirds of the world's cases— ten times the number of North Africa and the Middle East combined.
In Zimbabwe, the impact has been so great that life expectancy has dropped from 70 to 38 in recent years.
Regardless of the quotes above, many people contract AIDS from a spouse or, in the case of babies, from their mother.
As one would probably expect, women who contract AIDS via sexual contact are typically in their child-bearing years.
Without any say in the matter, without deliberately engaging in risky activity, many babies are born infected with HIV, and thus die before reaching adulthood.
By the turn of the millennium , there were over 13 million AIDS orphans.
To fall into this category, a child has had to lose its mother before reaching the age of fifteen.
In some countries of Africa, health workers fear that the disease will eventually kill two thirds of all the young men and women.
All told, upwards of 22 million people worldwide have died from from this pandemic.
Even in the U.S., more than half a million had died from AIDS by the close of 2001.
Information on AIDS and how it could be transmitted was sketchy at the time, and Ryan was ostracized, as his quote above makes clear.
He died in 1990, a year before he would have graduated from high school.
Unless there are slaves to do the ugly, horrible, uninteresting work, culture and contemplation becomes almost impossible.
On mechanical slavery, on the slavery of the machine, the future of the world depends.
Another brother, Robert Taft Shannon, born 1916, had survived the plane crash in 1949 in which Calvin Coolidge Shannon perished.
Often times the person Time Magazine has chosen for its ""Man of the Year"" has proven controversial.
It's staying with her now because she needs you; it's knowing you and she will still care about each other when sex and daydreams, fights and futures — when all that's on the shelf and done with.
I am walking in their alleys, standing in their rooms and sheds and workshops, looking in and out of their windows.
Albert and Alice were married for fifty-four years and one week at the time of Albert's death.
Although not matching Will and Gertie's sixtytwo years together, it was quite a run.
Albert was also survived by his children David A, Lyle Clem, Rosie Lee Shannon, Sharon Dee Noland, Benjamin Lee, and Patsy Jane Lima Roberts.
Of the aggregate one hundred fifty-five years that Pop Shannon and Albert Kollenborn lived, one hundred of those years were spent in the married state.
Albert died in George Orwell's dystopian year, for which Orwell had ""foreseen"" dire social conditions.
Besides the Exxon Valdez oil spill which would take place three years later, this can also be said of the Challenger Disaster, which killed seven astronauts.
Millions of people watching the event live knew that the seven on board had certainly been instantly killed.
After a three-year cessation of space flights, it was ultimately determined that a faulty seal on one of the rocket's boosters was at fault.
The investigators concluded that fatigue on the managerial level, caused by ""several days of irregular working hours and insufficient sleep,"" was a significant factor in the shuttle getting the ill-advised go-ahead to launch.
Pop's second wife Dolly would eventually beat them all, though, and live ninety-five years and ten months.
Those that are getting within striking distance are two of Albert's half-sisters, Thora Louise Wheeler, born 1920, and Lula Mae Dixon, born 1922.
Even supposing a young man of appreciable mental powers to be lured upon the stage, as philosophers are occasionally lured into bordellos, his mind would be inevitably and almost immediately destroyed by the gaudy nonsense issuing from his mouth every night.
On October 19 th , the Dow Jones Industrial Average took the deepest, fastest plunge in its history.
This 22.6% mass sell-off represented a much steeper drop than the Great Depression of 1929.
This was when the two men were running against each other during the Republican primaries.
Bush later became Reagan's running mate, and served as Vice President before entering the oval office himself following Reagan's departure from public life.
Presenting his economic theory as the justification for doing so, Reagan annulled many of the social programs that FDR had instituted during the Great Depression.
And making matters worse was the optimism, the ""irrational exuberance,"" that had preceded the fall.
The number of Americans who personally invested in the stock market had doubled between 1975 and 1985.
Besides these direct investors, many others had indirect connections to the stock market, for example via pensions tied to stock performance.
In comparison, ""Black Monday"" in 1987 saw a drop, as mentioned, of 22. per cent.
As it turned out, the world recovered rather quickly from this financial battering.
This is not to say that all individuals got the money back they lost in the crash, but the stock market had been growing so robustly that even after the crash its level was just four per cent less than it had been a year before, and by the end of the year, it even managed to be a little ahead of where it had been prior to the crash.
Nevertheless, some view the precipitous, breakneck decline as a harbinger of possible future calamities.
One reason was their feeling of impotence after not even being able to get through to their harried brokers to sell their shares of stock before the value of these dropped even lower.
Once the price reached such-and-such a level, they should sell, so advised these electronic assistants.
The problem was, the broker often was not allowed enough time to evaluate whether he should act on the suggestion or not.
As many brokers were using the same software, and thus all received the same selling suggestions, this led to gigantic dumping of certain stocks almost simultaneously, which then triggered other selling binges, and the race to the bottom was on.
The computer programs used by brokers were re factored after this event.
Their bullish ways were pushing up the price of stocks far higher than their intrinsic value.
Mr Gorbachev, tear down this wall!"" -Ronald Reagan ""The cold war is over.
The cold war appears all but over; peace seems to be breaking out in many parts of the world.
We are destroying everything we inherited."" Jacques Cousteau ""Some people say the animals see the straight path and flee from it in fear, for they know it was built by men.
Which goes to show you that experts do not always know what they think they know.
In any case, the Wiedervereinigung was not half a century or more away — it was practically knocking at the door when he penned those words.
Although the Berlin Wall fell in Europe, we cover it here in this book about United States History because it was a crumbling felt 'round the world, even if there was a time lapse, a delayed reaction, before its full impact was felt here.
Unlike the walls of Jericho, the trumpets blew after the November 9 th fall of the wall.
Foremost, perhaps, was the easing of tensions between the super powers.
While good news when viewed from one angle, on the other hand there are now several countries which own nuclear weapons, and the world may have grown even less stable than it was during the Cold War.
In fact, in 1998 the infamous doomsday clock of The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists was advanced to five minutes before midnight.
Some believe that it is inevitable that the time will come when a group of terrorists are able to obtain an atomic weapon.
Exactly when it will happen cannot be predicted, but they believe it to be inevitable.
These two nations still have 5,000 nuclear weapons on hair-trigger alert.
In a worst-case scenario, two thousand ICBMs (Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles) from Russia could pass two thousand ICBMs from America somewhere over the Atlantic.
All this could happen within minutes — in the time it takes you to read this chapter.
And that is not counting another thousand warheads from submarines that could be launched soon thereafter.
With the collapse of communism came also the collapse of its artificially controlled economy.
It is no longer possible, or at least no longer appealing to most countries, to remain an economic island.
In other words, globalization was, if not born, at least popularized with the wall's fall.
Instead of just competing with their neighbors for jobs and for business, everybody competes with everybody else, worldwide, today.
Understanding Globalization,"" the wall's fall reverberated throughout the earth.
It was a social tsunami that led to globalization via what he calls the three democratizations of money, technology, and information.
He is certainly not unique in viewing a country's GDP as indicative of how livable the place is.
Although Stiglitz views globalization as— theoretically at least— having great potential for benefiting all peoples, he sees it in actual practice too often bringing about just the opposite.
I believe that globalization — the removal of barriers to free trade and the closer integration of national economies — can be a force for good and that it has the potential to enrich everyone in the world, particularly the poor.
But I also believe that if this is to be the case, the way globalization has been managed, including the international trade agreements that have played such a large role in removing those barriers and policies that have been imposed on developing countries in the process of globalization, need to be radically rethought.
Globalization may appear a dry topic, but it is one that has lit a fire under many people who oppose it.
Globalization in general and why many oppose it will be discussed in greater detail in the 1999 chapter, in the ""The Battle of Seattle"" section.
The Alaska Pipeline carries oil from the Prudhoe Bay fields way in the northern part of this more-than-twice-as-big-as-Texas State down south to Valdez on the Gulf of Alaska, the northernmost year-round ice-free port.
The tiny town of Valdez, eight-hundred miles south of Prudhoe Bay, is thus a busy place, where supertankers fill up with crude and carry it on to other ports of call.
Crew reductions, made in order to reduce operating costs led to mariners working longer hours and performing additional duties.
The third mate may not have been fully qualified to serve as commander.
In any case, he had been up since early the previous day when the accident occurred shortly after midnight.
Deep-sea divers sent out to inspect the damage reported that the ship was teetering on the edge of Bligh Reef.
If it broke apart on hitting the bottom, the other 42 million galls of oil could have also been released into the biosphere.
It is estimated that only 10 to 14 percent of that oil is properly disposed of.
Thus millions of gallons of waste oil end up in the ground, in streams, or in sewers each year.
It would take at least 25 Exxon Valdez-sized spills annually to equal that amount of despoliation.
How can people be so cruel? — from the song ""Easy to be Hard"" by Three Dog Night ""If you're not the solution, you're part of the problem.
Unbeknownst to the officers of the law, their actions were being recorded by a citizen near the scene.
The officers dragged King, a parttime Dodger stadium groundskeeper who was to start a full-time construction job the next day, from his car and beat him with their nightsticks and kicked him with their feet — after first shooting him in the chest with a stun gun.
The fifty-six blows with their metal batons and six kicks with their jackbooted feet caused King to suffer eleven skull fractures, brain injury, and kidney damage.
In addition to the litany of damage noted above, the 25-year-old victim's eye socket was shattered, a cheek bone was fractured, a leg was broken, and he suffered a concussion as well as facial nerve damage.
The brutal attack was broadcast throughout the nation, to the consternation of those who had previously assumed policemen were fair and civil in their dealings with the public.
Tom Sullivan, an LAPD officer, said ""This isn't just a case of excessive force.
Four days after the assault, he went on record that the four officers should be charged with felony assault.
The four officers were called to account and required to answer for their actions in a court of law.
As to whether justice resulted, let the facts speak for themselves— the results of that court case are discussed in the next chapter.
In the meantime, though, other acts of excessive force by L.A. law enforcement continued to take place.
For instance, on August 3 rd , a man was shot dead by a sheriffs deputy.
The official version of the account was that the man had grabbed another deputy's flashlight and had knocked him unconscious with it.
Residents of the housing project where the event took place, though, claimed the dead man had only engaged in a verbal altercation with the officers.
As bad as King's beating was, what he experienced was actually relatively mild compared to what many blacks had experienced in the South, even just a few decades earlier.
Some had been beaten to death for refusing to sit in the back of buses, for saying something ""saucy"" to a white person, or just for being there, so to speak.
On August 13 th , a mentally disturbed man was shot eight times in the back and once in the shoulder.
On the 28 th of that same month, a fifteen-year-old boy was killed by law enforcement officers.
These two countries roughly correspond to ancient Babylon and Medo-Persia , and have, in effect, been fighting each other for thousands of years.
Although both modern nations are Islamic, Iraqis are Arabic while Iranians, for the most part, are not ethnically Arabs.
Because of their shared ethnicity, Saddam Hussein, leader of Iraq, believed that Iranian Arabs would welcome his troops as liberators when they entered Iran.
This mistake — expecting to be welcomed as a liberatorwould be repeated by the United States a generation later, in 2003, when they invaded Iraq.
Manpower, materiel, ""moral"" support, and money — in fact, to the tune of $18 billion dollars.
America was not the only foreign power interested in the outcome of this war, though — the Soviet Union was, too.
Oddly enough, both of these arch-enemies in this cold war, pre-Berlin Wall Fall period backed Iraq.
By 1990, the United States was sending signals to Iraq that it would not interfere with other conflicts in the region.
In July, United States Ambassador to Iraq April Glaspie told Hussein that the United States didn't want to get involved in regional conflicts and border disputes.
Hussein apparently read this, whether it was meant that way or not, as a go-ahead to expand his empire.
Although Hussein had risen to power in Iraq as a result of his anti-imperialist stance, Hussein apparently had no qualms about imperialism if it was Iraq in the role of the hammer rather than the nail.
On August 2 nd , 1990, Iraqi troops moved into Kuwait, conquering it within twelve hours.
The United States went to the United Nations to secure sanctions against Iraq for this action.
Ultimately, a U.N Security Council resolution gave Iraq until January 15 th to pull out of Kuwait.
Iraq President Saddam Hussein instead thumbed his nose at the ultimatum.
The United States responded with a show of force designed to keep Iraq from furthering its conquest.
A second phase followed, an aerial attack which sported the sobriquet Desert Storm.
Not only did he acquire the support of many Arab nations against Iraq, he simultaneously kept Israel out of the fray.
In a deafening roar of saber-rattling turned saber-slashing, the coalition deployed more than a half million troops, one thousand eight hundred aircraft, and one hundred ships.
The front and rear portions of the Iraqi convoy was attacked by United States forces, trapping them in their tracks.
Fewer than three hundred Americans were killed, about half of these as a result of accidents during training exercises.
It stopped short of invading and deposing Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
In the Eye of the Storm"": Many politicians and commentators in the West and the Middle East have repeatedly asked why the coalition forces did not overthrow Saddam.
Sir Peter de La Billiere, who commanded the troops of Britain, which contributed the second largest Western force to the Coalition.
The Arabs themselves had no intention of invading another Arab country.
The Islamic forces [i.e., forces of the 13 Muslim members of the coalition] were happy to enter Kuwait for the purpose of restoring the legal government, but that was the limit of their ambition.
We would have split the coalition physically , since the Islamic forces would not have come with us, and risked splitting it morally and psychologically as well, thus undoing all the goodwill which we had taken so much trouble to achieve.
The American, British, and French would have been presented as the foreign invaders of Iraq and we would have undermined the prestige which we had earned around the world for helping the Arabs resolve a major threat to the Middle East.
The whole Desert Storm would have been seen purely as an operation to further Western interests in the Middle East.
Either we would have to set up a puppet government or withdraw ignominiously without a proper regime in power, leaving the way open for Saddam to return.
In other words, to have gone on to Baghdad would have achieved nothing except to create even wider problems.
Like Germany in World War II, Iraq had been attempting to produce a nuclear bomb, which they had hoped would be deployable by mid1991.
Fortunately, they had been unable to attain the necessary triggering device.
It appears as though the feds are attempting to draw fire from the house as an excuse to finish us all off.
Ticket holders of color were not surprised by her fall, only hurt and weary after having been taken in again.
Reflections on Rage and Responsibility, A Memoir of the Los Angeles Riots"" by Gregory Alan-Williams ""The jury system puts a ban upon intelligence and honesty, and a premium upon ignorance, stupidity and perjury.
But no doubt I shall be defeated— every effort I make to save the country 'misses fire. '"" — from ""Roughing It"" by Mark Twain ""I go into the streets, into the neighborhoods, into the projects.
I see the homeless, the helpless, the anger and the violence, the drugs and the despondency.
Some people were shocked by the explosion of rioting in Los Angeles in 1992.
The stew of poverty and despair simmers and cooks in the grimmest parts of our cities, and it will not go away.
We who do not live in these places might close our eyes or our hearts, we might pretend it does not exist or that it has nothing to do with us, but it will not simply go away.
We can look and listen and respond in constructive, creative ways to our places of poverty, or we can be forced to respond to outbursts of violence such as these riots.
This year, their case had become a high priority for federal law enforcement.
Also culpable are many of the members of those aforementioned officers of the law.
The Weavers had become extremely paranoid about the government, which they considered to be completely corrupt and backed by Jews, one of their least favorite races.
In fact, one of the reasons the Weavers moved to remote northern Idaho from mid-America Iowa was that they wanted to home-school their daughters, a process which was illegal in Iowa.
Unfortunately for everyone concerned, from the perspective of the Weaver family, and their friend Kevin Harris, the fears they had of government conspiracies seemed to actually come true in their case.
Especially was this true for Vicki Weaver, who would die believing ZOG was out to kill her entire family.
The Weaver's extremes of behavior actually brought upon them the unwanted attention from the government that they so feared.
Their debilitating paranoia turned their nightmare into a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Had the government agents not over-estimated the danger the Weavers posed, the whole tragedy need not have happened.
Prior to the deadly day, the feds thought Randy was a member of the Aryan Nations.
He was not, although he had attended a few of their gatherings and was friendly with some of the members.
Raising the hair even further on the back of the feds' necks was their belief that Weaver was hording a massive cache of illegal weapons.
It was feared, too, that the mountain on which the Weavers lived was booby trapped.
That thought made little sense, though, with three children and several animals running around the place.
It certainly would have been good for all had the two sides somehow managed to get a grip on their frenzyinducing fear.
At the time of the events related here, Sara was 16, Samuel was 13, Rachel was 10 — and Elisheba, of course, was yet a babe.
The Weavers' troubles began in earnest when Randy was under surveillance by the ATF due to his rather tenuous connections with the Aryan Nations , a rabidly racist and anti-government pack of wackos.
At one time focusing mainly on raiding stills in the south , the ATF has in recent years come to focus more intently on the ""Firearms"" portion of their acronym as their chief duty.
An informant working for the ATF lured the cash-strapped Weaver into selling him an illegal weapon, getting Randy to agree to provide the informant with a sawed-off shotgun.
After being caught in the act, Weaver hoped to avoid being taken into custody by keeping a low profile and staying on his land as much as possible.
A couple pretended their truck was broken down on the road near the Weavers' mountain cabin while Randy and Vicki were on their way down the mountain into town.
Stopping to see if they could be of any assistance to the supposedly stranded strangers, the Weavers were arrested by this pair of undercover agents.
Then, in a tragicomedy of errors, after Randy was apprehended he was given false information about the gravity and potential consequences of his situation, being told he could lose his property to amend for matters.
As matters turned out, it was for missing his scheduled day in court that the heat really came down on Weaver.
This intractability of some of the mountain folk was just the thing to jangle the nerves of the officers of the law.
Such cases, once they started going badly, could pick up their own momentum, like a stone rolling downhill.
In the case of the Weaver family, the foregoing would prove to be an understatement.
Randy being set up in the gun deal; begin tricked by the ATF on his arrest; being given false information as to his court date at his arraignment; and then being spied on by hidden cameras.
Before the shootout, one of the surveillance cameras the FBI had set up in the woods above their cabin was discovered and destroyed by the Weavers.
On the day of the killings, the Weaver's golden Labrador Retriever, Striker, picked up on the presence of the strangers and raced into the woods after them.
Randy Weaver hoped that the scent Striker was tracking was that of an elk or a deer, as the family lived hand-to-mouth and could have used the meat.
The United States Marshals retreated, not wanting to get involved in a firefight with Randy, his thirteen-year-old son Sammy, and Kevin Harris — all of whom were, like almost always, armed.
Even Vicki and the girls, not only 16-year-old Sara but also 10-year-old Rachel, normally went around with weapons strapped around their bodies.
A United States Marshal named Arthur Roderick shot Striker dead, hoping he could ""take out"" the dog before it led its owners to him and his partners.
Young Sammy quickly came on the scene, saw his dog had been shot dead, and reacted — as many armed boys would do in such a predicament— by shooting at Roderick.
He didn't make it far, though — he was felled by a bullet through the back, which killed him instantly.
Harris, in order to protect his young friend, fired on the agents, mortally wounding Degan with a shot to the chest.
Harris was moaning and shaking so violently on coming out of the woods and into the clearing near the cabin, though, that Randy at first thought he was someone else.
The FBI had changed their normal rules of engagement due to misunderstanding the situation.
In actuality, Weaver had mostly driven heavy equipment during his stint in the military, and, although he was in the service during the time of the Vietnam War, he had never been to Vietnam.
The FBI was also nervous that the anti-government sentiment in northern Idaho was strong enough that they would be facing more foes than just the Weaver family.
Do not shoot at anyone unless you intend to kill them, and do not have that intention unless your life, or someone else's, is in imminent danger.
Agents are expected to be as familiar with the rules as they are with their own phone numbers.
These rules are framed and hang on a wall at FBI headquarters in Quantico, Virginia.
Agents are not to use deadly force against any person except as necessary in self-defense or the defense of another when they have reason to believe they or another are in danger of death or grievous bodily harm.
Whenever feasible, verbal warning should be given before deadly force is applied.
Those in the FBI who made that decision did not even consult with the United States Marshals who had been in the firefight.
After three days of being surrounded in their house, and no shots coming from inside, the rules of engagement were finally changed back to standard.
Yes, Randy Weaver, the man they considered so dangerous, never even fired at any of the interlopers.
He himself had been hit by an FBI sniper, Lon Horiuchi, as he opened the door of an outbuilding to take one last look at his dead son Sammy, whose body the family had washed and wrapped in a sheet and stored there.
Aiming to kill Weaver — who moved to reach for the door just as the sniper was pulling the trigger — Horiuchi instead struck him in the upper arm.
At that point Weaver, his older daughter Sara, and Harris made a run for the cabin.
As Randy and Sara ducked into their dwelling, and Kevin Harris was preparing to do so, Horiuchi tried to kill Harris.
Vicki Weaver, who was holding baby Elisheba in her right arm, was standing in the doorway, hurling obscenities at the men who had killed her son.
Vicki died instantly, and collapsed in a heap just inside the doorway, still clutching her baby tightly.
The sniper claimed he was aiming for Harris, and yet hit Vicki, who the authorities felt was the ""strength"" of the family.
In any case, shooting into a house with three children present does not seem the most ethical, nor the brightest, thing to do— to say the least.
In the woods with his friend Kevin Harris and his young son, Randy Weaver fled when he realized Striker was stalking, not an elk or a deer, but gun-toting lawmen, abandoning his son.
Incomprehensible, too, is Weaver's practice of having his daughters serve as ""shields"" for him.
Any time Randy went outside, his girls stood between him and the enemy.
It would be suspect enough to do that if you felt your enemy would refrain from firing on young ones.
Weaver, though, claimed the government was completely vicious, evil and untrustworthy.
After Vicki had been shot dead, there was certainly no reason for any of the surviving members of the family to have much faith in fair play from the FBI and their cohorts.
An hour after shooting at various and sundry family members and friend of the family Kevin Harris, the FBI finally gave those in the house a chance to surrender — which would normally be an option proffered at the outset, but which on this occasion seemed to be an afterthought.
The remaining Weavers, and Harris, refused to negotiate with the federal agents at first.
They thought it was pointless, that the whole thing had been a setup— that they were doomed no matter what they said or did.
Adding to this conviction, fueling their suspicions about what they thought of as a thoroughly corrupt and conspiratorial government, the news reports they listened to about the unfolding situation claimed that Kevin Harris had fired the first volley.
The wounding of Randy Weaver and Kevin Harris, and the killing of the family dog Striker were also omitted from the early newscasts.
The lawmen even claimed that they didn't know one of their number had killed young Samuel Weaver.
When they found Sammy's body in the shed later (they were about to bulldoze the building, as it was obstructing their view of the house, but decided to do a reconnaissance mission first to make sure nobody was skulking inside, waiting to ambush the bulldozer operator), they claimed to surmise that perhaps Randy had started killing his own children.
Vicki Weaver's faceless body (Horiuchi was using bullets that expanded on impact) lay in the cabin for several days before the remaining members of the household— Randy, Sara, Rachel, the seriously wounded Kevin Harris, with baby Elisheba— finally gave up.
The bullet that blew up Vicki Weaver's skull and tore away the bottom half of her face continued its erratic, bee-dance flight path and ended up lodged in Kevin Harris' upper arm.
He was the first of those holed up in the house to surrender, and he did so in order to receive the medical attention he so desperately required.
At first, the rest of the household thought that Kevin was dead after being hit with the bullet that had passed through Vicki's body.
Subsequently, based on how he looked, sounded, and smelled, the Weavers thought that their friend would not make it through the night.
As the investigation of Randy Weaver revolved around trafficking in illegal weapons, the federal agents had expected to find a cache of these in Weaver possession.
There were no illegal weapons whatsoever — no sawed-off shotguns, no automatic weapons.
However, the feds did find armor-piercing bullets among the ammunition the Weavers had at their disposal.
The Weavers showed either great restraint, fear, or resignation in not using these.
Or perhaps it was simply the prudent course to refrain from giving the law an excuse to really let loose.
The armor-piercing bullets could have quite possibly been effectively used against the APC the FBI had driven up to the house to negotiate with Weaver.
At one point when it seemed Randy just may have been willing to consider a negotiated surrender, he spotted the robot the FBI was using to approach his house.
The automaton was to punch a hole through one of the windows and drop a telephone inside.
In the end, the FBI got their woman, and the United States Marshals got their little boy.
As mentioned previously, both agencies at first denied knowing they had killed their targets.
Whether he was simply lying, or he had a mental blackout about the situation afterward, the shooter of Sammy claimed that neither he nor the slain William Degan had fired their weapons in the initial clash.
United States Marshal Arthur Roderick shot and killed Striker; Sammy attempted to retaliate by shooting at Roderick, but missed; United States Marshal William Degan shot Sammy in the arm, at which point the boy turned around and fled back toward the house; Kevin Harris shot and mortally wounded William Degan; United States Marshal Larry Cooper shot Sammy in the back, killing him.
Later on the same day, FBI sniper Lon Horiuchi attempted to kill Randy Weaver, but only injured him; Horiuchi then killed Vicki Weaver and the bullet passed through her head and embedded itself in Kevin Harris' arm, seriously wounding him.
Although Larry Cooper denied shooting Sammy, and asserted that neither he nor his partner William Degan had fired their weapons, one of the slugs from Cooper's gun that was found at the scene of the first gun battle still contained trace material from Sammy's clothing.
Both sides, which had gone to extreme measures out of grotesquely exaggerated fear of one another, were found liable for their actions by the judge and jury.
For failing to appear in court, Randy Weaver was sentenced to eighteen months in jail.
At the time of sentencing, he had already served fourteen of those months.
Weaver was found not guilty of the murder and assault charges the government tried to hang on him.
Judge Edward Lodge found the FBI in contempt of court, and fined them $1,920 for its delays and obstructions.
Lodge said, ""The actions of the government, acting through the FBI, evidence a callous disregard for the rights of the defendants and the interests of justice.
In fact, the one person on the government side of the issue who served time, Michael Kahoe, did so for obstruction of justice.
Specifically, Kahoe had shredded the FBI's internal post-confrontation critique.
Other government employees were disciplined to various degrees, but for the most part these were ""slaps on the wrist"" — none of those involved were fired from their jobs, although some were reassigned from one assignment to another and/ or ""censured"" and given some time off.
Simpson murder trial, the gap between criminal and civic court cases are often quite wide.
Although both sides were found guilty to one extent or another in the criminal trial, in the 1995 civil trial that the Weaver family brought against the government, the Weavers were awarded $3. million dollars — a million each to the Weaver girls, Sara, Rachel, and Elisheba; and $100,000 for Randy.
It wasn't until late in the year 2000 that closure came to Kevin Harris, when he accepted a $380,000 settlement from the government.
By that time, the little cabin in the woods of Northern Idaho, where the Weavers had gone to await a government-bred Armageddon, was gone — it had collapsed in the spring of 1997 under a heavy load of snow.
As symbolic as that may seem, the Ruby Ridge debacle did not end on the remote north Idaho outpost.
The mayhem there, along with another raid involving the ATF, would serve as a catalyst to other tragedies to follow.
In fact, the standoff between the ATF and the Branch Davidians outside Waco, Texas would take place during the trial of Randy Weaver and Kevin Harris in 1995.
FBI sniper Lon Horiuchi was also at Waco, and would also end up in the middle of the controversy surrounding that deadly conflagration.
Although many law enforcement personnel present at the trialincluding the CHP officers who started the chase— condemned their overwhelming use of force, all four officers (Stacey Koon, Theodore Briseno, Timothy Wind, and Lawrence Powell) captured on videotape beating Rodney King were acquitted by an all-white jury in arch-""conservative"" Simi Valley, which is located forty miles northwest of Los Angeles.
They yelled ""guilty"" as the plaintiffs came out of the courthouse and chased the officers to their cars with rocks.
Many observers were completely dumbfounded by the outcome of the trial.
He said that he, his wife, and his children were stunned by the verdict.
Los Angeles Before and After the Rodney King Case,"" compiled by the staff of the Los Angeles Times (whose building was also the target of rioters during the unrest), reported it this way: As for Rodney King himself, he retreated to the solitude of his bedroom, shaking and speechless.
It suddenly was like he had no idea who he was or what time it was or where he was.
He would start to make sense, and then 10 seconds later he couldn't even tell you what room he was in.
On the screen, the officers who had beaten King were hugging and smiling, free men.
Justice is another concept altogether, and any who would really try to uphold it would be sticking their neck out.
Once again the ubiquitous and multipurpose acronym CYA stamps itself on events, an acronym which, among other things, stands for California Youth Authority.
The jury's practically inconceivable decision triggered three days of rioting over a fiftysquare -mile swath of Los Angeles.
Hundreds of fires were set and millions of dollars worth of goods was looted.
Fifty-four people were killed, over two thousand wounded, $700 million of property was damaged, and more than thirteen thousand arrests were made.
Parking lot attendant Adey Behre said ""It's horrible what they've done.
The outrage of many from the African-American Community in Los Angeles manifested itself on April 29 th with a chaotic cacophony of mayhem directed against, it seemed, any non-black person.
In some cases, even light-skinned blacks who appeared Caucasian by mobs were targeted.
In some cases, they came to the aid of those the crowds were pummeling.
After wrenching him away from the clutches of the murderous mob, Alan-Williams asked Takao his name and, due to the man's impaired speech , thought he was a recent immigrant.
In actuality, the Japanese man was born in America-in a government internment camp during World War II, in which his family had been placed due to their ethnicity.
Members of the crowd had not only smashed him in the face with their fists, but had viciously broken bottles against his face.
A middle-aged man was also on the scene, protecting Hirata by holding back some of the attackers.
After Alan-Williams had escorted Hirata away from the worst area of the trouble spot, another black man came to the rescue and drove Hirata to the hospital.
Additionally, pummeled white truck driver Reginald Denny was taken to the hospital by five black men.
Denny had been dragged from his truck, beaten, kicked, and had his own fire extinguisher bashed against his skull.
Similar to the Rodney King beating, it was seen by millions on television — the difference being that Denny's beating was broadcast live, as it was happening — the police unable to come to his assistance.
Although Denny's face was covered in blood and his eyes were swollen shut, he somehow managed to climb back into his truck and began to drive slowly away.
He was helped by some good Samaritans who at first hung on alongside his truck and guided him with steering instructions, and then took over the driving, pulling his truck into the hospital in the nick of time — he suffered a seizure on arrival at the hospital, and doctors said had he arrived any later he would have died.
Times reporter John Mitchell, who saved a Vietnamese refugee from the wrath of an angry mob.
What started as a riot in response to the injustice in the Rodney King case seemed to morph into a combination poverty riot (many stores were looted) and a race riot, wreaking revenge not only on whites, but also on Asians.
As the four policeman in the Rodney King case had been, Soon Ja Du was inexplicably acquitted.
She jumped out of her car without rolling up the windows, leaving her screaming infant unattended.
Then, the well-dressed, professional-looking woman sprinted into the store for her share.
As far as monetary damage to businesses went (from vandalism and looting), the ethnic groups who suffered the most were Koreans and — perhaps surprisingly, African-Americans.
During the Watts Riots/ Rebellion of 1965, black businesspeople had tried to ward off destruction of their own shops by posting ""Soul Brother"" signs in their store windows.
One person compared it to a person becoming so angry that he strikes out in uncontrolled rage and frustration and punches a wall — hurting his own hand in the process.
Another, perhaps more convoluted, psychological hypothesis asserts that such self-destructive behavior is a result of self-loathing brought on by an internalizing of the message behind the verdicts — that they are a lesser people, unworthy of justice.
Regardless of the psychology behind it all, Rodney King was not reveling in the rabid rabble's reckless abandon.
He emerged from his lawyer's office in Beverly Hills to be engulfed by a throng of 1 00 reporters.
Nervous and barely audible, his voice lost at times to the blast of helicopter rotors overhead, King delivered a halting plea for peace that, in its rambling, elliptical, tragic quality, became one of the more memorable moments in the Los Angeles riots.
We've got enough smog here in Los Angeles, let alone to deal with the setting of these fires and things.
I can understand the first upset in for the first two hours after the verdict, but to go on, to keep going on like this, and to see a security guard shot on the ground, it's just not right.
It's just not right because those people will never go home to their families again.
Bush also announced that a federal grand jury had already issued subpoenas as part of an accelerated Justice Department investigation into whether the beating of Rodney King violated federal civil rights laws.
White House aides described the unusual disclosure as an attempt by Bush to soothe the destructive anger sparked by the not-guilty verdicts.
The next year, two of the officers were found guilty on federal civil rights charges.
Ramzi Yousef had filled a rented van with twelve hundred pounds of high explosives and parked it next to a concrete wall in the bowels of the World Trade Center.
Yousefs intent was to blow up and take down the entire World Trade Center complex.
The monsters behind the attack had wanted to knock one tower into the other and kill everyone in both buildings.
In fact, Yousef admitted after being captured in the Philippines two years later that he had hoped to kill 250,000 civilians in the attack.
Yousef and his accomplices failed in that grotesque and grandiose endeavor, but nevertheless killed six and wounded more than a thousand.
The missive demanded changes in American foreign policy in the Middle East.
If the demands were ignored, more terrorist attacks would take place against American targets, in the United States and elsewhere.
However, we promise you that next time it will be very precise, and the World Trade Center will continue to be one of our targets in the U.S., unless our demands are met.
And Yousef is now completely impotent, no longer in a situation to harm anyone.
He is now caged in a Supermax prison near the small town of Florence, in the Colorado Rockies — in fact in the most secure prison in the United States Among Youselfs ""neighbors"" are Unabomber Ted Kaczynksi, Oklahoma City bomber Terry Nichols, and— until he was executed on June 1 1 th , 2001 — Nichols' co-conspirator, Timothy McVeigh.
BATF (The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, a branch of the United States Treasury Department) and FBI agents raided the seventy-seven acre Branch Davidian compound outside Waco, Texas in the spring of this year, investigating reports of a stockpile of illegal arms, as well as childabuse allegations.
When the ATF unit moved in on February 28 th , the Branch Davidian members resisted by using some of their stockpile of weaponry.
Four ATF agents were killed in the exchange, as were six members of the Branch Davidian community.
Koresh is the Hebrew name for ""Cyrus,"" the Persian King who had destroyed Babylon twenty five hundred years earlier.
Howell apparently viewed modern society as a new ""Babylon"" and presumably saw himself as the future conqueror of such.
The ""Branch Davidians,"" as they were called (they didn't normally refer to themselves by that name) had actually broken off from the Seventh Day Adventists in 1934 and had been living at ""Mount Carmel,"" as they called their compound located outside Waco, Texas, for almost sixty years at the time of the raid.
It was believed that the residents of the compound were producing machine guns and grenades.
The initial raid was made in order to search for evidence of illegal activity and to arrest David Koresh.
Rather than accept the invitation, the government forced their way in, upon which the aforementioned gun battle ensued.
During 1992 alone, the group had received hundreds of weapons and thousands of rounds of ammunition, including parts for M-16s and AK-47s, grenades, a grenade launcher, and explosives.
Suspicious at least was their practice of posting armed guards at their compound, who were told by Koresh to ""shoot to kill"" in the event that intruders were to infiltrate Mt.
One possible reason for this fearful attitude toward outsiders on the part of the Davidians was that the former leader of the group, George Roden, had threatened Koresh, who had taken over leadership after a gunfight between the two factions.
The legal basis behind the pursuit was that the gun activity in which the group was involved was deemed illegal.
In order to own a machine gun, one must pay a $200 tax and fill out requisite paperwork.
A former member of the group, a Registered Nurse, claimed that Koresh had fathered at least fifteen children from various women and girls in the compound — some of them as young as twelve years old.
This nurse says that she delivered seven of these babies herself, and that Koresh annulled the marriages of members of his church and then gained sole sexual access to all the women.
From the more cynical camp of observers (those critical of the government, that is) came the charge that the raid was carried out due to— or at least timed so as to closely precede— an upcoming Congressional decision regarding BATF funding.
After all, the BATF, as well as their partners in crime-fighting, the FBI, were still smarting from the PR bruising they had received after the debacle in Ruby Ridge.
It was reeling from a 60 Minutes series on sexual harassment of female agents, stinging from a racial discrimination class-action lawsuit (which it soon lost), and was only ten days away from its appropriations hearings in the House of Representatives.
Internally, agents were referring to the Waco raid as ""ZBO,"" slang for ""Zee Big One,"" the publicity stunt that would ensure the agency went into the hearings with headlines and national media coverage behind it.
After the initial raid, additional BATF and FBI forces arrived on the scene, bottling up the members inside their compound.
Various forms of ""persuasion"" were utilized to undermine Koresh's influence on the residents of Mt.
The FBI played statements of former members over loudspeakers, and they sent into the compound videotapes and pictures of members' children, as well as messages from family members.
Their intent was to increase the flow of the exodus from the compound from a trickle to a flood— Koresh apparently allowed any who chose to depart to do so at any time they wished.
During the nights, a weapon of psychological warfare wielded was floodlights that served to disrupt the sleep of those involuntarily basking in their eerie glow.
Carmelites were too comfortably ensconced in their collection of buildings, the feds shut off electrical power to the compound, and surrounded their quarters with ""concertina wire"" (spiral barbed wire) fencing.
If the authorities had really wanted the group to surrender, as they claimed they did, one would think they would have wanted the people inside to be thinking straight and clearly, but this strategy was not conducive to such a state of mind.
In addition to the previously mentioned tactics, they increasingly tightened the perimeter around Mt.
Armored vehicles of various types, as well as a massive display of weapons and personnel.
Stone also complained about the CS gas used by the FBI, which is known to be harmful, especially to children — the group of people inside the compound the government claimed to be most concerned about protecting.
Many of these deaths were from smoke inhalation, but some may have been a result of the CS gas.
The cause of the fire is also disputed, both sides blaming the other for the ignition of the conflagration.
Helicopters were also used to — if you believe one side — simply observe the goings-on in the compound, or — if you believe the other side — fire on the residents of the compound from above.
Some say these shooters were government law enforcement agents, others claim they were in fact members of the military's secret Delta Force Unit.
It is illegal for the government to use the military in police matters.
The final one, fifty-one days later, on April 19 th , was much more chaotic and catastrophic.
The FBI, fearing their team would lose its edge if they had to wait any longer, decided it was time to act.
President Clinton conferred with Attorney General Janet Reno, but told her it was ultimately her decision.
Clinton's delegation of this decision was not due to any ambiguity in his mind about the bent of the Branch Davidians and their leader.
David Thibodeau, one of the few survivors of the raid, claims that their gun operations were a legal money-making venture, and that Koresh had invited the BATF to come and examine the weapons weeks prior to the initial raid.
Thibodeau also asserts that Koresh was going to surrender to the authorities once he completed the writing of his interpretation of the Seven Seals of Revelation.
Two completed commentaries written by Koresh were discovered in the ashes of Mount Carmel in the inferno's aftermath.
Probably nobody knows for certain whether Koresh would have really ""come out with his hands up"" after completing the full complement of manuscripts.
Differing with the nurse who had been a member, he also denies the child abuse charges.
But apparently there is no prohibition against its use against American citizens.
It could be that many who may have wanted to escape found it impossible to do so — they might have been prevented from doing so due to being trapped by the fire and building damage, or possibly even lost consciousness as a result of the massive amount of gas infused into their quarters.
When the tear gas was ""inserted"" (in the euphemistic terminology of the government), the Davidians fired back.
It seems unlikely that they anticipated the authorities would shut off their electricity — the outrage they displayed when it occurred makes it at least appear they were not expecting it.
It remains hard for me to clearly remember what happened after the tanks made their move.
Inside Mount Carmel, the notion of leaving seemed insane; with tanks smashing through your walls and rockets smashing through the windows, our very human reaction was not to walk out but to find a safe corner and pray.
I thought first of the women and children, whom I had been separated from.
I dropped to my knees to pray, and the wall next to me erupted inflame.
Community member Derek Lovelock, who had ended up in the same place as me, ran through a hole in the wall and I followed.
As millions watched the shootout and inferno on live television, upwards of seventy people died inside the compound.
Of the eightythree members trapped inside the blazing inferno, Thibodeau was one of only nine who survived.
During the siege, Davidians told FBI negotiators that the double doors were the best evidence of who fired first: The bullet holes through the left one were all pointing inward.
After the fire, the left door (which, it should be stressed, was made of sheet metal, not wood) simply vanished.
Although the scene was sealed off to all but the ATF and the FBI, divided into squares and searched as if it were an archaeological site, the left door somehow went missing and remains so to this day.
Second, Jim Brannon, attorney for some of the Davidian survivors, located a home video made by one of the fire department personnel as the fire died down.
This shows agents backing up a rented moving truck to the ruins and hastily loading a door-sized object, wrapped in black plastic, into it.
The evidence, in short, strongly suggests that the government knew the door's bullet holes would incriminate the ATF as the initiator of the gunfight in front, and accordingly made its disappearance a high priority.
Getting rid of the incriminating front door appears to have been a high priority.
It would have been the most solid piece of evidence that the ATF began the gunfight, and coming after 51 days of government spokesmen blaming the Davidians, would have been stunning evidence that they were victims rather than cop-killers.
The Davidians had been insisting that the door would prove them right and that the building bore bullet holes from above, as a record of the helicopters' gunfire, as well.
A fire provided the only convenient way of making the door and all the bullet holes in the walls vanish.
A disastrous fire wold, in short, be uncommonly convenient to the federal agencies.
Precisely two years later, the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma was bombed.
The perpetrators claimed they had carried out their carnage in retaliation for the government's acts in Ruby Ridge and Waco.
Spurred on by the cold war, the original intent of the decentralized architecture the Internet used (a collection of remote computers connected with one another) was to maintain communications in the event of a catastrophic attack on the United States.
In the event that one computer center was destroyed, other computers in the country would automatically detect this, and use an alternate routing plan to relay messages.
In this way the Internet could theoretically stay operational even if a large percentage of the country had been destroyed.
The Internet came about indirectly as a result of Sputnik, a little machine just a smidgen larger than a basketball, which was launched October 4 th , 1957 by the Soviets.
Sputnik set in motion the space age, and, tangentially, the information/ cyberspace age.
President Dwight Eisenhower embarked on a ""crash"" program to catch up with the Russians.
ARPA was the Pentagon's arm for computer science research and information processing.
It is impossible to say exactly what year the Internet became mainstream.
Work began on the Internet in the 1960s, but it wasn't until the 1990s that it achieved mainstream fame and became household terminology.
The work that government computer scientists were doing was originally unveiled in 1969, and was called ARPAnet.
As already alluded to, in its initial incarnation, the Internet was only available to certain government workers and university personnel.
Even if it had been open to public use, the average person would not have been able to make heads or tails out of how to utilize it, or, more specifically, would not have considered the investment of time necessary to learn how to use it a worthwhile endeavor.
That changed with the advent of browsers, which placed a graphical overlay on top of the previously-used command-line prompts that generated plain text only.
The 1990 creation of the World Wide Web set the stage for the Internet becoming user-friendly and useful for the common person.
According to recent figures, each week the Internet gains 300,000 new users.
Even many isolated villages in third-world countries are, or soon will be, wired — or, as is the current trend, connected to the Internet, but not literally wired with literal, physical cables.
Renault in the movie ""Casablanca"" ""The only good nigger is a dead nigger.
Brown you 've got a lovely daughter Girls as sharp as her are something rare But it 's sad She doesn 't love me now . . . — from the song ""Mrs.
Simpson was the prime suspect when his ex-wife Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman, a male guest at her home, were found brutally murdered on June 12 th of this year.
Goldman, a martial arts devotee, defended himself valiantly, but eventually succumbed to the vicious onslaught of a knife-wielding assailant.
Nicole's head was practically severed from her body, her throat cut ear to ear.
And, if that's not enough, O.J. had even on occasion told people that he was going to kill Nicole.
Yet there are reasons for questioning whether O.J. really was the murderer.
On that occasion, he simply berated the two for their lack of discretion and left.
Goldman had bruises on his hands, indicating he had made violent contact with the murderer prior to his bloody demise.
That is exactly what O.J. and house guest Kato Kaelin had done an hour before the murder.
Had O.J. been the knife-wielder, so assert many authorities, he would have been covered — indeed, completely drenched — in blood.
However, only minuscule amounts of blood were found in O.J.'s vehicle, on his clothing, and in his house — such a small amount that it was barely enough to fit under a man's fingernail.
There were only traces of blood found in O.J.'s vehicle, house, and on his clothing.
The police tore apart the plumbing in Rockingham, O.J.'s estate, to see if he had washed himself clean.
The prosecutors claimed the bloody glove found at the scene of the murders fell off O.J. during the attack.
When the prosecutors bone-headedly had O.J. try on the gloves in the courtoom (bone-headed because they should not have instigated something unless they knew for certain it would strengthen their case), the gloves were way too small for O.J. — in fact, they were so small, he couldn't even put them on.
According to the book ""O.J. is Guilty, But Not of Murder"" by private detective William C Dear— who spent six years investigating the case— the most likely suspect is O.J.'s son Jason.
Despite the fact that Dear's book is written rather amateurishly (many of the conversations he records seem stilted — the dialog he reports does not ring true, or at least does not sound natural), the conclusions he draws are perhaps worth considering.
The police investigators at the scene of the crime had done a very sloppy job of collecting evidence, examining the crime scene, and maintaining the integrity of the forensic evidence.
For example, photographs show them at the scene without rubber gloves or protective booties over their shoes.
They walked from one body to the other, thus carrying evidence from one location to the other.
Perhaps worst of all, they covered Nicole's body with a blanket from another location in the house — and the blanket was doubtless contaminated with hair, etc. which could have then been transferred from the blanket onto her clothing and body.
Jason was a chef, and owned a collection of chef's knives which he carried with him to and from work.
He had worked as a chef that night, and may have been upset with Nicole for promising to bring the family to the restaurant where he worked after her daughter's dance recital but then changing her mind.
Jason had prepared for their appearance by reserving a table for them and ordering special food.
Not only that, Jason had been arrested (in fact, was still on probation at the time of the murders) for assault with a deadly weapon.
He had on at least one occasion deliberately stabbed himself in a suicide attempt.
Dear makes the claim in his book that Jason suffers from IRD , a condition which causes people to ""go berserk,"" after which they oftentimes don't remember what they did while in that state.
On one occasion, he chopped off the hair of one of these ex-girlfriends in a fit or rage using one of his chef's knives.
Regarding O.J.'s Bruno Magli shoes, whose imprints were found at the crime scene, Jason often borrowed his father's clothing.
When first questioned about his whereabouts on that fateful and fatal night, Jason claimed he hadn't spoken with Nicole since a couple of weeks before her murder.
After yet more questioning, he admitted to speaking with her the day before she was murdered, and finally, on the day of the murders.
One minute he's the sweetest nicest guy you ever met and the next minute he's all angry and upset, a Dr.
There was one time — I don't even remember what for — when he dragged me into the bathroom and picked me up and held me over his head and dropped me into the empty tub.
Nor were his fingerprints examined to compare them with those found at the murder scene.
Defense attorney F Lee Bailey accused police officer Mark Fuhrman of finding a second bloody glove at the crime scene and surreptitiously depositing it at Rockingham.
Yet, in excerpts from taped interviews, Fuhrman was found to be a rank bigot, deriding minorities in the crudest of terms, bragging about beating suspects and evading discipline for such heinous behavior.
During his tenacious investigation, William Dear hired a London firm called Complete Investigations, an independent crime investigation laboratory run by two retired British policemen, Terry Merston and Peter Harpur, to appraise the job the LAPD had done.
Between them, Merston and Harpur had more than fifty-eight years of combined investigative experience.
He also commits the... sin of attending other connected scenes during the investigation, therefore creating the real possibility of contaminating the other scenes.
It is obvious from the carnage at the murder scene and other evidence that the murderer would have had to have been in close contact with both of the victims.
Due to the severity of the injuries and the amount of wounds resulting in the severing of both jugular veins of Nicole Simpson and one jugular vein of Ronald Goldman, causing blood to gush from the victims, there is no doubt that the perpetrator of these vicious attacks would have been soaked in blood from head to foot.
The distinct lack of blood in the Ford Bronco would therefore exclude it from being the murderer's 'get away' vehicle.
A scenario, or theory, of Dear's is that after Jason killed Nicole and Ron, O.J. somehow found out about it — perhaps after receiving a call from Jason on his cell phone.
O.J. may have then gone to the scene to check on not only Nicole, but also on his younger son Justin and daughter Sydney.
Thus could he have picked up the traces of blood that were found on his clothing, in his car, and in his estate.
Suspiciously, when being questioned about the incident, Jason made a point of claiming he did not own a cell phone, whereas in actuality telephone company records show that he did.
Simpson was in all probability at the murder scene, at some time after the events, for some reason best known to himself.
Many people are 100% certain O.J. is guilty; others are just as convinced of his innocence.
It is possible that the only person alive who knows who the murderer was is the murderer himself.
I think you'll find the facts also work if you assume everyone is endlessly stupid.
There was a vast gap among Americans as to their response to this decision.
Only a little more than one-third of whites concurred with the verdict , whereas twice as many, almost three-quarters of blacks held the jury's decision to be the right one.
Similar to the situation with the Rodney King-related trial of a few years earlier, O.J. was found guilty in a subsequent wrongful death civil trial and ordered to pay $8 million in damages to the families of Ron Goldman and the family of his ex-wife, Nicole Brown Simpson.
United States Army veterans Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols bombed the Alfred P Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April 19 th , on the two-year anniversary of the Waco/Branch Davidian disaster.
Included in the dead were nineteen children who had been in the building's day-care center on the first floor.
His accomplice Terry Nichols is serving a life sentence for involuntary manslaughter (although it is difficult to understand why the results of their deed could be considered involuntary) and conspiring with McVeigh.
Even if you concur that various individuals from a few government agencies were culpable in the Waco and Ruby Ridge debacles, it is quite a challenge to puzzle out how bombing a federal office building— one which contained no military or secret service offices, but which did include a day-care center on the ground floor— could be considered a blow against tyranny, a strike in the cause of justice.
Besides the hundreds of people directly affected by the despicable and incomprehensible crime against humanity— that is to say, those killed and their family and friends— others too were seriously impacted.
Within twenty minutes, police K-9 teams from Oklahoma City arrived on the scene.
Within six hours of the blast, the first volunteer search and rescue teams from outside the area arrived.
By midnight, the focus of the search had shifted from locating live victims to recovering bodies.
The search and rescue operation was extremely stressful for the seventy-four dogs used in the effort as well as their handlers.
It was not until May 29 th , a full forty days after the mass murder, that the last three bodies were recovered by two Oklahoma City Police Department patrol/ search dogs.
Strategies of Real-Life Search 85 Rescue Missions,"" in a chapter written by Marilyn Neudeck-Dicken, Ph.
Dogs experienced exposure to chemical toxins, asbestos, body fluids, eye irritants, and cuts, to name a few.
Could the high incidence of cancer and blindness of the dogs who were in the first responding dog teams be a result of these exposures?... long-term ramifications of the bombing not only affected the dogs, but also the handlers as well.
Neudeck-Dicken, herself a search-and-rescue worker, goes on to relate some of the affects the disaster had on the rescue personnel who responded.
Sixty-eight per cent of the dog handlers at Oklahoma City demonstrated acute stress reactions for over two years.
Of the dog handlers who were not emergency personnel by occupation, 25% of them dropped out of Search 85 Rescue immediately after returning home.
Being from Virginia we felt that we were very familiar with the mystique of ""the genteel South"" and its hospitality.
Yet every time that we met the locals, they expressed their gratitude and concern that we should be careful.
At first we interpreted this as a method to encourage us to work harder, but as the days wore on, we realized that they knew we were truly working as hard as we could.
The citizens waited on us hand and foot and we actually had to be careful what we requested since anything we asked for was delivered.
Besides having our meals supplied, a small support city evolved within the confines of the Myriad.
This included podiatrists, opticians, masseuses, shipment anywhere by United Parcel Service, telephone service by Southwest Bell, and a barbershop.
These were people who just wanted to help or others who had family directly affected by the bombing.
At the age of ninety-five years and ten months, Dollena ""Dollie"" Shannon died on August 13 th in Humboldt County, California.
The world lost perhaps the greatest cinnamon roll maker/baker of all time.
In my studied and sober judgment on the matter, Dollie Madison (the bakery, not the former first lady) couldn't hold a candle to Dollie Shannon when it came to kitchen wizardry.
Chef is not a powerful enough word to convey Dollie 's mastery; the word artiste may better define what she was able to accomplish with her tools and instrument of choice — range, stove, and oven.
Plenty of roses, stars, sunsets, rainbows, brothers and sisters, aunts and cousins, comrades and friends but only one mother in the whole world.
All five of her children, and a dozen grandchildren as well as many great-grandchildren, survived her.
Perhaps we should start getting used to the idea that history is also a vast array of truths, hotly debated. "" — from the editorial ""Gone, but not Forgotten or Forgiven"" in the Halifax Chronicle Herald of January 19 th , 1998 ""If man does find the solution for world peace it will be the most revolutionary reversal of his record we have ever known.
John Gorham Boulevard ♦ Desert Fox ♦ Puerto Rico rejects a suitor In many of the early chapters of this book— those that covered the 1740s and 1750s— the exploits of Gorham's Rangers were explored.
A quarter millennium later these came into the limelight in Nova Scotia, as it was decided to name a street connecting Bedford and Sackville the ""Capt.
The web site ""The John Gorham Controversy"" contains a collection of 45 ""clippings"" about the whole debacle, which lasted through January and February of this year.
I was shocked, but not surprised, when the Department of Transportation named the connector road between Bedford and Sackville after a man who was considered by the Mi'kmaq and Acadians, and by many of his peers, to be an ""uncivilized savage.
Perhaps the most balanced and clear summary of the matter was provided by Parker Barss Donham, in an article entitled ""The Road Named Gorham,"" which appeared in the Sunday Daily Times of Halifax.
Those who want to name a local highway after a British colonial officer who committed atrocities against Micmac women and children make the following arguments: 1) Capt.
John Gorham was an important historical figure whose activities, including those lately criticized, provided the security necessary to establish a British colony on mainland Nova Scotia.
Moreover, Micmacs of the day, whose descendants object to naming a road after him, were not themselves above collecting enemy scalps.
If we don't take a stand against it here, there will be no end to the demands for sanitizing our history.
Americans at the time often used ""Mohawk"" as a generic term for any Indian.
The name of the road has now reverted to Glendale Avenue in Lower Sackville and Duke Street in Bedford.
Additionally, they had succeeded in producing large quantities of Anthrax.
When Clinton gave the word to begin the bombing, his impeachment hearings were postponed — but only for twenty-four hours.
American military analyst Anthony H Cordesman held a different viewpoint regarding the effectiveness of the attacks.
Cordesman said, ""the initial assertions of significant damage inflicted on Iraq appears to be an awkward combination of propaganda and complete rubbish.
While Hussein may have shrugged off the attacks, or even tangentially benefited by them, the Iraqi people were the ones to be pitied.
They had been attacked on and off for seven years by the U.S., both periodically from the skies, and daily as a result of sanctions imposed on the country.
These sanctions brought about privation, deprivation, and even death by starvation.
It has been estimated that 1,000,000 Iraqis, mostly children, have died as a result of the United States -sponsored United Nations sanctions.
This gross injustice has certainly not gone unnoticed throughout the world, especially in Muslim countries.
Hussein and his henchmen used poison gas to kill Kurds in Northern Iraq who wanted independence from his rule.
Lawrence had also advocated using poison gas against their enemies in the Middle East, this certainly proves Hussein's wickedness.
Certainly they knew that Hussein himself continued to live in the lap of luxury, sanctions or no sanctions.
Just as Americans would rally around President George Bush, Jr. in the wake of ""9/ 1 1"" in 2001, Iraqis rallied around their leader when their country was attacked, too.
It was the Americans and the Britons, or more specifically their governments, who are blamed most by the Iraqi populace in general for conditions there.
On December 13 th , voters in Puerto Rico rejected United States statehood in a non-binding referendum.
Understanding Globalization"" by Thomas Friedman ""The world is tired of the wealth and splendor that you have squeezed out of our blood and bone.
In the beginning, all men were alike and they lived in peace and they shared among them what they had.
You put little children into your mines and work them to death in a few months.
Others, including well-known computer consultant and author Ed Yourdon, considered the danger so severe that they made dramatic life changes.
Yourdon and other computer professionals (those whom one would think were in the best position to ascertain the most realistic state of affairs regarding how computer programs would ""act"") were sometimes the ones most vigorously fanning the flames of fear.
Some of them predicted a run on banks, small-business failures, and a stock market crash.
Others stocked up on canned goods, withdrew their money from the bank, or even built underground ""airraid"" shelters.
They were hoping to avoid the catastrophic effects of what was popularly called the Y2K bug.
The cause for alarm was the neglect of many programmers— due to previously strict memory and disk size requirements to save as much memory and disk space as possible in an era of expensive and limited computer memory— to allot four digits to store the year portion of date values.
For this reason (not planning for the future, or thinking their programs would be obsolete by the turn of the millennium), many programmers were stuffing the year value into just two digits.
Thus, 1958 was stored as simply 58, with 1900 being added to it elsewhere in the program when the date needed to be displayed, for example.
As the pivotal date drew close, most everyone was at least curious as to what would happen.
Many of those who had dismissed the warnings as a tempest in a teacup felt vindicated.
But others felt the only reason disaster was averted was due to the massive amount of time and effort that had been expended in advance in order to fix as much of the suspect computer code as possible.
The year 2000 may bring technological chaos, but the Federal Reserve Board wants to make sure that whatever happens, Americans will be able to buy groceries in the new millennium.
The central bank has ordered an additional $50 billion of new currency to pump into circulation in case consumers make a run on their banks and automated teller machines.
And no one will find out until New Year's Day 2000 or a week or two afterward.
We 're concerned about the potential disruption of power grids, telecommunications, and banking services.
Networks controlling power grids and the nation's air traffic control system were all at risk of suffering ill effects if the problems were not solved.
And it wasn't just people in the United States who were concerned, either.
Unless these systems are identified and changed, there could be global chaos.
As dates in the 20 th century would begin to be dealt with in computer programs even before the new century and millennium began, some of the problems should have started showing up even prior to the year 2000.
At one state prison, the bug made computers miscalculate the sentences of several inmates who were then released.
Some credit cards have been refused at stores and restaurants when their '00' expiration dates confused computers.
And in several states truckers have found their interstate licenses canceled when computers couldn't handle renewal applications with dates past the millennium.
It was estimated that corporations worldwide would need to invest $600 billion to solve the potential problems.
This required programmers to examine and fix source code written sometimes years before.
While re-writing the code, many other bugs and logic errors were fixed at the same time, or at least the code was updated to reflect modern needs.
In a lighter vein, the British computer programming journal ""The Delphi Magazine"" printed the article ""Ask not for whom the clock ticks"" in its July, 1999 number.
The only honest answer to the question, of course, is that I haven't the faintest clue.
I'm flattered that people think that because I work in the computer industry I have some kind of insider knowledge that makes me better-informed than the man on the street.
In my heart of hearts I suspect that the whole thing's been massively overblown and, apart from a minor irritations, life will carry on pretty much as before on 1 st January 2000.
But I've got nothing to back this up, and my hunches have been spectacularly wrong before.
Given that the questioner is usually the first person to show any interest in me all evening, my only recourse is to hide my total ignorance by making stuff up.
If the questioner is relatively young looking, I tell them airily that there's nothing to worry about, that it's all taken care of and the worst that can happen is that they might get some odd-looking bank statements for a couple of months.
Then I get to look wise and 'in the know', and hopefully they'll introduce me to one of the girls who came with them.
Or, if I'm talking to an oldie, perhaps somebody's elderly aunt or uncle, I suck my cheeks in mournfully and tell them that I'm expecting the worst.
It's going to be much worse than people think, I mutter conspiratorially.
They usually turn white, stagger slightly, then head off unsteadily to call their stockbroker.
The actuality was very mild, at least in comparison with what had been predicted and feared by many.
All in all, though, the world survived the Y2K bug better than it has many viruses spread by hackers.
And ""experts"" keep waiting for ""the big one"" which, many feel, is bound to hit at one time or another.
If terrorists are able to take down the Internet for an extended period of time, the adverse affects could be well-nigh incalculable.
And the more extensive and ubiquitous the Internet becomes— the more we rely on it for our banking, shopping, appointment-making, and ever more things— the more devastating such an attack would be.
In that sense, it is to the advantage of the hacker attackers to wait as long as they can— the longer they postpone their attack, the more damage they can do.
Ten years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, globalization had really begun to pick up steam.
The end of the Cold War led to the end of the artificially propped-up economies of the formerly communist nations.
Everybody has been trying to sell things to everybody else ever since — or so it sometimes seems.
In a nutshell, globalization is the growing worldwide interdependence of people and countries.
In some ways— on paper anyway— this breaking down of national barriers seems to bring benefits.
Understanding Globalization, while in general being proglobalization, also details many of the negatives it brings along with the positives.
Friedman also warns about even worse possibilities which can result from ""super-empowered"" evil men, and the tenuous position a world linked to the Internet as a lifeline places itself in.
Friedman's opinion is that Americans in particular have the duty of ""talking up"" globalization to the rest of the world, as we have more to gain from it than anyone, and we want as many supporters and as few detractors of it as possible.
It is perhaps telling that what we commonly refer to as ""globalization"" here in the United States is often called ""Americanization"" elsewhere.
Financially speaking, globalization is good for some people, and the opposite for others; good for some countries, bad for others; a boon to some companies, a death knell to others.
The increased market — practically the entire earth — opens many opportunities for corporations alert enough to take advantage of them.
And so, the successful corporations become super-successful, and ever larger.
It seems, at least, that a handful of corporations control the lion's share of business being conducted around the world.
Corporations are not immoral, but they are certainly amoral— lacking in morals, good or bad.
They are not really people and thus have no emotions, nor can they subscribe to any set of beliefs or hold any ethical values.
Corporations are, though, by law, required to make as much profit as possible.
Thus, a corporation is obligated by law, by its charter and by its mission, to do whatever it can, ethical or not, to increase its profits and thus its dividends and payouts to shareholders.
There is certainly quite a difference between a salesman who believes in his product and one who is a shyster, offering either nonexistent goods or goods whose quality he is not sure of.
We have to understand that today's global economic system is still so new and so fast that even our best minds don't fully understand how it works and what happens when you pull a level here or turn a dial there.
The United States Senate voted in favor of the North American Free Trade Agreement on November 19 th , 1993, allowing for the freer movement of goods, services, and investments between Canada, Mexico, and the United States.
During the meeting of the WTO this year in Seattle, Washington, large protests were held.
The police ended up using tear gas, rubber bullets, and pepper spray to restore order after the marches and demonstrations devolved into riots.
If you favor globalization, you probably think not; if you are against globalization, you are probably inclined to give credence to such a possibility.
The critics of globalization accuse Western countries of hypocrisy, and the critics are right.
The Western countries have pushed poor countries to eliminate trade barriers, but kept up their own barriers, preventing developing countries from exporting their agricultural products and so depriving them of desperately needed export income.
The United States was, of course, one of the prime culprits, and this was an issue about which I felt intensely.
When I was chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, I fought hard against this hypocrisy.
It not only hurt the developing countries; it also cost Americans, both as consumers, in the higher prices they paid, and as taxpayers, to finance the huge subsidies, billions of dollars.
But these drug companies in the developing world were making these life-saving drugs available to their citizens at a fraction of the price at which the drugs were sold by the Western drug companies.
Advocates said this would provide them more incentive to innovate; but the increased profits from sales in the developing world were small, since few could afford the drugs, and hence the incentive effect, at best, might be limited.
The other side was that thousands were effectively condemned to death, because governments and individuals in developing countries could no longer pay the high prices demanded.
The global protests over globalization began at the WTO meetings in Seattle, Washington, because it was the most obvious symbol of the global inequities and the hypocrisy of the advanced industrial countries.
While these countries had preached — and forced — the opening of the markets in the developing countries to their industrial products, they had continued to keep their markets closed to the products of the developing countries, such as textiles and agriculture.
While they preached the virtues of competitive markets, the United States was quick to push for global cartels in steel and aluminum when its domestic industries seemed threatened by imports.
One of the reasons globalization is being attacked is that it seems to undermine traditional values.
Economic growth — including that induced by globalization — will result in urbanization, undermining traditional rural societies.
Unfortunately, so far, those responsible for managing globalization, while praising these positive benefits, all too often have shown an insufficient appreciation of this adverse side, the threat to cultural identity and values.
Europe defends its agricultural policies not just in terms of those special interests, but to preserve rural traditions.
People in small towns everywhere complain that large national retailers and shopping malls have killed their small businesses and their communities.
Many of the rich have become super-rich, and even more of the poor have gone from simply needy to downright desperate.
Even those countries that have experienced some limited growth have seen the benefits accrue to the well-off, and especially the very well-off— the top 1 percent — while poverty has remained high, and in some cases the income of those at the bottom has fallen.
Modern high-tech warfare is designed to remove physical contact: dropping bombs from 50,000 feet ensures that one does not ""feel"" what one does.
Vastly and disproportionately, it is funneled to the relatively few at the top.
If we continue to allow hundreds of thousands of our young people black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, white to grow up without a feeling that they have a stake in this society, if we let them come into young adulthood without ever holding a meaningful job, without any sense of hope, I think we are asking for trouble.
We can't circle the wagons in suburban developments with armed guards at the gates and believe that we are safe.
The people, the masses, will eventually arrive at those gates, angry and upset, and then it will be too late.
The average wealth of those two hundred is thus the equivalent of the total owned by twelve million poor people.
Sitting Bull said that white people were good at making things, but not at fairly distributing those things.
The affliction of acquisitiveness at the expense of others seems to cross racial and ethnic lines.
Many have actually been made worse off, as they have seen their jobs destroyed and their lives become more insecure.
They have felt increasingly powerless against forces beyond their control.
If globalization continues to be conducted in the way that it has been in the past, if we continue to fail to learn from our mistakes, globalization will not only not succeed in promoting development but will continue to create poverty and instability.
Without reform, the backlash that has already started will mount and discontent with globalization will grow.
Seattle was not the only locale where demonstrations against globalization took place.
And since the ""Battle in Seattle,"" the demonstrations against globalization have grown larger in size and have increased in intensity.
For that reason, some meetings of the WTO have been held in isolated locations to ward off these masses of angry protesters.
On April 20 th of this year, fifteen people were killed at Columbine High School.
One teacher, the two student gunmen and thirteen innocent classmates made up the fifteen.
Columbine is by no means the only contemporary example of school violence.
The book ""Columbine High School Shooting"" by Judy L Hasday contains a chart that lists eleven other fatal incidents in American schools between early 1996 and early 2001.
Dylan Klebold, whose mother was a counselor at a nearby community college, had as a boy played in Little League and been a Boy Scout.
Although a complaint was filed by the parents of one boy who was threatened by name, the police never investigated the matter.
Had they been successful, the death toll could have been much higher than fifteen.
The day that Harris and Klebold referred to as ""Judgment Day"" began normally.
Harris, in fact, showed up on time at 6:15 that morning for his bowling class at a local bowling alley.
According to detailed descriptions of their plans, which were discovered after the attack, Harris and Klebold had been planning the attack for over a year.
Harris and Klebold planned to detonate the propane bombs at 11:17, during first lunch, then position themselves outside the cafeteria so as to shoot the surviving victims as they exited the building.
The two brought shotguns and semi-automatic weapons with them for this purpose.
At the pre-arranged time, the two youths placed the duffel bugs containing the propane tanks inside the cafeteria, went outside, strapped on their weapons, put on trench coats, and waited for the bombs to explode.
Not wanting to call off their killing spree, Harris and Klebold improvised.
Seemingly indiscriminately, they wandered around the cafeteria and other areas in the school, shooting just about everybody they came across, and tossing pipe bombs around.
Soon, the school was filled with smoke from the pipe bombs, noise from the fire alarms that the smoke triggered, water from the automatic overhead sprinklers — and the prone bodies of the dead and wounded.
Fear, pain, chaos and death ensued for forty minutes, until Harris and Klebold took their own lives at 12:05.
Those on the outside didn't know how many gunmen there were, or exactly where inside the school they were located.
Although the police did not have or make the time to investigate the complaint about Harris' threats published on his web site, after the fact 80 detectives spent eight months interviewing 4,500 witnesses and gathering 10,000 pieces of evidence.
Angela's father, a teacher named Dave Sanders, had courageously come to the aid of students during the crisis.
After he was wounded, it took SWAT teams almost three hours to reach Mr Sanders.
It should be noted, though, that those officers may have been more than willing to ""move"" earlier, but had to wait on orders allowing them to do so.
For the record, some people assert that there were other attackers in addition to Klebold and Harris.
Specifically, many students reported seeing a third, older man, with the two youths outside the school when the mayhem began.
He was dressed differently than Klebold and Harris and was seen throwing something on the roof of the building.
Whether this is a case of unreliable witnesses muddying the waters, or a cover-up, I don't know.
It is the Nation 's confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law.
Mencken ""The principal difference between a cat and a lie is that the cat has only nine lives.
The System is just too powerful, it's like quicksand, and I would have been sucked in.
Thus, about 3,500 citizens were being added each month to the United States Total.
A century earlier, in 1900, only thirteen per cent of Americans lived in cities; by this year, the percentage of urbanites had quadrupled to fifty per cent.
For the Branstuders, their way of life remained for the most part more like a typical 1900 existence than the average lifestyle of people alive in the year 2000.
As are her parents Lizzie and Jim, Ruie is buried in Gravette, Arkansas, near the old Branstuder home which had stood in Hiwasse.
This leaves only one surviving member of the Branstuder household, Lula Mae Dixon.
The healthy skepticism, attention to detail, and sound business fundamentals required for wise investing seemed to have flown out the window in a flurry of feathers, as a free-for-all feeding frenzy ensued.
Many companies with minor-league quality products had been wooed by hopeful companies and bankrolled by unsavvy investors.
The chickens came home to roost when many of these companies were not able to bring their product to market or find a niche in their target market.
Many of these companies projected for stardom only ended up in the ""bigs"" for the proverbial ""cup of coffee"" before they submerged, never to be heard from again.
Some young hotshots who had been CEOs of these startups fell hard and fast and were soon to be found flipping burgers in fast-food joints, regaling their co-workers with tales of the halcyon days.
In a reverse rags-to-riches tale, the Phoenix had incinerated and returned to the ashes.
Some had made millions, to be sure, but many of them lost that money as fast as they had attained it.
Neither George W Bush nor Al Gore really struck a chord with the majority of the nation's citizens.
Turnout at the polls was relatively low, as both candidates avoided the hot-button issues as much as possible, and many Americans did not feel a personal stake in the election's results.
Nevertheless, the election was an extremely close one, and the final results were not known for more than a month following election day.
Gore was leading in both the popular vote and electoral votes with three states still too close to call, namely Oregon, New Mexico, and Florida.
Of the three undecided states, the only one that really mattered was Florida, with its 25 electoral votes.
No matter what happened with the latter two, the winner of Florida would get the keys to the White House door.
At first, it seemed that Gore had won that key state, and such was announced on television.
Later, though, the news media flip-flopped and said that actually Bush had won.
In the first count of Florida's votes, Bush was ahead by a mere 1,800 votes.
This triggered an automatic recount, as according to Florida law a margin of victory of less than 2,000 votes must be examined more closely.
For thirty-six days everyone was in suspense as to the election's outcome.
The democrats wanted widespread recounts, citing voting abnormalities and irregularities.
The Florida Supreme Courtmost of whose members had been appointed by Democratic Presidentsdecided in favor of a recount.
Many blacks with names similar to the names of ex-cons were excluded from voting.
In a move to prevent the excons from voting, they had apparently ""thrown out the baby with the bathwater"" by removing all with similar names from the list.
As most people named ""Harold Washington"" are black, preventing anyone with that name from voting because one ex-con bears that name may meant the disenfranchisement of many Harold Washingtons.
Historically, blacks tend to vote the Democratic ticket more often than the Republican.
In addition to that, problems were found with many of the ballots themselves.
A ""hanging chad"" was caused when a person used a stylus to punch the perforation that corresponded to his candidate of choice.
These votes were not counted, as the machines used to count could not compute with certainty the intention of the voter.
The so-called ""butterfly ballot"" was a problem due to its confusing design.
The hole for Bush was right next to his name, but those for Gore and right-wing extremist Pat Buchanan were not in the same spot relative to their name.
Many elderly Jewish voters realized too late that they had accidentally voted for Buchanan , when they actually intended to vote for Gore.
The belief that he is is enough to make it highly unlikely that Jewish people would deliberately vote for him.
She was a Bush delegate to the Republican National Convention and was very active in his campaign.
His brother Jeb was at the time, and still is at the time of writing, Governor of Florida.
We see whites live alone and die alone, and it seems that an excess of money may only bring loneliness.
We pity the shyster businessmen, the chiseling coal developers, the rip-off land developers who have no people with them.
People here only ask a decent life — a roof, a decent car, an education for their children, good water, to be near their relatives, and near the mountains and the land.
And no wonder, for Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light.
It is therefore nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness.
If not, you may want to start because it 's going to be a long time before we trust you again.
This year, though, when Seven World Trade Center collapsed, it seemed to be an afterthought, taking a back seat to even worse calamities on a horrific day in late-summer— September 1 1 th to be precise.
The targets were buildings and icons, the direct casualties were people going about their daily business.
On this sunny late summer morn, four commercial airliners were apparently hijacked.
Two of them, originating in Boston, Massachusetts, were flown into the World Trade Center, eighteen minutes apart.
The pilot angled the jets wings so that the lower wing entered the tower at the 93 rd floor, the upper wing at the 98 th floor.
In this case, too, the plane's wings were angled so that the hole created stretched from the 77 th to the 85 th floors.
The initial collision raised concerns about a terrorist attack, but the possibility remained that the plane crashing into the building was a tragic mistake.
One woman who was on the scene, Cynthia Tucker, at first thought that a terrible accident had occurred.
The noise was so loud that it was like being underwater; I felt the sound.
People were taking off their shirts to cover their faces because of the dust.
A man named Joshua had been in the north tower, teaching a class on the fortieth floor.
I looked up at the towers and saw that both buildings had been sliced open.
Then I heard an eerie sound — an uncanny silence as if thousands of people were holding their breath.
At around 10m., less than an hour after being struck, the south tower collapsed.
Most people in the north tower were unaware the south tower had fallen.
They heard and/or felt its collapse, though not knowing just what had happened.
Some assumed that a third plane, which had been rumored to be on its way, had struck one of the buildings.
But the plane that had been spotted, giving rise to the rumors, was not a hijacked airliner, but a military plane on its way to intercept the hijacked planes.
The loss of the twin 1 10-story towers, completed in 1973, left a gaping void in downtown Manhattan.
The vacuum was not just physical; nor was the altering of the landscape, which seemed too surreal to be assimilated by many of the onlookers.
It had already been too much, more than many could bear, but the terrorists were not yet finished.
A third plane had flown into the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. at 9:43m.
President George W Bush, who had been visiting an elementary school in Sarasota, Florida, was whisked away on Air Force One.
The fourth and final hijacked airliner went down in an empty field in rural Somerset County, Pennsylvania, not far from Pittsburgh.
The bucolic field in rural Pennsylvania was not the intended landing spot of the terrorists.
They were apparently successful in preventing the hijackers from flying the plane to their intended destination.
And indeed, the attack was compared to that day that lives in infamy, December 7 th , 1941, in its effect on the American people in particular, and the world in general.
Another comparison has been made between the collapse of the Twin Towers and the sinking of the Titanic.
As the Titanic was considered unsinkable, so many viewed the Twin Towers as indestructible.
As to the World Trade Center towers, the three stairways they had were the bare minimum to meet the building code (the smaller Empire State Building has nine), but were not enough— because so many people were attempting to simultaneously evacuate, and because the staircases were all situated close to one another rather than being spread out throughout the buildings.
Most of the staircases were destroyed beyond usability, as were the greater number of the elevators.
In addition to the Americans killed, citizens of eighty countries had died in the attacks, and many of those nations joined forces to fight the terrorists.
According to official reports, the terrorists were sponsored chiefly by Saudi multi-millionaire Osama bin Laden, who was living under the protection of the Islamic Taliban government in Afghanistan.
Late this year, the Pentagon released a videotape of bin Laden, in which the al Qaeda leader says the attacks of September 1 1 th had exceeded his ""most optimistic"" expectations.
This was by no means the first time that al Qaeda had attacked United States targets, but this was the first time they had done so on American soil.
Previous targets had been hit throughout the Middle East and Africa, including the crippling of the United States battleship Cole off the shores of Yemen in October of 2000, which had killed seventeen United States sailors.
A message to the American people: Peace be upon those who follow the right path.
I urge you to seek the joy of life and the after life and to rid yourself of your dry, miserable, and spiritless materialistic existence.
I urge you to become Muslims, for Islam calls for the principle of ""there is no God but Allah,"" and for justice and forbids injustice and criminality.
We regret to tell you that you are the worst civilization in the history of mankind.
The Taliban regime in Afghanistan was given the ultimatum to turn over all al Qaeda leaders living in that country.
Similar to Saddam Hussein's response after being given the United Nations ultimatum a decade earlier to quit Kuwait, the Taliban was defiant.
And, in fact, an attack by the United States on al Qaeda in Afghanistan was not unwelcome by bin Laden.
Bin Laden would also be happy two years later when the United States invaded Iraq.
In the writer's view, that was too late — al Qaeda had by then had time to disperse, melt into the surrounding villages and countryside, and dig in.
It should be noted that there are many who suspect a United States government conspiracy behind the attacks, claiming the towers could not have blown up as they did, and come down as they had, lest bombs had been planted inside them prior to the planes striking them.
Some conspiracy theorists also claim that the airliner that supposedly struck the Pentagon was bogus, due to the minimal damage it did to the building and their claim that there was no wreckage of the plane remaining at the site.
Some of these agencies were also aware that Arabs with known or at least suspected ties to terrorist organizations were taking flying lessons in the U.S., and that some of these novice pilots were not interested in learning how to take off and land aircraft, just how to guide them while in flight.
These should have been clues; bells should have gone off; suspicions should have been shared between agencies , regardless of the ""sibling rivalry""— the ""bad blood"" and competition that historically exist between them.
Two months previously, in July, the late John O'Neill quit his job as Deputy Director of the FBI in disgust because the Bush administration was not allowing him to pursue Islamic terrorists as aggressively as he wished to.
San Francisco mayor Willie Brown, who was planning a trip to the east coast, was warned at 10m. on September 10 th to be very cautious about flying.
No Surprise,"" (from the book Everything You Know Is Wrong): At the very least, the success of the 91 1 attacks reveals gross incompetence, criminal negligence, and general stupidity on the part of intelligence and other aspects of the government.
If there is any truth to the conspiracy theories, such wicked maneuverings would not be something that had never before been considered.
A History of Official Deception and Its Consequences reported on a similar scenario during the Cuban missile crisis of the Kennedy era (""the island"" mentioned refers to Cuba): In March the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff proposed an absolutely incredible series of actions, including acts of terrorism against United States Citizens, the United States Space program, and internationally bound air travel — including students — for the purposes of surreptitiously provoking a global reaction that would justify a United States Invasion and occupation of the island.
The only way such a thing could have been perpetrated is if among that large group not a single one of them possessed a shred of decency, and all of them were criminally insane.
Yet, it is said that writer Hunter S Thompson was investigating 9/11, attempting to expose a massive cover-up and government plot, when he died at the age of 67 as a result of a gunshot wound to the head.
At any rate, as had taken place at Ruby Ridge, the rules of engagement were changing again with regards to the response to terrorism.
In America, the so-called ""Patriot Act"" changed the way suspects were dealt with; in Britain, whose government is America's staunchest ally, suspects were shot in the head — a realization of the old ""shoot first, and ask questions later"" method of interrogation.
In October, United States forces invaded Afghanistan, outlawed the Taliban government, and set up a proUnited States government.
These methods will bring only greater instability and disorder in the world.
North Korea is a regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction, while starving its citizens.
States like these, and their terrorist allies, constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten then peace of the world.
The prophet Muhammad himself was said to have personally taken part in seventy-eight battles.
In fact, defensive jihads are considered by Muslims an unavoidable personal responsibility when the Muslim faith, Muslim land, or Muslim people themselves are attacked.
War with one Muslim people or land, then, is by Islamic definition war with all Muslims.
One of the greatest dangers for Americans in deciding how to confront the Islamist threat lies in continuing to believe — at the urging of senior United States leaders — that Muslims hate and attack us for what we are and think, rather than for what we do.
The Islamic world is not so offended by our democratic system of politics, guarantees of personal rights, and civil liberties, and separation of church and state that it is willing to wage war against overwhelming odds in order to stop Americans from voting, speaking freely, and praying, or not, as they wish.
With due respect for those who have concluded that we are hated for what we are, think, and represent, I beg to disagree and contend that your conclusion is errant and potentially fatal nonsense.
The author goes on to point out that it is United States policies toward Muslim nations— not how we live, or ""our freedom""— that have moved Muslims to act against the United States After all, Muslims in Afghanistan fought against communist Russia, too.
Bin Laden and most militant Muslims, therefore, can be said to be motivated by their love for Allah and their hatred for a few, specific United States policies and actions they believe are damaging — and threatening to destroy — the things they love.
While they will use whatever weapon comes to hand — including weapons of mass destruction — their goal is not to wipe out our secular democracy, but to deter us by military means from attacking the things they love.
There is evidence to the contrary, in fact, showing bin Laden and other Islamist leaders would like to end the war, get back to their families, and live a less martial lifestyle.
They are weary of war, but not war weary in a way making them ready to compromise or fight less enthusiastically.
In both cases, participating in a defensive jihad was a duty to God and therefore had to be pursued until victory or martyrdom.
For the Afghans, their jihad continued until the Soviets were stopped from destroying Islam, killing Muslims, and occupying Afghan land — the three things they love most and that united the ethnically and linguistically diverse insurgent groups.
While America's political, military, and media elites portray efforts to kill bin Laden as nothing more than a necessary act to annihilate a deranged gangster, many Muslims see that effort as an attempt to kill a heroic and holy man who lives and works only to protect his brethren and preserve their faith.
While Americans are told United States forces are hunting an Arab version of Timothy McVeigh, Muslims are praying and working for the survival of a man better characterized for them as a combination of Robin Hood and St.
Francis ofAssisi, an inspiring, devout leader who is unlikely to be betrayed for $25 million in United States reward money.
The anonymous writer of ""Imperial Hubris"" is not optimistic regarding United States chances for victory in Afghanistan.
Many questions still remain about the tragedies of 9/ 1 1, and doubtless will linger for a long time to come.
Some conspiracy theorists believe that the 1941 attacks on Pearl Harbor were allowed— or even orchestrated by— FDR (well-known as a prevaricator), as a means to get the American public behind the war.
Why, sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast.
This seemingly strange etymology stems from the black scabs that form over the scars of those who have been in contact with anthrax-infected livestock.
A more dangerous effect of Anthrax in humans can occur when they breathe in the anthrax spores.
Anthrax appeals to terrorists because it is easy to cultivate and is hardy.
Letters laced with weapons-grade anthrax spores killed five people in the United States this year.
Among those targeted were Senator Tom Daschle and television news commentator Tom Brokaw.
As frightening as biological attacks are, very few of them kill more than a few people.
According to one assessment by the United States government, if two hundred twenty pounds of aerosolized anthrax were released over a major city, the effects could be as lethal as a hydrogen bomb.
The World Medical Association recognizes the growing threat that biological weapons might be used to cause devastating epidemics that could spread internationally.
The release of organisms such as smallpox, plague, and anthrax could prove catastrophic in terms of the resulting illnesses and deaths compounded by the panic such outbreaks would generate. — American Medical Association.
Their symptoms might baffle doctors or mimic those of more common illnesses.
By the time health care workers realize what is going on, entire cities could be infected. — ""Scientific American"" magazine If the smallpox virus were released today, the majority of the world's population would be defenseless, and given the virus' 30 percent kill rate, nearly two billion people could die. — ""Foreign Affairs"" magazine Anthrax was deliberately developed as a weapon in the second half of the 1900s by a number of countries, the United States and Russia among them.
The culprit or culprits of the anthrax attack have not as yet been apprehended.
On the surface, Enron seemed like a terrific company in which to invest.
The poster child of deregulation, Enron had started life as a Houston oil pipeline company and morphed into being primarily an energy broker.
Yet there was a disconnect between how Enron presented itself and who it really was behind closed doors.
Enron's incrediby complex and meticulously manipulated bookkeeping was a maze of partnerships and subsidiaries that camouflaged shady deals and pernicious problems.
In the end, company officials admitted overstating earnings by $586 million.
Enron posted a $638 million loss in the third quarter for this year, and also admitted owing a whopping $3 billion dollars.
Following a reduction of its stock to junk-bond status, a hoped-for acquisition by chief rival Dynegy (which was up to that point a much smaller company than Enron), which would have infused $23 billion into the company, fell apart.
Based on the juggling, ventriloquism, optical illusions, high-wire acts, sleight of hand card tricks, and men being shot out of cannons that were constantly being conjured up by Chief Financial Officer Andy Fastow, he and his cohorts would have been more fitted to life in a traveling circus.
Andy had no qualms about manipulating matters so that his personal fortune was enhanced, either.
When their accounting shenanigans really got out of control near the end, when they were not just cooking the books but charbroiling them in true Cajun fashion, their accomplices at Arthur Andersen (who should have served as a check on overzealous Enron officials and, if necessary, a whistle-blower to the SEC and/ or the IRS) chose not to report them.
In fact, Arthur Andersen left it up to their client, Enron, to turn themselves in — or not.
This method allows a company to post all the estimated future earnings of a deal into the company's books immediately.
While doing this made Enron look good out on paper, it put pressure on them to continue landing more and bigger long-term contracts.
This they needed to do because corporations are judged by those they care most about primarily by growth.
If they recorded $100 million in earnings in one quarter, the pressure was on to record more than that the next quarter, even more than that in the quarter after that, and so forth.
The treadmill revolves ever faster, and its incline rises ever steeper.
The deceit and cheating eventually caught up to the unprincipled principals of Enron.
The Amazing Rise and Scandalous Fall of Enron, "" Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind write regarding Andy Fastow's tricky accounting schemes: Many of Fastow's structured-finance vehicles, which seemed so clever — even elegant — not long before, now stood revealed as rickety contraptions, lashed to one another and rigged to explode.
Rather than a reliable Rube Goldberg-esque construct, Fastow's machinations resembled a TNT-laden train trestle.
Finally caught with their collective hands in the cookie jar, the exposure of the leaders led to bankruptcy for Enron, personal shame and jail time for many of the master mirror mechanics at Enron, the crumbling of Arthur Andersen, and the loss of huge amounts of investor's money.
At the time Enron collapsed, they were on the verge of moving into a new corporate headquarters building across the street from their relatively spartan former digs.
The building's current occupants could save a little money on interior decorating costs by using Enron stock as wallpaper.
Like currency bearing the visage of Jefferson Davis, such stocks are now hardly worth more than the paper on which they were printed.
The intensified public scrutiny that settled in after the fallout of the Enron implosion shone a light on cooked books and funny business at other corporations, too.
Some of these to quickly make the news in a similar negative fashion as had Enron were WorldCom, Global Crossing, Adelphia, and Tyco.
The accounting firm that Enron used, and who aided and abetted them in their steamy ""book"" kitchen, Arthur Andersen, was also a casualty of the self-inflicted wound of complicity in egregious wrongdoing.
On August 1 1 th , 2005, WorldCom finance chief Scott Sullivan was sentenced to five years in prison for his high-ranking role in the largest accounting fraud in United States history.
A total of $1 1 billion was mishandled — a stupendous sum which averages out to more than $30 for every man, woman, and child in the United States.
More than two centuries of government 'of the people, by the people, and for the people' in the United States came to an end at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
And every week, if not more, people will say, 'God, that was a close call.
Strangelove"" ""If what America represents to the world is a leadership in a commonwealth of equals, then our friends are legion; if what we represent is empire, then it is our enemies who will be legion.
As happened two years prior, most of those victimized were civilians, trying to get on with the business of day-to-day living.
An advance force of carpet bombs was to be followed by an ""army"" of carpetbaggers.
The stage had been set the previous year, when The House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly to give President George W Bush the authority to use military force against Iraq, whether the United Nations gave its blessing to such or not.
The Senate then joined the House in an even greater show of solidarity in favor of the use of America's military against Iraq.
In the Eye of the Storm,"" Dilip Hiro writes of the alleged Iraq/al Qaeda connection: According to the longtime Saudi intelligence chief Prince Turki, who possessed volumes of intelligence on Iraq and bin Laden, ""Iraq does not come very high in the estimation of bin Laden.
Jamal al Fadl, a key Al Qaeda defector, said there were individual Iraqis in Al Qaeda but there was no specific Iraqi group that Al Qaeda was backing.
He told the United States authorities that bin Laden criticized Saddam ""sometimes for attacking Muslims and killing women and children, but most importantly for not believing in 'most of Islam, ' and for setting up his own political party, the Baath.
So the idea of an alliance between Saddam and Al Qaeda seemed outlandish.
Hiro also brings out in his book that Israel was guilty of being in breech of more United Nations Security Council resolutions than Iraq was, so attacking them on that basis, as the United States sometimes claimed, rings hollow.
The United Nations weapons inspectors had been searching for such, but in vain.
The Bush administration, though, ran out of patience and apparently thought the inspectors weren't looking hard enough.
By invading Iraq, Washington will initiate a conflict the course of which is very hard to predict.
The best scenario projected by the United States hawks shows Iraqi soldiers defecting in droves and civilians welcoming the Americans as liberators.
Such an eventuality is based on the information and expectations of the exiled Iraqi opposition.
History shows that exiles are the last people to have a correct grasp of the current situation in the country they have left.
More recently in Iraqi Kurdistan, the scenario visualized by the Iraqi National Congress and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan in March 1995 failed to materialize.
To imagine that a people who have suffered grievously at the hands of the United States for twelve years, and have grown deep hatred for it, would turn out in thousands to greet American soldiers and their Iraqi cohorts as liberators seems unrealistic.
The United States has been generally wrong both in gauging popular feeling in Iraq and in devising policies likely to turn Iraqis against Saddam and his regime Leaving aside the immediate aftermath of the Gulf War, what has actually happened in Iraq is the opposite of Washington's scenarios, often conceived in consultation with the Iraqi opposition.
The United States has failed to grasp a basic element of popular psychology.
In Iraq this is precisely what happened after the Pentagon's bombings of Iraq — in January and June 1 993, September 1996, December 1998, and February 2001.
Also, far from causing Saddam's ousting or destabilization of his regime, the United States policy of maintaining punishing sanctions against Iraq has ended up — albeit inadvertently — aiding him to tighten his grip over society by a most effective instrument of rationing.
Not only was he, as the dictator of the country, to a great extent immune to personal privation, the sanctions allowed him to blame any and all bad conditions in Iraq on the sanctions, and simultaneously increase, rather than diminish, his control over the people.
This was so because his government was administering the distribution and dissemination of necessities, doling out what little there was to those who maintained their loyalty to him and his regime.
Since the invasion of Iraq, thousands of civilians there have been killed — not to mention members of both the United States and Iraqi military and police forces, as well as subjects of other countries.
According to the British medical journal The Lancet, approximately 100,000 Iraqi civilians, the majority of them women and children — have died in Iraq since the invasion this year.
Most of these deaths have been the result of air strikes by the United States -led ""coalition"" forces.
Among these fourteen were his wife and children as well as his parents.
As it had in 1991, 1993, 1996, and 1998, this year the United States bombed Iraq.
Like an attempt to smash a mosquito in a preschool classroom with a sledgehammer, the American military, in attempting to ""take out"" certain unsavory individuals, bombed and shelled the areas they were purported to be occupying.
In many cases, though, the bombs and shells killed Iraqi citizens with no connection to the military or its government.
As of the time of writing, the United States occupation of Iraq, three years old, continues, and with no end in sight.
Allegedly undertaken to fight terrorism, this tactical blunder, just like the invasion of Afghanistan, seems to have played right into Bush's archenemy Osama bin Laden 's hands.
Al Qaeda was overjoyed at this turn of events because now United States troops were spread out across Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Arabian Peninsula— close at hand, and easy to target.
There is nothing bin Laden could have hoped for more than the American invasion and occupation of Iraq.
Iraq is the second holiest land in Islam; a place where Islam had been long suppressed by Saddam; where the Sunni minority long dominated and brutalized the Shia majority; where order was kept only by the Baathist barbarity that prevented a long overdue civil war; and where, in the wake of Saddam's fall, the regional powers Iran and Saudi Arabia would intervene, at least clandestinely, to stop the creation of, respectively, a Sunni or Shia successor state.
In short, Iraq without Saddam would obviously become what political scientists call a ""failed state, "" a place bedeviled by its neighbors and — as is Afghanistan — a land where al Qaeda or al Qaeda-like organizations would thrive.
Surely, thought bin Laden, the Americans would not want to create this kind of situation.
In the end, something much like Christmas had come for bin Laden, and the gift he received from Washington will haunt, hurt, and hound Americans for years to come.
Ousting Saddam and replacing him with a democratic regime in Baghdad will open Iraq's rich oilfields to United States corporations, thus releasing the United States from its dependence on petroleum from Saudi Arabia, a fundamentalist kingdom that provided the bulk of the hijackers for the 9/11 attacks.
Furthermore, they claim, Washington will introduce democracy in Iraq, from where it is bound to spread to the rest of the region.
There is a well-known and oft-quoted aphorism about those ignorant of history being destined to repeat it.
It seems to apply even better than usual in this case, as Britain had earlier failed to harness Iraq.
A key point driven home in Jon Lee Anderson's book ""The Fall of Baghdad"" is that most Iraqis were glad to see Saddam Hussein removed from power, but they would not stand for the United States staying on and trying to run their country after the removal of Saddam was accomplished.
Most Iraqis want Americans to simply leave and allow them run their own affairs.
I wondered whether Washington's war planners had studied the history and taken some of its lessons into account.
Muslih told me that he and most other Iraqis had been pleased by the American overthrow of Saddam and had had high expectations of what would come next.
The only maxim of a free government ought to be to trust no man living with power to endanger the public liberty."" — John Adams ♦ Wiyot Tribe Gets Land ♦ George Shannon dies ♦ Eda Cordy dies ♦ Another close election ♦ Iraq Quagmire In May 2004, the city of Eureka, California and the Kay family, residents of that town, returned a portion of Indian/ Gunther Island to the Wiyot tribe.
A parcel of greater than forty acres was included in the transaction, including historic Tuluwat village, where the massacre of 1860 had taken place.
The tribe had earlier, following extensive fundraising efforts, purchased one and a half acres on the island.
Indians look around at the malls and stores of America, and say, 'None of this is ever going to be ours.
We don't need only to remember the tragedy, but to also remember the gift, to live in this place, to know it gave us birth, to feel the responsibility we have for it.
We have to sit down and figure out how to not hurt each other any more.
To see change as failure, as some kind of cultural corruption, is to condemn Indians to solitary confinement in a prison of myth that whites invented for them in the first place.
In the course of the past five centuries, Indian life has been utterly transformed by the impact of European horses and firearms, by imported diseases and modern medicine, by missionary zeal and Christian morality, by iron cookware, sheepherding, pickup trucks, rodeos and schools, by rum and welfare offices, and by elections, alphabets, and Jeffersonian idealism as well as by MTV, Dallas, and The Simpsons and by the rich mingling of native bloodlines with those of Europe, African, and the Hispanic Southwest.
In many ways, the Indian revolution of the 1990s is itself a form of adaptation, as Indians, freed from the lockstep stewardship of Washington, search out new ways to live in the modern world.
The Indian story does not, of course, end with an intellectual accommodation with the past or even a moral coming to terms.
Imagining that we see the Indian, we have often seen little more than a warped reflection of ourselves; when Indians have stepped from the roles to which we have assigned them, we have often seen nothing at all.
There will be no end to history, but an end may be put to the invention of distorting myth.
With that may come a recognition that Indians are not, at last, poignant vestiges of a lost age, but men and women of our own time, struggling to solve twentieth-century problems with the tools of our shared civilization.
To see Indians as they are is to see not only afar richer tapestry of life than our fantasies ever allowed but also the limitations of futile attempts to remake one another by force.
Stripped of myth, the relationship between Indians and other Americans may yet remain an uncertain one, an embrace that permits neither consummation nor release, but that is, nonetheless, full of hope.
A prosperous walnut grower in Tulare County, George seems to have known exactly what he wanted from an early age.
Nevertheless, he said that it was his brother Theodore who was truly the most successful in the family.
That leaves Albert's two half-sisters Lula Mae Dixon and Thora Wheeler as the only siblings of Pop Shannon, Albert Kollenborn, Esther Shannon Welch, and Alice Kollenborn who are still living.
Diebold is one of three major suppliers of electronic voting machines that were used in Ohio in 2004.
If we weren't convinced of that before these last elections, then now is the time to wake up to that fact.
Even beyond the fraudulent elections of 2000 and 2004, public policies are not now, nor have they ever been, settled through elections.
Reminding many people of Vietnam, the situation in Iraq seemed to go from bad to worse.
The Iraqis had been liberated from dictatorship by Operation Iraqi Freedom, but their newfound liberty was not something they could easily cherish.
Iraqis now had the freedom to express their opinions, to surf the Web and watch satellite TV, to ready any newspaper they wanted, and to join the political party of their choice ; but now too terrorists and criminals were free to strike at will, seemingly, against whomever they wanted, whenever and wherever they wanted.
It seems like a simple formula, but it was the essential ingredient still missing in Iraq a year after George W Bush declared it to have been delivered from evil.
No Iraqi I knew felt comforted or protected by the continued presence of 130,000 American soldiers in the country.
Because of the risks to their own safety, the American troops lived inside secure compounds like the Green Zone or Saddam's former palaces and military camps, protected by sentries and blast walls.
When they emerged, they engaged with Iraqi society from behind their protective coating of flak jackets and Kevlar helmets and weaponry, and they moved around in armoured vehicles, guns at the ready.
Most days, several of them were killed by ambushes or roadside bombs detonated by remote control.
After such incidents the soldiers often opened fire, sometimes wildly, spraying everything around them.
All too often they killed Iraqi civilians who just happened to be there, within range of their bullets.
In the month of March alone a series of targeted ambushes on Iraq's roads resulted in the deaths of about twenty Western civilians, including businessmen, civilian contractors, clergymen, and relief experts.
After the bombing of the Lebanon Hotel, which had apparently been targeted because it hosted some foreign guests (a British businessman was among the blast's victims), and subsequent attacks on other small, unguarded hotels, most Western reporters and other civilians remaining in Baghdad moved behind the walls that surrounded the Palestine and Sheraton or else to the Al-Hamra, which now was also surrounded by blast walls and armed guards.
Just about the only people in Baghdad living without such protection were the ordinary Iraqis, and for them, life had become just as hazardous.
The number of murders and rapes had skyrocketed since the fall of Baghdad, as had carjackings and kidnappings for ransom.
Kelvin is the grandson of Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee/ Alice Rosalie Shannon and the great-grandson of Pop Shannon, Esther Shannon Welch, Albert Lee Benjamin Kollenborn, and Alice Kollenborn.
Her daughters Rosie Lee Shannon and Sharon Dee Noland, who live in the same town of Mokelumne Hill, California, cared for her up to this time.
After just a couple of days in the nursing home, Alice had to be rehospitalized, in nearby Jackson, California.
In terms of the calendar, Alice outlived her husband Albert by 2 1 years.
Some claim that the effects of climate change (popularly known as ""global warming"") have intensified, and will continue to intensify, the severity of hurricanes, among other things.
You can't stop it, but you can keep the progressive warming to a minimum.
If we can keep it down another two degrees until 2010, then we may lose some species, but I'm hoping we can still maybe keep coral reefs.
But if it goes over that by much, we will simply lose coral reefs, because their little algal symbiont can't persist above a certain temperature.
And alpine environments will no longer exist, because there will be no more mountain for them to go up.
The sea level has risen from four to eight inches in the last century and will keep rising any where from five inches to six and a half feet in the next one.
The climate system has a long lag time, and we can't reverse the effects that are happening or in motion even now.
So climate change is unlike any other environmental crisis we face in that it is global and slow moving.
It has a lot of momentum, and once it gets going, you're not going to stop it.
What we've already put up, we're not feeling the full effects of, so even if we stop it now, we will still feel its effects.
But global warming is also the thing that the individual can do the most about, without asking anyone's permission, like trading in their SUV for a Honda Civic that gets 40 miles per gallon.
The number of intense hurricanes, typhoons, and cyclones throughout the world have indeed been increasing.
They have found that there has been a sharp rise in the number of category 4 and 5 tropical cyclones over the last thirty-five years.
Additionally, they have tallied the number of severe hurricanes over two consecutive fourteen-year spans.
And those statistics, obviously, do not include the hurricanes since 2004, such as Katrina and Wilma.
Low-lying Louisiana, surrounded by levees, had been a catastrophe waiting to occur for some time.
That state's vulnerability to hurricanes had increased dramatically due to the deterioration and widespread disappearance of the coastal wetlands, which slow down storm surges.
He either doesn't realize the implications of what he's doing, or simply doesn't care about the long-term damage done.
The flood-control levees were the culprit behind the loss of wetlands — instead of periodic flooding to replenish and invigorate the soil (farmers along the Mississippi used to pray for floods if they hadn't had one in recent years), and maintain the wetlands, the levees starved the soil and dehydrated the former wetlands.
The rapid rate of coastal wetland loss in Louisiana has been well-documented for more than a quarter century.
Short-term economic interest has driven the decision-making process there, as has been the case almost everywhere at almost every time in history.
Hundreds of people died as a result of Hurricane Katrina, many of them trapped in the city without a way out.
And some were told not to worry, the Superdome would be open and, if worse came to worse, they could repair to that mega-coliseum and be safe there.
For those who had to resort to the Superdome as a temporary residence, though, conditions were neither safe nor were they well-provided for.
In addition to the hundreds of deaths, tens of thousands lost their homes and all their possessions.
These became refugees and were dispersed to various cities throughout the country, to start life anew.
Not to the same extent as those who had lived in New Orleans, of course.
Nevertheless, throughout the country, gas prices skyrocketed to their highest historic levels — often over $3 per gallon.
Although the United States -led coalition had expected to be welcomed by the Iraqis with open arms, many Iraqis and other Muslims continued to meet them with arms of a different sort.
A strongly entrenched insurgency kept up the pressure on American forces and, in fact, Iraqi citizens.
True insurgencies are more serious than isolated incidents of terrorism or revenge.
An insurgency is a type of conflict that shares many commonalities with ""conventional"" warfare.
They are exceedingly difficult to overcome, as their purpose is to wear down the opposition, the invaders, by destruction so catastrophic and unrelenting that the attacker decides any possible victory would only be Pyrrhic.
Insurgency is, in fact, the only form of warfare that has ever been successfully employed by a minor power to defeat a superpower.
Modernday examples include Algeria in the 1960s, when the French were defeated there by the natives; the Vietnam War in the '60s and '70s ; and the Soviet Union in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
The insurgency in Iraq is being carried out primarily by the nation's once-ruling Sunni Arab minority, which now fears a massive power loss to their arch-enemy, the Iraqi Shiite majority.
In fact, by this year the insurgency there had actually transformed into a low-grade Civil War between the two Iraqi Muslim sects.
It seems that the fundamental difference between the Sunnis and the Shiites is that the former believe the leadership of Islam is assumed by elective office, whereas the latter believe primacy in the faith is passed on as a birthright.
On so many fronts, military and otherwise, the world seemed to edge closer to oblivion, chaos— and possibly even, ultimately, anarchy— this year.
An array of perfect storms, both literal and figurative, seemed to be on the verge of simultaneously converging.
An analysis of such would call for a separate and different type of book, though.
We end this tome on a positive note, with the following and final chapter.
Eliot / shall be telling this with a sigh Somewhere ages and ages hence Two roads diverged in a wood And I took the one less traveled by And that has made all the difference — from ""Road Less Traveled"" by Robert Frost ♦ 50 th Anniversary of Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee Shannon On September 8 th of this year, Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee/Alice Rosalie Shannon will celebrate their fiftieth wedding anniversary.
The linkage of the Shannon and Kollenborn families has thus proved successful and stable— and fruitful, as evidenced by their four children and five grandchildren.
The events that made the melding of these two families possible, for the most part, seem very commonplace and ordinary.
Combined, though, these events form a virtually miraculous linkage of deliberate decisions with serendipitous happenstance.
Had any of a number of decisions not been made, or been made at a different time, or been somehow thwarted, Theodore and Rosie Lee would have never even met.
If John Howland had not hung on for dear life after being swept overboard on the Mayflower's 1620 passage to the ""New World,"" Desire Howland would not have been born.
Without Desire, George Gorham would have never existed, and thus never come to California from Massachusetts and married Susan Lucky.
If any one of the fighting Gorhams of colonial times (members of which fought in King Philip's War, the French and Indian War, and the Revolutionary War) had died before fathering the child who ended up in the Howland/ Gorham/ Silva/ Nelson line, Pop Shannon's children — including Theodore Russell— would never have existed.
Had the John Gorham who had been born during a diphtheria epidemic in New England succumbed to that oft-fatal disease, the family line would have ended with him.
Shannon had not come to California from Canada in 1889, his father and siblings would probably not have come in 1891.
And if they hadn't, Will Shannon and Gertie Bailey would not have married in Trinity County at the Turn of the Century.
That also would have meant no Theodore Roosevelt Shannon, which would have meant no Theodore Russell Shannon, etc.
Had the incompatible Harry Kollenborn and Lizzie Huddleston not married in 1906 in northern Missouri, there would have been no Albert Kollenborn.
If the answer is no, whether he really would have followed through on his threat would be a moot point as far as this question of all the pieces falling perfectly together goes — they wouldn't have; couldn't have.
Albert Kollenborn would have moved his family there from Colusa, instead of to Fort Bragg.
Theodore Russell Shannon and Rosie Lee Kollenborn would probably never have met in that case.
And all this is just scratching the surface of all the decisions and happenings, all the seemingly trivial events that made the difference between things turning out as they have and not turning out so.
That is of course not unique to the Shannon/ Kollenborn extended family.
Each one of us here on earth exist only because of a succession of fortuitous happenings and non-happenings, decisions large and small — the lives of all of us are a miracle almost beyond comprehension.
Indeed, this kaleidoscopic juxtaposition requires just the right number of revolutions of the cylinder.
Necessary, too, is that the cessation of revolutions, allowing the pieces to settle into their necessary spot, takes place at the precise millisecond and with the exact perfect touch on the barrel.
The deceleration and temporary interruption of the ballet, the musical ""rest,"" must be made with ultimate finesse, otherwise— all is lost.
This astronomically low-chance, super-high stakes existential lottery is not at all impossible to win, though.
Reader, whoever you may be, wherever you may be, you are one of those victors in the timeless quest for life.
My parents and grandparents settled in a little town near the moist green coast in Northern California.
My immediate family located at Hydesville while my grandparents lived a few miles distant in Carlotta.
My sister, Effie, who was three years older than me; and my brother Edgar, who was five years younger than I was.
My grandmother soon became mother and grandmother to me and I owe much to her.
I used to follow my grandfather all around and I would lead the horse for grandfather when he plowed.
When it came time for grandfather to go fishing, I dearly wanted to go with him, but as I was just a little noisy creature, I was not invited.
This left me wondering, but now I realize that he must have enjoyed this opportunity to be alone to meditate.
Sometimes he used the worms that I proudly picked up for him while walking in back of him as he made fresh furrows in the fields.
We walked two miles to school and this was my mode of transportation until I was sixteen years old.
I remember as a girl the making of all of our soap, which is completely foreign to the young folks of today, and was just one of the chores for us.
We then poured water through them and as it was draining off, it was formed into lye.
With a big roaring fire under the old black wash pot, we thus made our soap.
We had to draw water from the will in the yard, fill the old pot and diligently use the wash board.
When I was about 8 years I used to go down to the river bar and fill a flour sack full of rocks, and in the evening my grandfather would get down on the floor with me and show me how he would and did build his barns, fences and his house out of rocks.
This was a wonderful time for me and I can never forget how kind he was to me.
Another memory I have was that during the Spring and Summer months we were busy canning fruits and vegetables so that we had plenty of canned goods on hand for the long winter months.
This was quite handy, to have the food canned and in our home, as it took some three or four hours to fetch groceries from the closest store, which was eight miles away by the horse and buggy.
My grandparents had a few cows and I used to milk, churn, and mold butter.
We kept the butter in a big crock and stored it and all of the milk and milk products in the well house where it was always cool.
One day my grandmother and I went to see some friends and we were about there when our horse starting acting funny.
Someone had lost a cow and it seems as though they found her on the river bar and it didn't want to come home.
The horse seemed to sense that something was wrong, and then a while later, on our way home, at the very same spot, the horse acted funny again, and grandmother got out and held the horse until I got out of the cart.
The horse then knocked her down and the wheel of the cart went over her arm, but as we found out later her arm wasn't broken, although it was very sore after that.
One of the neighbors caught the horse at the bridge and brought him to a friend's house to be picked up later.
I went to get my grandfather who then went and picked up my grandmother.
Another memory which is very plain is when I was still with my parents, when I was about five years old.
I went to my uncle's home and my cousin, Will Smith, went with me to grandmothers and while climbing over a fence, I stepped into a bee's nest and was stung quite badly.
Will picked me up and ran the rest of the way (it was about a half a mile) to grandmothers, climbing the fences with me as they got in his way.
The first heifer that I had was given to me by my grandmother, so that I would have a cow of my own on which to learn how to milk.
I had a dear friend, her name was Josie and one day at school, dear Josie Barney fell and she was never able to walk again.
I would go to see her once every week and then she died and was buried the day before Christmas.
When I went out to feed the chickens my pet hen, a special hen, would fly up on my shoulder and there she stayed until I got to the place we fed them, the chickens.
I met my future husband a year before grand mother died, and had seen him many times where we both happened to be at homes of mutual acquaintances and friends.
The next year casual friendship grew into love but since I was only sixteen we decided to wait awhile for marriage but catastrophe invaded my life about this time when my beloved grandmother passed away at the age of seventy.
My grandfather had passed away six years earlier at the age of seventy-one.
When my grandmother died I went to live with my father, for a short time before Will and I married.
My heart still aches for my grandmother and my last memory of my grandfather bears mentioning.
The waters were so high when my wise and hard working grandfather passed away, that my uncle had to put his body in the back of his wagon without a coffin, to take it to uncle's place, where a coffin was obtained before it's trip to his final resting place in the cemetery at Hydesville.
Clarence Bailey, my father, was born on December 22, 1850 and I don't know when he died.
I don't know when my grandparents, William Eaton and Electra Bailey were married.
Just a month and a day before I am seventeen, we were married on December 23, 1900.
Our first home was rented in Carlotta where we spent a year and a half.
Then in May 1902 we moved to Trinity County in northern California, and took up a homestead on the Eel River where we lived for eighteen years.
The following paragraphs and pages will tell of some of the experiences we had in the mountains.
I can remember one time when I didn't see another woman for two whole years.
It was a peddler and when he started to open our gate and enter, he noticed our dog, backed out and kept right on going.
I remember how we became acquainted with our first neighbor, Mr Lamply.
Before we moved to the hills, we made several trips to work on the cabin, and when we came out, we camped out under the trees.
After moving, we stacked up some logs so that we could later add another room onto the cabin, but then we heard of another place and moved into it instead.
She had brought over a hen, and six baby chicks, excusing her generosity by saying that they were for the baby.
The log cabin had a front room with a fireplace, also a kitchen, bedroom, and we had busied ourselves getting a room fixed upstairs for one more bedroom.
There was the barn on the place already, and a good well on it, and a bucket even to draw up the water.
I had to make a short hike up the hill to the house, after drawing the water.
There were many coyotes around at the time we came, but the first one I saw was one that Dad Shannon caught in a trap.
After that, while herding the young pigs and turkeys I would catch sight of many of them.
We had made pets of all our animals and one day, hearing a noise on the porch, we were so surprised to see our pet colt, Prince, come up onto the porch and stick his head in at front door.
Often times when we walked to the post office, one of our little pet pigs would end up following us and then someone would have to be left outside to keep watch on the mischievous ham.
Wildlife was abundant and one day while we were herding the pigs, they seemed excited and noisy.
The rattlesnakes seemed to be everywhere when first we moved to the hills.
One day I fixed a place under the bushes to lay my baby so I could help with the hay.
Just as I was about to put the baby down, I saw a rattlesnake; and it scared me so badly that I didn't help much with the hay that day.
Another time I was just coming back from getting some wood from the wood pile and I saw two or three rattlers in the gateway.
When March came I would go out and hunt the turkey nests while there was still snow on the ground.
We raised the turkeys to sell so we would have the ready cash we needed.
I'd have to gather them so they wouldn't freeze and dad made small individual houses for each hen.
Some turkeys came to our place and Dad and I ended up taking them back to the neighbors from the ranch whence they came.
When they wandered off the coyotes would get in the pack, scattering, and scaring them; then kill them just for pleasure, not even hungry enough to eat them.
An old hen was making quite a commotion only a short while after I had taken care of them so I went out to check on her.
I looked under the shed that was in the yard and saw a rattlesnake lying there.
We heard a noise and upon investigating we discovered that the sow had eaten some of the baby chicks.
They did not tell us when we bought her that she would do such a thing.
Around Christmas time, we would sit up most of the night getting turkeys ready for the market.
The next day Dad would start out for Fortuna, which was some 70 miles away, to sell our turkeys and to bring back a supply of groceries which would last us about six months.
The two trips to ""civilization"" were the only ones made in a year's time, for it was a long drawn out difficult trip.
We lived there for 18 years, and in all that time, I only made one trip away from home, and that was to Fort Seward.
One day when I was lonesome for company, we walked for four hours to visit with Mrs.
Shields and when we got there, we could only visit for a half hour in order to get home again before dark set in.
But it was worth the walk, It was not an easy life, but it was a good life.
Mother left father at this time, and we traveled by boat to San Francisco.
It took us a little more than 24 hours and I was sea sick the whole time, along with Effie.
As soon as we reached the city, I and Edgar were placed in a orphan's home.
We were there almost a year before we again joyfully made our home with grandma and grandpa.
Effie went to live with a Methodist minister, who was very good to her.
While Edgar and I were in the home, Edgar walked in front of a child swinging, and the edge of the swing hit him in the mouth, almost cutting his tongue off.
After this, people were surprised that he could still talk as good as always.
My grandparents didn't know where we were and so he couldn't know of the straits we were in.
My schoolteacher, while I was at the home, wrote to friends of hers living in the Eureka area and the news reached my grandparents.
Folks in the area gathered up the $ necessary to bring us back to Hydesville but they gave the money to my father, to go and get us, and he drank it up.
So they all donated again, but this time Mr Godfrey went to the boat and stayed there until it sailed for San Francisco.
I knew the only place I had to go was with his folks and this is what we all wanted.
My father gave his consent for Dad and I to marry, and then a couple months after we married, he left the country and I have never saw him since.
We took up two different homesteads in Trinity and the last one was near the river.
This house was built on a hill overlooking the river and had a beautiful sweeping view of the hills around us.
I could see the river from my kitchen window and watch its changing moods.
The river was turbulent and angry in the winter; I could see logs and every kind of debris, being battered and carried downstream.
We built two barns down by the river and there we stored hay for the cattle.
We built sheds around one so that they could get out of sleet rain and snow.
The other place was just right of the fruit trees, by the Shannon buttes.
An old school friend and her husband came to take up a homestead near us.
One day a friend, Harry Parry, from Humboldt came out and the two of them went hunting for deer.
They parted and in the excitement of the hunt, Harry accidentally shot John to death.
One of our neighbors, Mr Espie, went to hunt his horse when it was snowing, and he got lost and died.
The searchers found where he tried to keep warm by going around and around a tree but when they found him, it was too late.
She had unsaddled her horse and with the saddle had tried to keep her self warm, but to no avail.
Sadness also came to our house when our Girlie was bitten by a rattlesnake and we had to bury her.
He asked John Holtorf if he would carry the mail that day, as he had to bury his girl.
John said he couldn't as he had to be at that picnic, and it was too bad that she had to die just at this time.
This answer made us both feel real bad, as it was too bad she had to die at all, and she certainly couldn't help what day the Lord took her home.
Anyway, Dad asked Mr Caar to carry the mail so he could attend Girlie's funeral, and Mr Caar said yea, right away.
They were the only ones except for the grave diggers to come to her funeral.
Everyone else had to go to a 4 th of July picnic and this has never ceased to leave a horrible feeling with us.
Gray was so sick she couldn't come to the house to comfort or help us, and yet she was at this picnic.
Maude Gilman said she'd come but that it was too late by the time she heard.
She said even if she didn't know or like the parents, she would have come for the child.
Frank Lampley invited us all to come home with them, and we appreciated it but we had to go home.
We had a true friend who was with us all the time, right through to the end.
A little while after we lost her, our first school burned to the ground and the children's next school was the old Clem cabin.
Another school was built in 1916 and Ted went to school there, and so did his children and Kenneth's a little while.
It is still standing, across a dip and field where Ted and his wife built.
I lost a brand new white coat I had just bought and worn just one time.
One day Marian was down by the river and the first thing I thought about was a rattlesnake.
She had seen a rattler but it had went under a log and we couldn't find it.
Another time I heard her screaming and she had stepped into a bee's nest while out with her brother Theodore while he was cutting wood.
It was no easy task then and when the river was dangerous in the winter, the horse would swim across and dad would go over, suspended in the air, in a bucket.
When Kenneth, our second son was born, exactly two years to the day after Theodore, a woman came in to stay with me, as Dad was away working and didn't want to leave me alone.
She built a big warm fire and put some baby clothes on the chair in front of the fireplace.
I'd arranged to be in the living room and had gone to sleep but awoke to find the baby clothes on fire, also some of the wall paper.
There were some cartridges on the mantle of the fireplace and the logs would go up in a flash and the bullets could explode who knows where.
The woman dashed in and put the fire out before it had a chance to get any worse.
We raised six of our children in Trinity Co. . . . sons still living there.
The oldest son, Theodore, still has the old homestead although around 1944 it burned to the ground, and there is hardly a trace of where it stood.
He said the couldn't leave and they placed men at his place but the men thought the place was safe, and they went to sleep and it burned to the ground.
In the year of 1948, while spending the summer in Trinity County, after having moved south, Dad built a barn for Theodore and he'd turned 70 years old.
We camped out in the old Clem cabin which was built many years ago in Kettenpom Valley.
After many years of being away from Trinity and Dad Shannon had passed away, I took a trip back with my grand daughter Laura and her husband and my great grand daughter, Laurie.
The first thing I remember seeing were two of the wild deer going across the road.
We went through Covelo, which in all the years I had lived in Trinity, I had never been.
It was a beautiful trip and we journeyed on into Orland to visit some friends and coming home we stopped in Weaverville and visited the old Joss House where the Chinese used to, and now a few still do, worship their Gods.
We read in the paper about one family that worships there, and it was so interesting.
We had the most wonderful trip, but it was when we arrived in Eureka at my grandson Ted's home that we received word that Laura's home had burned to the ground, also her father's which stood right next to it.
Laura lost everything, and little Laurie could not understand what was it all about.
They took the news wonderfully though, and placed their trust in Jesus Christ who is the head of their home.
Theodore was burned quite badly while fighting fire, but not critically.
The neighbors were all so kind and are helping to build a new house for Theodore.
Laura and Russ have built on to their trailer and it is nice and they are comfortable also.
They had left and were looking for work, and they wrote, asking us to come down.
We arrived in Tulare in the winter time and stayed with Carl Shannon in a little house he had.
During this time I gave birth to a daughter Eda, and two sons, one of which was still born.
Kenneth stayed in Tulare for a little while but soon returned north to look for work in the woods again, and Theodore soon followed him.
While we were living at Carl's, and Robert was about 7 years old, he gave me a scare.
George didn't realize anything was wrong and was playing a round under and around the swing through all this.
When Dad and I first went to Trinity, the trip was made with the horses and the large wagon he came from Tulare with and it took a week of long hard days from Carlotta.
When we left Trinity to go to Tulare, we started out in a mail truck and went as far as Alder point, where we spent the night, catching the train the next day for Oakland.
It took the whole day, and was dark by the time we got to Oakland, and my sister Effie Whetstone and a daughter Annie, met us at the station and we stayed with them for 3 days.
Then we went a little further, to Dinuba, and the children and I stayed with Dad's sister, Marian Brubaker while Dad went to Tulare to make arrangements for us.
We stayed with her several enjoyable days, and Dad and Carl came back for us.
We stayed on the Carl Shannon ranch four years, living in a small comfortable home and Dad helped Carl in the fruit.
Dad went before us and purchased a large apartment house just outside of Los Angeles, in a town called Wilmington.
I can't remember the exact time or date that we sold the place in Shafter and moved to a far out place called Lost Hills, Calif.
George and Lavern built our house which had 2 bedrooms, a kitchen, a front room, and a big back porch.
We raised chickens, pigs, horses, cows, and Dad farmed Alfalfa on the land.
While we lived here I had acquired 5 daughters-in-laws and 2 sons-in-laws and they had all given me grandchildren.
We left Lost Hills on Friday with our possessions in our pick-up and drove to Tulare to spend the night with George and his wife.
We went to the real estate office and the salesman took Dad to look at some property while I waited in the truck.
When they got back, Dad had decided to take the place and now we had a home in Gridley, and we raised sugar beets, tomatoes, and one cow.
Dad liked this part of the country very well, and so did 1. 1 especially remember one Christmas when I had almost all of my family home.
We didn't have enough room for everybody in the house and the men slept in the barn.
One day a man came by and noticed our tomato crop and said he would like to buy our place.
One thing I think is worth mentioning is how Dad always made such close friends with his animals.
Really it was called Capay, the little farming community outside of Orland.
The Doctor put him into the hospital as he had suffered a heart attack.
Gary George, and Marian, and Eda, arrived late the same night, and they were so much comfort.
I couldn't stay alone while he was in the hospital so George took me in to stay with friends who had offered their home to me, The Macy's of Orland.
I had only been there a couple of days when Theodore, and his daughter and her husband arrived.
We went back home and Laura stayed with me when the men had to leave for home.
She stayed with us until we left Orland, which was a little better than two months.
Dad couldn't have come home when he did if we didn't have anyone with us.
I remember when Dad was telling Laura of the cost of the hospital, it tickled her so when he used his Black Angus in terms of cost, instead of Dollars and cents.
I came to know my grandparents so intimately, and to love them so completely.
It was a blessing for me to stay with them, and listen to the stories Grandpa would tell about early life, coming from Canada and to Fortuna, and meeting Grandma, and settling in Trinity.
It was great. — Laura) George and Gary took care of selling the livestock and property and we purchased a trailer house, and as soon as Dad was well enough, we took it to Tulare, parking it on George's place.
Then all too soon Dad was to suffer so terribly from a blood clot in his leg.
The doctors tried to help him with medicine, but he just didn't respond.
He wondered and worried about who would take care of me, and do all of the little jobs he did for me, such as cutting my toe nails, and seeing to it that the little everyday things were taken care of.
I can never forget how he worried over me when it was him who was so sick.
This was how he was, and I know it but I fear that too many people didn't understand him.
They felt he was too conservative with his money, but I now realize he did this so that I would have a good life with plenty, and not be a burden to our children.
Financially, I am able to do what I want to do and go where I want, and buy what I want.
I feel that he was a good and generous man in his own way, in the only way he could be.
At the funeral I looked around me and I found all my children, great grandchildren, and so many great grand children with me when I did need them so much.
Your mother and grand-mother, Gertrude Bailey Shannon 1967 Since I have a little more on this page to write about, and since it is now July of another period, 1969, 1 have decided to add a few notes to the last couple of years.
In 1967 my granddaughter Laura came and we visited all my friends in Capay, Fortuna, and Eureka, plus all my family up north, spending quite some time in Trinity.
We went to Fort Worth for a few days, to visit her brother and wife, the Ellises.
We went many other places but these were the highlights of the journey for me.
I stayed with her for three years, and when I had to leave because she had a heart attack, it made me sad for I came to love her.
Three weeks ago, my grand daughter Laura came after me, and we have visited the family and friends who are left.
Also she promised to help me finish and put together this book, before I went back home.
Before saying goodbye, I'd like to tell you how much I love you all, and how proud I am of all of you.
Theodore was just 3 months old when we moved to Trinity and we stayed there all through his seven yrs. of school.
We stayed there while he went into Eureka, no, to Fortuna for his eighth grade.
After completing his 8 th grade, he went to work for Hammond Lumber Company, in the woods.
Theodore Russell Shannon Sep 3, 1934 Rosalee Alice Kollenborn February 11, 1938 Ted and Roz are living in a large beautiful home, which is their own in the hills above San Andreas.
They have just bought and moved into their new home, complete with swimming pool.
Gertrude Irene Shannon June 24, 1936 Richard Harold Crook Dec 12, 1926 Anniversary Mar 3 1,1956 5.
January 18, 1904 Kenneth was born in Trinity and he was delivered by a woman who really knew ho to deliver babies.
Kenneth went to school in the community school until he was out of the 8 th grade and then he went to work in the woods.
They had two sons after they lost her, then after a couple years, they divorced and Kenneth married and Louise gave him a daughter, Linda.
He worked for many years for Pacific Lumber Co. and retired this January, 1969.
He supposedly is retired, but he keeps busy all the day long, working around their home, planting a huge garden, big enough for all their kids to share.
They are living just outside of a little town in Northern California, near Eureka, called Carlotta.
March 30, 1906 Debra May, better known to her family as Girlie, was born in Trinity.
She made some biscuits and was not going to tell her father that she had made them but she waited as long as she could, after he had eaten a couple, and just could not wait for him to say anything.
The day before she was bitten by the rattle snake, she and I went up into the field where the two oldest boys were working in the hay, & she and Kenneth ran a race to the house.
The 3 rd of July, 1911, Dad and Theodore and Kenneth were up on top of the hill, working in the hay.
Girlie took Howard up, walking with him around the side of the mountain, through the woods and the brush.
She hadn't quite reached the field when the rattlesnake bit her on the inside of the instep.
She begged for water but someone told us to give her whiskey, and keep all the water away from her.
It wasn't the 3 rd after all because that is when she died and she did live for a day.
Howard was 2 Vi when Girlie was taken from us, and Theodore was 9 and Kenneth was 7.
She is buried in her family's beloved Trinity County, in Hoaglin Valley, real close to where Theodore and Robert live.
February 14, 1908 Howard was born in Trinity and was delivered by Dad, because he didn't like the way the midwife delivered Girlie.
Howard also went to school in Trinity up to the 8 th grade and it was at this time that we left Trinity and went to Tulare where he went to school awhile before we moved to Shafter where he graduated.
When he went north, he met and married Kate and they had two girls and a son.
He lived in various places, going back to Trinity as most of the boys did.
He is logging now out of Willits but will shortly go to Hales Grove just north of Rockport, over on the coast.
January 7, 1912 Marian was born in Trinity and was brought into the world by her father.
Miss Elsie Holtorf carried her into her home and did a fine job of setting the arm.
The school which is on the Shannon ranch today was where Marian slid off, and Miss Holtorf packed her about a half mile to her home.
It was the little place just at the foot of the hill going up the road to the old Shannon place.
Marian went to grammar school in Trinity & in 1920 the family moved several times and she finished school in Shatter and went to finish high school in Wasco.
She went to work in a telephone office in McFarland where she met our beloved Irish.
May 5, 1891 Anniversary July 8, 1931 Passed away Dec 15, 1959 Marian married Dick Haney on June 29, 1967 at a small family wedding.
MARCH 15, 1916 Robert was born in Trinity also and was delivered by his father.
He was playing out in the yard with a cat and I looked out to find out where he was doing and I no more than went back to my canning when I heard him crying and found that ha had hit his head against the old grindstone and cut his forehead.
I picked him up and went to find Dad who was raking somewhere on the ranch.
Robert attended school in Trinity and several other schools before graduating from Shatter.
He met Belle in Trinidad and they married and had two sons and a daughter.
They are now living in Trinity, where he is employed by the County Road Department.
Lena Belle Blake Sept., 1914 Anniversary June 25, 1939 Just a final word on Robert, he has been interested in ""Ham"" radio and he now has a set in his home and one for the car.
He picks people up all over the country and really enjoys this form of communication.
He even interested the most isolated member of the community into getting one.
October 15, 1918 George was also among the many of Shannon children born in Trinity, and he was also delivered by his father.
He went to high school in Wasco and was an honor student all four years.
He was very active in the Future Farmers of America, and is now a successful farmer in Tulare.
Estelle had trouble with her feet and she passed away on June 18, 1967 at the young age of 47.
The last couple of years were so rough on her but tender words from George, to the effect that he was remembering the darling she was and forgetting the last couple of yrs; left all of us who loved them both with warm memories.
George is still living and farming in the Tulare area and is a very well known man all through the valley area.
Dale was in a Honda accident, and he has had one successful operation on his feet and will have another one this summer.
September 4, 1920 Eda was born in Tulare in a hospital and we named her after her Aunt Eda.
She went to several schools and she graduated from high school in Wasco.
Lavern Kenneth Cordy and Eda Irene S were married in September of 1937.
Their daughter, Merna Lee Cordy was born in August on the 23 rd in 1938.
June 11, 1924 Calvin was born, along with a twin brother who was still born, in the home of Eda Shannon, who lived in Tulare, California.
While overseas he met a long lost cousin, Edgar Whetstone and they became very good friends.
After returning home, he became engaged to a lovely girl from Westport, Miss Jeannie F Larssen.
He also purchased an airplane for pleasure purposes, and one day in the early spring, on March 10, 1949, he took the plane up and couldn't get the wheels on the ground.
After several hours he died and after more hours, he was washed up to shore, which I am so thankful for.
Calvin's brother Robert was a passenger in the plane and when he gave up , the tide brought him in, and he recovered.
They didn't want the shock of a phone call to hurt us worse, and they had driven steadily to reach us as quickly as possible, but the radio blurted it out to us.
My little son was still born, and was then buried in a cemetery in Tulare.
I always desired to know where his little grave was, so in or about 1965 I went to the office and inquired.
They were able to show me his little grave and I was able to put a marker on it, after all these 40 odd years.
January 14, 1929 Gary was born in Shafter in an adobe house and went to school in Shafter, graduating from the Wasco High School.
Gary and his family are now living in Tulare, and he has continued with farming.
Gary is the baby of my large family and he will always be remembered as the last of the William Shannon children.
Possibly a son of either Thomas Kemper Carr , or his brother John Carr.
John was a long-time resident of both Trinity and then Humboldt counties, and was the author of the book ""Pioneer Days in California,"" quoted many times throughout this book.
Johnson was a married name from Dollie's first marriage; her maiden name was Kohl, or possibly Cole.
Esther's middle name may have actually been Silva, her mother's maiden name.
Actually Mokelumne Hill; they lived in San Andreas only one year, 1968.
It seems rather strange to say that Robert was named after Will's brother Robert, not after his father, or both of them.
It is unclear who Gertie meant here; neither she nor Will had a sister named Eda, unless her sister Effie's middle name was Eda.
There are sixteen other Westports in the United States, but there is no reason to believe that Calvin's fiance was from one of these other Westports~if she had been, it would seem that Gertie would have mentioned which one she hailed from.
Ted Shannon, Hoaglin Valley My parents are William Frederick Shannon and Gertrude Shannon.
My father was born in 4 Corners Ontario Canada in 1877 and came to Tulare Co. about 1890.
Her father was a drinking man and her father and mother separated when she was a small girl.
Her grandparents were Eli Eaton, they were early settlers in Humboldt County.
Father worked making shingle bolts for Beckwith, what is now the Mantecin ranch just west of the Van Duzen River grange hall.
Theodore R Shannon their first child was born at the Felt place at Carlotta Jan.02.
He met Arnett Shields who told him about homestead land in Trinity County in March, 1902.
He went out on horseback to look at the land, there was two foot of snow on the ground.
The place he first looked at was government land, it had too much young brush on it.
The land my father first looked at was taken up in later years by Abe Clover.
My father went back to Humboldt Co., bought six pigs, a dozen dairy calves to bring out.
The first house the folks had was just a lean-to cabin, had no siding on it for awhile.
Arnett Shields and my father were good friends by this time so Arnett told him about the George Kindred place, a better location, lots of water, so he moved over on Kindred place in April, 1902.
My brothers were born in the old homestead, Kenneth, Howard, Robert and George, also my sisters Deborah May and Marian Adele.
Deborah was bitten by a rattlesnake July 1, 1911 while bringing water to my father and myself in the hayfield.
Holtorf in Hoaglin Valley they had the post office, Also a man by the name of Espie.
Mr Espie was coming into his place, was very cold, got a little ways from the place, was found frozen to death by a pine tree, what is known now the Garcia Mill on Ted Shannon place.
Wade and Grace Atkinson and their mother lived about two miles due west from us.
There was a cable crossing the main Northfork branch of Eel River, near Bob Hoaglin ranch.
When the river was too high father tied the horse and walked the four miles to Caution and carried the mail on his back.
We have five children, William F Shannon just out of the army, Laura who is married to Russel Gibney, Theodore R Shannon Jr., working for the Union Lumber Co., Ft.
Bragg, Gertrude who is working as a bookkeeper at the Community Hospital in Ft.
Derring was my first teacher, Miss Lillian White was my second teacher.
My folks left the ranch in 1919 to go to Tulare where my father rented his brothers fruit orchard for 8 years, in that time three more children were born, Eda, Gary, and Calvin.
Another account mentioned Mr Espie's death also: ""Mr Espey's place lay north of the Hoaglin school a short way.
He was quite crippled and he lost his life in Bluff Creek Canyon, attempting to hike to Zenia.
Mr Algy Lampley and I attended school together with a hermit thrush, in Hoaglin, the Mariposa Tulips on Long Ridge, the Diogenese Lanterns on Hamen Ridge.
This is the only place where his name is given as Kenneth; elsewhere he is called Clarence.
My father Jeremiah Bliss Nelson, was working on the railroad for Hammonds.
It was for many years the largest lumber mill on the coast with the exception of Weyerhauser Lumber Company in Washington.
From Samoa, we moved to Fields Landing, (where we lived in a houseboat on the landing) and which I do not remember.
I was about three when we moved to Fortuna, where my brother Gerald was born.
From Fortuna, we moved to Eureka, on sixth street between C and D Streets, and near a laundry.
It was very different in those days, and I can remember much of the change.
My father was called into the service in this time period, and perhaps was a soldier for two years.
He was preparing to board a ship when the Armistice was signed, and so did not go to the front.
His allotment had been slow in coming, and my mother had had to go to work to provide for us.
Her sister took care of us, while she was at work at Abe's Chop House as a waitress.
Our mother never ran him down to us children, nor did she discuss him to us.
She was always so proud, never complaining about her lot, and she surely must have had occasion to do so, with three small children to support and raise.
Father had been gone so much of our life that I don't ever remember any of us even missing having a father.
Our mother cooked, washed, cleaned, sewed, played dolls, popped pop corn over the fireplace, took our brother to the Baseball games when he was old enough to go, took us to the Sequoia Park on Sundays, Samoa Beach for picnics on Sundays when it was nice; and was in fact Father, Mother, Uncle, Aunt, Cousin, Grandparents — the whole lot to us.
I mention this last, because when she and my father broke up, both sides of the family never came round.
They were afraid that she would ask them to taker her in, or help out financially.
I think now though, of how very lonely and hard it must have been for her; especially after we had all been read to and tucked into bed.
She was perhaps so tired, that when she went to bed she was already half asleep.
I began school at Lincoln School on Harris Street, between California and Summer Streets.
My mother then moved to 1001 A Street, right across from the Washington School.
I was then in upper A grade, and who should be my teacher but the same Mrs.
To me, at six, I probably thought that she had come there to be with me.
My mother had moved here because she had changed jobs, and was working at the Eureka Woolen Mills, and we were closer to school.
When I was twelve years old, I received a second-hand Piano for my birthday, and It was the most treasured gift I ever received.
I was always playing on the edge of the table, across the front of a chair — anything that had an edge that I could pretend it was Piano or Organ.
Looking back now, and since; I realize that it probably originated in listening to the beautiful organs that they had in Theaters.
The Silent Days, when the words appeared across the screen, and the Organist accompanied the action on the Organ.
Perhaps, an interlude of one-half hour before the movie started, one could sit and enjoy the sound of just the music filling the building; the organist always well groomed, sitting in a pool of light in the darkened theater.
And so, my mother went with me to the Convent, and asked the sisters if they would give me lessons.
I took lessons for over a year, and then came down with an illness, definitely not a child's.
Erysipelas, which is an acute inflammatory disease of the skin, due to infection by various strains of streptococcus and accompanied by fever.
I awoke one morning, my head just pounding; aching clear across the temples.
Being unable to find anything wrong with me, outside of my headache, gave me some Aspirin, and figured I would be all right after a bit.
I knew I didn't feel good, but did not get up out of bed; and when my mother came home from work, and came in to see me I could see that she was worried.
He sent my brother down to the store for a prescription, after he had questioned and questioned.
He wanted to know if I had cut myself anywhere, or scratched myself and didn't remember that I had done it, but it had not seemed important.
But he seemed to know that somewhere, somehow, there had been skin broken to allow infection in.
The symptoms all pointed to this one thing and he felt that he was right in his diagnosis; but he was still perplexed when he left.
After awhile, I began to feel better and started thinking over what he had said, and tried to think if I had had a cut and it had gotten well, but I could recall nothing whatsoever.
This she did, and then tore a piece of white flannel to wrap around it.
Laying there, my head being warm and sweaty — I reached to scratch a spot on top of my head, and encountered a small scab, which felt no larger than a head of a common pin.
Anyway, I was in bed for three weeks before I was allowed to get up and go outside; and then that first day was only for a few minutes.
I had a high fever for several days, and the Erysipelas had almost completely circled my head, when the medication finally conquered it.
However, my love for music still went on and I kept up with what I knew.
My closest friend was a little Finnish girl, Aili Weijola, who lived across the street from me.
One block away lived the three Douglas girls; named Evelyn, Merle, and Eileen.
Evelyn bossed all of us, and we were always together; at least, up until the teens.
We attended Winship, which was called Junior High because it had only seventh and eight grades.
While attending Junior High, I used to baby-sit the Fire-Chiefs children when they wanted to go out.
The Carlson's had a Player Piano, with thirty or forty rolls neatly piled on top.
Carlson taught me how to use it, and the three of us would sit on the Piano Bench, and sing along with the words.
I was fascinated with all of the little holes which made the music come out, and the keyboard with all of the black and white notes flashing up and down, faster than the eye could seen.
He sat in his cage, atop a nice table in the entry hall, and greeted everyone who came into sight.
We always attended Sunday School, and when I was fifteen, was asked to teach the four and five year old class.
About this time, we were old enough to be taken to public dances; and the Nash's would take us with them to Weymouth Inn.
All of my life (since I was twelve, and my little girl friend Aili taught me to Waltz) I would rather dance than eat.
I was about seventeen when my mother had a nervous breakdown from working too hard, coupled with a rupture.
She was not expected to live, and everyday I walked, or went by trolley to the County Hospital.
I had to go in the afternoons, because she did not want to have to worry about me getting home at night.
The T B Hospital was right next to the hospital and many of the men patients had the run of the grounds, and freedom to leave the grounds.
There was about eight blocks to walk from the end of the trolley line up to the hospital, and it was heavily wooded.
Sidewalks in those days were about 30 to 36 inches wide, and when it was dark you also had to worry about not stepping over the edge; and carrying a flashlight.
I arranged with Mr Saunders, my bookkeeping teacher, to take that course in his evening class which was several times a week.
Then I would come home, make the beds, straightened the house and go to see our mother.
I can never remember disobeying my mother, and don't think it even ever occurred to me.
There had been a bread line for a year or two, but finally many were out of work.
Women, who were trained for office work, secretarial, clerks, etcetera; were asking for jobs in homes to pay for their keep.
My mother had recovered enough finally, that while she could not go back to the Woolen mills still needed a job to earn some money to take care of us.
Wallace asked her if she would consider doing some practical nursing for him.
He needed a woman that he could trust and train to take care of an elderly lady.
The lady was the mother of his close friend who worked in the Scotia Bank.
Mother took the job; and from then on, for some thirty years did work in private homes.
I did have to go there for an interview; but first I went to my teachers to see how they felt about my quitting school just two weeks before the end of school.
They all felt that I should avail myself of this opportunity while I had the chance.
There were so many trained people looking for jobs, and they thought that I was sufficiently schooled to be able to handle it.
So taking my courage in hand, I called them about the job, went to Redway from Eureka to see them, and got the job.
They said they didn't want someone who was experienced; that they wanted to break their help in themselves.
They were opening a subdivision office there on the land, and wanted a girl in there at all times.
They hired an accountant from Eureka to set up the books, and I was to sort out the various checks bills, papers, etc. from the past several months and enter them into the accounts.
The Incorporation had purchased a large quantity of lumber from Scotia Lumber Company, and other materials to build a number of houses, but did not keep up with any kind of regular payment schedule; or an adequate payment, when they did find time to make one.
All of this time, they were selling a lot of lots; many for cash; but taking the money to Los Angeles, where they would throw big parties, as part of advertising to sell properties.
It was busy during the tourist season; and little doing the rest of the year.
I was not able to obtain work, so my mother suggested that I go to school at Miranda with my brother and sister.
I did go, but found only first year bookkeeping, typing, shorthand, were offered this year.
They were probably beginning courses at the school, so had not been given before.
So, I took Sewing for two periods, English, for one period, Library for two periods; and practice with their little school orchestra.
This was a small high school, so it took practically the whole school, to fill the cast.
Production started, and from playing for one period now, and another period later, we were utilizing all of my periods, which was very rewarding.
The High School is called South Fork High School, because it is on the south fork of the Eel River, but is situated in Miranda.
We were married on Saturday morning, and my new husband had to be back to work on Wednesday morning.
There were four ""60"" Caterpillars, and the responsibility for the landing, logging, and men, was his.
In January, he had been getting ninety cents, then a cut to eighty cents, then to seventy-two cents, and finally down to sixty-seven cents.
They re-hired all the married men still living in the company cabins, but could promise them only four hours work a day, two and three days a week.
They lowered the rent from $10.00 a month to $2.50. the mill was not running — the company was merely making work by having the men repile the lumber.
It was a little sustenance, not much its true, but it sure beat nothing.
I believe that Humboldt County suffered the least from the depression, than did any place else.
The logging at Hammond Lumber Company woods, took you inland about twenty miles, and the only way to get there was by train.
The train with around twenty to thirty empty flat cars would leave Crannell on Sunday afternoon, about four o'clock, and it would sometimes take two and one-half hours to get to Camp 41 where I lived.
Our friends, who lived at Camp Forty-Three were Watchmen for the camp, and had at their use a Speeder, which they could use at their will, and would come over several times a week to visit.
One day, after we had been married a whole week, we were at Cleo and Red's visiting, and we all decided to go on further to an older camp to look around.
It's really fun, this miniature flat-car with an engine; the sun is shining, the birds are singing; the wind is blowing in your hair, blowing it this way and that.
The iron wheels going around, and around, until in your subconscious you hear and feel the rhythmic motion, and the even steady thump, thump, as it moves over the tracks.
It was the Fourth of July, and Cleo and Red had to stay around the camps — in case fire should break out.
In which case, Red would have to get word to Crannell for fire fighting crews.
There were phones at strategic points along the tracks, mainly for the use of the train conductors, to call in to the train dispatcher for clearance.
I should have said six days; actually five and one-half, because the Malley would be ready to make its trip down to Crannell around noon time, and any of the men who wished to go home, or go to town; had to take this train.
A camp would be composed of a long building which was used as the Cook-house.
There would be a small building with a phone, desk, chairs, which would be the time-keeper's office.
Enormous meals were always prepared, and enormous plates of food were served family style.
It was an ordinary sight to see any one take the plate of eggs and scoop off four to eight of them onto his plate, plus an equal helping of potatoes; biscuits, pancakes or toast; butter, jelly, and syrup.
Dinner was always two kinds of meat, two kinds of vegetable, beans, hot biscuits and loaves of bread; butter, jam, milk, coffee, pies and cakes.
I could go on and on, until I will have written the book that I intend to write some day.
We could drive up to the last two miles of Camp 9, and walk the rest of the way.
September 1934 Our second son is born at Hydesville on the 3 rd June 1936 Our second daughter is born on the 20 th , at Camp Baker.
September 1941 We move to Camp 3, Ten Mile Camp; where the children will go to school at Camp 2.
We move to Westport, where, I not only cook for our crew, but for the Burman crew.
War is declared 'officially' over, and Ted's brother comes home from overseas.
Calvin, killed in the accident when the plane plunges into the ocean — two miles north of Westport.
I am helping out at the Elementary School; playing the Piano, helping with the singing; teaching the children songs; making costumes for their programs at Westport.
I have two children yet to put through school, and I do have some assistance from him.
I felt and still do, that children need their parents home with them at night.
I went to work for Lee Wilson, owner of the Rexall Drug Store, as bookkeeper; where I kept all records.
Payrolls, quarterly reports, cash registers, balanced tapes, handled all cash and banking were entrusted to me.
We charged and figured Butane-Propane gas tags; used various bookkeeping machines for posting to accounts and ledgers, and other routine jobs.
I went to work for C Louis Wood, the Dodge dealer, where I did some bookkeeping and Accounts receivable and payable.
I went to work for Coast Tire Recapping Company where I did similar work.
I went to work for Eastman Transport and Trucking Company where I did general office work.
I worked for Thomas Construction Co. of Fresno; one of the three companies.
I went to work for Head Start, as a Teacher Aide Advanced to Teacher Assistant.
Debris would fall off the timber and mud from the woods packed into the tires and dropped onto the road.
A family was driving on such a day, lost control and went down an embankment.
On the opening day of the trail, dad and his lawyer met at a coffee shop in the county seat, Ukiah.
A comment was made that the driver hoped his license wouldn't be checked as he was restricted from driving at night and without glasses.
A look of complete shock came over their faces when my dad and his lawyer took their place in the courtroom.
Dad was a big robust man with such a love of family, animals and even the sky.
When a story was told, even if you didn't think it was funny; when he laughed, everyone laughed.
When we would be out in the woods or on a rocky ledge; when he got ready for a nap he could sleep any where.
He would find a spot, lie down and with his body — re-arrange the setting until he was comfortable.
Always said his land provided for the wildlife so whenever he wanted venison, he would go kill a deer.
She sometimes would use the leftovers out of the refrigerator, add a few items and come up with a marvelous casserole.
The ranch and surrounding ranches are so far from ""civilization"" that each property has their own electrical power source.
If you own a small jet plane, you can land safely plus the regular planes use it frequently.
The fowl population did an excellent job of keeping pesky earwigs under control.
We had one rabbit that was so buck toothed and how it ate and survived was a mystery.
Within a few years, a large workshop and a duplex was built; also a large master bedroom and a sunroom.
We lived in Westport for a few years before electricity was provided to the area.
There was a pay phone at Van Horn's grocery store but my parents were the first to have a phone in the home.
We listened to favorite programs on the radio, played games and played musical instruments.
I recall the family sitting so silently as the broadcast was made about the dropping of the atomic bomb.
My uncle Bob and Belle and family lived about seven miles north at Union Landing and I spent a lot of week-ends there.
The ride to Fort Bragg to attend Junior High seemed so long and many of us napped both ways.
The fog would be so thick; could only see a few feet in distance or a rock slide would happen right before or after our bus had approached or passed.
The third grade was the only one I spent in Trinity County, attending the same school as my father.
He was one of its first students and after completing the eight grade, he went to work.
The one room school house is still being used today but as ranch quarters for the owner's foreman.
The roads were not maintained as they are today and we had horses instead of bicycles.
If our house and barn locations had been reversed; our parents would have been paid for the distance to school, even though we were not taken by car.
Seven students were required to fund a public school so our teacher, Florence Stevens, brought her daughter to meet the quota.
Making up the group were the two Lampley girls and four of us Shannon's.
We tried to time it right at the halfway point so we could climb into her pick-up.
During the hot summer afternoons, she was very creative in ""outings"" and we could collect floral specimens or bugs.
My brother Ted was such a slow eater that he usually took the entire lunch hour to finish his food.
The truant officers came calling frequently and finally realized our situation wasn't on the books.
We spent many summers at the ranch while my father would harvest portions of timber off his land.
We would walk the fences, ride horses checking on the cattle, or climbing on board the big ""Caterpillar"" which he used for building roads or pulling logs onto a landing so they could be loaded on trucks and hauled to the mill.
Hired only my dad for construction or repair of all the roads on his properties.
Besides the main ranch which was his get-away, were the Lone Pine and Armstrong.
He made trips to Africa gone of Safari's, and brought home his trophies which were proudly displayed on his walls.
It had servants quarters, a separate room which was refrigerated where meat was cut up.
The house was patterned after a villa you might see in Scandinavia and it seemed surreal to believe it was in Trinity County.
Once the plants were at a certain size and we were able to distinguish vegetable from weed; we were responsible for keeping the weeds out.
At the ranch, we always had such a large garden, it appeared to be five acres in my mind.
Swimming hole at Salt Creek was so inviting and the dumb weeds stood in our way.
After the garden was processed, the goods always tasted so good in the winter.
It also was a beautiful sight to see all the products sitting on shelves.
At this time, my father had an opportunity to contract with Rockport Lumber Company.
There weren't any homes available for rent so my parents went shopping at Westport which was twenty miles south.
In the once busy bar-room was a player piano and the several rolls of music provided variety.
Mom eventually enrolled us in piano lessons but I didn't practice or become determined.
Playing baseball with the neighborhood kids was more fund and it's a decision I regret to this day; not being able to play.
She had always made matching outfits for Laura and I with panties to match.
Laura and I growled about still having the dish chore with all the added people but it didn't hurt us.
Older kids were transported to Fort Bragg; thirty miles away on very winding roads.
The school was located on a hill overlooking the town and the view of the ocean was breathtaking.
We'd barely present one program to our community and she would us working on the next one.
I remember our ""May Pole,"" decorated with streamers and one girl was chosen as Queen.
Baskets were filled with fresh flowers and we would put it on the door step of a favorite neighbor or another lady in the community.
I went through all the 'chairs' and then was juvenile master for a few years.
I memorized the installation of officers and the initiation of new members plus knowing the regular meeting regulations.
The closest shopping center was Fort Bragg and it was fifteen miles from our home.
We also were allowed to buy one comic book and were careful not to buy the same as our siblings.
I still do not know why I responded with that comment as children had respect for older people and did not say no or question a request.
I believe this was the first and last time my father spanked me and I was heartbroken.
A nurse also lived in our camp and she applied a 'butterfly' bandage and I don't even have scars.
Vacations were normally to the San Joaquin Valley to see relatives on my dads side.
After this experience, I vowed not to take my children away from their home at this ""festive"" time of year.
Dad was color blind so one of us had to be on guard to tell him which color the light was.
Only once upon our return did we find our house had been burglarized and the gifts missing.
Before my father returned from the woods one night, I vividly remember my mother being aware of a prowler.
She moved furniture to cover windows and the adrenalin must have really kicked in as she moved the piano to block the front door.
The person was scared away by the lights of my dad's vehicle as he came down the driveway.
Several men searched the area and then helped move the piano back to its spot.
Canning was done in every household to preserve fruits and vegetables when the fresh products were not in season.
I recall the family sitting in the front room listening to the radio when there was a ka-boom.
A large pressure cooker hadn't performed properly and every inch of the large kitchen showed evidence of the peas.
We were not wealthy so it also meant the cost of the peas and the pressure cooker.
I can still see the fields of wild poppies surrounding our place and how gorgeous it was.
My dad's favorite story about me was when he came home and I had been playing in the dirt.
He would ask how I got so clean and I would grin and say my mama washed me.
Each Friday we were allowed to board and ride the train as it was the only day their schedule met ours.
On modern maps today it is named ""Heller-Highwater Airport,"" a cutesy name assigned it by its current owner, Andrew Heller.
In 1882, her parents homesteaded in Graham County, KS where she grew up.
He grew up on a homestead in Jewell County, KS which his parents had claimed in 1872.
Life was hard and lonely on the prairie and Belle looked forward to children.
He sent Belle and the three children ahead by train while he followed by freight train with the livestock.
When Belle looked across the farm she saw beautiful flowering fruit orchards covering the hillsides.
She saw sparkling, clear waters of Sugar creek meandering around rich bottomland flanked by huge sycamore trees and small willow trees.
It was a paradise to Belle, but she still felt a longing for the open prairie, stretching for miles toward the horizon.
A 2-story evaporator, log granary and grey rambling rail fences scattered here and there.
Atop the hill, against the forest stood a lonely frame house, weathered silver-grey by the elements of time.
Its outstanding features were the huge white rock fireplace chimney, fashioned of native stone and the front porch overlooking the emerald green valley below.
When Thomas arrived with the livestock and two stock dogs, the place came alive.
Thomas piped cold water from a spring above the house into the house and wash house he built next to the kitchen.
He dug a fruit cellar with concrete walls and steps for storing fruit and vegetables for winter use.
Four more children were born on the farm, Mary Eunice in 1909, Alice Gladys in 1911 and Andrew Jackson in 1913.
Baby Charles Hurley in 1915, named for the family doctor, lived only four months.
When the children were old enough to attend school, Tommy built a long swinging bridge over Sugar Creek, anchoring it by heavy cables to huge sycamore trees on one end and steel cables anchored firmly in heavy concrete pillars on the other end above the creek.
Every child in the family clattered over that bridge endless times to cross Sugar Creek.
It was a work of engineering skill and durability, lasting until the children were grown and gone from home.
Every Sunday Tommy led the children to the little white church he and the neighbors helped build.
He loved to debate and sing, often inviting neighbors into the home to sing and play.
He had a clear tenor voice and the children loved it when he sang ""Gypsy Davey"" and played his harmonica as they promenaded across the worn wood floor.
These were happy times for the family, but Tommy became ill with a kidney disease and died on October 9, 1915, leaving Belle with seven children.
Nothing could move her from the farm, even though she had to sell most of the stock.
The family doctor and close relatives offered to adopt Andy and Alice, but Belle's life was dedicated to her seven children and she declined.
In 1919 as Belle was cutting sorghum cane for winter molasses, the sharp knife slipped, cutting into her shin bone.
He explained to Belle that her only hope was for him to amputate above the poison.
Next morning when he returned, he was amazed that Belle's heartbeat was stronger and her temperature lower.
The doctor could only shake his head, knowing he had just witnessed a miracle.
Fifteen year old Ruth dropped out of school and became nurse and second mother to Mary, Alice and Andy.
Man and Effie did the outside chores which consisted of milking, feeding the stock, cleaning the stalls, and cutting wood.
A good neighbor, Port Howard, came with a big load of wood during a blizzard.
Belle saw all her children grow up together on the farm, but her leg never fully healed from the dreaded gangrene.
Lillian graduated from Springfield Business College and worked as a secretary until she returned to Dug Hill in the 1920s and took a job as general secretary to the Linebarger brothers, owners of Bella Vista summer resort.
They were her greatest love next to her three children, Georgia, Evelyn, and Nadine.
He was service manager for Burger Motors of Bentonville for thirty-four years until a tragic accident took his life in 1972.
Mary and Alice worked their way through school and married soon after graduation.
Alice had six children, one, Alice Rosalie, was born on the old farm in the same house her mother was.
Green and Alice Kollenborn are the only surviving members of Tommy and Belle Green's seven children.
Virginia Belle lived on the old home place until all the children were grown.
Thomas and Virginia Belle now rest beside Baby Charles and Belle's parents, Margaret Eunice and Sylvester Myers, in the family plot overlooking their beloved farm home.
The rich farm land is buried beneath golf carts and manicured fairways.
Only memories remain. by Alice G Kollenborn Other sources indicate his first name was James, not Jesse.
He was born in Coleborne, Ontario, Can., June 9, 1870, the second in a family of four sons and one daughter, born to Robert and Deborah Shannon.
The parents left Canada in 1891 and came to California, making their home on a farm near Visalia, where Mr Shannon died.
Their son, Carleton J., lived on the parental farm in Canada until he was sixteen years old, attending the public school near his home.
At sixteen he became self-supporting and for three years worked at such employment as he could find in the vicinity of his birthplace.
At nineteen he was making only fifteen dollars a month and he was not at all satisfied with his income.
But he saved the little money that he could and in 1889 reached Tulare county, all traveling expenses paid, with twenty dollars in his pocket.
Robinson, a year and eight months and then worked two full years for John Frans at stock-raising.
Returning to the Frans ranch he became Mr Frans's partner in handling stock, and by 1897, through good management, acquired enough capital to purchase a farm of one hundred and forty acres, which was the nucleus of his present ranch.
In 1900 he bought two hundred and forty acres more and in 1902 another hundred acres, bringing his holding up to four hundred and eighty acres in sections thirty -two and thirty -three, township nineteen, range twenty-five, located five miles northeast of Tulare.
He has improved and cultivated the tract until it ranks with the best ranches in the county.
By later purchases he has become the owner of fifteen hundred and sixty acres.
Forty acres is devoted to peaches, one hundred to alfalfa and eighty to vineyards.
He has a dairy of sixteen Holstein cows, keeps an average of four hundred hogs and raises seventy -five beef cattle yearly, and he has also raised some fine Percheron colts.
He is a member of the Dairymen's Co-operative Creamery association and president and manager of the Farmers' Irrigation Ditch company, which has an eight-mile ditch whose practical length is greatly increased by many laterals.
Public-spiritedly he is all that his many admiring friends could wish him.
Mr Speaker, at this time I ask that my colleagues join with me in paying tribute to a selfless act of heroism performed by Officer Ted Shannon of the California Highway Patrol.
On November 13, Officer Shannon was awarded the State of California's highest honor for bravery, the medal of valor.
This medal has been awarded only 40 times, and those upon whom it has been bestowed are indeed a select group.
Last December, Officer Shannon came upon the scene of a head-on collision involving an automobile and a pickup truck.
After radioing for fire and ambulance assistance, Officer Shannon attempted to remove the occupant of the truck.
Repulsed by the expanding fire, he used his patrol extinguisher to subdue the flames, then attempted again to remove the victim.
At this point, gasoline leaking from the truck's dislodges gas tank caused the fire to spread to the second vehicle.
Officer Shannon then turned his attention to the three occupants of that car.
He was able to pull out an unconscious young girl, and was removing a second victim from the blaze when two passersby rendered assistance.
The driver of the car was pinned in the wreckage, and could not be removed.
Officer Shannon applied his highway emergency medical training in an effort to assist the two unconscious teenagers who were now clear of the accident, then returned again to the task of rescuing the two trapped drivers.
He suffered the effects of smoke inhalation, as well as second degree facial burns, and the threat of explosion was very real.
Despite Officer Shannon's incredible efforts, all four young victims of the accident succumbed to the massive injuries they had sustained.
However, that tragic conclusion does not dilute the selfless courage and determination demonstrated by Officer Shannon.
He is a 16-year veteran of the California Highway Patrol, and his outstanding performance is indicative of his dedication to his profession.
Acts of bravery such as his are few and far between, and they are certainly deserving of our recognition and tribute.
I know that my colleagues will share in my pride, enthusiasm, and gratitude to this outstanding individual.
I observed headlights in my rear-view mirror and identified a Chevy Vega as it passed alongside me.
As it had appeared to be traveling a little fast for this narrow, winding side road, I decided to run a speed check on it as it proceeded north on 49.
I waited several seconds to allow the Vega to go around a right curve (so as not to alert the driver that I was following him), started the patrol car and accelerated hard once on 49 as no taillights were in sight and I wanted to close quickly on the Vega to start the speed check.
My headlights soon illuminated the Vega and a mid-60s GM pickup, tangled together both badly damaged.
They had obviously collided head-on and also obvious was that the occupants had to have sustained serious injuries.
The glow I had seen was from fire in the GMC's cab, and it was growing in intensity.
While I was only about 2/1 th of a mile away when the grinding high-speed collision occurred, I did not hear what was surely a very noisy impact.
I can only guess that I was starting the CHP Dodge patrol car at the time.
I grabbed my two-way radio mike as I pulled to a stop just short of the vehicles, advising Stockton CHP Dispatch of a major injury accident with vehicles on fire.
As I ran to the burning pickup, I noted slumped and motionless occupants in the Vega.
Except for the murmur of burning fuel, the site of carnage was eerily silent.
Due to the sloping nature of the terrain, the burning driver's side of the GMC was tilted downhill.
The driver was lying across the seat, his head near the passenger door.
I did not take the time to determine if he was alive as my priority was to get him out of the fire.
Flaming fuel illuminated gasoline flowing out of the neck of the in-cab fuel tank.
When I first opened the right door, the fire was extending up to around the driver's knees.
I emptied my fire extinguisher as the flames spread, but only managed to temporarily reduce, not extinguish the fire, which soon encompassed his entire body.
I continued attempting to remove him until I noted that burning fuel had flowed down to the Vega and its left front was on fire.
There was a young male passenger in the right front and a young female in the right rear both motionless and quiet.
Due to the low roof structure of the car, I had to tilt the front seat occupant's head back to get the clearance to remove him.
Cradling him in my arms, I drug him about fifteen feet from the Vega, noting that he was still breathing.
As I turned my attention to removing the rear seat passenger, a youthful male approached and offered to help.
Together, we removed her also still alive to a spot away from the burning car.
Other CHP Officers arrived and we gave both victims oxygen until an ambulance crew took over the life-sustaining efforts, freeing us to do accident investigation.
Our investigation showed that the GMC driver allowed his vehicle to drift onto the southbound shoulder, overcorrected, and slid into the northbound lane where it collided head-on with the Vega.
The much heavier and faster moving pickup drove the Vega backwards off the highway in a southeasterly direction.
Both Vega passengers arrived at Mark Twain Hospital alive, but unfortunately were too severely injured to survive.
My ensuing Medal of Valor would have been so much more rewarding had they lived.
And while I never blamed myself, I could not help but wonder if the Vega driver might have been further up Highway 49, beyond the spot where the GMC slid into his lane, if seeing a CHP unit had not caused him to slow down even a little.
As to the medal, while I certainly cherish and am proud of it, there was more than one other occasion in my CHP career when I was more in fear of my future well-being.
My previous stint as a City of Eureka fire fighter taught me that burning vehicles do not violently explode as shown in the movies.
Yes, it was extremely hot 1 sustained burns on my forehead and smoke inhalation.
Certainly less than many recipients and probably more than a few others.
I know there were others who helped in various ways, and I apologize for any omissions in this list.
Bonnie Arnold, Ken Artlip, Marion Bishop, Patricia Graves Burrell of the White Lily Clan, Phillip Carnahan, Evelyn Cimino, Kate Clabough, Dale H Cook, Betty Cox, Gertrude ""Trudy"" Crook, Barbara Dickey, Lula Mae Dixon, Pearl Dorr, Sharon Dulcich, Mrs.
Peoples, Gerald Philp, Lori Radtkey, Redwood Genealogical Society, Nancy Riley, Rogers Historical Museum , Mrs.
You will come here and get books that will open your eyes, and your ears, and your curiosity, and turn you inside out or outside in.
John Howland 1599*-1672 born Fenstanton, Huntingdonshire, England; 1620 Mayflower passenger 1.
Elizabeth Tilley 1607-1687 born Henlow, Huntingdonshire, England; 1620 Mayflower passenger 2.
Desire Howland 1625-1683 born Plymouth, Massachusetts Captain John Gorham 1621-1676 born Benefield, England 3.
Lieutenant Colonel John Gorham II 1651Nov., 1716 born Marshfield, Massachusetts Mary Otis 1652-1733 bornHingham, Massachusetts 4.
John Gorham III 1688-1769 born Barnstable or Yarmouth, Massachusetts Prudence Crocker 1692-1779 born Barnstable, Massachusetts 5.
George Raymond Gorham 1819-1906 born Nantucket, Massachusetts Susan Lucky 1847-1894 born Eel River Island, California 9.
Esther Silvia Nelson 1912-1997 born Samoa, California Theodore Roosevelt Shannon 1902-1979 born Carlotta, California 12.
The site does not connect generations 3 and 4, but the book (which only goes through the fifth generation from the Mayflower passengers) does make that link.
By combining these two sources, the complete line from John Howland and Elizabeth Tilley down to Esther Silva Shannon—and beyond—can be ascertained.
