I argue, first, that violations of red lines create fleeting ‘windows of credibility’ wherein violators fear retaliation.
If declarers move quickly, they can convert non-enforcement into a bargaining chip, exchanging it for concessions while avoiding escalation.
Second, rather than wholly embrace clarity or ambiguity, declarers frequently optimize by combin­ ing clear demands with ambiguity about the consequences of crossing those lines.
Unfortunately, two oversimplified lessons permeate current thinking about red lines.
In 2012, United States President Barack Obama declared a red line against the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
After the Assad regime massacred an estimated 1,400 with sarin gas in August 2013, he considered bombing regime targets to enforce his red line.
Denied support from Parliament in London and Congress in Washington, he ultimately opted against strikes.
His critics alleged that this loss of credibility emboldened United States adversaries.
That President Obama erred in declaring the Syria red line and failing to enforce it has crystalised as received wisdom.
To the extent that controversy endures, it concerns whether the mistake was making the statement or failing to follow through on it.
In 1990, United States Ambassador April Glaspie told Iraqi President Saddam Hussein that the United States had ‘no opinion’ on Iraq’s differences with Kuwait.
In 1950, United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson gave a speech detailing the United States ‘defensive perimeter’ in Asia – delimiting a line that excluded South Korea.
Several months later, China failed to make sufficiently clear its red line against a United States occupation of North Korea, paving the way for war between the United States and China.
Regardless, they contribute to the popular belief that credibility requires declaring clear red lines.
Superficially at odds over the wisdom of declaring red lines, the two lessons are compatible.
Syria instructs policymakers that they must punish any violations of their red lines or else lose credibility.
The Korean and Gulf Wars teach policymakers that they must clearly and publicly declare their red lines in order to deter aggression, especially when they are truly willing to fight to oppose it.
The synthesis of these propositions is that leaders should declare clear red lines against actions that will truly provoke retaliation.
They should then follow through on those threats after violations while avoiding bluffs that are likely to be called.
This study examines three hypotheses drawn from this conventional wis­ dom and advances arguments to amend each of them.
Although these argu­ ments do not reject the hypotheses outright, they each present an important and prevalent reason why events deviate from expectations.
Collectively they caution against rotely applying the conventional wisdom to policy decisions and contribute to a more nuanced understanding of red lines.
First, the enforcement hypothesis postulates that when an adversary violates a red line, leaders must aggressively enforce it to sustain the credibility of that red line.
However, when an adversary crosses a red line, declarers enter a fleeting window of time in which they retain credibility because their adver­ saries fear imminent retaliation.
By parlaying a willingness to forgo 2 Many other cases contributed to popularizing both lessons.
For instance, in the Munich Crisis, Britain and France are widely thought to have damaged their credibility by having committed to defend Czechoslovakia and only to abandon it in Prague’s hour of need.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 3 retaliation as a bargaining chip, opportunistic declarers can take advan­ tage of these ‘windows of credibility’ after violations to convert credible threats to retaliate into concessions – and sometimes to forge deals that end crises.
Recognizing these opportunities has important implications for crisis management, because they provide leaders an alternative ave­ nue to pursue after red line violations besides prompt retaliation or acquiescence.
Second, the declaration hypothesis holds that leaders must declare red lines for those red lines to be credible.
However, I follow Thomas Schelling in arguing that declaration is generally superfluous when the red line is set on a saliency that makes it obvious to observers.
Prominent saliencies include crossing borders, using force, and nuclear use.
Red lines against these actions are often credible without declaration.
Third, the unambiguity hypothesis expects that leaders avoid ambiguous red lines because they undermine credibility.
This reflects one side of a decadesrunning muddle of policy advice about deterrence that alternatively praises clarity or lauds ambiguity.
This study explains why leaders generally formulate threats that are clear about their red lines but ambiguous about the consequences of crossing those lines.
This has direct implications for policymakers navigating difficult policy problems such as the level of ambiguity to attach to United States deterrence of Chinese aggression against Taiwan.
The research design works within the limits of what case studies can reveal about general theories.
Case studies are comparatively ill-suited to answering probabil­ istic questions about explanatory power, such as how much failing to enforce a red line after a violation damages credibility.
In contrast, case studies stand on firmer ground when they explore causal processes.
This study relies primarily on one application of that broader approach.
For theories that assume actors make constrained choices between two policy options, case studies can contribute by showing that actors repeatedly identified and selected a third option, one whose existence and appeal requires revisiting the logic of the theory.
Within that umbrella, it combines theory-testing and theory-building by revealing when and why causal processes divert from the expected sequence.
Derek Beach and Rasmus B Pedersen, Process-Tracing Methods: Foundations and Guidelines.
Rather than immediately enforce his red line against Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba, President Kennedy held the potential for a military response in abeyance, exploiting Soviet fears to press for concessions.
He used this tactic again when the Soviet Union shot down an American U-2 over Cuba.
Restraining from a military response became a bargaining chip that helped to forge the deal that ended the crisis.
Two of Kennedy’s five initial red lines – those against Soviet bases and organized combat forces in Cuba – quickly faded to the background.
Further challen­ ging the belief that red lines must be enforced to the letter, Washington allowed certain Soviet-bloc ships and submarines to transgress the blockade line and suffered no apparent credibility loss.
The Soviet Union did not declare a crucial red line against attacking Soviet troops in Cuba, whose existence Moscow denied.
Washington committed to the Pentagon that it would retaliate if the Soviet Union shot down a United States surveillance aircraft, but not to the Soviets.
All but one red line set during the crisis by either side combined clarity about the red line itself with ambiguity about the consequences of crossing it.
The exceptional array of declassified documents available from the United States and, albeit to a lesser extent, the Soviet Union, makes this study possible.
Nonetheless, caution is always warranted when seeking to generalize from a single case.
Rather, it seeks to use this important case to shed light on contemporary theoretical controversies and policy debates.
The statecraft of red lines Leaders confronted with a crisis often cannot swiftly improve the balance of power or forge new alliances, but one policy tool leaders always have immediately available is rhetoric.
Decisions about what, if anything, to say stand as a virtually universal feature of conflicts that approach the brink of war.
In calmer times, states formulate declaratory policies that set the stage 9 Speculatively, intense fear of nuclear war could lead policymakers to declare fewer or more ambiguous red lines , to enforce less aggressively after violations, and to devote more care to crafting the mix of ambiguity and clarity in their red lines.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 5 for future conflicts, often by establishing verbal and legal commitments to defend an ally or interest.
The impact of verbal statements articulating red lines is the subject of question throughout this study, but the time policy­ makers dedicate to crafting their red lines even on the brink of nuclear war underscores their importance.
Red lines are policy tools meant to influence – usually to constrain – the actions of an adversary.
Each demand, in turn, must contain a red line to distinguish what is demanded from what is not.
A coercer conveys the intent to carry out its threat for unacceptable actions that cross the red line, but not for acceptable actions that fall short of it.
By this definition, red lines are an inherent part of all coercive demands, both deterrent threats that aim to sustain the status quo and compellent threats that demand changes to it.
Leaders found ample language for articulat­ ing red lines before the phrase came into vogue.
Indeed, the definition does not require that red lines be publicly or verbally declared.
Leaders can convey red lines implicitly, tacitly, privately, and ambiguously.
This allows for the important possibi­ lity of undeclared red lines that are nonetheless mutually understood.
Although this study investigates threats and coercion as much as red lines, using the term facilitates discussion of both enforcement and ambiguity.
One can more easily speak of limited violations of red lines than of threats, which is important for analyzing decisions concerning enforcement.
Discussion of undeclared red lines is also clearer than it would be for undeclared threats, if only because many established definitions of coercive threats define threats by requiring explicit declaration.
If a leader fails to impose the threatened conse­ quences after a violation, that leader loses credibility for subsequent encounters and domestic political standing.
Leaders worry about the per­ ceptions of allies, adversaries, neutrals, and their own publics.
These reputa­ tional concerns and audience costs render verbal statements such as red 10 Of course, threatened consequences are not always imposed; bluffs qualify as coercion.
Consequently, 2) when a leader clearly and publicly declares a red line, that red line gains credibility.
Clear red lines – as opposed to ambiguous red lines – are thought to magnify both effects.
The enforcement hypothesis The enforcement hypothesis is the implicit basis for much of the criticism directed at President Obama for his decision not to strike in Syria.
It expects that allowing a violation of a declared red line to go unpunished damages the subsequent credibility of that red line.
It may further damage the credibility of the leader who declared it and perhaps even the declarer state,15 but the focus here is on the violated red line itself.
In practical terms, this hypothesis counsels policymakers that they must treat their red lines as inviolable, strictly enforcing them after violations lest they erode or collapse.
Suppose a state declares a red line, then fails to enforce it after a first violation.
By allowing the first offense to pass, the declarer reveals an unwill­ ingness to enforce the red line.
Survey experiments consistently find that the American public disap­ proves of a President who pledges to intervene to stop an aggressor but fails to follow through.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 7 Case studies, by contrast, have yielded mixed conclusions.
They argue that publics judge leaders based on policies and policy outcomes regardless of the content of their verbal statements.
Early studies of reputation concluded that backing down in crises did not critically damage leaders or states’ cred­ ibility in future encounters.
Even reputation skeptics might concede that failing to enforce a specific red line after a first violation would undercut the credibility of threats to enforce that same red line upon the next violation.
After President Obama decided not to enforce his 2012 red line by striking the Assad regime, Senator John McCain remarked, ‘Our friends and enemies alike, both in the Middle East and across the world, are questioning whether America has the will and the capacity to do what it says’.22 McCain later attributed Russia’s invasion of Crimea to the weakness President Obama revealed in Syria.
Even many Democrats agreed that President Obama damaged his own – and perhaps the nation’s – credibility by deciding against airstrikes.
Jim Jones, Obama’s National Security Advisor until 2010, later called the Syria red line a ‘colossal mistake’.24 Windows of credibility Let us stipulate that unpunished violations undermine credibility eventually.
Nonetheless, in the immediate aftermath of a violation before a response crystallizes, violators fear punishment.
After all, a child most fears her parents’ wrath immediately after they glimpse her hand in the cookie jar.
The absence of immediate enforcement is consistent with acquiescence but, crucially, also with preparing to retaliate.
Leaders can use that time to attempt other policy options besides immediate retaliation.
In this period, the violator keenly understands that the declarer now confronts significant incentives to punish them and/or to attempt to reverse the violation.
These post-violation incentives emerge from the harm done by the violation, concerns about international reputation, domestic audience costs, and the strategic logic of tit-for-tat reciprocity.
The length of each window of credibility depends on the circumstances – specifically, the length of time needed to fully prepare (militarily, diplomati­ cally, and politically) to enforce the red line.
Once the violator perceives that preparations have stalled or reached completion without enforcement occur­ ring, credibility loss begins.
Because violators cannot exactly know the length of time required to prepare an enforcement response, this credibility loss is typically incremental.
Although some declarers simply react to violations by retaliating, others harness the aftermath of a violation as a window of opportunity to press the violator for concessions.
Implicitly or explicitly, they convert restraining from enforcement into a bargaining chip, then trade it for something of value.
Describing President Obama’s Syria policy as a decision not to enforce his red line is an oversimplification.
After the United States Congress declined to back the use of force, he instead leveraged what remained of his post-violation credibility to pressure the Assad regime into a Russian-brokered deal.
The regime osten­ sibly gave up its chemical weapons in return for United States non-retaliation for their violation.
Assad’s decision to take this deal reflected the residual credibility of the United States threat to punish Syria.
Tragically, Assad relinquished only a substantial part of his chemical weapons arsenal, later using chemical 26 Credibility is the target’s perception of the probability that the coercer will carry out the threat after a violation.
Reputation encompasses longer-term views about an actor with implications for the credibility of all of that actor’s threats.
The discussion focuses on immediate credibility for simplicity’s sake and for consistency with the analysis of a single crisis.
In effect, the violator accepts creating incentives to retaliate as the price for reaping the benefits of the violation.
The violator may hope that the declarer’s response will be eventual non-enforcement, but opportunistic pressure by the declarer shortly after the violation may nonetheless lead the violator to grant concessions.
Nonetheless, the destruction of significant quantities of Syrian weapons of mass destruction was a substantive conces­ sion, quite possibly more than airstrikes could have achieved.
Leveraging a window of credibility to forge a coercive bargain is not a guarantee against credibility loss, as the prolonged criticism of President Obama over non-enforcement in Syria suggests.
Perceptions will depend on the value of the concessions received in return for non-enforcement, among other factors.
And indeed, the Assad regime’s subsequent use of chemical weapons revealed the limits of the concessions it made.
Nonetheless, it is reasonable to postulate that observers will typically judge non-enforcement with meaningful concessions more favorably than non-enforcement without them.
As will be discussed, President Kennedy used similar tactics with greater success.
Like in the Syrian case, exploiting a window of credibility achieved concessions while avoiding escalation.
The declaration hypothesis The declaration hypothesis proposes that publicly declaring a red line is necessary for that red line to be credible in the eyes of the adversary.
The distinction is between publicly declared red lines and those left unsaid, either because no threat was made at all or because the threat was conveyed implicitly or tacitly.
States have a clear incentive to appear resolute so that the adversary will back down.
Confessing low resolve by declining to declare a red line gives away the game without playing.
If leaders will not even say aloud that they are willing to fight for something, the declaration hypothesis doubts that adversaries will believe that they are truly willing to do so.
Consistent with this hypothesis, McManus analyses large collections of United States government statements and finds that statements of resolve affect diplomatic outcomes, particularly in the absence of military and domestic political constraints against following through on those threats.
The Logic of Chemical Weapons Use in Syria ; Hisham Melhem, ‘How Obama’s Syrian Chemical Weapons Deal Fell Apart’, The Atlantic, 10 April 2017.
However, two studies find that private communica­ tions more often affect perceptions than public statements.
Moreover, historians have raised doubts about the significance of those non-declarations.
Pyongyang began request­ ing Moscow’s support for an invasion before Dean Acheson’s speech leaving South Korea outside the United States ‘defensive perimeter’, so the speech did not cause the intention to invade.
Well-placed Soviet spies furn­ ished more reliable sources of information to Moscow.
Stalin remained con­ cerned about potential United States intervention despite the speech.
United States Ambassador to Iraq April Glaspie stated only that the United States had ‘no opinion’ on Iraq’s ‘border disagreement with Kuwait’ in her July 1990 conversation with Saddam Hussein.
She meant that the United States sought a peaceful settlement but was agnostic about the content of that deal.
Hussein clearly stated his intention to pursue multi-round negotiations with Kuwait.
He gave Glaspie no indication of war that would have prompted her to scuttle the meeting by overtly threatening him.
Iraqi documents suggest that – far from perceiving a green light – Baghdad perceived the United States as implacably hostile and expected a United States response.
Saliencies and undeclared red lines Both the Korean and Gulf War precedents seem to underscore the damage that non-declaration inflicts on credibility.
However, the evidence presented below will show that undeclared red lines can be surprisingly credible.
I follow Schelling in arguing that red lines are obvious to adversaries without needing declaration when a violation would transgress established saliencies, especially those against using force, crossing borders, and using nuclear weapons.
That is, South Korea need not communicate to North Korea that it must not invade across the Demilitarized Zone for Pyongyang to appreciate the credibility of that red line.
These saliencies can render declaration irrele­ vant by making implicit red lines apparent to adversaries.
I argue that declaration is often superfluous when a red line is set on one of these saliencies.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 11 To illustrate why this matters, the Korea example is again useful.
Station tens of thousands of American soldiers in South Korea, obscure their numbers, and refer to them only as advisors.
Demand that North Korea not invade but fail to specify clear consequences.
This deterrent posture would fall outside the boundaries of current policy debates in Washington.
It is inimical to common assumptions about the importance of declaratory policy for deterrence.
Yet, strange as it may seem, this is essentially what the Soviet Union did in Cuba.
The undeclared Soviet red line against attacking their troops in Cuba was credible to President Kennedy.
The unambiguity hypothesis The unambiguity hypothesis expects that leaders avoid ambiguous red lines because they undermine credibility.
Precise red lines are thought to increase the reputational and audience costs of not enforcing them, tying leaders’ hands and lending their threats greater credibility.
By calibrating the level of ambi­ guity, leaders can attempt to optimize the degree to which they tie their hands.
Audience cost critics reject this hypothesis and conclude that leaders consistently opt for ambiguity to preserve their freedom of action in order to reduce the risk of unwanted escalation.
They differ on which side of that tradeoff tends to outweigh the other and thus which option leaders generally select.
I posit that ambiguity about where the line is drawn damages credibility more than ambiguity about what happens if the line is crossed (the threatened consequences for violations).41 Resultantly, ambiguity about consequences occurs more 38 E.g., Schelling, Arms and Influence.
Because the two function differ­ ently, no blanket claim about ambiguity being beneficial, detrimental, com­ mon, or rare can capture the full picture.
In 2014, for example, United States President Barack Obama declared, ‘There will be costs’ for a Russian military intervention in the Crimean Peninsula.
Obama was relatively clear about the red line – what action was prohibited – but considerably more ambiguous about the punishment for a violation.
Even the language of the North Atlantic Treaty Association charter is surprisingly vague about consequences.
First, telegraphing the exact form of a punitive strike allows the adversary to take countermeasures to defeat it, blunt its impact, or prepare a riposte.
Second, threats that specify exact consequences for violations are often at odds with the strategic and policy processes with which states respond to violations.
The nature, extent, and context of the violation influence the response.
The windows of credibility discussed previously happen amid this period of flux immediately after violations.
In the case of Syria, the size of any punish­ ment might have depended on the quantity of chemical weapons used, the number of people killed, and the responses of other states, among other considerations.
Under such circumstances, threatening a specific, fixed response to a violation is impractical.
Tertrais distinguishes these two types of ambiguity but argues only that it is best to avoid both at once.
McManus classifies statements of resolve that refer to consequences as stronger by a tier than statements that merely articulate demands.
Snyder and Borghard discuss both types of ambiguity together and make the same claims about both.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 13 Third, only ambiguity about demands creates specific gray areas that provide openings for the adversary to advance with reduced fear of consequences, often via what are sometimes referred to as ‘grey zone’ tactics.
To borrow an example from Schelling, threatening to ground a child for a week if he enters the water will leave the parent in a bind when the initial violation is merely feet in the water (clear punishment; gray area in red line).47 In contrast, demanding that the child not put one toe in the water or else face consequences (ambiguous punish­ ment; clear red line) provides no natural opening for limited deterrence failure.
Importantly, my claim that ambiguous red lines function as green lights is antithetical to a popular argument about the virtues of ambiguity.
This argument posits that ambiguity engenders uncertainty about exactly what will trigger retribution, thus promoting caution.
Correspondingly, clarity is said to function as a green light that encourages the adversary to advance up to the line.
That logic seems compelling, but deciding between leaving some­ thing outside a red line and leaving it ambiguous is a false choice.
By analogy, the argument is that yellow lights better deter drivers from entering intersections than green lights.
Ambiguity appears the more constraining of the two only because the third option, a red light, has been excluded.
Yet states always retain the option to display a red light,e., to draw a clear line such that the adversary cannot advance before reaching it.
In sum, there are good reasons to expect that leaders will gravitate toward clarity about their red lines and ambiguity about the consequences of cross­ ing them.
Future studies might better assess whether this combination truly outperforms the alternatives.
Because both sides adopted it so consistently, the variation to draw inferences about effectiveness is lacking in the Cuba case.
Nonetheless, the fact that both the United States and the Soviet Union – two rather different regimes – shared this predilection provides reason to suppose that leaders frequently settle upon declaring red lines with this configuration.
In comparison, 47% of sanctions threats were specific about consequences.
With respect to the enforcement hypothesis, the evidence will show that President Kennedy let smaller Soviet violations of two of his five initial red lines as well as his subsequent blockade line pass without enforcement.
Throughout the crisis, he avoided any admission that he would not use force to enforce his red lines in Cuba in order to exploit Soviet fears about his response to their violations.
Washington doubled down on this tactic after the shootdown of an American U-2.
Rather than retaliate immediately, Attorney General Robert Kennedy leveraged the threat to do so to make the deal that removed Soviet missiles from Cuba – along, of course, with the secret concession to remove missiles from Turkey.
With respect to the declaration hypothesis, each side chose not to declare a vital red line that nonetheless proved credible to the other.
Soviet leaders never publicly declared a red line against attacking Soviet forces in Cuba, whose presence they denied.
The undeclared Soviet red line against attacking those troops was credible anyway.
Washington never declared a red line against firing on its surveillance aircraft over Cuba.
Yet Khrushchev rightly reacted with dread upon learning that Soviet forces shot down a U-2 without orders from Moscow.
With respect to the unambiguity hypothesis, all but one red line that either side declared during the crisis combined clarity about demands and ambi­ guity about consequences.
The subsequent discussion provides the basis for the determina­ tions in the tables.
For Kennedy’s initial red lines, it is possible to trace how initial language featuring ambiguous demands and clear consequences reversed course on both counts as he and his advisors crafted his statement of 4 September.
Kennedy’s initial red lines Wary of the continuing flow of Soviet arms to Cuba and seeking to deflect intense Congressional criticism after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, President Kennedy released a portentous statement declaring a red line against Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba on 4 September 1962.50 Or so it is remembered.
A red line is considered credible if the target of the threat believes that violation will more likely than not lead the coercer to use force.
That force might be limited in nature and need not involve nuclear weapons. ground missiles; or of other significant offensive capability either in Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and guidance.
Kennedy personally read this statement to Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko on 18 October.
W C, ‘Cable on the Conversation between Gromyko and Kennedy’, 18 October 1962.
Alongside the missiles and nuclear-capable IL-28 medium bombers, the Soviets established bases and deployed 41,000 troops, though the full extent of that deployment was unknown at the time.
Nonetheless, the United States did not aggressively pursue demands other than the removal of missiles and, with less vigor, the IL-28s.
President Kennedy instead decided to allow the non-nuclear violations in implicit exchange for Soviet compliance with higher-priority demands.
Although the greater importance of the nuclear red lines explains public acceptance of that decision, it still notable that Kennedy set aside two of his red lines after their violation without any apparent loss of credibility.
Both United States and available Soviet documents from the crisis and its aftermath largely fail to mention it, which suggests that this tacit acquiescence did not figure significantly into Soviet perceptions or create concerns about credibility loss in Washington.
This conflicts with a rigid belief that red lines must always be enforced to the letter.
For example, a Joint Staff memo written two weeks after the crisis subsided and entitled ‘Soviet Military Presence in Cuba’ began by asserting, ‘No one will record the Cuba episode as a victory of even modest proportions for the United States if the end result is a substantial Soviet military presence in the hemisphere’.55 This memo reflected the views of hawks who had advocated invading Cuba.
It recommended using the blockade as leverage to force out Soviet troops.
Curiously, however, the memo failed to mention that President Kennedy had publicly committed to that red line.
The 4 September statement not only included the prohibitions against Soviet organized combat forces and bases in Cuba; it began with them.
Nonetheless, by 14 November the exact words Kennedy used on 4 September had lost their importance.
It will continue to be so confined’.56 Concerned about the vagueness of ‘offensive 52 The Soviet Union eventually did remove most of its troop presence from Cuba.
That withdrawal owed more to the souring of relations with Castro than United States threats.
The decision to specify ground-to-ground missiles left Khrushchev in a weaker position from which to make that argument.
In general, that line should be drawn at the installation in Cuba or in Cuban Waters of nuclear weapons or delivery vehicles, sea or land based.
This largely describes the resultant statement, except with respect to specify­ ing military consequences.
The decision, instead, was for clarity about demands but ambiguity about consequences.
Indeed, on 13 September, President Kennedy reiterated the United States position.
Days of intense delibera­ tion saw an initial inclination toward airstrikes give way to the eventual 57 Even after removing background noise with the software Audacity, I was not certain of my ability to recognize voices besides Kennedy’s from the poor-quality tape; hence the lack of specificity about advisors’ identities.
That strategy depended greatly on context that would have been difficult to anticipate.
For instance, United States policy was shaped by Washington’s detection of the missiles in the brief period after they arrived in Cuba but before they became operational.
Kennedy’s five red lines could have been violated in any of dozens of combinations, each to various extents.
Soviet red lines against attacking Cuba Moscow succeeded, at least for thirteen days, at deterring Washington from attacking Cuba.
The Soviet Union declared a red line against attacking the Cubans but declined to do so for its own forces in Cuba.
Contrary to the expectations of the declaration hypothesis, however, President Kennedy and most of his advisors perceived the undeclared Soviet red line against attacking Soviet troops as credible and indeed as significantly more credible than the declared red line against attacking Cubans.
That is, they did not fear killing Cubans, despite the declared Soviet red line against doing so.
But they did fear killing Soviet troops in Cuba, despite the official Soviet position that such troops did not exist and so could not be killed.
The physical reality of attacking Soviet soldiers and missiles took precedence over the Soviet rhetorical stance.
We have said and we do repeat that if war is unleashed, if the aggressor makes an attack on one state or another and this state asks for assistance, the Soviet Union has the possibility from its own territory to render assistance to any peace-loving state and not only to Cuba.
If this attack is made, this will be the beginning of the unleashing of war.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 19 Taking both selections together, the Soviet Union declared a red line that made clear the demand not to attack Cuba.
However, the convoluted prose never plainly stated that a United States attack against Cuba would trigger a Soviet attack, nuclear or otherwise, against the United States.
Moscow has once again used vague and ambiguous language to avoid clear-cut obligation of military support in event of attack.
The declaration hypothesis expects that the Soviet red line against attacking Soviet troops should lack credibility because it was not declared.
However, President Kennedy and most of his advisors feared the consequences of cross­ ing this undeclared line.
Consequences of action by the United States will be the inevitable “spilling of blood” of Soviet military personnel.
He emphasized Soviet casualties, the costs of a Soviet response, and the difficulties of controlling subsequent events.
According to the declaration hypothesis, Soviet non-declaration left a fatal weakness in its deterrent posture.
The United States could strike Cuba while denying that it had attacked the Soviet Union.
The Soviets have no public treaty with Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the Island.
This situation provides them with a pretext for treating United States military action against Cuba as an affair which does not directly involve them, and thereby avoiding the risks of a strong response.
Hawks in Washington repeatedly raised this proposal to use Soviet nondeclaration as an opportunity to strike.
Kennedy rejected this approach on multiple occasions because he feared that a strike would cause war, Soviet rhetoric notwithstanding.
Soviet Reactions to Certain United States Courses of Action on Cuba’, 19 October 1962.
Khrushchev’s thinking began with a clear appreciation of the vulnerability he created, in line with the declaration hypothesis’s expectations about the dangers of non-declaration.
Khrushchev anticipated the gambit that hawks in Washington thought they could use to strike without Soviet retaliation.
He left the vulnerability in place for several more crucial days rather than release a press statement.
Although such a concise record leaves scope for interpretation, the reason seems evident, ‘ . . . they can attack, and we will respond.
Khrushchev concluded that the United States would fear attacking Soviet troops in Cuba despite the lack of a declared Soviet red line.
Other Soviet leaders shared his view that declaration was unnecessary for the Soviet Union to be committed to retaliate for an attack on its troops in Cuba.
If an invasion on the part of the Americans began, it would have led to a global confrontation’.73 Khrushchev’s choice not to declare strongly suggests that he saw the deterrence benefit of declaring the troops’ presence as smaller than the propaganda value of continuing to deny it.
It is revealing that Soviet denials persisted even after the United States discovered and announced the presence of the missiles in Cuba.
Forgoing the credibility boost of public declaration is easier to explain away as a Soviet attempt to deploy the missiles secretly as a fait accompli.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 21 Castro proposed that publicizing a treaty of alliance between the Soviet Union and Cuba might suffice to protect Cuba, Khrushchev demurred because he preferred to deploy the missiles in secret.
He planned to announce the missiles in November after the United States midterm elections.
The persistence of Soviet denials after all hopes for secrecy died on 22 October reveals that the Soviet Union valued the propaganda value of continuing to deny the missiles’ existence over the deterrence value of declaring a red line to protect them.
Khrushchev could, on 23 October, have announced the large-scale pre­ sence of Soviet troops and missiles in Cuba and pledged to defend Cuba as an ally.
He did not do so even after United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson unveiled photographs of the missiles at the United Nations on 25 October.
Soviet stonewalling about the presence of missiles only began to wane on 26 October.
He edged toward articulating a red line against attacking Soviet troops in Cuba, ‘ . . . e are of sound mind and understand perfectly well that if we attack you, you will respond the same way.
And I think that you also understand this’.77 That language evinces Khrushchev’s assumption that declaration was superfluous.
Public perceptions of Soviet denials persisted until the last full day of the crisis.
Khrushchev unambiguously acknowledged the presence of the missiles in a 27 October letter to Kennedy, both to facilitate a deal and to reassure Washington that Soviet officers – not Cubans – controlled the missiles.
Overall, Soviet red lines against attacking Cuba paint a two-part picture.
Both Khrushchev and hawks in Washington clearly understood the incentives captured in the declaration hypothesis.
However, Khrushchev deemed the advantages of declaration less valuable than secrecy and, after that collapsed, propaganda.
Correctly believing that the United States would hesitate before attacking Soviet forces regardless, Khrushchev chose to forgo declaring his red line until the last full day of the crisis.
The quarantine speech After a tense week of deliberations, President Kennedy went public on 22 October with the discovery of Soviet missiles and his decision to ‘quarantine’ Cuba.
Referring to the blockade as a quarantine allowed the United States to maintain a patina of legality over what would otherwise legally constitute an act of war.
Instead, Kennedy held the potential use of force in abeyance, using it as coercive leverage during the window of credibility before the Soviet Union gained confidence that he would not strike.
Although a significant signal of resolve, the blockade could not itself remove the missiles.
It served a broader strategy of coercion predicated on the possibility that more enforcement was to come, capitalizing on a window of credibility.
The demand to remove the missiles first appears midway through the speech.
One easily overlooked drawback of the blockade was that it gave Moscow the opportunity to correct its mistake (from the standpoint of the declaration hypothesis) by declaring a clear red line against attacking Soviet forces in Cuba.
According to President Kennedy, ‘ . . . obviously you can’t sort of announce that in four days from now you’re going to take them out.
Kennedy reiterated this fear five days later in the lead-up to his speech.
Consistent with the declaration hypothesis, Washington preferred that the Soviet leaders never had a chance to tie their hands with a public red line.
Nonetheless, Kennedy accepted that exact risk by selecting the blockade option.
In deciding how to enforce the 4 September red lines, the White House took seriously the domestic and international consequences of inaction.
Shortly after learning of the missiles, Kennedy ruminated, ‘My press statement was so clear about how we wouldn’t do anything under these conditions and under the conditions that we would.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 23 which we had made publicly at that time’.85 These and other similar remarks confirm that Kennedy took seriously the consequences of failing to enforce a red line.
Soviet leaders also contemplated the possibility that Kennedy’s public state­ ments would tie his hands.
Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin wrote to Moscow, A certain danger of the situation is that the President has largely engaged himself before the public opinion of America and not only America.
In essence, he, as a hottempered gambler, has put at stake his reputation as a statesman and politician, and thus his prospects for re-election in 1964, what–being an ambitious man–he passionately seeks.
This is why it is not possible to exclude completely the possi­ bility that he can, especially taking into consideration his circle, undertake such an adventurist step as an invasion of Cuba.
This remarkable step-by-step explication of audience costs theory provides a measure of support for the declaration hypothesis.
Yet, in another cable reacting to the speech Dobrynin reached the opposite conclusion, explaining that the severity of events ‘obviously have overtaken the significance of electoral considerations and that these considerations now are moving to the background’.87 The atmosphere in the Kremlin grew tense as senior Soviet officials stayed up past midnight to learn what Washington would do.
The declara­ tion hypothesis envisions that a public statement such as Kennedy’s gen­ erates credibility by tying hands.
Interestingly, the immediate reaction of Soviet leaders to Kennedy’s speech was a sense of relief.
The choice for coercive diplomacy and blockade was a choice not to bomb or invade Cuba, at least not initially.
Whereas Soviet fears spiked with the dis­ covery of the missiles, which revealed the violation of Kennedy’s red lines, those fears eased with the announcement of Kennedy’s brinkmanship policy.
The basic threat itself – that the United States would retaliate after a Soviet first strike with nuclear weapons – merely reprised the logic of Cold War deterrence.
The Soviet press statement challenging the blockade responded in similar terms, albeit with less bellicose language that opted for ambiguity about consequences, ‘The Soviet Government is taking all necessary measures for preventing our country from being taken unawares and to enable it to offer a condign reply to the aggressor’.90 In contrast, Kennedy’s red lines with respect to the blockade and the removal of the missiles required rapid resolutions to avert escalation.
Seen in that light, Washington and Moscow’s focus on those red lines becomes easier to understand.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk’s reaction to Soviet ships halting short of the blockade line remains a signature phrase in the public memory of the crisis.
Yet the blockade line was not a total success, but rather merely mostly successful.
The 22 October address declared, ‘To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
All ships of any kind bound for Cuba from whatever nation or port will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back’.91 In contrast to this clear demand, Washington never detailed how it would handle a Soviet ship crossing the blockade line.
The United States Navy’s lengthy rules of engage­ ment provided speak to the difficultly of accounting for the wide range of eventualities that could have arisen.
The Bucharest, a tanker unlikely to carry sensitive cargo, was allowed to proceed without physical inspection.
The East German passenger ship Voelker Fruendschaft too was permitted through the line.
Its lack of weaponry provided the public excuse for a decision motivated by the desire to avoid confronting a ship full of civilians.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 25 Soviet submarines successfully violated the blockade line.
Although an unlikely way to move cargo, American officials did worry that submarines could deliver sensitive materials such as nuclear warheads.
The United States Navy’s encounters with these submarines produced some of the tensest moments of the crisis, but the blockade never stopped them.
The same Central Committee meeting where the decision was made to turn back the freighters ordered, ‘Keep the submarines on their approaches’.97 Washington tolerated specific Eastern Bloc ships and submarines to pass through the blockade line rather than confronting them under unfavorable circumstances.
This suggests that United States credibility did not require a sacrosanct line that brooked no violations.
Contrary to the enforcement hypothesis, those violations did not cripple the broader red line or Kennedy’s credibility moving forward.
Responding to Kennedy’s announcement of the blockade, Khrushchev wrote to him on 24 October, Our instructions to Soviet sailors are to observe strictly the generally accepted standards of navigation in international waters and not retreat one step from them.
Khrushchev almost immediately backed off from this implied commitment to run the blockade.
Presumably he prioritized rejecting the legitimacy of the blockade over that inconsistency.
The undeclared red line against firing on surveillance aircraft On the morning of 27 October, Moscow had reason to hope that a favorable stalemate had emerged.
The United States had successfully blockaded Cuba but also increasingly demonstrated its reluctance to attack.
Then, however, a Soviet surface-to-air missile site opened fire, downing an American U-2 over Cuba and killing Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr.
There does not appear to have been extensive discussion of making such a declaration before Major Anderson’s death.
President Kennedy did once state, ‘If they fire on us, tell them we’ll take them out,’ but it appears that nothing came of it.
White House press statements on 26 and 27 October did not mention the issue – this despite the fact that the former devoted all four of its paragraphs to the topic of aerial surveillance over Cuba.1 Unbeknownst to Washington, two Soviet generals in Cuba ordered the mis­ siles fired on their own initiative.
According to Sergei Khrushchev, son and biographer of Nikita Khrushchev, ‘It was at that very moment – not before or after – that Father felt the situation slipping out of his control’.103 Nikita Khrushchev was furious that the SAMs fired without his orders.
He feared how the United States would respond and the possibility that further firing, perhaps by Cubans, would lead to disaster.
McNamara advocated this policy shortly before learning of Major Anderson’s death.
General Taylor’s report of the shootdown came with a recommendation for an airstrike on that SAM site the next day.
Like McNamara, he expected this strike to escalate to a larger bombing campaign and – most likely – invasion.
Remarkably, Kennedy committed to retaliate after a shoot-down to the Pentagon but not the Soviets.
That combination is difficult to reconcile with the declaration hypothesis.
On another occasion, McNamara suggested that the United States declare a red line against shooting down U-2s after the first was shot down.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 27 President Kennedy seriously contemplated retaliatory attacks on SAM sites firing at American aircraft the next day if diplomatic negotiations did not progress.
What he did instead helps to reveal the limitations of the enfor­ cement hypothesis.
The secret concession to eventually remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey contributed, but the credible threat of United States military action in response to the U-2 shootdown also catalyzed that outcome.
Rather than immediately retaliate or reveal an unwillingness to do so, Kennedy used the credible threat of enforcement to as leverage to forge a broader deal to end the crisis.
Because of the plane that was shot down, there is now strong pressure on the president to give an order to respond with fire if fired upon when American reconnaissance planes are flying over Cuba.
The USA can’t stop these flights, . . . ut if we start to fire in response—a chain reaction will quickly start that will be very hard to stop.9 Soviet perceptions of United States credibility peaked at this moment.
The Kremlin broadcasted its decision to remove the missiles on Radio Moscow without waiting for normal diplomatic channels or consulting Castro.
Had Kennedy not looked beyond the false choice between enforcing the United States red line and appearing weak for not doing so, the crisis might have ended differently.
Conclusion Conventional thinking counsels policymakers that they must declare clear red lines in order to deter.
They must enforce those red lines after violations or else lose credibility.
Soviet and American leaders consistently evinced an intui­ tive understanding of what I have referred to as the enforcement, declaration, and unambiguity hypotheses.
In each instance, there is little reason to believe that they paid a price for doing so.
Moscow knowingly left open the possibility that Washington could attack Cuba while denying that the United States had in fact attacked the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev’s calculated decision not to issue a statement to foreclose this tactic speaks volumes about how little he prioritized the credibility benefits of declaration.
Kennedy, meanwhile, made internal commitments to the Pentagon to retaliate after the shootdown of a United States surveillance aircraft without publicly conveying the red line to the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev perceived the threat as credible nonetheless, the decision of his generals in Cuba to fire notwithstanding.
This suggests that the lessons of the Korean and Gulf Wars are, perhaps, not what they have seemed.
Rather than blame solitary verbal statements for failing to declare clear red lines, the withdrawal of United States forces from South Korea in June 1949 and the absence of a tripwire in Kuwait may have mattered more.0 Nor does the evidence sustain the view that leaders must aggressively enforce their red lines after small violations lest deterrence crumble.
President Kennedy set aside his demands about organized combat units and military bases in Cuba in return for the more important concession to remove the missiles.
He tolerated a freighter, a passenger ship, and attack submarines crossing the blockade line as long as the ships more likely to carry weapons shipments turned back.
Indeed, Soviet leaders’ fears of United States escalation spiked twice during the crisis, once when they learned that Washington had detected the missiles – but before Kennedy revealed his response – and once when Soviet forces shot down Major Anderson.
However, the Soviet ‘blink’ notwith­ standing, those steps failed to halt Soviet progress toward readying the missiles.
The final impetus came from Robert Kennedy’s adept leveraging of the potential United States response to the Soviet shootdown of a United States aircraft.
This mirrored and built on President Kennedy’s initial decision to hold the potential for a military response to the missiles in abeyance while exploiting Soviet fears of it.
United States brinkmanship contributed to the Soviet withdrawal, as did the Jupiter missiles concession.
THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES 29 This success calls into question the criticism of President Obama’s Syria red line, because he used the same approach.
Eliminating a substantial fraction of Syria’s chemical weapons arsenal was an objective that seemed unachievable until the Russians put it on the table.
Only the credible threat to retaliate after the Assad regime crossed his red line made that possible.
The notion that Syria led to Russia’s invasion of Crimea is particularly overwrought.3 Finally, current understandings of the role of ambiguity in deterrence and coercion paint a muddled picture for policymakers that mixes praise for clarity with endorsements of strategic ambiguity.
The resolution of that contradiction emerges from distinguishing ambiguity about demands from ambiguity about consequences.
Leaders can set clear red lines while mitigat­ ing entrapment risks and preserving flexibility via ambiguity about the con­ sequences of crossing those lines.
Every threat save one made by either side of the crisis settled on this combination.
In short, it would be a mistake to believe that publicly declaring a red line is essential for its credibility.
It would be an error to regard either clarity or ambiguity as innately superior.
And it could spell disaster to conclude that every small violation of a red line requires a military response.
Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
He studies issues of international security including territorial conquest, the fait accompli, red lines, deterrence, coercion, nuclear proliferation, and the causes of war.
His research appears in International Organization, International Studies Quarterly, Security Studies, and the Nonproliferation Review.
Beard, David, ‘“There Will Be Costs” – The Text of Obama’s Statement on Ukraine’, Washington Post, 28 February 2014.
Beavers, Olivia, ‘Former Obama National Security Adviser Blasts Decisions in Syria as a “Colossal Mistake”’, The Hill, 19 February 2017.
Haass, Richard and David Sacks, ‘American Support for Taiwan Must Be Unambiguous’, Foreign Affairs, 2 September 2021.
Helprin, Mark, ‘Hollow Talk in the South China Sea’, Wall Street Journal, 15 August 2010.
Ioffe, Julia, ‘How Russia Saw the Red Line Crisis’, The Atlantic, 11 March 2016.
Mandell, Mark, ‘Obama’s Thick Red Line on Syria’, BBC News, 22 August 2013.
Melhem, Hisham, ‘How Obama’s Syrian Chemical Weapons Deal Fell Apart’, The Atlantic, 10 April 2017.
Miller, Jake, ‘John McCain Blames Obama’s ‘Feckless’ Foreign Policy for Ukraine Crisis’, CBS News, 3 March 2014.
