The Soviets relied on checkered shirts and tight quarters to sneak thousands of troops into Cuba.
Beginning in the summer of 1962, the Soviets employed an elaborate ruse, code-named Operation Anadyr, to ship thousands of combat troops to Cuba.
A few thousand soldiers donned checkered shirts to pose as civilian agricultural advisers.
Many more were issued Arctic equipment to throw off the scent, sent aboard a fleet of 85 ships and then told to remain below the decks for the long voyage in order to go undetected.
When the CIA estimated on October 20, 1962, that 6,000 to 8,000 Soviet troops were stationed in Cuba, the true number was more than 40,000.3.
To keep news of the crisis from leaking, a concocted cold was blamed for President Kennedy’s cancellation of public events.
To avoid arousing public concerns in the first days of the crisis, Kennedy attempted to maintain his official schedule, including a planned seven-state campaign swing in advance of midterm elections.
On October 20, 1962, however, he abruptly flew back from Chicago to Washington.
The president’s physician fabricated a story that Kennedy’s voice had been “husky” the night before and that he was suffering from a cold and a slight fever.
While aides told the press that Kennedy would spend the rest of the day in bed, he instead engaged in five hours of meetings with advisers before deciding on instituting a naval blockade of Cuba.
President Kennedy’s aides drafted a speech announcing a military invasion of Cuba.
In a dramatic primetime address on October 22, 1962, Kennedy informed the nation of the naval blockade around Cuba.
An alternative speech with a much different message had been drafted days before, however, in the event the president opted for a military strike.
Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, a Soviet military intelligence officer, passed along vital espionage about Soviet missile systems—including technical manuals—to the CIA and British intelligence officials.
That knowledge proved extremely valuable for the CIA agents analyzing the aerial photographs taken over Cuba.
On October 22, 1962, KGB officials arrested Penkovsky in Moscow, and it is believed he was convicted of espionage and executed in 1963.
On October 27, 1962, a Soviet-supplied surface-to-air missile downed an American U-2 plane, killing its pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson Jr.
President Kennedy posthumously awarded him the Distinguished Service Medal.
While on October 28, 1962, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev ordered the removal of Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba, it wasn’t a unilateral move.
Secret back-door diplomacy, rather than brinkmanship, defused the crisis.
Once Kennedy announced the blockade, the Americans and Soviets were in regular communication.
The October 28 agreement was hammered out the night before in a secret meeting between Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
The Attorney General’s outreach and offer to remove missiles from Turkey was so clandestine that only a handful of presidential advisers were aware of it at the time.Members of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council leave the White House on October 29, 1962.
Yes, it was 13 days from when Bundy showed Kennedy the incriminating U-2 photographs to Radio Moscow’s announcement of Khrushchev’s decision to remove the missiles, and the number has been drilled into history with Robert Kennedy’s posthumous memoir “Thirteen Days” and the 2000 motion picture of the same name.
But even though the world breathed a sigh of relief after the news of that 13th day, the tense situation did not suddenly abate.
Although the Kennedy administration thought all the Soviet nukes were gone, they weren’t.
President Kennedy, satisfied with Soviet assurances that all nuclear weapons had been removed, lifted the Cuban blockade on November 20, 1962.
Khrushchev had intended to train the Cubans and transfer the missiles to them, as long as they kept their presence a secret.
Soviet concerns about whether Castro could be trusted with the weapons mounted, however, and the Soviets finally removed the last of the nuclear warheads from Cuba on December 1, 1962.
