President John F Kennedy and his family brought glamour, charm, and enthusiasm to the political scene.
For many, the Civil Rights and feminist movements represented the realization of democratic ideals.
For others, the changes these movements ushered in represented social upheaval.
The spirit of optimism so emblematic of the early 1960s soon dissolved, as President Kennedy, his brother, Robert F Kennedy, Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr., and several other prominent civil rights leaders were assassinated.
The Vietnam War, generally supported by Americans early in the decade, also became a catalyst for social protest.
As the news media intensified its scrutiny of America's role in Vietnam, gruesome images filled the television airwaves, introducing many directly to the horrors of modern warfare.
The Kennedy Presidency Kennedy was elected president in 1960 by a thin margin over then-Vice President Richard Nixon.
Kennedy, at 43, was the youngest man ever elected president and the first president born in the twentieth century.
His stylish wife Jacqueline and their young children, John and Caroline, brought vigor and exuberance to the White House.
Aided by his brother Robert, who served as attorney general, Kennedy promised that the United States would put a man on the moon before the end of the decade and embraced the Civil Rights Movement.
As television use increased during the 1960s, the telegenic Kennedys used the new medium to their advantage.
In 1960, Kennedy performed calmly and confidently during the first-ever televised presidential debates against Nixon.
After the inauguration, Americans followed the new first lady on a televised tour of the White House, and the administration released to the press a steady stream of photographs of the president interacting with his young family.
On April 17, 1961, an invasion force of Cuban exiles went ashore at the Bay of Pigs, but were quickly defeated, an embarrassing beginning in foreign affairs for the new president.
After the failed Bay of Pigs incident, President Kennedy urged Americans to take steps to prepare themselves in case of attack.
Many companies sold underground shelters designed to protect families from nuclear attack.
Ranging from simple concrete block constructions to elaborate facilities that could comfortably house a whole family inside termite-proof walls and thick metal doors.
By October 1962, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had deployed two dozen nuclear-armed ballistic missiles in Cuba.
On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy announced a quarantine of the island.
American ships were deployed and at the ready to confront any vessels carrying weapons.
With Soviet ships en route to Cuba and a confrontation looming, Americans gathered at churches and families stockpiled food and supplies.
Meanwhile, the Kennedy Administration sought a solution during an agonizing six-day period.
America shared a collective sigh of relief, having perhaps come closer to a nuclear war than at any other time in its history.
Kennedy's Legacy On November 22, 1963, President Kennedy was assassinated while riding in an open limousine in Dallas, Texas.
The event was traumatic for Americans, partly because the first family had become so much a part of their lives through television and the print media.
Television stations covered Kennedy's funeral live, which ushered in a period of national mourning.
Many Americans felt that a unique era of youth, excitement, and promise had been snuffed out almost before it began.
Police officers soon apprehended President Kennedy's apparent assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald.
Two days after his arrest, Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby burst through a crowd of reporters and television crews surrounding Oswald as he was transferred to another facility.
Oswald's death, and the subsequent death of Ruby from cancer in 1967, left open many still debated conspiracy theories regarding the president's death—including that others, such as Cuban dictator Fidel Castro, organized crime figures, perhaps even government agents, might have been involved in the assassination.
Vice President Lyndon B Johnson succeeded Kennedy as president and inaugurated a series of programs meant to spread American prosperity to a wider number of people.
President Johnson's War on Poverty, modeled after Franklin D Roosevelt's New Deal, included the Food Stamp program, public housing, job training, and the creation of the healthcare programs Medicare and Medicaid.
Johnson also worked with Congress to push through legislation that had been supported by President Kennedy, including various civil rights reforms.
Civil Rights Although many were deeply involved in the movement, the most widely recognized civil rights leader of the era was Dr.
As head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King, a Baptist minister, preached nonviolent resistance, including boycotts, sit-ins, and marches, patterned after the ideas of East Indian leader Mahatma Gandhi.
King's efforts in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963, were met by brutal police repression and were widely reported on television news, leading to expanded support for the Civil Rights movement.
King gave his famous ""I Have a Dream Speech"" in front of the Lincoln Memorial.
The speech presented King's vision of a society in which all people would be judged by their character rather than their skin color.
The speech quickly became one of the most famous moments in American history.
On April 3, 1968, King gave his final speech, ""I've Been to the Mountaintop,"" in which he described both his vision of the future and his belief that he would not live to see it.
The following day he was shot and killed in Memphis, Tennessee, by James Earl Ray.
King's assassination sparked riots in several cities and further divided the nation.
Many groups violently opposed the struggle for equal rights, including the Ku Klux Klan.
Politicians and state government officials also resisted the dismantling of segregation.
Among the most violent tactics employed by segregationists was a wave of church bombings.
The most deadly attack was directed against the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, on September 15, 1963, when four girls, age 10 to 14, died in their Sunday school classrooms.
In 1963, Medgar Evers, a prominent National Association of Colored People activist, was gunned down outside his home in Jackson, Mississippi.
In 1964, three civil rights workers were murdered in Mississippi by Ku Klux Klan members.
In 1965, Malcolm X, a charismatic speaker and former member of the black separatist Nation of Islam, was murdered.
Increasingly during the 1960s, segments of the African American community became more militant, often carrying out their struggle for justice under the Black Power slogan.
In 1966, Huey Newton and Bobby Seale founded the Black Panthers, one of many Black Power organizations that rejected the nonviolent, integrationist approach of Dr.
The Black Panthers adopted a paramilitary style and focused on creating community services, such as free breakfasts for school children.
In 1967, the Black Panthers were involved in a shootout with police in Oakland, California.
An officer was killed, and Newton, who was wounded, was convicted of manslaughter.
The movement led to an array of important legislation, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlawed racial segregation in public facilities and banned gender discrimination; the Twenty-Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1964, prohibiting poll and other voting taxes; the Voting Rights Act of 1965, making literacy tests for voting illegal; and the Civil Rights Act of 1968, which included provisions to ensure fair housing practices.
The American Indian Movement tried to focus the nation's attention on treaty violations.
Founded in 1968 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the group dramatized their cause by occupying Alcatraz Island, in 1969.
The Vietnam War Between 1964 and 1968, the United States moved from an advisory role toward South Vietnam, which was trying to retain its independence from communist North Vietnam, to a more active role, spearheading military action against communist-backed forces in the South known as the Viet Cong.
As 1968 began, close to half a million United States military personnel were in Vietnam, and over 16,000 Americans had been killed in the conflict.
The Viet Cong proclaimed a cease-fire in conjunction with the annual three-day Vietnamese holiday known as Tet, scheduled to begin on January 30; however, they instead infiltrated cities and towns across South Vietnam and launched waves of attacks.
The communist assaults were repelled, in some cases with great loss of American lives.
The Viet Cong was effectively destroyed; however, the military defeat ended up being a psychological and public relations victory for the communist forces.
Millions of Americans concluded that American forces were unable to secure even the largest cities of South Vietnam and what little support remained for the war evaporated quickly.
President Richard Nixon responded by gradually turning over primary combat responsibilities to the South Vietnamese.
Unsatisfied with the rate of demilitarization, antiwar activity actually increased during this period, particularly on America's college campuses.
By the end of 1969, more than 40,000 Americans had been killed in the conflict.
Attitudes toward patriotism and supporting the nation in wartime changed during the second half of the 1960s.
A growing number aggressively questioned American foreign policy, and the soldier, traditionally a hero, fell in stature.
For the first time in American history, returning veterans faced job discrimination and other forms of bias.
The Vietnam War and the rights of women and minorities, the political turmoil of the 1968 presidential election, changing sexual attitudes, increased drug use, and radically different styles in clothes strained not only the country as a whole but also individual families.
With so many changes in American society, children and parents found themselves disagreeing over many areas of everyday life.
Moral and religious issues were often at the heart of family conflicts.
Sexual freedom, including pre-marital sex, multiple sexual relationships, and unmarried couples living together, proved difficult for many parents to tolerate.
The 1968 race for the White House, ultimately won by Nixon, was one of the most polarizing in American history.
Eugene McCarthy, who attracted vehement support from young voters opposed to the Vietnam War; the assassination of Robert F Kennedy, a popular candidate among many African Americans and others who had supported his brother; widespread antiwar demonstrations at the Democratic Convention in Chicago; and a strong showing by segregationist Gov.
Americans split not only along party affiliation, but by age, race, views on women's rights, and United States foreign policy.
For the rest of the decade, and long after, the generation gap and other manifestations of national divisiveness would haunt the nation.
At the same time, there were many challenges facing the nation in the 1960s as well.
