He has taught at the U of the Witwatersrand, been a consultant for an international NGO, run a famous Johannesburg theatre and remains on its board, and been a commentator for South African and international print/broadcast/online media, in addition to writing for The Daily Maverick from day one.
Cuban leader Raúl Castro’s announcement that Cubans will now be allowed to travel freely beyond their island is the latest reminder of the legacy of the 1962 US-Soviet standoff over nuclear missiles in Cuba that nearly plunged the two nuclear powers into atomic warfare 50 years ago this week.
It may seem astonishing now, but throughout the 1950s and early ’60s, children like this writer throughout America, and most probably in the Soviet Union as well, lived with the idea of death.
Death in the form of nuclear Armageddon that would be visited on school children foolish enough to fail to follow the instructions in every school’s routine “duck and cover” civil defence drills.
The rise and fall of a wailing civil defence siren would sound, children scrambled safely beneath their elementary school wooden desks, heads down, eyes covered to protect against the deadly atomic flash fearfully watching for the tell-tale flash of the real explosion.
Television, radio, newspapers and popular novels frequently offered stories about the atomic holocaust visited upon Earth as Russian and American bombers, missiles and even nuclear-armed artillery duelled for victory in a world where the living would surely envy the dead.
Shows like “The Twilight Zone” dealt frequently with the terrors of a post-nuclear war world; films like Dr Strangelove and Failsafe fantasized about the inevitable; while classic science fiction stories like On the Beach, A Canticle for Leibowitz and The Golden Horn set out the new human society that would arise on the ashes of the old – or perish amidst the flames.
Einstein answered that while he wasn’t sure about the Third World War, he was absolutely certain the war that came after that one would use sticks, stones, bows and arrows.
The United States defence bureaucracy and military establishment – and undoubtedly their Soviet equivalents – were equally transfixed with the emerging nuclear balance, trying hard to create a military doctrine that could explain how one side’s nuclear weapons would be a counterweight to the other’s in a balance of terror in a strategy of deterrence and Mutually Assured Deterrence and Destruction.
Each side was intent on stockpiling sufficient weapons that even if its antagonist could carry off a pre-emptive launch of weapons, the other side would still have sufficient forces left over in reserve to deliver a lethal response.
Photo taken by the CIA With that clarified, no rational leader would choose to launch a first strike if it meant their own half of the world became cinders once all the missiles and planes had done their horrible work.
For the theorists, the idea, instead, was to create a perfectly protected second strike that could guarantee retaliation and thereby prevent the first strike from ever happening.
Strategists like Herman Kahn and Thomas Schelling developed mathematically sophisticated models of the movement up the escalatory ladder from a modest border patrol clash to a full-scale nuclear war, the better to sort out how to put a break on any run-away military confrontation.
Meanwhile, however, the two sides continued to test increasingly terrifyingly sized nuclear weapons and worked on missile delivery systems of increasing accuracy and ease of operation.
In 1960’s American presidential election, one of the electrifying issues that animated the campaign was the supposed missile gap favouring the Soviet Union.
Democratic candidate John F Kennedy charged that Dwight Eisenhower’s Republican administration had allowed the Russians to achieve tactical, and perhaps even strategic, success as they built larger, more agile guided missiles in contrast to those developed by the American military.
This was paired with the Russians’ success in reaching space with their new rockets.
The fear was that a Russian satellite, loaded with a bomb, could pass over the United States and launch its payload from space.
Fidel Castro’s increasingly radical socialist revolution in Cuba was drawing closer to a full-scale alliance with Russia at the time, antagonising the Americans.
Early in the his administration, Kennedy, perhaps unnerved by his unhappy first encounter with Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna, allowed the CIA to go forward in sending a secretly equipped army of Cuban exiles to end Castro’s rule on the island.
This invasion force was defeated at the Bay of Pigs landing zone, but Castro, himself now close to panic over the possibility of a formal United States invasion of his island, prevailed upon his Soviet allies to build up their military forces on the island, including the secret installation of batteries of intermediate range nuclear missiles.
These were missiles that could reach most of the territory of the continental US, most of its major cities, many of its primary nuclear weapons bases – all in less time than it would take to prepare to launch America’s own missiles and strategic bombers.
Strategic surprise with an actual first-strike capability in the hands of the Russians seemed in place.
For Castro, this missile force has also become a shield that will prevent an American invasion.
For the Soviet Union this gamble seems poised to achieve strategic success, allowing them to force the Americans to make yet other concessions in Berlin, Southeast Asia, the Mediterranean littoral – almost anywhere – or else.
Then these new missile emplacements are discovered by routine surveillance flights over Cuba by American spy planes.
Once military and intelligence analysts were sure they were missiles, the president and his cabinet and staff were briefed.
On 22 October, Kennedy went on nationwide live TV and radio to announce that terrible Russian missiles were in Cuba, with more on the way.
America – almost literally – held its collective breath, then checked out bomb shelters and stocked up on supplies like tinned milk, beans, tuna, biscuits and water.
This might have meant the nuclear war a generation of children had spent afternoons under their school desks giggling about.
The president ordered troops to move south to Florida in the first steps of an actual invasion force.
The navy steamed a flotilla into place to tighten a ring around Cuba, quarantining the island to prevent the arrival of further shipments of missiles and supplies and, it was hoped, to monitor the return to Russia of the missiles already in place.
It was called a quarantine, an antiseptic, clinical word, instead of a “blockade”, which could be interpreted as an act of war.
The two sides were moving quickly into unknown territory, like night drills in a dense forest.
The wrong turn of phrase, the wrong message, the wrong act, the wrong signal, the wrong twitch and things could go all wrong.
The mythology that evolved out of this confrontation is of steely eyed men in the White House who carefully calibrated quarantine ship placements and Russian transport ship inspections without boarding the enemy vessels.
The craftily interpreted messages from Khrushchev to pick the one that gives a way forward out of madness.
These steps were coupled with a promise to dismantle older American missiles based in Turkey and Italy aimed at Russia, making it easier to climb back down that ladder of escalation and away from nuclear disaster.
Entire university courses are built around the crisis as a case study in political management.
Even now, conferences in honour of the crisis’ 50 anniversary, lectures and yet more books are coming forward.
But Cold War historian Michael Dobbs has recently argued that “the myth has become a touchstone of toughness by which presidents are measured.
Dobbs has learned that the Russian ships did not in fact continue ominously to steam towards the quarantine line in the Caribbean Sea.
Rather than this clash of the titans, the real dangers came from the more mundane fog of war.
By 27 October, Dobbs argues, the two national leaders were no longer the total masters of their respective military machines now sliding onward under their own momentum.
The Soviets sent MiG fighters into the air to try to shoot down the American intruder, and in response, Alaska Air Defence Command scrambled F-102 interceptors armed with tactical nuclear missiles.
In the Caribbean, a frazzled Soviet submarine commander was dissuaded by his subordinates from using his nuclear torpedo against American destroyers that were trying to force him to the surface,” Dobbs writes.
Left unsaid by Dobbs, but just as clearly true, is that this very same lesson will need to be understood by whoever takes charge of the United States military forces on 20 January 2013.
A dispatch from a country fighting for its very existence DM168 Mystery global hepatitis outbreak in children causes a scare Ukraine Crisis Vladimir Putin’s Samson option spells disaster of biblical proportions World New battle over women’s reproductive rights causes further turbulence in stormy United States political seas SPONSORED CONTENT Sponsored Content Uber launches Uber Connect Car Sponsored Content Reimagining sustainable energy solutions for Africa Sponsored Content The Carrington The Cape Town property investment you’ve been searching for.
CookieDurationDescription__cfduid1 monthThe cookie is used by cdn services like CloudFlare to identify individual clients behind a shared IP address and apply security settings on a per-client basis.
It does not correspond to any user ID in the web application and does not store any personally identifiable information.
It allows the online transaction without storing the credit card information.This service is provided by Stripe.com.connect.sid1 monthThis cookie is used for authentication and for secure log-in.
It registers the log-in information.cookielawinfo-checkbox-analytics11 monthsThis cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin.
CookieDurationDescription__atuvc1 year 1 monthThis cookie is set by Addthis to make sure you see the updated count if you share a page and return to it before our share count cache is updated.__atuvs30 minutesThis cookie is set by Addthis to make sure you see the updated count if you share a page and return to it before our share count cache is updated.__cf_bm30 minutesThis cookie is set by CloudFlare.
The cookie is used to support Cloudflare Bot Management.__pvi1 dayThis cookie is used for the implementation of the news content from other sites.bcookie2 yearsThis cookie is set by linkedIn.
The purpose of the cookie is to enable LinkedIn functionalities on the page.lidc1 dayThis cookie is set by LinkedIn and used for routing.
CookieDurationDescription__gads1 year 24 daysThis cookie is set by Google and stored under the name dounleclick.com.
This cookie is used to track how many times users see a particular advert which helps in measuring the success of the campaign and calculate the revenue generated by the campaign.
The cookie is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report.
The cookie is used to give a unique number to visitors, and collects data on user behaviour like what page have been visited.
The data collected is used for analysis.uvc1 year 1 monthThe cookie is set by addthis.com to determine the usage of Addthis.com service.
These data are then used to segment audiences based on the geographical location, demographic, and user interest provide relevant content and for advertisers for targeted advertising._cc_ccsessionThe cookie is set by crwdcntrl.net.
These data are then used to segment audiences based on the geographical location, demographic, and user interest provide relevant content and for advertisers for targeted advertising._cc_dc8 months 26 daysThe cookie is set by crwdcntrl.net.
These data are then used to segment audiences based on the geographical location, demographic, and user interest provide relevant content and for advertisers for targeted advertising._cc_id8 months 26 daysThe cookie is set by crwdcntrl.net.
These data are then used to segment audiences based on the geographical location, demographic, and user interest provide relevant content and for advertisers for targeted advertising._kuid_5 months 27 daysThe cookie is set by Krux Digital under the domain krxd.net.
The cookie stores a unique ID to identify a returning user for the purpose of targeted advertising._rxuuid1 yearThe main purpose of this cookie is targeting, advertesing and effective marketing.
This cookie is used to set a unique ID to the visitors, which allow third party advertisers to target the visitors with relevant advertisement up to 1 year.ANON_ID_old3 monthsThis cookie helps to categorise the users interest and to create profiles in terms of resales of targeted marketing.
The cookie is used to collect information about the usage behavior for targeted advertising.CMPRO3 monthsThis cookie is set by Casalemedia and is used for targeted advertisement purposes.CMPS3 monthsThis cookie is set by Casalemedia and is used for targeted advertisement purposes.CMST1 dayThe cookie is set by CasaleMedia.
The cookie is used to collect information about the usage behavior for targeted advertising.DSID1 hourThis cookie is setup by doubleclick.net.
This cookie is used by Google to make advertising more engaging to users and are stored under doubleclick.net.
It contains an encrypted unique ID.google_push5 minutesThis cookie is set by the Bidswitch.
This collected information is used to sort out the users based on demographics and geographical locations inorder to serve them with relevant online advertising.i1 yearThe purpose of the cookie is not known yet.id3 monthsThe main purpose of this cookie is targeting and advertising.
It is used to create a profile of the user's interest and to show relevant ads on their site.
The cookie is used for recognizing the browser or device when users return to their site or one of their partner's site.loc1 year 1 monthThis cookie is set by Addthis.
This cookie is used for promoting events and products by the webiste owners on CRM-campaign-platform.TDCPM1 yearThe cookie is set by CloudFlare service to store a unique ID to identify a returning users device which then is used for targeted advertising.TDID1 yearThe cookie is set by CloudFlare service to store a unique ID to identify a returning users device which then is used for targeted advertising.test_cookie15 minutesThis cookie is set by doubleclick.net.
The information is used for determining when and how often users will see a certain banner.tuuid_lu1 yearThis cookie is set by .bidswitch.net.
The main business activity of this cookie is targeting and advertising.
CookieDurationDescription__cflb23 hoursThis cookie is used by Cloudflare for load balancing.ajs_group_idneverThis cookie is set by Segment.io.
Removing advertising from your browsing experience is one of them we don't just block ads, we redesign our pages to look smarter and load faster.
Click here to see other benefits and to sign-up to our reader community supporting quality, independent journalism.
