See also the Cuba history of the bombs list of colonial governors of Cuba and list of presidents of Cuba. .mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness.
His troops withdraw after being decimated by fevers and raids from Spanish troops.
Skirmishes between British and Spanish fleets end indecisively on a strategic level.
September Spanish Captain-General Arsenio Martínez Campos is defeated at Peralejo and leaves Cuba in January 1887.
Upon Menocal's reelection, José Miguel Gómez and other Liberals launch a revolt known as the Chambelona War.
They are defeated by 14 August in military operations that include the first use of military aviation in Cuba.
A provisional government is established, with Carlos Manuel de Céspedes y Quesada as president.
January 18 Manuel Márquez Sterling is president for a few hours, followed by Carlos Mendieta.
Its first ambassador is Andrei Gromyko.51 5 August Eduardo Chibás, leader of the Ortodoxo party and mentor of Fidel Castro, commits suicide during a live radio broadcast.
November Batista dissolves parliament and is elected constitutional president unopposed.
June Brothers Fidel and Raúl Castro are introduced to Che Guevara in Mexico City.
Ex-president Prío exiled to Miami.November The yacht Granma sets out from Mexico to Cuba with 82 men on board, including Raúl Castro, Che Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos.
By August, the rebels had defeated the army's advance and captured a huge amount of weaponry.
December Guevara, William Alexander Morgan, and forces of the Directorio Revolucionario Estudiantil, an organization of university students, attack Santa Clara.
Various urban rebels, mainly associated with Directorio, seize Havana 2 January Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos arrive in Havana.
May The Cuban government enacts the Agrarian Reform Law, seizing large holdings of agricultural land and redistributing it to smaller land owners.
Dorticós serves until 2 December 1976 28 October Plane carrying Camilo Cienfuegos disappears during a night flight from Camagüey to Havana.
March United States President Dwight Eisenhower orders CIA director Allen Dulles to train Cuban exiles for a covert invasion of Cuba.
The scheme continues until United States airports are closed to Cuban flights during 1962.
March Former rebel comandante Humberto Sorí Marin and Catholic leaders shot.
United States threatens to invade Cuba if the bases are not dismantled and warns that a nuclear attack launched from Cuba would be considered a Soviet attack requiring full retaliation.
The Family Code bill establishes the official goal of equal participation in the home.
May Fifty Cuban military personnel sent to Ethiopia.79 21 October Huber Matos is released from prison after serving out his full term.80 April–October The Mariel Boatlift.
Cuban authorities allow up to 125,000 people to depart Cuba by boat from Mariel harbor for the United States The Cuban and United States governments agree to halt the exodus in October.
He praises the Varela project and criticizes the United States embargo.
July Hurricane Dennis causes widespread destruction in Cuba and leaves 16 people dead.
February Raúl is elected President by the National Assembly.14 17 December United States President Barack Obama and Raúl Castro re-establish diplomatic ties between the two countries.16 20 March United States President Barack Obama begins a three-day visit to Cuba.16 25 November The death of Fidel Castro is announced.
