It is an excellent study and one that should be highly comes to making a decision,” Gibson argues, “what is not recommended to colleagues and students. said can be just as important as what is said.
Gibson never really establishes a strong case for sysThe subfield of microsociology is grounded in a belief temic suppression of the serious risks tied to the blockthat face-to-face interactions and the conversations they ade.
They encompass causal mechstrong reservations that were never expressed in the anisms that determine perceptions, preferences, and outExcomm meetings.
However, given the time constraints common to any will be successful, in part, if I can demonstrate how crisisinternational crisis, a final decision has to be made, and related talk is anchored in, and shaped by, the machinery endless repetition of the same objections, with the same of conversation, I have a more ambitious goal in mind, to level of intensity, is not always constructive or rational.
I decision to unfold, and, in this case, it occurred after an believe that he succeeds in making a strong case for the exhaustive review of alternatives. importance of conversational analysis, but I am not conGibson obviously believes that the suppression of McNamavinced that the evidence he offers is sufficient to mount a ra’s objections privileged the blockade, but it is just as June 2013 | Vol.
The assumption here is that Excomm conversaapplying specific microsociology techniques for interprettions were central to the decision-making process, a pering the mechanics of what is said and how.
Presumably, fectly reasonable position shared by many scholars writing written transcripts would be more than sufficient to idenon the crisis.
I can imagine many one-on-one converif ” counterfactual analysis he claimed was necessary for sations between John and Robert Kennedy, or between defending his argument.
Simply posing a what-if questhe president and secretary of defense, outside the Excomm tion is never sufficient to establish the case for continmeetings, that would have shaped, changed, and solidigency.
Scientists, Politicians, ability to control escalation was always the most appealand Proliferation.
Edited McNamara ultimately came to accept the blockade stratby Etel Solingen.
With respect to Gibson’s assertion, nance of international peace and security.
Fortunately, two therefore—that “the Cuban missile crisis has continrecent books by established scholars astutely address these gency written all over it insofar as there are so many ways critical questions. in which it could have gone differently” —the eviIn Sanctions, Statecraft, and Nuclear Proliferation, Etel dence presented in the book does not, in my opinion, Solingen and a stable of experts examine the role of support this view.
Gibson does not provide a clear account economic sanctions in dissuading states from pursuing of the relationship between the conversational mechanics nuclear weapons.
