Page 1 of 6 4 The Cold War Divides the World MAIN IDEA WHY IT MATTERS NOW TERMS & NAMES REVOLUTION The superpowers Many of these areas today are • Third World • Anastasio Somoza supported opposing sides in troubled by political, economic, • nonaligned • Daniel Ortega Latin American and Middle and military conflict and crisis. nations • Ayatollah Ruholla Eastern conflicts.
The first was the industrialized capitalist nations, including the United States and its allies.
The Third World consisted of developing nations, often newly independent, who were not aligned with either superpower.
These nonaligned countries provided yet another arena for competition between the Cold War superpowers.
TAKING NOTES Fighting for the Third World Determining Main Ideas Use a chart to list main The Third World nations were located in Latin America, Asia, and Africa.
They points about Third World were economically poor and politically unstable.
They also suffered from ethnic conflicts and lack of technology and education.
Each needed a political and economic system around Country Conflict which to build its society.
Soviet-style communism and U.S.-style free-market Cuba democracy were the main choices.
Nicaragug a Iran Cold War Strategies The United States, the Soviet Union, and, in some cases, China, used a variety of techniques to gain influence in the Third World.
The United States and Soviet intelligence agencies—the CIA and the KGB—engaged in various covert, or secret, activities, ranging from spying to assassination attempts.
The United States also gave military aid, built schools, set up programs to combat poverty, and sent volunteer workers to many developing nations.
The Soviets offered military and technical assistance, mainly to India and Egypt.
Association of Nonaligned Nations Other developing nations also needed assistance.
They became important players in the Cold War competition between the United States, the Soviet Union, and later, China.
But not all Third World countries wished to play a role in the Cold War.
Indonesia, a populous island nation in Southeast Asia, also struggled to stay uninvolved.
In 1955, it hosted many leaders from Asia and Africa at the Bandung Conference.
They met to form what they called a “third force” of independent countries, or nonaligned nations.
Some nations, such as India and Indonesia, were able to maintain their neutrality.
But others took sides with the superpowers or played competing sides against each other.
What differentiated the Cold War from other 20th century conflicts was that the two enemies did not engage in a shooting war.
Instead, they pursued their rivalry by using the strategies shown below.
Major Strategies of the Cold War Foreign Aid Espionage Multinational Alliances The two superpowers tried to win allies Fearing the enemy might be gaining To gain the support of other nations, by giving financial aid to other nations. the advantage, each side spied on the both the Soviet Union and the United For instance, Egypt took aid from the other.
Two Soviet Union to build the Aswan High Soviet downing of a United States U-2 spy plane examples of this were NATO and the Dam . in 1960.
Propaganda Brinkmanship Surrogate Wars Both superpowers used propaganda The policy of brinkmanship meant The word surrogate means substitute. to try to win support overseas.
For going to the brink of war to make the Although the United States and the example, Radio Free Europe other side back down.
Communists retain or gain down United States U-2 Communist-led control after bloody pilot Francis Gary rebels wars in Korea Powers in 1960.
The United States SOVIET UNION GERMANY and the Soviet Union N O RT H bring the world to ASIA AMERICA the brink of nuclear EUROPE war during the Cuban NORTH 40°N UNITED missile crisis in 1962.
KOREA TURKEY STATES GREECE CHINA IRAN SOUTH ATLANTI C OCE A N KOREA EGYPT PACI FI C CUBA Tropic of Cancer OCEAN PACI FI C AFRICA O CEAN VIETNAM GUATEMALA 5.
Britain helps MALAYSIA aids anticolonial Indonesia repress a 0° Equator struggles in Congo CONGO Communist uprising SOUTH , Mozambique in 1965.
Confrontations in Latin America After World War II, rapid industrialization, population growth, and a lingering gap between the rich and the poor led Latin American nations to seek aid from both superpowers.
At the same time, many of these countries alternated between shortlived democracy and harsh military rule.
American businesses backed leaders who protected United States interests but who also often oppressed their people.
After the war, communism and nationalistic feelings inspired revolutionary movements.
In response, the United States provided military and economic assistance to anti-Communist dictators.
Fidel Castro and the Cuban Revolution In the 1950s, Cuba was ruled by an unpopular dictator, Fulgencio Batista, who had United States support.
Cuban resentment led to a popular revolution, which overthrew Batista in January 1959.
At first, many people praised Castro for bringing social reforms to Cuba and improving the economy.
He suspended elections, jailed CUBA or executed his opponents, and tightly controlled the press.
When Castro nationalized the Cuban economy, he took over U.S.-owned sugar mills and refineries.
In response, NICARAGUA Eisenhower ordered an embargo on all trade with Cuba.
Castro’s forces easily defeated the invaders, humiliating the United States.
So, in July 1962, Khrushchev secretly began to build 42 missile sites in Cuba.
President John F Kennedy declared that missiles so close to the United States mainFidel Castro land were a threat.
Cuba did not and does not intend to be in the middle of a conflict between the East and the West.
Our problem is above Personally, I am not interested in all one of national sovereignty.
Cuba does not mean to get power nor do I envisage assuming involved in the Cold War. it at any time.
All that I will do is to make sure that the sacrifices of FIDEL CASTRO, quoted in an interview October 27, 1962 so many compatriots should not be But Castro and Cuba were deeply involved.
Despite this declaration, Castro has demand for the removal of Soviet missiles put the United ruled Cuba as a dictator for more States and the Soviet Union on a collision course.
Soviet aid to Cuba, however, ended abruptly with the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.
But the aging Castro refused to adopt economic reforms or to give up power.
Civil War in Nicaragua Just as the United States had supported Batista in Cuba, it had funded the Nicaraguan dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza and his family since 1933.
The Sandinistas, however, gave assistance to other Marxist rebels in nearby El Salvador.
To help the El Salvadoran governAnalyzing Motives ment fight those rebels, the United States supported Nicaraguan anti-Communist Why did the forces called the Contras or contrarevolucionarios.
United States switch its supThe civil war in Nicaragua lasted more than a decade and seriously weakened port from the the country’s economy.
Religious and Secular Values Clash in Iran Throughout the Middle East, oil industry wealth fueled a growing clash between traditional Islamic values and modern Western materialism.
After World War II, Iran’s leader, Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi , embraced Western governments and wealthy Western oil companies.
AFGHANISTAN They nationalized a British-owned oil company and, in 1953, forced the shah to flee.
Fearing Iran might turn to the Soviets for Analyzing Motives support, the United States helped restore the shah to power.
Why did the United States The United States Supports Secular Rule With United States support, the shah westernsupport the shah ized his country.
The shah tried to weaken the political influence of Iran’s conservative Muslim leaders, known as ayatollahs , who opposed Western influences.
The leader of this religious opposition, Ayatollah Ruholla Khomeini , was living in exile.
Spurred by his taperecorded messages, Iranians rioted in every major city in late 1978.
A triumphant Khomeini returned to establish an Islamic state and to export Iran’s militant form of Islam.
Khomeini’s AntiUnited States Policies Strict adherence to Islam ruled Khomeini’s domestic policies.
But hatred of the United States, because of United States support for the shah, was at the heart of his foreign policy.
In 1979, with the ayatollah’s blessing, young Islamic revolutionaries seized the United States embassy in Tehran.
They took more than 60 Americans hostage and demanded the United States force the shah to face trial.
Khomeini supported the Khomeini encouraged Muslim radicals elsewhere to overthrow their secular taking of United States governments.
Intended to unify Muslims, this policy heightened tensions between hostages by Islamic Iran and its neighbor and territorial rival, Iraq.
A military leader, Saddam Hussein militants in Tehran , governed Iraq as a secular state. in 1979.
The United States secretly gave aid to both sides because it did not want the balance of power in the region to change.
The Soviet Union, on the other hand, had long been a supporter of Iraq.
A million Iranians and Iraqis died in the war before the UN negotiated a ceasefire in 1988.
The Superpowers Face Off in Afghanistan For several years following World War II, Afghanistan maintained its independence from both the neighboring Soviet Union and the United States.
In the 1950s, however, Soviet influence in the country began to increase.
In the late 1970s, a Muslim revolt threatened to topple Afghanistan’s Communist The Taliban regime.
Islamic religious students, or taliban, The Soviets expected to prop up the Afghan Communists were among the mujahideen rebels and quickly withdraw.
Instead, just like the United States in who fought the Soviet occupation of Vietnam, the Soviets found themselves stuck.
Various groups of Vietcong in Vietnam, rebel forces outmaneuvered a military students loosely organized themselves during a civil war among Comparing superpower.
Supplied with American weapons, the Afgan mujahideen factions that followed In what ways rebels, called mujahideen, or holy warriors, fought on. the Soviet withdrawal in 1989. were United States involveThe United States had armed the rebels because they In 1996, one of these groups, ment in Vietnam considered the Soviet invasion a threat to Middle Eastern oil called the Taliban, seized power and and Soviet involvesupplies.
President Jimmy Carter warned the Soviets established an Islamic government. ment in Afghanistan against any attempt to gain control of the Persian Gulf.
But they imposed a protest the invasion, he stopped United States grain shipments to the repressive rule especially harsh on Soviet Union and ordered a United States boycott of the 1980 women, and failed to improve the Moscow Olympics.
They also gave Mikhail Gorbachev, acknowledged the war’s devastating sanctuary to international Islamic costs.
In 2001, an anti-terrorist internal unrest and economic problems were tearing apart coalition led by the United States drove them from power. the Soviet Union itself.
WRITING ACTIVITY REVOLUTION For either Cuba, Nicaragua, or Iran, write an annotated time line of events discussed in this section.
CONNECT TO TODAY WRITING AN OPINION PAPER Research the effects of the United States trade embargo on Cuba.
Write a two-paragraph opinion paper on whether it would be in the best interests of the United States to lift that embargo.
