Sputnik— “Traveler” Explorer I The Space Race continues… • On November 3, 1957, the Soviet Union decided to launch another satellite, Sputnik II, into space… except this time with a passenger.
Other animals that helped… • Other animals that have helped to “pave the way” of space travel are monkeys, chimpanzees, rats, mice, fish, ants, spiders, bullfrogs, honeybees, and jellyfish.
The Space Race Continues… • America and the Soviet Union were constantly trying to be the first nation to accomplish different aspects of space travel.
Alan Shepard, Jr., became famous for being the first American in space.
Alan Shepard John Glenn America’s Apollo Program • The space race continued on, and the Soviets and Americans were sending more and more satellites into space.
John F Kennedy • In 1961, John F Kennedy at 43 years old became the youngest person to ever be elected as the President of the United States.
President John F Kennedy The 35th President The Fight on Communism • When Kennedy became president, he jumped right in to the Cold War and the fight against communism.
Kennedy’s Response • President Kennedy responded to this threat by setting up a blockade around Cuba.
A Stalemate • President Kennedy told the ship to turn around, and President Khrushchev told JFK to lift the blockade—but JFK would not lift the blockade until the missile site in Cuba was dismantled.
An End to the Fear • Finally, without any attack occurring on either side, the Soviet Union gave in and had the missile site in Cuba dismantled and all the troops return home.
The Assassination of JFK and the War in Vietnam The Cold War starts to Heat Up • In 1954, a new hotspot developed just after the signing of a truce between North and South Korea in 1953.
Eisenhower and JFK, still held true to President Truman’s doctrine to help any country struggling against a communist takeover.
President Lyndon B Johnson • That same afternoon while the nation was sitting in a state of shock and mourning the loss of their President, Vice President Johnson was sworn into office.
President Lyndon B Johnson The 36th President An Undefeatable Vietnam • When Johnson became President, the Vietcong were winning the war in South Vietnam.
Americans are divided as well… • Because so many America lives were being sacrificed in Vietnam, many Americans became divided on the issue of war.
Some believed we needed to keep fighting communism in S Vietnam, others felt that the Vietnamese had to settle the war themselves.
Protests and Marches • Protests and marches against the war (and for the war) started all over the nation.
Another New President • The division and problems that the War in Vietnam was causing in America was enough to convince President Johnson to not run for a second term of presidency.
Nixon’s Plans to End the War • President Nixon tried to end the war quickly by bombing North Vietnam more heavily than before, and he sent soldiers to the neighboring country of Cambodia.
