Because the policy makers feared censure by the United Nations and/or the Organization of American States, the myth of ""plausible deniability"" was the caveat that determined the CIA would be the principal implementing arm for the anti-Castro effort.
This volume describes the Agency's organization designed to accomplish the assigned task; and it records the i n teraction between the Agency and other government components (State and the military in particular,, between the Agency and the White House, and among various CIA components as the program evolved. *he relationships were sometimes less than harmonious.
Emphasis also is focused on the drastic change in the concept, of the operation between the spring and fall off I960.
Encompassed in this volume are the records of the policy level meetings which considered such items as funding the operation, possible use of United States personnel in combat roles, the use of United States bases for training or for operations, types of direct action programs (e.g., propaganda drops vs sabotage) , and the host of other problems related to Castro's overthrow, it also makes clear that various United States corporate interests played an active {sometimes overactive) role in support of the anti-Castro efforts of the Government.
There is no basis in fact for this gh^/ v g NAR A fU^Q DAT E 3 $f i #3 TOP OCCRDF Finally, the reader of this volume"" should gain some insights to the character of various of the principal actors — Agency and non-Agency — who were involved most closely with the Government's anti-Castro policy during the period from its inception through the close of the Eisenhower administration.
Not all of these impressions are flattering; but the author, who was in no way associated with the operation or the Directorate of Plans , hopes that the presentation of the evidence has been as free from bias as possible.
Again the author wishes to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the other two members of the CIA History Staff, Mrs.
Without their unfailing willingness to perform either the ""substantive research or the grimly mechanical tasks required in preparing a volume such as this, the task could have been interminable.
For any errors of fact or questionable interpretations, the author alone is responsible.
By early 1960 the USG officially adopted a covert action program designed 4o remove the Castro government from control of the island of Cuba.
The nature of the Agency's interest in' answers to these questions is reflected in various of the records for the period beginning in the mid19 50' s when it appeared that the Agency depended in considerable part on the reporting from the American Embassy offices in Havana.
NAR A CJF-O DAT E %'gfiti'h TOP OCCRCT, The SIM report is nothing more than a summary of allegations and accusations made against Fidel Castro during the period 1948-1950.
This summary has apparently been slanted in an effort to make Castro a ""Rojo,"" but the result is a rather poor one.
Agency funds also were used to support the efforts of an anti-Communist organization engaged principally in propaganda activities.
McLean suggested that Kirkpatrick helped organize BRAC, but the present author has not confirmed this story.
This would have to be done covertly, and any results achieved either not ever publicly announced or certainly not advertised until after the election.
Any public attempt to bring peace would be foredoomed to failure by each side probably indicating exorbitant demands and then being unable to withdraw from its announced position.
But we are responsible for keeping order in the hemisphere quite aside from the proprieties, and a rather bolder policy in that regard seems indicated.
At least two agents were successfully placed in PSP ranks, and in March 1958, one Agency officer managed to join the Castro forces in the mountains for a period of two weeks and to observe their tactics in combat.
In both instances, the Agency representatives returned unharmed; and both reported on the ""radical"" and antiAmerican nature of the Castro movement.
According to one source, Wiecha found ""definite communist overtones"" among the Raul Castro forces.
Whether Castro's contingent was communist oriented or not, others such as Adolf Berle and his friends (both in and out of State Department) , continued to reflect their concern about the possible ways to combat the growing strength of the Castro movement in Cuba.
IV At a time when the Agency's fears about the Castro movement were increasing, a rather different proposal was put forward by the Chief of the Paramilitary Division, Political and Psychological Staff, of the Clandestine Service.
Rather than trying to whip Castro, Alfred Cox suggested that perhaps the wisest move for the Agency would be to join Castro.
It was apparent, according to Cox, that since Batista was on the way out, we should now try to remedy Castro's hostile attitude toward the United States because of our efforts to prop up Batista.
A practical way to protect United States interests in this matter would be to make secret contact with Castro, assure him of the United States sympathy withysome of his objectives, and to offer him support.
Obviously, the support must be given covertly so as not to endanger United States relations with Batista.
The most effective means of help to Castro would be arms and ammunition.
Air dropping of top nr.cn rr NAR A CJ^O DATE. ne National Arcnivej IUF ShLRhl this equipment might be dangerous from the security aspect.
Allowing a shipload of equipment manned by a Cuban crew to evade our Coast Guard would probably be a better method.
The most secure means of help would be giving the money to Castro, who could then purchase his own arms.
Three Catholic priests have joined Fidel Castro and his forces in the Sierra Maestra, and one has joined Raul Castro and his troops in the Sierra Cristal.
The rebel forces under the Castros, therefore, have four chaplains, while the entire Cuban Army does not have a single chaplain.
T I njS a^cj^^^ dat e% X -3$2& "" pep OCCRCT traveling to Miami with William Snow, an Assistant Secretary of State, and Henry Holland, formerly a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Col.
Pawley was a long-time acquaintance and friend of Batista from the days when Pawley had been running the Cubana Airline.
In return for Batista's support for a friendly military junta — nominally to be responsible for his ouster — the representatives of the Department of State and the Agency agreed that Batista should be provided safety for himself, his friends, and his close cronies, particularly those whose lives would be endangered should there ever be a truly violent overthrow of the government.
Batista also was to be provided protection for his personal assets in Cuba.
Following the meeting in Miami, Pawley did undertake the mission to see Batista in Cuba.
Arriving on 8 December in Havana he had a series of preliminary meetings with the Cuban Foreign Minister, who strongly supported the proposals that Pawley indicated that he was going to make.
Unfortunately, however, the Foreign Minister told Pawley that it was unlikely that Batista would accept the proposals.
He agreed with much of Pawley' s analysis of situation, but said he could not take the junta way out. ,17/ Batista made no promises, and went through the reasons why he couldn't possibly give up the office — for fear of being called a coward and traitor; that there would be a blood bath; and that he had both moral and constitutional obligations.
A representative of the Archbishop of Havana, Father Bez Chebebe, approached the American Consul in Santiago to float some proposals for resolving the differences between the two countries.
Both Fidel Castro and United States interests had important stake in sugar crop and both undoubtedly wish resolve problems caused by present situation.
Also said that there were matters now mostly minor on both sides which have been sources mutual irritation and misunderstanding and that these should be eliminated soonest, so that they would not grow to affect future relations, which Father considers inevitable.
Operation this nature could pay big future dividends if fully qualified person could be found for job and dispatched quickly.
Regardless how we may feel about Castro and his movement, both will be important political forces for a long time to come.
Perhaps candidate could be found through National Catholic Welfare Organization.
What WH hoped to accomplish, presumably, was that they could organize these anti-Batista and anti-Castro dissidents and get them armed in time so that they could prevent Castro from taking over the government if Batista should suddenly resign or decide to flee the country.
The President apparently indicated that he had not been fully aware of the positions of State and CIA TOP OCCRDF ra^i^cnoau rais.iv-iu^-jzotjrjv /V^l ) Reproduced at the National Archives NAR A CjRO DAT Eg-ffia^ 15 regarding Castro, and he suggested that meetings of the Special Group under NSC 5412/2 should be held on a weekly basis, with Cuba to be a regular subject for discussion.
Gordon Gray and Allen Dulles had some differences of opinion concerning the advisability of reading other individuals into the act.
Gray suggested that the President's Board of Consultants (later the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board) be made party to the discussions, but Dulles rather strongly suggested that there was a significant difference between the discussions which were intended for the Special Group * 5412 on Covert Operations, and PFIAB responsibilities for general problems related to foreign intelligence.
Dulles made the specific point that if the Board of Consultants was going to get involved in the details of planned covert operations, they were then in a position of reviewing United States foreign policy.
The discussxon also seems to have verged on the right of Congress to attempt to oversee covert operations — a point about which Eisenhower expressed himself very strongly, noting that such action by Congress would be an infringement of his prerogative as Commander-in-Chief.
TAJ 15 Inaj NAR A CJ&O D ATE_3^^3 At 3:40 on the afternoon of 31 December 1958, there was another high level meeting attended by Messrs.
Herter, Murphy, and Rubottom, Department of State; Irwin, Department of Defense; Admiral Burke, the CNO; General Cabell, DDCI; and Gordon Gray at which the Cuban situation was again discussed.
Even as the meeting was in progress, Batista was preparing to flee Cuba; and possible United States action, including direct., intervention by United States Marines, was among the topics that were discussed.
There also was some suggestion that the United States take the responsibility for naming members to a junta to succeed Batista, rather than permitting Fidel Castro and his followers to take over the Cuban Government.
During the rush of these last events m the final days of 1958, the Central Intelligence Agency suggested for the firgfc time that a Castro victory might „ not be in the best interests of the United States.
Though our intelligence experts backed and filled for a number of months, events were gradually driving them to the conclusion that with the coming' of Castro, Communism had penetrated this hemisphere.
The Station seemed assured that it was cognizant of all of Castro's movements, especially on the developing military capabilities.
In fact, when the United States Army suggested that the Station provide support for the Army's covert collection of military intelligence under commercial cover in Havana, COS took strong exception to the proposals, emphasizing the Station's own capabilities in this area.
COS was overruled by Headquarters, however, and General Cabell assured the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence of the Army that while he was aware that Havana had TOP GCCttCT I kAR A^rJgjT "" DAT E^-^^ objected to the Army's proposals, the COS nonetheless had been ""instructed"" to cooperate.
In a memorandum to the Chief ,VWes tern Hemisphere Division, and to the Chief, Foreign Intelligence Staff, Al Cox, Chief, Paramilitary Division reported — without ever using the term ""black"" — that General Erskine (Army Special Forces) believed that a ""color bar"" did exist in the Caribbean area and that a better choice than Lt.
Unless he gets a strong helping hand from the United States, many serious observers feel his regime will collapse within a matter of months.
A^i; Reproduced at the National Archives NAR A Cje-O DATE 3 ' ^2^ top ""rrrTrrr students, and the masses in America to support his revolution.
COS emphasized that Headquarters should make nd mistake that the Castro.
Government, while not openly avowed Communist, was heavily infiltrated with Communists and had taken no stand in opposition to Communist positions, and, moreover, there was little question about who would eventuaOJLy control the Cuban Government.
It would be unwise to assume from the minor indications to date that Fidel has undergone a serious change of heart as a result of his visit to the United States.
Despite Castro's apparent simplicity, sincerity, and eagerness to reassure the United States public, there is little KAR A Cj&O *'"" DA TCTffizft 3 *3f J>BCKbl probability that Castro had altered the essentially radical course of his revolution.
From his experience here, he has gained a valuable knowledge of American public reaction which may make him a more difficult man to deal with on his return to Cuba.
With all his appearance of naivete"", unsophistication, and ignorance on many matters, he is clearly a strong personality and a born leader of great personal courage and conviction.
While we certainly know him better than before, Castro remains an enigma; and we should await his decisions on specific matters before assuming a more optimistic view than heretofore about the possibility of developing a constuctive relationship with him and his government.
These demonstrations obviously welcome, but possibly most significant aspect is demonstration once again, enormous power Castro, who with few words made antiCommunism popular position.
By same token he could reverse trend at any time, and skeptics speculating that current stand is sop intended to make it more difficult for United States interests .to protest effectively against stringent agrarian reform law.
According to the source reporting on Escalante' s talk, Vice-President Nixon had told Castro that unless he broke his alliance with the Communists, the United States would cut off economic aid to Cuba; and this threat had struck Castro as so serious that he made some unwise statements.
The Communists probably do not now control Castro, but they are in a position to exert influence in his regime, and to carry on further organizational work.
In August 1959, when the Deputy Chief of Western Hemisphere Division, Rudolph Gomez, assisted Leo Churn in the preparation of an ""Urgent Report on Cuba"" for distribution to members of the Research Institute of America, Castro's Communist association was prominently featured.
At this time, and reflecting the views of both Western Hemisphere Division and the Department of State with whom Gomez had coordinated the paper, Fidel Castro was not 23 JOP SECRET ■xvLij-jinLOiiu riixvr.jj-iUX-J^o^jrJS./\v^lJ Reproduced at the National Archive; NAR A Cjf^O DAT EB^^ <OB-SeeRFT considered to be a Communist.
His brother Raul Castro, however, was clearly identified as a hard-core Communist.
Matos resigned as military leader of Camaguey on 19 October 1959 and was arrested on 20 October.
During the months prior to his trial in December 1959, when hie was found guilty of treason and sentenced to 20 years imprisonment, a * In view of the trend of recent years, it is interesting to note*' that the Chusrn report found reason to be somewhat critical of the Senate Internal Security Committee for getting involved in matters which were principally of concern to the intelligence community.
In this case, the Senate Committee was criticized specifically for taking Diaz Lanz, the head of Castro's Air Force who had defected, and questioning him before turning him over to the intelligence agencies for initial interrogation . 24 TOP SECRETNAR A CJ&O DAT EB'^^ number of others who had been prominent anti-Batistianos also broke with Castro.
Among these were Faustino Perez, Minister for Recovery of Illegally Acquired Property; Rufo L6pez-Fresquet, Minister of Finance; Manuel Ray, Minister of Public Works; and Felipe Pazos, head of the National Bank who was removed by Castro and replaced by Che Guevera, whose expertise was in revolution not in banking.
In the course of this tour, the qualifications of the best of the agents who might conduct this penetration were reviewed with c6s Havana and Station personnel.
King, Chief of Western Hemisphere Division, was going forward to the Director of Central Intelligence with a memorandum complaining about the Department of State's failure to provide CIA with a policy action paper on Cuba — a paper which, according to King, h^d been .promised as early as May 1959, yet had not been received by the end of October.
Nor was there any indication when such paper might be * It would appear from this request that both the DDP and State were remiss in the training of their overseas personnel.
On v the othe4thand, they are delighted with the nature of his government, which was allowed the Communists opportunity — free opportunity — to organize, to propagandize, and to infiltrate.
Our conclusion, therefore, is that Fidel Castro is not a Communist, however, he certainly is not anti-Communist.
For the moment, CIA operations should be carried out on the assumption that the revolutionary government is basically nonCommunist, with legitimate reform goals that deserve United States respect and support.
Covert operations should support overt efforts to arrive at a rapprochement with the present government and to eliminate the conditions described above without resorting to forceful means.
If it should be established that the Cuban government is Communist-led or Communist-dominated, or if that government cannot be swayed from adopting measures which intentionally or unintentionally accomplish Communist objectives, the question of direct attacks against Castro will be re-examined.
In planning for such a contingency, each existing or new asset should be evaluated in terms of possible future utility from a paramilitary point of view, nor will the development or recruitment of assets be precluded merely because they lack a paramilitary capability.
Under no circumstances would any asset be apprised of this contingency planning.
In fact any disposition to undertake violent action should be promptly and emphatically discouraged pending a change in policy at the policy-making level.
King, Chief, WH Division prepared a memorandum for the TOP OCCRGTiNAR A rig-O DAT E 3-^2^ *W SbCkkl Director of Central Intelligence, through the Deputy Director of.
Intrusion operations against Castro's TV and radio, to be mounted from within Cuba.
Formation of pro-US opposition groups to establish by force a controlled area within Cuba.
Many informed people believe that the disappearance of Fidel would greatly accelerate the fall of the present government.
At this time, the DDCI also discussed the need for increased covert and semicovert programs aimed at Castro — psychological warfare, political action, economic action, and paramilitary action, all of which had been conducted in some degree during the past year.
White, then Deputy Director for Support, in reporting on the DCI's morning meeting of 8 January 1960.
King, Chief, WH Division; and to the best of Esterline' s recollection, toward the end of his two year tour inC \l :J3 he had been queried by King about remaining in £ // J or coming back to Headquarters to work on the Cuban problem.
It was shortly after his return to the States in January of 1960 that Esterline became Chief, WH/4.
King, Chief, WH Division and the relationship between King and Richard Bissell; Deputy Director for Plans during the course of * The author had heard that Esterline had been directly selected by the DDP, Richard Bissell, to be the head of WH/4.
Bissell made no mention of this, and it is contrary to the story noted above, as told by Esterline.
I JSra ^cq"" ~ dat e'S^^S top accucT the Bay of Pigs Operation has been the subject of considerable speculation ever since the close out of the invasionIt seems appropriate that some attention should be devoted to this subject before going further into detail about the evolution of the covert plans to oust Castro.
King, Chief, WH/D, from having in fact any control whatsoever over the activity.
There was an informal but understood short cut in the chain of command; basic decisions were made at the DDP, I>C1, or Presidential level.
Reproduced at the Natal Archives NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3 Sfid'^ TOP OCCRDT Pigs activity from its inception until its conclusion.
It is clear, however, that Esterline was in very close contact with Col.
King never was told, I think for understandable reasons, to what extent he * Elder suggested to the author that ""they"" wanted King out of the operation because of his strong Republican affiliations.
Therefore, from time to time, he would protrude ... sometimes, saying that he was sorry to protrude; and then he would retract; and then he would be in; and then he would be out that • s as a person.
Then again, his Deputy, Ray Herbert, would call and say ""I just don't understand Cable 18963 IN from Guatemala today.
Would you come over and explain to me what that's all about;"" and I would step out of the maelstrom of JMATE . . . they were just working flat out . . . and go over.
King was that he had stayed overlong in the same job; and he was ""Mr WH,"" by Gawd.
With the exception of first Guatemala and then Cuba, there was very little that ever happened in Latin America which got to be, given our other worldwide responsibilities in the DDP, a very front priority matter; and consequently, at Staff meetings, for example, they would go around and talk about the Soviet Union and China and Europe and even Africa.
King would have his time at bat and report' some relatively minor thing.
Now this one comes along, and rather than expand WH/4, or whatever the hell it was, and leave this JMATE Project within that Branch, and build up that Branch — oh, no.
Once again the same man, Dick Bissell — now, however, DDP instead of SAPC — becomes the case officer for the thing; and his assistant, Tracy Barnes, is all over him.
He had all of the area expertise that one would like to see in a Division Chief, but he had been at it an awful long time.
There were very few people in WH who had served outside of the Western Hemisphere, except in Washington.
They were a tight-knit little group, and here now, for the second time running, one of their big chances to shine — there was a lot of money and all that kind of stuff — Again had been taken away . . . and it was ... it was tough.
I have heard it on both sides — that he was involved and that he was deliberately end-run.
I was going to say that both of the things that you have heard have an element of truth in them.
There was a deliberate decision fairly early in the game — I doubt if it was as early as March I am pretty sure that it wasn't, I am reasonably sure that the decision I speak of was made by some such date as June — Esterline would take charge of this Project and Esterline would have direct access to me.
On the other hand, J C. v was brought into all the consultations and was fully informed from the very beginning about this operation.
His advice was sought and given, and I usually found it very good and followed it.
I think it was in part on the model of the Guatemalan operation, and in part, I think, a feeling, probably on my own part — in some degree perhaps on the part of Allen Dulles — that J C was not effective enough to handle this kind of very fast moving, quite large scale, quite complex, paramilitary operation.
I don't remember many, if any, and I believe that the relationships between Jake and J C. were pretty good throughout.
At one point, Jake suggested to the DDP that all contact with Pawley be cut off, but in sending Esterline' s memorandum through channels, J King noted that he was against cutting Pawley completely off from contact with WH/4.
In fact, Pawley was in continuous contact — even though in disagreement — with both Jake and King until the close out of the operation. 39 TOP 3 DC RE T NAR A r^-O DAT E 3'^^ -H J l J ShLkhl Another of the questions which must be addressed in setting the stage of the Bay of Pigs operation is the failure of Richard Helms — at that time Chief of Operations for the DDP — to become more than marginally involved in the Cuban project.
Oral interviews again provided the best explanations, and, consequently, are entered into this record in rather full ■ detail.
Either on his own volition, which I suspect or on order — which I doubt — Dick Helms completely divorced himself from this thing.
What he did have to do with, ever since NA3R A r^n) DAT E 3^^ Keproaucea at the National Archive TOP 30CRET , the Francis Gary Powers thing, he had been a member of an inter-Agency committee that met with periodic regularity to discuss air matters of any sensitivity.
He was going to the regular committee meeting that afternoon, so he had to ask me the details . . . very apologetically.
One of the reasons may have been that, of course, life went on; and if Bissell was getting increasingly immersed in this one thing, somebody had to watch the whole worldwide store . . . which of course Helms was damned good at.
A less attractive suggestion is that Helms figured that there was a high likelihood that this thing would screw up, and he didn't want to have the tar baby around him.
I think that he saw most all of the cable traffic and I think he was pretty well informed as to what was going on, very well informed; but he was really out of the line of command on this operation.
There was something of a tacit agreement between us, that he would be devoting himself to a lot of the other on TOP SECRET I NAR A^fLJgQ^ ""~ DAT E^^^ XQV SCCRCT going business of the DDP office, because this was taking a great deal of my time.
I would make an observation here, and I don't want you to infer anything really beyond what it says, it was not particularly easy — I did not find it particularly easy — to discuss things clearly and derive a clear understanding with Dick about the division of labor between us when he was my Deputy.
I don't imply by this any sense of conflict or rivalry, but he would go ahead and handle certain kinds of matters, and I would go ahead and handle certain kinds of matters.
I don't mean to imply however in that any kind of concealment from me — I never had that feeling at all — but it really was our habit during the „ whole time that we were in those positions that the division of labor between us was^more tacit than explicit.
The Department of State was concerned that if Fidel Castro were deposed, perhaps his successors, Che Guevara and Raul Castro, would be even worse than Fidel.
TOP 3CCRDT NAR AC^O DAT E 3 ^ftTi Jnar 101"" ^LCKL ' f Mr Gray commented that a problem would be posed for administration officials if a decision should be taken to change our attitude toward Castro, as outlined earlier in the meeting.
He acknowledged that any such decision must be kept highly secret, but he foresaw difficulties which would arise, for example, during testimony by the Secretaries of Defense and Treasury before Congress, at public gatherings, etc., if they should have to give an impression that the United States was not doing anything about Cuba.
It/ This in fact, was the ""damned if I do, damned if I don't"" position in which Richard Nixon found himself in the Fall of 1960 and the position in which the United States found itself with reference to both the United Nations and the Organization of the American States throughout the course of the Bay of Pigs operation as the myth of ""plausible deniability"" overruled common sense.
The possible involvement of United States businesses to put overt pressure on the United States government for the possible imposition of economic sanctions and as a covert means of raising money for the support of Cuban exile organizations also surfaced.
This, of course, was valuable as a built-in penetration of JMARC in the best FI and CI tradition.
The focus was on sabotage of the Cuban sugar industry,** propaganda broadcasts, and funding.
Noting that WH Division had roughly $50,000 available for immediate use, it was speculated that the ""ultimate magnitude"" of the anti-Castro effort might reach 3 million dollars — an estimate that would, in effect, be some 40 million short of the eventual cost.
It was stated, however, that funds would easily be obtainable from the Agency reserve to meet any shortages.
At this planning session, the training program for the PM cadre at Fort Randolph in Pan&ma was given minor attention; and * In addition to the Special Group, which included a DOD representative, WH/U worked directly with other representatives of DOD regarding current developments and the possible coordination of activities vis-a-vis Cuba.
TOr GCCRCT NAR A Cjez-Q DAT E B •tyh'Ji \uaeL lOl .iLLRtil here, too, the seeds were planted by Tracy Barnes for an attitudinal survey of ""Cuban society"" which could have caused CIA planners to re-think the whole anti-Castro effort.
On 17 February 1960 when Allen Dulles presented the sugar sabotage plan to the Special Group, he emphasized that he was not asking for permission to engage in action, only that he was looking for a Special Group approval.
Mr Irwin (Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs) noted that he and the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Mr Douglas were all for the plan; and the Group agreed to present the plan to the Secretary of State and to Gordon Gray so that the latter could get the President's reaction.
President Eisenhower was less than enthusiastic about the sugar sabotage plan, reportedly doubting that the loss of sugar revenues would impact on TO P 0CCRE3.
E NAR A CfrO WWtiH -HJF ^hLkbT Castro's ability to continue to finance subversive activities in other Latin America areas.
President Eisenhower also objected to the focus on economic sabotage, and he would not agree to the plan to identify assets specifically for sabotage operations against the sugar industry.
In addition to identifying assets on a broad basis, the President also requested that a comprehensive covert action program be prepared by Kr.
This, it was suggested, should go to the Special Group; and if they approved the plans, then the President wanted to discuss them.
In any event, action on the PM program would be delayed until Eisenhower returned from his upcoming Latin American visit and gave his specific approval.* 23/ ruary e i96S U SL°n f oteI SS^ ^ ""^""^ ° f "" ^ Mr Joseph Scott of State also reported later that Mr Herter had made exactly the same point.
On 18 February, King arid Milo Perkins had a detailed discussion concerning the disruptive effects which might result from interference with the Cuban sugar operation.
Perkins was planning meetings with Ambassador Hill and Thomas Corcoran, and King brought to Perkins's attention that Corcoran had been willing and able to provide valuable assistance to the Agency in the past.
King met with Thomas Mann, the Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs (subsequently Assistant Secretary for American Republic Affairs) who reportedly was in favor of both reduced sugar quotas and direct sabotage of Cuban sugar mills.
According to King, Secretary Mann^also would support both cut backs in United States oil companies deliveries to Cuba and actions which might cut back on United States tourist trade with the island.
King agreed that Holland could tell prospective donors that the ""money was going to be used on behalf of non-Batista groups who were going to make a serious effort to remove Fidel Castro.
King's high level contacts, Jake Esterline and Mr Dulles had a meeting with Abbott Washburn, Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency who had requested a briefing on the current state of activities in Cuba — Washburn was concerned lest there be a conflict of interests between USIA and the CIA's ongoing effort in the area.
Washburn presented ^the Agency with a copy of some proposals which the State Department had approved for implementation by USIA in Cuba.
NAR A cj&O DATE jjhgj£^ TOP ABLl^F r into Cuba — at the same time not denying that the United States was sympathetic to the need for a change in Cuba.
The Director and Mr Esterline agreed that it would be advisable for Mr Washburn, who was planning to visit Cuba, to meetC 3 J, COS Havana, and outline the USIA program forC 3 J benefit.
It noted some of the similarities or differences with respect to the removal of Jacobo Arbenz in contrast to the possibilities of removing Fidel Castro; and in light of ultimate tragedy at the Bay of Pigs, some of the the * One result of the meeting with Washburn was a decision to turn over a planned USIA anti-Castro cartoon effort to CIA. 53 I NAR A Cj&O DAT E S 'iff a^S HO E ^bC F Tb T key points made in this memorandum are worth repeating — even though it is not known who read the piece.
Specifically pointing out that where Arbenz was a weak leader, Castro was obviously a strong leader; that Castillo Armas was a Guatemalan leader of high character and standing, but no one of similar stature had surfaced in Cuba to oppose Castro; and that in Guatemala Arbenz had made no changes in the armed forces of Guatemala, and when the crisis came, he could not depend on his army.
NAR A rj^-Q D ATEj5Jgf£5 -KJF SbLkbl the key military positions with his own followers and ""introduced a system of intense ideological indoctrination.
It stated that the blunt propaganda attacks on Castro were forging all anti-US elements in Cuba into a united front and United States efforts should be attempting to drive a wedge between Castro, as a victim of international Communism, and the Communists both Cuban and foreign.
Secondly, it was pointed out that the propaganda broadcast out of United States commercial radio stations, even if the time were legitimately being purchased by Cuban exile groups, would be a ""kiss of death"" for anyone who tried to deny United States intervention in Cuban affairs.
A^i; Reproduced at the National Archivi NAR A Cfrx> DAT E 3 -^fc #3 TOP 3CCIIL1 of United States business groups as a cover for the Agency's support of the Cuban opposition, particularly the use of United States business as a funding mechanism, was also hazardous in the eyes of the author of the memorandum under study.
The memorandum suggested that many of these risks could be eliminated if propaganda activities were moved to Third countries and if fund raising activities were run out of Latin America or Western Europe.
The memorandum may have been prompted in part by the increasing attention which the OCB and the Cabinet had 1 ' been giving to fire bomb attacks on the Cuban cane fields by light aircraft flying out of the United States.
The Agency fully supported General Quesada's effort to put an end to such flights.
In the course of this two week period, they were engaged in efforts to satisfy the 5412 Group, the National Security Council, and themselves that they had developed a viable program which would lead to ,the downfall and ouster of Fidel Castro and his principal cohorts, Che Guevara and Raul Castro, and the elmimination of Communism from the island of Cuba and, in effect, from the Western Hemisphere.
During this period of evolution of national policy, WH/4 held its first official meeting as a branch on 9 March 1960.
At this initial meeting, Jake Esterline mentioned that Bob Reynolds, Deputy Chief, WH/U, Dave Phillips, Propaganda Officer, Phil Toomey, Political and Psychological Stategist, £* 3 Jr the Economist, and Ed Stanulus, his Plans and Ops Officer, would be the principals who would be in contact with other Agency elements which would be called on for support.
Those who figured most prominently among the Special Group representatives at this time were Livingston Merchant, Department of State; John Irwin, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs, Department of Defense; Admiral Burke, Chief, Naval Operations; and Gordon Gray, the President's National Security Adviser.
Other than the more than a dozen memorandums and drafts and other papers related to the development of the policy paper, perhaps a note from Richard Helms to C Tracy Barnes on 8 March 1960 best illustrates the seriousness with which the Agency approached the task of writing a paper for the Director.
Tom Parrott gave me for security late this afternoon the attached paper for the 5412 Group outlining the proposed covert action program against Fidel Castro.
I think you will agree with me that the paper is poorly drafted and needs considerable pointing up in various . 59 irnr Tnrrrr NAR A CfrO v$W#> ■ TOP GCORDr r places.
I do not disagree with the listed recommendations in paragraph 6, but I do feel that the backup material in paragraphs 2 and 3 needs recasting.
For example, the reference to a ""short-wave radio station patterned after Radio Free Europe"", is no way, in my opinion, to describe what we have in mind.
Also the paragraph on covert economic action is not sufficiently precise and raises more questions than it answers.
May I ask that you take this matter; in hand and advise WH how to put it in suitable shape for use by the Director with the 5412 Group next week.
To replace the present Government of Cuba, headed by Fidel Castro, with one that will be acceptable to the United States; and to cause this change to occur in such a manner that anti-US repercussions are not induced in Latin America.
The constant quest for plausible deniability would TOP SECP.n*"" NAR A CJprO DAT E 3 Gf/fS Keproaucea at me ne become the holiest of grails — constantly, and unsuccessfully, to be sought throughout the course of the operation by Agency planners.
The proposed paper for the Special Group (the paper which Mr Helms found somewhat lacking) emphasized those areas highlighted in previous Special Group sessions — anti-Castro propaganda, disruptions of the Cuban economy, including large scale sabotage operations, and the development of instructor cadres to provide both communications and PM training cadres to resistance groups already extant in Cuba.
Interesting, too, is the fact that at this early stage of United States planning mention was made of the offer from the Guatemalan Government of a training site for the PM cadres, or ""action groups"" as they were called.
A financial annex included in the proposals for the Special Group indicated the need for $900,000 for the remainder of FY 1960 and $1. million for FY 1961.
King, Chief, Western Hemisphere Division had forwarded a memorandum for the Director of Central Intelligence, providing him with additional information for use during the Special Group discussions; and the transmittal to the DCI recorded that this paper had been used to brief Mr Nixon on 2 March 1960.
King's memorandum covered much the same ground as the paper which went to the Special Group, but contained considerably more detail about the activities of the Castro Government which were directly aimed at overthrowing the legitimate governments and replacing them with Communist oriented governments.
King's paper also revealed that both Guatemala and Nicaragua — the only two governments in Latin America which were to throw their full support behind the Agency's anti-Castro activity — hadymade offers at this time for both radio time for anti-Castro broadcasts and, also, for training facilities for anti-Castro groups which the Agency might wish to sponsor.
We have available, a drug, which, if placed in Castro's food, would make him behave in such an irrational manner that a public appearance could have very damaging results to him.
Again, there was great concern over the question of possible loss of prestige should the United States act independently of the international organizations.
There also was interest in protecting United States business and in the protection of United States lives, and the question of viability of the Guantanamo Base was of considerable concern to the President's National Security adviser, Gordon Gray.
A\^i; Keproduced at the Nc NAR A CJ&Q DAT E 3'^^ < TQr J>ELKhl "" availability to the United States of bases and base rights in Latin America that are considered vital to the security of the United States.
In the event of an imminent or actual Communist seizure of control from within, taxe all feasible measure to thwart it, including military action if finally required and appropriate to cope with the situation.
The responsible Departments and Agencies should keep current plans to deal promptly with likely contingencies which might develop with respect to Cuba, especially those involving the safety of United States citizens in the Guantanamo Base.
The developments with regard to the situation in Cuba should be reviewed by the Council each meeting, for the immediate future.
This explains ChiCom special interest in supporting the Cuban revolution and expanding it, with the ultimate aim of facilitating mass emigration of Chinese to the Latin American continent to meet their over-population problem.
Much of the ground was already familiar to the participants, but the memorandum of the meeting reflects a number of items worth review.
Even though Dulles' s paper placed heavy emphasis on the propaganda needs, even greater emphasis was urged for covert and overt propaganda activities, not only through WRUL, the commercial broadcasting operation, but also through the efforts of USIA's programs for Latin America — programs which apparently had been sharply curtailed in the recent past.
The question of location for the Agency's covert broadcasting activity was again raised and discussed, the question being whether it should be somewhere in the Florida TOP SECRET NAR A CjPO DAT E jjTffi 2& TOP &hLRbl "" Keys, in some Caribbean country, or elsewhere.
One additional subject of disucssion at this Special Group meeting as recorded by Col.
What ^ould be the effect on the Cuban scene if Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevarra should disappear simultaneously.
HH/ In the reported context of the discussion it is not believed that the term ""disappear"" was a euphemism for assassination, but rather referred to the ouster of 67 . -1UP iBLKhl Inar NAR A CJ^O D ATE_3^^3 ^CTT^ECRET Castro's government from political power.
Admiral Burke said that the only organized group within Cuba today were the Communists, and there was therefore the danger that they might move into control.
Colonel King said that there were few leaders capable of taking over so far identified.
One possibility was Nunez Jiminez, the head of the Agricultural Reform Program.
King that ""unless Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevara could be eliminated in one package — which is highly unlikely — this operation can be a long drawn-out affair and the present government will only be overthrown by the use of force"" were discussed in SSC report on Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, and it is apparent from the recollections of the participants in the meetings that assassination was not the issue in these two instances.
The DCI proposed that CIA should take the lead in assisting these groups to develop friendships among various of the Latin American Governments which were skeptical of Castro and that the Agency should be responsible for identifying and training in facilities in the United States or elsewhere those who would be the leaders of the Cuban guerrilla warfare groups.
At the conclusion of the 14 March meeting, it was agreed that the Agency would revise the paper on the basis of the discussions and plan to present it to President Eisenhower later in the week.
On 14 and 15 March, the records reveal copies of two drafts of such a paper, one of which was labeled as ""revised version, done by Barnes, evening 14 Mar,"" which went into more detail on both the political opposition to Castro and on the propaganda activities that were being mounted against Castro.
The sum for PM operations was revised from an estimated $500,000 in Dulles* s 14 March presentation to a total of $1. million for that same year.
From the time Allen Dulles enunciated the covert action plan until President Eisenhower approved it , there was an interesting bit of bi-play between the National Security Council and the Special Group 5412.
One of the principal concerns of the National Security Council was the proper United States response should the Cubans try to intervene or interfere with operations of the Naval base at Guantanamo Bay, including a possible takeover of the Base.
NAR A rjg-O DAT E 3 'tyd^ JQ P-S CCRh ' l note from a member of his own Staff, Samuel E Belk, for the planned National Security Council meeting of 17 March which again focused exclusively on the situation at Guantanamo Bay.
It appears as though Mr Belk, even though he was a member of the NSC Staff was completely in the dark as to the planning that had already been undertaken with regard to Castro's ouster.
At a time when the President had already indicated that proposals for economic action or direct sabotage of the Cuban sugar industry were less than what he desired, Mr Belk, for whatever reason, suggested again that with the new sugar legislation, perhaps Castro could be straightened out.
In addition, Belk suggested a plan which was ""unconventional and radical"" — having President Eisenhower send a message directly to Castro telling him that he was concerned over the deterioration of relations between the two countries and suggesting that Castro have private conversations with an emissary whom the President would personally designate.
The United States on the other hand would receive the blessings of the OAS and the UN for its efforts.
If Castro did agree to meet with the President's representative, then relations between the United States and Cuba probably would be improved.
At 1U30 hours on 17 March 1960, Mr Dulles presented his covert action plan to a combined meeting of the National Security Council and the principals of the Special Group.
The President said that he knows of no better plan for dealing with this situation.
TOP 3CCRDfr» NAB NAR A Cj&O DAT E 2 'JfiZf^ sd at the National Archives -rnESeemET and the operations.
Essentially, the 30b is to get the OAS to support During the course of this meeting, Secretary of the Treasury Anderson exhibited great concern over the welfare of the United States firms which had investments in Cuba; and he was pushing for United States intervention to protect these private property rights.
Briefly restated, the four major courses of action called for the formation of an antiCommunist exile political opposition located outside of Cuba which would be the focal point for all of the anti-Castro elements, provision for a powerful propaganda offensive against the island, perfection of a covert intelligence-in-action network organization within Cuba, and the development of a paramilitary force outside Cuba, with the necessary logistical support for covert military operations on the island.
King prepared a memorandum on the same meeting, but, strangely enough, failed to include a list of the participants.
The fact that the President, Vice President, and Secretary of State were in attendance could not be known fyom King's memo alone.
This was one of numerous instances where higher level personnel — in this instance, the DCI, Col.
King, and Bissell — were the principals in a meeting at which Esterline would seem to have been an equally legitimate participant.
Initially, a cadre of leaders will be recruited after careful screening and trained as paramilitary instructors, m a second phase, a number of paramilitary cadres will be trained at secure locations outside of the United States so as to be available for immediate deployment into Cuba to organize train, and lead resistance forces recruited there, both before and after the establishtance ^ ^ ""^ active cente *s of resisAt no point in this Presidentially-approved plan for covert action by the Agency is there any hint of invasion.
The paramilitary activity was clearly to be in the context of guerrilla warfare with leadership and training to the dissident activities inside Cuba being provided by Cubans trained by United States technicians.
The reader is also urged to examine Appendix C, a set of correspondence between the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, and Livingston Merchant, the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs.
Admiral Burke apparently had become extremely agitated about the rise of Castro to power in Cuba; and on 26 February of 1960, he had forwarded a paper on United States action in Cuba, to both Secretary Merchant and also to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Irwin, in which the Navy's senior officer took it upon himself to examine the various options available to the United States to reassert itself in the Western Hemisphere vis-a-vis the growth of Communist power represented by Castro.
Merchant then went on to review the bidding that had already been done, particularly in the Special Group, on the question of how to handle Castro, emphasizing, of course, that State was very much concerned that precipitate action against Castro's government would work, if not immediately, certainly in the long run, to the detriment of the United States, particularly in its relations to the other governments of Latin America.
Whether the response did not satisfy Admiral Burke or whether he sincerely believed that the Navy, more than any other United States Agency, should be principally responsible for setting United States policy toward Cuba is not known.
In any event, on 16 March 1960, he forwarded another set of proposals for United States action in Cuba to both Gordon Gray, the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and to Allen W Dulles.
Burke's comments on the transmittal sheets to these two individuals are interesting.
Dear Gordon: Enclosed is my copy of a memorandum on United States Action in Cuba which may be of interest to you.
Dear Allen: Enclosed is a memorandum my Staff prepared containing some suggestions which might be useful to you in your work.
Naturally, I do not agree with quite all the comments contained in the memorandum but I know that you will forgive the impatient young lad for his desire to make sure no opportunity is left uncovered.
Why one of the recipients was cautioned about ""the impatient young lad"" and the other was not is something -11 TOP CCCRIZT NAR A CjfrO ■ eS v ^^S rm .secret On March 17, 1960, less than two weeks after my return from Puerto Rico, I ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to begin to organize the training of Cuban exiles, mainly in Guatemala, against the possible future day when they might return to their homeland.
More specific planning was not possible because the Cubans living in exile had made no move to select from among their numbers, a of a mystery.
These last proposals that Admiral Burke had forwarded to the Director of Central Intelligence ended up in the files of Chief, Western Hemisphere Division.
The memorandum having been sent down from Mr Bissell's office, with the following notation to Col.
DA raXffizft ^l 1 bULliTT leader whom we could recognize as the head of a government in exile.
Based on his own recollections Eisenhower said that neither his own nor Goodpaster' s records contained anything about the 17 March 1960 meeting.
You may recall that not so very long after I became your Special Assistant, in a meeting you had with Allen Dulles and me you gave instructions that activities of the so-called ""Special Group"" should not be recorded in any place except the files of the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
It was for this reason that I did not seek a copy of the March 17th paper for my files, nor did I make notes at that meeting.
Subsequent to March 17th, I began to make memoranda of every meeting on that particular subject because I had a hunch that someday these might be important, and I intended to put them in your hands at the appropriate time, understanding, of course, that you might wish to have them destroyed.
Incidentally, there were no carbons or other copies made of these memoranda.
By not making copies, and by planning to put the documents in your own hands for whatever disposition you wished to make of them, I sort of rationalized my violation of your instructions about not making such memoranda.
I hope I need not assure you that it was not my practice to violate your instructions and this is the only instance of such that I can recall.
Problems which had been discussed philosophically prior to this time now had to be put to the test of practicality.
The SSA-DDS has advised of the DDP's approval of the creation of a new operational Branch, the abolishment of an existing Section, and the creation of a new Section within the WH Division Headquarters Staffing complement.
The 15 new positions required by the Branch would be more than offset by the decrease in the DDP complement.
W NAR A rjg-O DAT E 3 ' jff 1 2>^ TOP SbCKbl ' Cuban crisis; after which all the positions in the new Branch and Section will be reviewed for reclassification purposes.
In the first meeting following the Presidential approval of the anti-Castro program, Jake Esterline called the members of WH/4 together to announce that the program had been given the crypt of JMARC; and he further pointed out that 1 May 1960 was the target date for the beginning of training at Fort Randolph in Panama.
Medical and security officers were to be assigned to the training base and the communications link was to be established with Headquarters.
The WH/4 Financial Officer, on the other hand, had suggested that certain of the responsibilities for approval of funding be given to the project Chief, or the Chief, WH/Division.
He emphasized again that secrecy was of paramount importance if the operation was to succeed, . and stressed that the establishment of a Governmentin-exile was a key point to making the planned operation credible.
Esterline further indicated that such a government hopefully could be announced by the early part of April and that the Headquarters for such a government could be located either in Puerto Rico or Costa Rica.
Mr Georgia reported that the DDS Offices concerned had nominated nearly all of the personnel required by 1 and 15 April respectively.
He also indicated the considerable degree of cooperation which already was being required from other services.
Dave Phillips provided a specific example of this, emphasizing that without the close cooperation of the United States Navy, it would have been difficult to transport the two radio transmitters which were going to be installed on Swan Island.
Because the activities then established on Swan Island were under the control of the Federal Aviation Administration, C Tracy Barnes was to meet with the Director of FAA, Gen.
Elwood Quesada, to clear with him the problems that were 85 TOP 3CCKCT ' I xvjoi J xi/\oEJjiriiJ^r.i J -iuz-Dzoui , J<wAClJ NAR A CJ^O DATE 3'^^ jor accKui involved in establishing this Agency activity on the island.
I have the impression that our basic JMARC plary commits us to a rather firm timetable, in my judgment, we should have great flexibility in deciding the appropriate time for kicking off any paramilitary operations.
Before such operations are initiated, we should have firm evidence that our propaganda and political action operations have irrevocably undermined Castro's prestige, both in Cuba and abroad.
A^IJ Reproduced at NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3 £fi 2ft -*ef stiOkbr Castro to recuperate lost prestige and rally local and foreign sympathy and supportGenerally speaking, current area attitudes toward the Castro regime are satisfactory from our point of view.
However, this could change radically and rapidly, if there are any premature paramilitary actions.
When the time comes for paramilitary activity, we should make every effort to conceal any invasion actions.
To avoid or minimize Castro's counter propaganda, the paramilitary operations must appear to be an internal uprising by dissident elements within Cuba.
In my opinion, Castro will inevitably charge the United States with responsibility for JMARC operations, and many Latin Americans and other foreign observers will be inclined to accept such charges with or without supporting evidence.
Therefore, what we need is a massive diversionary effort that will either obscure the fact of our involvement or make our involvement palatable.
If it became known, or strongly suspected, that we were supporting operations to bring about a transition to democratic government in the Dominican Republic, the waters would be suitably muddied, and a climate prepared for the Cuban effort.
As with other of the cautionary and restrained proposals which would be put forth prior to launching the invasion, little heed 87 TOP SbLRtf — NAR A TJg-O DATE_X^^3 u^.j^.u^jr js.
Al, l J Keproduced at the National Archives In mid-April of 1960 WH/4 made the first presentation for the DCI since the basic program had been approved by President Eisenhower in mid-March.
Cabell, Mr Helms , Herman Horton , and C Tracy Barnes, Mr Bissell's Deputy.
This high level group was informed that broadcasting activity from Swan Island was scheduled to begin on 17 May 1960 and that very special operations were being carried out in order to provide stories for propaganda use.
According to Dave Phillips who made the presentation apparently was paid to Mr Oberst's proposals.
About the same time that Oberst's memorandum was going forward, the DDP was calling for WH/4 to prepare daily progress reports as one way of eliminating the need for crash-type responses or actions.
The Progress Report should generally not exceed one page in length, and that we should not hesitate to include it in items which were not favorable to our progress, in other words, setbacks or handicaps which we might have encountered.
The reports on the evolution of the government in exile and the buildup of the stay-behind network and on paramilitary activity indicated that much work still remained to be done to get these activities off the ground.
Direct costs of nonexpendable equipment being charged against the project which, in fact, was the major cause of the project's over-obligation.
The DCI was advised that this matter would be discussed with the Comptroller for resolution.
Not only has the initial $900,000 already been expended, but it is currently estimated that an additional $1. million is immediately required to carry the activity through 30 June 1960 Note is also made of possible contingencies amounting to an additional $1. million for which no funds are requested at this time.
On 8 April 1960, General Cabell headed a CIA delegation including Mr Bissell, Col.
King, and Jake Esterline which briefed a very high level group of Department of Defense representatives in the JCS conference room at the Pentagon.
Shoup, Commandant United States Marines; Admiral Burke; CNO; General Erskine, Chief, Special Ops, United States Army; Gen.
Apparently Jake Esterline, the man who had the monkey on his back as project chief sat quietly by.
The suggestion which had been made by Paul Oberst that the ""waters be muddied"" by making it appear that the United States was backing the anti-Trujillo forces in the Dominican Republic was not introduced during the course of this brief ing of the JCS, even though the Dominican Republic was included as a part of the overall briefing.
What did emerge with reference to the Dominican Republic was a concensus that if Trujillo were ousted, there was a strong possibility that Castro might move into the Dominican Republic where he probably would be received as a conquering hero.
UliLkLT Cuban government launch an attack on Guantanamo, the Navy was prepared to defend that base.
On 19 April, for example, $150,000 was to be funneled from the CIA's Director of Logistics to the Comptroller, United States Army, ostensibly as a working fund for the b v*f ' J U> t W ,\ This money, of course, was to be used for necessary construction, renovation, procurement of material, and hire of native labor as necessary to improve Fort Randolph as a training site for the PM insturctor cadre.
Burns Spore , to do much more than listen to WH/4's requests for the assignment of DOD personnel to the project and for real estate for use in the training program until he received a green light from the SecDef.
The decision on this matter was taken up, not only with the Air Force, but also with J Lampton Berry of the Department of State.
Ambassador Berry had called to say that the Department ... had approved the missxon, but insisted that extremely tight security be exercised throughout and that Col.
Benson inform Ambassador Berry before each sortie so that the Department would be properly prepared to respond to any emergency.
One of the particular problems of concern in this relationship was that of covert sea transportation which might be necessary to lift anti-Castro forces back to the island of Cuba.
Even though all the planning about which there is a record at this time concerned only cadres for guerrilla warfare training and the infiltration of communications experts, on 25 April I960, Savilion Chapman of DDP's Maritime Branch met with a Captain Thomas and a Col.
The acquisition from the Navy of two Landing Ship-Tanks and four AirSea Rescue Craft , the training of the Cuban crews for these vessels, and the means of covert transfer of the vessels from the Navy to the Agency.
NAR A CJ«rx> DAT E 3 -^^ TOP OCGRLf Maritime Branch representatives also diseased fceach gradient problems with the Marine Corps a** representatives of the Navy's Hydrographic Office.
Et was ascertained that much work needed to be done in order to upgrade information suitable for planning the use of LST's for beaching and landing of troops and vehicles.
On 25 March, for example, Roy Rubottom, Assistant Secretary of state for American Republic Affeirs. was the originator of an elaborate memorandum which Provided a check list, of current operations end ten categories of activity related to developments m Cuba.
Distribution Outside the USA ProQuest Information and Learning, The Quorum, Barnwell Road, Cambridge CB5 8SW, England , ln i| |lH l |i | DWD Il ll||^|| |' || | »l»' ' 10 20 11,111,11111.111.111)1111,111,11111,111,11111,111)11)1 ilihhlililili lllllllllhlll m ihlih lllllllllllllll ill I NAR A "" Tj&O * '"" DAT E S^ffi^ Tor occrct programs with reference to the Cuban problem.
In addition, there is the Special Group, of which Li vie is a member, and in his absence Ray Hare sits.
Further, there is a special activity * This, of course, apparently ignores or disregards the creation of WH/U and the responsibilities designated to the Agency by Gray's boss.
President Eisenhower. 96 ¥QP SECRET ■ NAR A CJ&-Q DAT B3*ffia^ Reproduced at the National Archives TOP SECRE T proceeding under the chairmanship of Bob Anderson, with which you may or may not be familiar.
Mr Barnes and the Director, therefore, plan to go over to State on Monday afternoon and head off this new development.
Mr Barnes believes that a short paper setting forth what we are already doing in the fields of coordination and liaison should be adequate to support their point of view.
Presumably both elements TOP-flC CR ET NAR A Cjf^O DAT E B'^ 2^ Keproaucea at me Nauonal Archive JO P 3EHRbl entered into the picture, m any event, Gordon Gray seemed cavalier in disregarding the creation of WH/4 and the liaison arrangements which had already been made.
Although it was not included on the list of Agencies with which CIA maintained liaison and contacts at this time, mention should be made of the CIA-FBIcontacts concerning Cuba.
Technically the FBI was prohibited from engaging in intelligence operations overseas, but in mid-June 1960, Chief, WH/4 revealed that the FBI reportedly had plans for installing a stay-behind network using Mexicans and Cubans to be activated in case diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba were broken.
Chief, WH/4 suggested that the CI Staff get in touch with the FBI Liaison Officer, Sam Papich and ask for an explanation of the Bureau's plan.
A thorough investigation has been made of the relations between the Havana Station and the Havana Office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
It has been concluded that the operations of the FBI have neither interferred with nor conflicted with the Station's operations.
King's memo also stated the Bureau's longtime contacts in the Cuban area were a benefit to both the Bureau and to the Station pointing out that frequently the Station was called on to participate in, or actually undertake, the debriefing of various individuals who had come into the FBI offices to volunteer information.
On occasion, the Bureau had even turned over specific operations to the Station.
Chief, WH Division went even further when, during the course of one of the weekly interdepartmental meetings in State, it was suggested by Mr t Gray and Mr Mallory that the FBI was exceeding its jurisdiction, and that perhaps this should be brought before the NSC for consideration.
King also recommended that the Agency not take the initiative in raising the question.
King, nor anyone else involved in the anti-Castro operation ever registered a formal protest against the FBI's activities in the Havana area.
By mid-summer 1960, the relationship became even closer, particularly as the Agency expanded activities at the Forward Operations Base, JMASH in Miami.
In one report concerning the number of the Cuban exiles in the Miami area who were under suspicion of — or were — working for Castro, or who were trying desperately to get support from one or another United States Agency, an FBI agent made a rather interesting forecast to the CIA representative with whom he. was exchanging information.
According to the report from Miami, an FBI agent told me that his personal opinion was that it would be virtually impossible, if not completely impossible, to bring about the overthrow of the Castro regime using Cuban exiles.
He admitted that this was only his personal opinion, but he felt that in view of his experience and contact with the Cuban exiles, he had a good point.
In general, the Miami FOB paralleled the organization bf Headquarters with FI, CI, CA, Support, and PM units.
FOB reported directly to the Chief, WH Division, not Ijp Jake Esterline, Chief, WH/4.
Initially the satellite communications center for relaying commo between Headquarters and the field — including facilities in the Florida Keys concerning the maritime operations — was established; and ultimately the commo link would connect Headquarters with the operations in Guatemala and Nicaragua.
The cover firm for the base, was Clarence A DePew 6 Sons, a notional cover for an organization engaged in classified research.
While the intelligence briefings were scheduled to consider the world situation, considerable emphasis was being given to both Cuba and the Dominican Republic.
In preparation for Mr Dulles' briefing of the Democratic nominee, John F Kennedy, on 23 July 1960, WH/U prepared a detailed Cuban briefing paper touching on the principal aspects of tfae exile organization, the propaganda plan, penetration of Cuba by personnel from communist countries (including the Soviet Union, Red China, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany), and the play that Castro was making in the Latin American world for pro-communist sympathizers.
In addition, emphasis also was given to the reports deal basically with the period between 1962 and 1968; and while there is some feeling that ttie story of the Bay of Pigs operation should go into extensive detail on the initial operations of tine FOB, this author has chosen not to do so, focusing instead on only those broad aspects of the problem relating to the Miami Base.
Insofar as can be determined, however, there is no indication that in his pre-election briefing of the Democratic Presidential candidates that Mr Dulles went into any specifics on the Agency's anti-Castro plans.
From an estimate of some $2. million of budgeted and reserve funds, which had been made available for the program by mid-August of 1960, Mr Bissell appeared at a special Group meeting, requesting that an additional $10.75 million be released from reserve funds to meet the ever-increasing needs, particularly for the paramilitary and propaganda programs.
This matter should be laid before the appropriate higher authorities and a presentation would be arranged hopefully within the next ten days.
AU1J Reproduced at the National An NARA_ceO___ D ATE_3^^3 should not be undertaken without a reasonable assurance that the operation was to go forward.
Perhaps the best way to describe the period from the summer of 1960 until the early fall was as a period of cooperation and challenge.
Cooperation because the needs of the Agency represented National Policy.
Challenge to most if not all of CIA's proposals — proposals which concerned the nature of the propaganda effort, the size and make-up of the exile military force which was being organized, the location of training sites, the types of technical materiel being requested, and, most important by the end of this period, the specific nature of the military -operation which was to be mounted against Fidel Castro.
J.,1 <jjL-j;LO(jr JV At1 J Reproduced at the National Archives NAR A CjPO DAT E 3'^^ TOP QCCRCT and from others who might be recruited inside Cuba.
The emphasis on the PM training at this time was to be on weapons, demolitions, sabotage, and guerrilla warfare tactics; and the weapons familiarization was to be with the M-l carbine, the Garand and Springfield rifles, the Thompson sub-machine gun, and the .45 Colt automatic pistol.
This, of course, was the weapons mix in the Agency's stockpile of standard arms packs.
As was past estimates, this particular NIE was unable to answer the question of whether Castro himself was a Communist.
PM personnel might assist in bringing a strong dissident leader to the fore, or develop the capability to overcome the Castro militia.
After President Eisenhower's National Security Adviser, Gordon Gray, summarized developments since the March announcement of the antiCastro program^, Mr Dulles provided some specifics concerning the organization of the FRD and its principals, noting that the Headquarters for the FRD had been established in Mexico City, in lieu of the invitation of President Ydigoras of Guatemala to permit the FRD to operate from his country.
When the discussion turned to the PM forces, the Department of Defense representative, Mr Gates, made it quite clear that he was concerned about the possibility of United States military personnel being involved directly in the military operations inside Cuba.
Mr Bissell responded that United States military personnel in third countries would be used only as instructors — not as cadre leaders for either an invasion or a guerrilla warfare effort.
Bissell did stress, however, that there was need for a standby force, preferably of non-Americans, with special training in guerrilla warfare to provide a leadership complement to the Cubans when ""push"" came to ""shove,"" a recommendation that provoked some differences of opinion during the course of this briefing for the President when it was suggested that United States officers might be required to direct these forces.
Mr Dulles proposed withholding this discussion until the Agency and the JCS could talk the matter over.
According to his own report of his position at this meeting, Mr Gray pointed out that it would be unwise to mount any kind of an operation without the determination to see it through and that an abortive effort would be worse than no effort at all.
He therefore thought that if this backup force was essential to ultimate success, full consideration should be given to it at this stage in the planning.
He wouldn't care much about this kind of cost [the $10 million increase noted earlier] ; indeed, he said he would defend this kind of action against all comers and that if we could be sure of freeing the Cubans from this incubus, $25 million might be a small price to pay.
For he noted at that time that if the United States failed to deal firmly with Cuba, there was an obvious danger that other small nations would be encouraged to undertake harassments of the major powers. 2/ -109 -top occi?.rj E NARA_&S32__ DAT E g-^i^^ ■ J wiour rw AV^ 1 J Reproduced at the National Archives'* a-wi 1 sLunrr The President concluded the meeting, by saying that he would like to urge caution with respect to the danger of making false moves, with the result of starting something before we were ready for it.
Mann already had been involved in some of the prior discussions concerning the anti-Castro activity in his capacity as Assistant Secretary for ■■■f^aaums^&niv.
Dulles and Bissell, a third CIA officer might possibly be in attendance; and he also noted that the Vice-President had been invited to attend the briefing.
According to Gray's record, however, neither the Vice-President nor the third CIA representatlveVwere in attendance at the briefing of 18 August.
The attendance of the Director and Mr Bissell, but with no CIA representative from WH/U, was further illustration of Jake Esterline's criticism that at too many high level briefings, CIA's representatives were individuals who , high ranks notwithstanding, were the furthest from the operation — yet they were responsible for informing the nation's policymakers about the details of the anti-Castro program.
In early September of I960, Chief, WH/4 learned from a member of the Department of State that Mr Mann was going to ask for a restudy of the basic concept of JMATE, or, if he did not ask for that re-evaluation, he would ask for immediate review and rescheduling of the timetable for the JMATE operation.
At this time and in view of the lack of prog• ress both in developing any great cohesion within the FRD in organizing the dissidents within Cuba, the questions seemed in order.
The degree to which we are already committed in JMARC would pose a monumental security problem alone if we were suddenly instructed to cease and desist from further activity.
Additionally, our acrossthe-board propaganda activities are being stepped ^ip daily.
As time passed, however, it would be charged that the cessation of the Agencysponsored training activities would loose a flood of TOP 0CCRfe£ ^ Cubans back into the exile community; and they would charge that the United States feared to undertake the task of ousting Fidel Castro.
This, in turn, would mean that the United States would lose face in the eyes of the Democratic Latin American republics.
Successful action in this area should weigi heavily on Assistant Secretary Mann's alleged new attitude.
That there were dissidents on the island was unquestioned, the problem was the degree of strength and effectiveness that they might be able to demonstrate.
SECRE T^ Mr Mann would continue to raise questions concerning the feasibility of discontinuing the training in Guatemala, and in on-going meetings with Agency representatives including the DCI, the DDP, Chief, WH, as well as Chief, WH/4 and others, Mann continued to raise questions about the effect on Project JMATE should all the American trainers and Cuban trainees be pulled out of Guatemala immediately.
As he raised such questions, the Assistant Secretary for Latin American Affairs was informed by CIA that they would much prefer that the training o'f the Cuban exiles take place in United States bases, both for purposes of security and for efficiency.
Mann persisted, however, suggesting that the question of maintaining the training base in and total bust, the supplies being dropped to the guerrillas fell into the hands of Castro's forces; and the aircraft itself made a forced landing in Mexico and was not recovered.
The fact that a move from the present training sites to the United States should not be made too hurriedly and the importance of avoiding a decision at a later date that the training in the United States is a bar to operational use.
At this time however, the Agency's representatives believed that Mann was talking in terms of a one to three year quarantine period, in an attempt to disrupt the Cuban economy — a quarantine, however, which would not interfere with the flow of goods from the Communist Countries.
It was suggested that the airfield logistical base should be located in southern Florida, and permission to use Ramey Air Force Base in Puerto Rico to stage black over-flights to Cuba should be obtained.
The maritime facilities would be located on Vieques Island, Puerto Rico and also , in southern Florida. v In a meeting with the Special Group, the Deputy Director for Central Intelligence put forth the proposals concerning the movement of training bases to the United States; and although he was supported by the Department of Defense representatives — Mr Douglas and Gen.
The Bureau of American Republic Affairs of Department of State, however, put the quietus on the plan for obtaining foreign volunteers; but J Foster Collins, the Chief of the Covert Action Staff, suggested to the Deputy Director for Plans that possibly he (the DDP) could convince Livingston Merchant of the need to re-examine the Department of State policy.
State's view prevailed, and there were no contingents of either American or foreign volunteers.6/ During the period of buildup and organization of WH/U for the JMATE effort against Castro, the Agency encountered some problems with the United States Mays', but none of these were as serious as the difficulties encountered with the Department of Defense per se, the Air Force, or the United States Army.
The existence of the United States Naval Base at Guantaoaoo Bay in Cuba presented an unusual situation ir. view of the planning that was taking place.
Apparently, however, there was no disagreement between the Agency and the Navy that prohibited Guantanamo frorn being used to mount anti -Castro activities or froc being used as a safe haven area for those who migfcz hiave been detected engaging in sabotage, propaganda, or other anti-Castro activities.
So serious was this issue in fact, that the Agency agreed that all Cubans participating in overflights of Cuba would be told that Guantanamo Naval Base was not to be used as a safe haven, and that if they landed there, they would be turned over to the Cuban authorities.7/ The Guantanamo Base also presented a major difficulty for the Department of State.
Evidence of this surfaced in early October of 1960 when it was reported that during a meeting of the State Working Group on Cuba a suggestion was put forward that the United States try to influence Latin American nations to approve United States retention of the base.
In addition, State desires that the IADB, make some statement on the importance of Guantanamo Bay to Latin American hemisphere defense.
I realize that this Agency is an implementing arm of the Executive Branch and has no right or privilege in the area of formulation of United States national policy.
I believe that within this framework we who are part of this Agency are permitted to comment on certain State Department or other Executive Department propositions that appear, on the basis of our own personal observations and experience, to be counter-productive to the best interest of the United States.
I am convinced that the course of action, described in paragraph 1 [that the United States use the IADB to win Latin American support for the United States retention of Guantanamo] is in fact within this category.
It is high time that the United States take an understandable public position in matters of international agreement, compact, contract, and treaty.
The rights of the United States to the Guantanamo Bay area have been clearly and legally described in several documents which bear the signatures of the then reigning and cognizant governments of the United States and Cuba, respectively.
Latin American nation in terms of the Guantanamo issue. . 109/ ""aui-cin By early yjovember 1960 Secretary of State, Christian Herter, had decided that the matter of Guantanamo needed to be discussed at a higher level ; and, consequently, he introduced the subject on the agenda for the National Security Council meeting of 7 November 1960.
Herter also suggested, of course, that there would be possible responses between the two extremes, with activities in the OAS or the UN possibly having some bearing on the United States response — the sort of contention that undoubtedly must have raised the hackles on Mr Stanulis again.
The Secretary of State did specify, however, that the United States response to an attack on Guantanamo would be the result of a decision made by the President of the United States.
As will be pointed out subsequently, the Cubans would make charges about Guantanamo being the center' for anti-Castro activities, and there would be a few instances where anti-Castro Cubans were able to find refuge within the confines of the base.
Before the end of October 1960, the Admiral had made it clear to the Agency's representatives that he believed it impossible for him to conduct the affairs of the Atlantic Fleet in the Cuban area properly until he received further information — specific information — about the Agency's planned operations against Castro.
Holcomb, Holcomb assured the Admiral that aay request for information which he cared to lay on the Agency would be promptly answered.
It was the impression of the CIA officers present that Admiral Dennison is a cooperative officer and favorably and objectively inclined towards CIA, and that if his needs can be met, he will undoubtedly follow a positive and helpful course.1/ c On 2 November 1960, Richard Bissell, Jacob Esterline, and Colonel Jack Hawkins traveled to Norfolk to Admiral Dennison 's headquarters.
Mr Bissell gave an overview of the CIA operation, Esterline discussed the political and propaganda aspects, and Hawkins talked about the PM program, including the plan for a 1,500-man invasion force to seize a lodgement on the island of Cuba.
Hawkins emphasized that this last obj^eo^ive could not be met until March or April of 1961.
It was obvious that as the operation began to increase in size that the Divisions didn't have the personnel, the senior personnel, to staff out the organization;, yr if they did have them, they weren't about to release them from the LSD which was to carry the landing craft to the area of the Bahia de Cochinos was ready to load at the naval base at Vieques for the invasion.
It was on that basis, I think, that when people like Dick Drain came back home from — in Dick's case, I think he came in from £ ft <^} — where he had a pretty good record — but he was not returning to Headquarters to go into an assignment, and Dick Bissell put him in the operation with us.
Gerry Droller had been around Headquarters for a long time, had been quite a bit of a replacement problem.
He was very bright, he was a German specialist, had a pretty good political background; and Gerry and Howard Hunt, for whatever reason, were sort of selected, not by us, but they were told they were going to be the people who would handle the political aspects of the operation.4/ Esterline also noted that the shortage of competent personnel, became particularly critical when the operational concepts began to change and to expand.
A Contingency Task Force, a program developed by the Clandestine Services, was designed to make available Agency personnel who could be pulled out of any position that they were assigned to and moved into any urgent, high priority type of project.
JMATE Project, was a high priority project; and the Contingency Task Force concept, in my opinion, failed at that point because the Clandestine Services did not provide the top quality people we needed for the position to be filled.
After JMATE Project the Contingency Task Force was completely abolished.
Many people in the Agency were designated from the Support and the Operational side to fill various positions as they would come up, but it didn't work from the Clandestine Services side.
We had real problems, trying to get qualified ... top qualified people ... to do those jobs.
It was set up and designed so that qualified personnel would be completely immunized and processed and ready to go with passports at any given time.
That doesn't really bring you up much on Latin America and latinos, and any of that I had never been on an amphibious operation, and if that was characteristic of my qualifications, it really characterized the whole damned operation about which, it seemed to me, there was a good deal of well-meaning hypocrisy.
Red White, soldierly like he was, took absolutely sincerely, what the Director said, when he said ""I want the very best people assigned to this;"" So we got Mike King to run the finance, not some stumblebum with garters on his sleeve . . . the best finance officer they had.
Our logistics support and Bill Eisemann, they were really hand picked by Red White The DDS or the DDA, whatever they called it then, deserved very high marks for being uniquely the people to put their back into it.
The DDI ireally wasn't asked; and that was too bad, because we could have used, \ it seems to me, some input from the DDL Our own intelligence report structure was not bad.
The Chief, FI was a nice old guy,£"" 3 J; and we had some reports officers who were quite competent in the DDP sense; but the thing was so corapartmented from the DDI, in any event, that the idea of drawing down on DDI talent to get in on this, was not well received.
For example, on just such a mundane, but important thing, as topography and geography and beach stuff Christ, I well knew from the time that I worked for Lofty Becker . . . that there was in old ORR ... in the geographic thing Jim , — Otto Guthe I mean, they would have been glad to supply people ... and we didn't ask.
So you can't say that DDI didn't provide, unless you understand that they didn't provide because they really weren't asked.
Frank Egan, United States Army, were in charge of the overall PM activity and the PM training for the Cuban exile brigade.
Hawkins, who was serving on the Staff of the Marine School at Quantico, Virginia at * Drain's suggestion that the DDI was left completely in the cold during the Bay of Pigs operation overstates the case.
As early as January 1959 there is evidence that Mr Helms agreed to cut the DDI in on ""useful intelligence to which it would be well for the DD/I to have access"" from State cable traffic on Cuba being carried over CIA channels.
S EC R E T I KbLJiAaiilJ IMiJK. rX-lUZ-DZO^Ji-i^ AU1J Reproduced allhe Nalional Arcn.ve NAR A , Cj&O DAT EB-^j^ TOP GCCRC T the time that he was assigned to Project JMARC, had taken part in the battles of Bataan and Corregidor; had been taken prisoner with the fall of Corregidor; and escaped from the Japanese prisoner of war camp at Davao, Mindanao; and joined the Philippine guerrilla forces, leading raiding parties and harassing attacks against the Japanese army in the Philippines.
After seven months of such activity, he was evacuated by submarine from the Philippines in November 1943 and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for these actions.
After returning to the United States for additional training, in November 1944 Hawkins again returned to the Pacific area where he was an assistant operations officer taking part in the assault and capture of Okinawa.
During the Korean conflict, he was Commanding Officer of the 1st Battalion, 1st Marines; and he, led the Battalion in combat Muring the Inchon landing and in subsequent operations in Korea.
For his participation in the Inchon-Seoul operation, Hawkins had received the Silver Star Medal for heroism.
Egan's military record showed a welltrained infantry officer who had served overseas in the European Theater during the course of World War II; an infantry officer including an infantry training officer in much of the period following World War II; and a staff officer in the Special Warfare Division of the United States Army in 1958, serving with the Director of Plans, in Washington from 1958 to 1960.
Colonel Egan had been on the Operations and Training Staff of a Joint Support Group, headquartered in Washington.
Egan EOD'd with Project JMATE, 27 June 1960, and Hawkins on 29 August of 1960.
I mean first rate, not compared with the jaded World War II memory, but first rate in terms of officers then serving in the armed forces of the United States.
F.L-1U2-526 NAR A Cj&O DAT E I'tytfS TOP SECRE T one could have found a better man.
Frank Egan, who went down to do the training, was the man that I would have picked.
He was probably the most disputable of the bunch because he was pretty volatile.
He has been condemned for leading the Cuban manpower to believe that they were going to get more support than he had any right to let them know about.
Well, I wasn't there, but I know damned well that if I had been, I would have been priming up the Brigade to do this tough job, not by counseling them as to the difficulty of it ... at least, exclusively ... or, giving them lectures about now you will really have to do this on your own, because you are not going to get one iota of assistance from the armed forces.
You don't normally train a group to conduct an operation of this sort by playing on their fears.
If, down ther£ at the end of the line — first in Guatemala and then in Nicaragua — Egan led them to believe that they were going to get them more help than he had any right to let them know, well, I can understand why that would have happened.
QP 3ECKBI By way of illustrating some of the problems encountered in acquiring adequate personnel for the JMATE operation, on the very day that President Eisenhower was approving the anti-Castro program, a memorandum was being sent to the Deputy Director for Plans from the Chief, Western Hemisphere Division noting that two individuals assigned to the Office of Training were urgently needed for service in WH/4.
It was made quite clear to the author that both individuals harbored considerable resentment about their relationships and association with the Agency at the time of the Bay of Pigs.
T released until suitable replacements could be found to take over their tasks in the Office of Training.
King, therefore, appealed to the Deputy Director feePlans for their immediate release.4/ Not only did the Clandestine Service encounter difficulty in obtaining personnel from within its cram units to serve in WH/4, it also appeared to draw ilanis in terms of Cubans willing to volunteer for the s-xrrocgle against Castro.
Many of the Agents who were proposed by other WH Stations for use in Cuba were either found unacceptable, or did not want to accept such an assignment.
Other stations were unable to come up with any assets who might gain access to the desired targets in Cuba.5/ The problem which Col.
Employees on detail to the project from the Clandestine Services offices will not be transferred since DDP considers them temporary assignments with the personnel returning to their parent office when the project is completed.
Colonel White pointed out, that although DDS personnel would be transferred to the project, thereby relieving slots in the variqus DDS elements, each office head should keep in mind that his employees will be returning to him, and he should plan accordingly.6/ Colonel White's comments are quite understandable in view of the fact that of 10 4 personnel on duty with JMATE on 7-8 June 1960, only 32 were Clandestine Services careerists; and excepting a few with DDI career designations, the bulk of the personnel were Support careerists.
Although Mr Bissell approved the recommended increment,, he nonetheless wrote a memorandum to C Tracy Barnes, the ADDP/A, suggesting that Barnes and Dick Helms take a close look at the JMATE staffing pattern to see if there were areas of duplication, particularly between the field bases and Headquarters.
The DDP suggested that in the areas of FI and PM there might be slots in either the Forward Operations Base in Miami or in JMOARSMAN — the Panama Training Site — where possibly the staffs could be transferred during slack periods to conduct similar operations in other parts of the JMATE operation.
At the same time that the Bay of Pigs operation was getting under way, there was considerable emphasis from various individuals in Headquarters for establishment, of a ""Forward Command Post,"" which also might be located in the Miami area, possibly in the communications complex.
Some even suggested the possibility of establishing a sub-command post in a third country.
In any event, no Forward Command Post was established.8/ RELEASED PER P.L-102-526 Reproduced at the National Archive NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3 &/* h*S T-OT ScLKt C By early November 1960, as the concept of the operation was shifting from one of guerrilla warfare and infiltration to invasion, the staffing pattern for WH/t was again increased.
I have signed this request to indicate my approval, but do so with a good deal of concern.
I realize that this is a very major and top priority activity and I also realize that the senior officers engaged in it continue to be heavily overworked.
On the other hand, I am fearful that the addition of large numbers of personnel will not in fact reduce the load on those individuals who are most overworked, but may instead create additional burdens of management without contributing significantly to the success of the underlying activities * I am concerned also that we may be simply running out of suitable people in the Agency in certain categories.
As early as August of 1960, it had been indicated that the DDP might be leaning toward the use of directed assignments, but nothing ever came of this.0/ T OP GCCR O ^ KHi,hAHiiUfiiKt.L-l02-52b Reproduced at the National Archives NAR A CJ&-Q DAT E 3-^^ Even before Mr Bissell's memorandum of early November 1960, indicating the possibility that experts in certain areas might no longer be available from within the Agency, proposals had gone forward requesting permission for the use of American contract personnel in the maritime operations.
Unlike the brouhaha that was precipitated by the early suggestions for the use of American volunteers from the ground forces, the authorization for the use of United States contracts in maritime activities apparently was granted without much debate.
The statement of the requirements for the use of the United States contracts indicated that United States citizens would be put under contract to act not only as trainers for the crews of LCI's, LCU's, LCVP's, and SK's, but also, that they would serve in key positions as LCI captains, LCI diesel engineers, and LCU coxwains during training and operations, where qualified Cubans cannot be obtained.
This would require their entering Cuban coastal wfeters and, on occasions, touching on Cuban beaches, when operations so require.
It is essential for operations that these key positions be held by qualified and dependable men.
At this time, it is not expected that Cuban trainees qualified for such positions or possessing the necessary aptitude and character to permit successful training will be found.
NAB they are located, the use of United States contract personnel will correspondingly be cut down.
In view degree risk involved rendezvoustype mission request Case Officer advise all Maritime contract personnel bonus this type mission be hereafter $100.00.
Bonus for Cuban territory beach landings or caching would remain $500.00.
It was really a tremendous % task to keep up with it, because a lot of J these people had personal problems.
In 1 some cases they would cable and request j release from their assignment for personal \ reasons.
The Support components and Clandestine Services then provided names of people who would be replacements.
AU'ij Reproduced at the National Archive NAR A c&>0 DATE j&J&a*) top SECRET Changing Concepts It has already been pointed out that tiie initial planning for paramilitary operations against Castro was to be based on extremely small units.
Two or three man units, including a communicator, would be trained and infiltrated into Cuba to work with a dissident group.
One trainer would be the adviser for the types of guerrilla warfare activities which the anti-Castro dissidents might undertake safely and reasonably securely.
There had been some signs of dissatisfaction with this particular type of program prior to the summer of 1960.
By the late summer of 1960 and through the fall there was to be a complete and radical shift in the concept of the paramilitary operations in which the forces backed by CIA should engage.
In late August-September, there were some clues that changes in the nature of operations were being contemplated.
During the last week of August and in the initial week of September 1960, Savilion Chapman claimed that he and a Col.
Frank Egan and Commander Norman Imler of the WH/4 staff reported they asked the Maritime Branch to draft a memo to the DDP giving information on the foreign cargo vessels that would be required for troop transport, including their ownership, their costs, and on the methods of their acquisition.
The reference to the use of -vessels for the transport of tanks would indicate that something beyond hit-and-run exercises were being contemplated.
Egan and a representative of the Logistics Branch of WH/4 had spelled out some additional details for the Maritime Branch of Special Operations.
At that time, according to Mr Chapman's report, WH/4 was talking about deck loading of 3 LCV's, with 5 armored tanks, 5 2-1/2 ton trucks, one caterpillar dozer, and two gasoline tank trucks — hardly type of equipment which would be required for 2-3 man guerrilla teams.
King, Tracy Barnes, and Richard Bissell — that decisions were going to have to be made about all aspects of the paramilitary program.
The basic question being whether a paramilitary program under CIA aegis should be launched at Castro, or whether, at this time, such a program should become a joint operation between the Department of Defense and the Agency.
In the discussion among Agency personnel, in the discussions between Agency personnel and representatives of the Special Group, and in discussions within the meetings of the Special Group, the whole gammut of options was being explored.
Barnes was very emphatic that what was needed at this time, was a willingness to run some risks — including the risk of defeat.
Barnes was critical of the Special Group, pointing out that the apparent belief of the Group was that every operation had to succeed; and that if there were ""losses, ,'H J l 1 l i L ' lKL.l KEUiASfcD MKL1 U2-526 Reproduced at the National Archives NAR A CJ&-D DAT E 2'ty&^ TOF SbiCRhf failures , or mishaps , "" the Special Group seemed to want to cancel everything.
This was contrary, completely, to Barnes' concept of operational activity.
The implementation of such teams would indicate whether the dissident elements in Cuba were likely to rally around such groups, once it had been established that such groups could provide guidance and supply for the anti-Castro activities.
It was at this same meeting that Mr Livingston Merchant of the Department of State raised the question of whether plans were being made to assassinate Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara ■""at which point General Cabell, the Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, pointed out that such activities as assassination were extremely difficult to manage and that the CIA had no capability for such an operation.
To do this JMTRAV was urged to provide for unit separation, competition in the military arts, and specific identities for the individual units through the use of scarfs, caps, or some other device.
J ShLRbl governments would recognize that the force lodged in ' Cuba and its nominal leadership was the Provisional Government of Cuba.
There will not be the internal unrest earlier believed possible, nor will the defenses permit the type strike first plannedOur second concept (1,5003,000 man force to secure a beach with airstrip) is also now seen to be unachievable, except as a joint Agency /DOD action.
Our Guatemala experience demonstrates we cannot staff nor otherwise timely create the base and lift needed.
L-i.UJ.-yibUtiLAL.i:) Reproduced at the National An NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3-^^ TW 6BLKE1 Operation in March 1961.
Certainly there was no lessening in the controls that Castro had instituted, nor in the efficiency of the military forces and militia that he had at his command by April 1961.
Thomas Mann of the State Department became increasingly concerned about this situation; and the discussions within the Special Group and among the concerned Agencies during the period from the middle of November until the end of the year, focused very frequently on this question.
Considering the continuingly favorable reception to Agency activities from Ydigoras Fuentes, Guatemala's * During interviews with the author of this history, Messrs.
E 1 NAR A C&Q DAT EB'^^ jXiE-seeR-rr President, State's concern that the training ""places too much strain on the government of Guatemala"" appear unrealistic.
Certainly Ydigoras was not interested in the removal of those military units which could most effectively guarantee his continued reign as President of Guatemala — the Cubans in training for both air and ground activities.
As noted in another volxime, Esterline went strongly on record in support of the Office of Logistics engineer who had been responsible for the reconstruction of the airstrip at Retalhuleu.
Jake noted that even though there had been a sizable cost overrun, the task had been performed on time under the most adverse weather conditions; and, consequently, suggestions from Headquarters that there had been gross inefficiency were unwarranted and unfounded.
In any event, they are not in my judgment worth the $1,000 per month which we have to pay them.
Under no circumstances would I wSrXe"" ^ns^ *"""" ^^ ^ ™> In closing his report on the visit to Guatemala, Esterline presented the following critical observations of the situation as he saw it.
Moreover, even though the discussions concerning plausible deniability reached near fever pitch during the discussions of November 1960, at no point did the Special Group of presidential consultants ever step forward with a/f irm recommendation that the United States assume responsibility and so admit.
A^ 1 ) Reproduced at the National Archive NAR A Cj&O DAT E S^a*) 'tUH SftRE questions concerning the Bay of Pigs Operation.
Similarly it was stressed that there was a priority need to secure Special Force trainers from the Army, on an ASAP basis.
Requirements for materiel juaped, particularly in the number of personal weapons which would be required for added numbers of troops in training.
With the acquisition of the additional training site in Guatemala from Roberto Alejos, requests immediately came forward for trucks and jeeps to transport troops to these training areas.
The * There also is evidence that at least one of the principal Agency planners, C Tracy Barnes, contributed to the November confusion.
At one point, when serious consideration was being given to the possibility of increasing significantly the training activity that might be done in Nicaragua, Barnes introduced what amounted to moral objections to the association — or to strengthening the association — with the Somoza Government.
Barnes emphasized that this would go down hard with the more liberal elements in Latin America.
NAR A rjg-O DAT E 3 gfiti^ field was aware that the increasing number of trainees would create problems, but at the same time, there were indications that the trainers were hopeful that the infiltration teams that had been developed could be held intact.
Recent cable traffic suggests major changes in near future and COS feels it would be of great assistance to have complete story to assist in dealing with Alejos and Ydigoras.
King made a specific attempt to obtain positive guidance through the office of the Deputy director for Plans.
The entire group would later be returned to a staging area in Nicaragua for the amphibious operation.
Thirty-eight Special Force officers and enlisted men to be used as instructors in Guatemala or in Saipan, or both.
Supplementation of logistic resupply air-lift to resistance after 1 February.
King then closed this memorandum to Mr Bissell by noting that if the paramilitary concept was approved, certain policy approvals would be required.
To use a small number of American civilian contract personnel in air and maritime operations.
What was now to be undertaken was an amphibious assault in strength — the strength as yet to be determined — with the concomitant requirement for heavy air support for resupply and possibly for military support as well.
Indicative of the confusion which surrounded this period when the concept was changing were Jake Esterline's remarks shortly fallowing the collapse of the Bay of Pigs when he testified before the Taylor Committee.
It appears as though Esterline had been informed — incorrectly as it turned out — that in his testimony of 1 May 1961 Lt.
Frank Egan had indicated to the committee that the strike force concept has been in being since his EOD in June I960.
Jack Hawkins] — or more particularly, members of your staff — will find that we had no approved philosophy of the operation within the Project until well in September.
The training program which Rocky Farnsworth conducted in Panama was directed solely toward training an instructor cadre in small unit or ""guerrilla type"" operations.
This cadre, when it arrived in Guatemala, in addition to working on building the camp with Carl Jenkins, continued to train the first recruits in the same kind of training they had received.
Another example of my positiveness that we were not, at Project level, thinking of the strike operation is the first conversation that we held in. my office in Barton Hall when I referred to the fact that the PM staff had been talking about the development of a strike operation, but that I, myself, was not convinced of it at the time and that I preferred to put small teams into existing units at the appropriate time.
Jack Hawkins] had an open mind at that point; although without positive study of Cuba you leaned to the concept . outlined.
It was at a somewhat later date, therefore , that we talked again vand you [Col.
Jack Hawkins]' stated your conviction that Castro could not be overthrown without a major or catalytic effort being made against him.
After deliberation, I came to the same conclusion, and we then began to think in terms of expanding the force to the strength of a reinforced battalion, more or less.
The foregoing is important only because General Taylor is going into very TOF SbLRLl NAR A Cjf^O DAT E frtfi&'S J^rTaiiLkL T"" fine points in his analysis of government policy.
It is incumbent upon us, therefore, to get the record straight in this manner, and, although Lt.
Egan may have had in his own mind the idea of a strike operation — and I believe he came to us with some idea on hitting the Isle of Pines — this nevertheless was not approved Project or Agency policy until quite a few months later.
In point of fact, as I look back over that period, I am sure during that period I found myself drifting along, devoting myself merely to creating basic capabilities in a variety of fields without any clear-cut idea of what national policy would permit us to do.
That the small team concept had been planned to toe put into operation early in November of 1960, and Esterline seems to believe that this would have been feasible.
However, the Presidential election of that year made the Eisenhower administration extremely cautious about anything that might have an impact on the outcome of the election; and, consequently, such delays as were incurred gave added time for the buildup of Castro's internal forces.
By the time that the election was over, it had become apparent that the small team concept was no longer viable.
Esterline in fact, suggested that the emphasis for the buildup m the brigade forces came from the White House.
But even though Gordon Gray — in various meetings of the Special Group during the period from November to the end of the.
Eisenhower administration — did support the idea of increasing the size of the force, there is no evidence to indicate that pressure to do this came from the White House.
That decision as to the character of the operation was rather gradually modified during the late autumn (of 1960], and it's very difficult, even for someone who was close to those developments, to put a finger on the exact moment when a clear decision was made, or the circumstances, or, really, the people who made it.
One of the clearest impressions I have of the whole planning period and of this change in concept was that by November ... and I don't think Esterline bought this view either as completely or as soon as I did I remember the feeling that I was well ahead of King ... in my belief that we had to place nearly exclusive reliance for the initial phase on whatever force it was possible to land.
Qgx> DAT E 3 ^ £*> ShUkfc-l of urgency at that point about a buildup in numbers than I did.
I think that Hawkins likewise felt that he had to rely on what the recruiting mechanism would turn up, which wasn't really his direct operation, and that he wasn ' t at all sure that he could get the sort of numbers that I was talking about.
During this period most of the discussion and the decisions, aside from those within CIA, were at the level of the Special Group.
The principals involved from the Department of State were at the Under Secretary/Assistant Secretary level at the highest, and at the Agency, both the Director of Central Intelligence and the Deputy Director for Plans were involved.
SWs 1 J TOP 3LCUUI suddenly the President emerged as one of the principal decision makers in the period prior to t-ie take-over by the Kennedy administration.
I can't explain it . . . but I will say this, it probably had a political basis.
They realized that they had lost, and they realized that they were going to have to brief a new administration along with the British on the things that had been going on.
I suspect that they didn't want to brief on something that would emerge that they hadn't been giving anything other than their full support.
The President made it clear he wanted all done that could be done with all possible urgency and nothing less on the part of any department, ... and the President led a discussion as to how best to organize the total United States effort against the target.
It was also felt desirable to use Mr Pawley's services, initially in connection with C 2 V M ' JJ assistance.
Mr Pawley said that two things are necessary, and I inferred that these would constitute his principal recommendations to the President.
The President should appoint a single experienced individual (he said he was personally qualified and would be available for the job if asked) to conduct the entire covert operation.
This could be done in five or six weeks, rather than months, according to him.
I asked if he was proposing overt intervention by United States armed forces.
He mentioned a number of names which were unfamiliar to me of Cubans who he said are politically unblemished in Cuba, neither pinks nor reactionary rightists.
Jake Esterline has tended to denigrate the role played by Pawley during the course of the Bay of Pigs operation; but, nonetheless, throughout the course of the operation Jake was charged with maintaining close liaison with Pawley.
JMATE records indicate not only the numerous face-toface meetings between Pawley and Esterline during the course of the operation, but also reflect an amazing number of telephone conversations between the two during the life of the operation.
In .terms of the operational plan per se, Esterline appeared to be most cagy in handling this subject during the discussions with Pawley.
The recorded conversations focus on the potential leadership for the FRD — with Pawley's ""best"" leadership choices usually being far to the right.
XQP 0CCRCT NAR A'""cu4o""''^ DAT ET-ffiPS ^tUH SbCkhT Solicited the Group's assistance in arriving at a concensus of views as to what exactly had been decided as a . result of the high level meeting [the meeting with the President] of the day before.
The problem that apparently created the greatest difficulty at this Special Group meeting was the President's suggestion that a single individual should be placed in charge of the anti-Castro program.
The Special Group decided that there should be two individuals with principal responsibilities — one to handle the overt and the other to handle the covert activities.
It was recognized that these nominees would have to be checked with Mr Gray's associates.
On the covert side Dillon followed the DCI's suggestion that C Tracy Barnes should be appointed ""to devote full time to the direction of the Agency's program with respect to Cuba, and to concert with Amb.
I approve of the suggestions regarding the reorganization of the government's T ^ P ^bLKEl* NAR A CJ^O D ATEjb^^) program with respect to that country , except that I think Mr Willauer should have a position directly subordinate to the Secretary of State for so long as Cuba remains a critical problem in our foreign relations.
There should be no doubt as to the authority of the Special Assistant to the State Department to subordinate covert and overt activities, nor as to his responsibility for conveying policy guidance to the operating agencies.
In their broad outline, these policies will, of course, be subject to the approval of higher authority.
When Thomas A Parrott who acted as 'secretary for the Special Group meeting transmitted a copy of the draft of Bui-les* memorandum^ to Tracy Barnes, Parrott had been made aware of the. possibility that Eisenhower was in favor of raising the position of Willauer.
Tracy Barnes seemed to have a great deal more to say than was warranted by his knowledge and apparent understanding of the planned action.
Lansdale when he forwarded one proposal — Please recognize that this proposal is a draft and is off the top of the head without any detailed knowledge of possible applicable regs and procedures — help make understandable the consternation within the ranks of. the Department of Defense concerning the Agency's understanding of which end was up.
T OP GCCRCT KAR A CjPO D ATE3J^^3 Inar — W5i*™ScCWtT In one of the longer and more detailed papers being prepared toward the close of the Eisenhower administration, the State Department drafted the political action recommendations and suggested collective action through the Organization of American States to effect the ouster of Castro.
Failing in that, State then outlined a unilateral political action program for the United States.
Neither the State nor the CIA paper introduced ideas that had not been thoroughly discussed.
These recommendations were made just as if the Secretary of State, the Special Group, and the President had approved, or would approve, the courses of action that were being outlined.
This being the case, it was suggested that the concurrence of the President-elect should be sought for the proposed program.
The militia's overall combat efficiency is low; many units are still on a part time training basis.
However, there appears to be emerging a nucleus of well organized, well equipped, and well trained units loyal to Castro and strongly Communist-influenced; we believe that within the next 12 months or so, these units will develop into a reasonably effective security force.
Despite his promotion early in the month, it was not until 23 December 1960 that Ambassador Willauer called a meeting with the Agency ' s principals to explain both his role and some of the problems that he anticipated the President wanted him to handle.
Mr Willauer stated that his role, as explained to him by Secretary Herter, was to be that of the chairman and major shareholder of a corporate board with Mr Tracy Barnes, the executive director for operations and minority shareholder.
King asked for clarification on this point, noting that Mr Esterline is the director for operations for CIA with the chain of command going from the Director to Bissell to Col.
Mr Willauer agreed that this was the case, noting that he had used the term operations in the looser sense of overall coordination.
For example, Willauer noted that there was a strong aversion to attempts to set a firm date for D-Day, with the opponents basing their arguments on the fact that the OAS would be sure to get in on the act and, moreover, that military planning should be deferred until it could be determined if the economic sanctions would work to Castro's disadvantage.
On the question of economic sanctions Willauer pointed out to the people in State that since the Soviet Union was so strongly committed to support the Castro government, economic sanctions would have little or no impact on Castro's position.
Willauer also argued that there was going to be revolutionary activity in Cuba, whether the United States had a hand in it or not; and he emphasized that, in any event, the United States would be blamed for it.
Esterline also emphasized that most of the arguments urging delay of PM planning, particularly concern re the OAS, had been debated with State for months, and the time had come for direct action.
The WH/4 representatives also stressed that the period of training for many of the Cubans had been extended and re-extended, and that to hold them beyond 1 March 1961 increased the problem of maintaining high morale among the troops.
Esterline took the position that the Cubans the Agency was training knew that the United States had the force to throw Castro out any time that it so desired, but the months and months of training was indicative, to them at least, that the United States was not really interested in the welfare of the anti-Castro Cubans.
Concerning the possibility of launching air strikes for three days before the invading force landed, Willauer objected, pointing out that this would give the OAS ample time to get involved in the act.
Willauer then raised the question of whether all of the tactical bombing could be done on D-Day.
Hawkins was ""no,"" but Hawkins said that it could be done on D-2, if permission were given for dawn airstrikes to take out Castro's air force and military targets, with additional sorties during the course of D-l and follow-up raids on D-Day prior to the landings.
Moreover, Hawkins pointed out that if an attempt were made to withhold the airstrikes until D-Day, the Castro air force would have an opportunity to attack the ships which would be carrying the invasion troops.
Apparently there was some discussion of limiting use of this base to only two or three days — at least some of the State Department people pushed this idea — but WH/4 pointed out that it was inconceivable in view of the nature of the planned air operations, that the air support operation could be in and out of Nicaragua in this period.
It was pointed out to Willauer that efforts had been made to get permission to use United States bases, or other closer bases to Cuba than Nicaragua, but without success.
Willauer, himself was positive that no United States bases would be made available for the strike against Castro.
One other interesting aspect of this initial meeting with Willauer, concerned the transition between the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations.
It would be very difficult for State people to try to approach Mr Kennedy via Mr Rusk and Mr Bowles.
The meeting had been called by Henry Holland, who was one of the principal fund raisers for the FRD, and in attendance at this meeting were the Vice President for Latin America of Standard Oil of New Jersey, the Chairman of the Cuban-American Sugar Company, the President of the American Sugar Domino Refining Company, the President of the American 6 Foreign Power Company, the Chairman of the Freeport Sulphur Company, and representatives from Texaco, International Telephone and Telegraph, and other .. v ■ American companies with business interests in Cuba.
The tenor of the conversation was that it was time for the United States to get off of dead center and take some direct action against Castro.
Suggestions were made to sabotage the sugar crop — the question being whether to burn the cane |^ A°f^O VA '"" DAT E 3'ffigfc -TOP 3CCIIET fields or ruin the refineries; to interrupt the electric power supply; and to put an embargo on food, drugs, and spare parts for machinery.
Dulles opposed the embargo on food and drugs, but the feeling of the business group was that it was time to get tough and, hopefully, the blame for an embargo would be laid on Castro.
This group of businessmen also indicated that they were going to undertake ±he publication of specific papers on issues and programs related to the post-Castro Cuba, which would be designed to help United States policy planners.
Mr Dulles, of course, emphasized that policy planning was not his responsibility; this was the responsibility of the Department of State.
Michael Haider, Standard of Jersey's Vice President for Latin America, for example, forwarded a memorandum to Col.
King in early January 1961 identifying as members of an extreme leftist group which had formed in Miami to oppose Castro, Manolo Ray, Aureliano Sanchez Arango, Rufo L6pez Fresquet, and Dr.
Mr Haider worried that unless more positive steps were taken to force the conservative Cuban exiles into a cohesive organization, that any post-Castro government would automatically be in the hands of fcHe leftists.
For whatever reason, in late December 1960 Lansdale forwarded to Bissell a number of suggestions which had been presented to him by an Army reservist who had put in two weeks of active duty with OSO at Lansdale' s direction researching Cuban political objectives.
Inasmuch as the Agency had devoted many months to the study of this subject, and all other aspects of the anti-Castro effort, it appears a rather gratuitous insult that Lansdale would have forwarded this kind of paper to Bissell.
The members of the Special Group, however, were unwilling to buy this particular plan of action; but they did support Mr Bissell's proposals for some limited covert action operations aimed at the L & J regime.
The latter made two points: it would be desirable to obtain the cooperation and support of individual Latin American Governments, it would be desirable, if possible, for United States to break relations with Cuba, in concert with other countries some time before January 20th.
He, thought, however, that Frondizi, Prado, and others should take diplomatic initiative to get Latin American countries to take a position that they would like to remove Castro from power, but, lacking the means to do so, would like the United States to take the lead.
The President said it was clear to him that Latin Americans must be brought to see the necessity of action.
He was inclined to think that it might be time"" to recognize the anti-Castro front as the Cuban Government.
He added that he would like to see a definite move taken in this matter before January 20th, and said that the State Department should be thinking of some definite action that could be brought about before that time.
At the Special Group meeting of 29 December 1960, it also was suggested by Mr Merchant that the Group's membership for discussions on Cuba be expanded to include Ambassador Willauer, Assistant Secretary Thomas Kaon, and CTracy Barnes.
Jack Hawkins who were the most knowledgeable about the status of the operation and, indeed, the whole operational plan.
A review of the records of the Bay of Pigs Operation, indicates that one of the most voluminous correspondents was C Tracy Barnes, that a great deal of the written aaterial' is re4iititious ad nauseam, and that Barnes belabored issues which were common knowledge to the principals in WH/4.
Illustrative of this, for example, was a 28 December 1960 memorandum which Barnes wrote to Jake Esterline.
On 3 January 1961, President Eisenhower held a meeting at the White House to discuss the Cuban situation.
In addition to the President, and the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury, the participants included the members of the Special Group, plus General Goodpaster, Mr Bissell, Thomas Mann, and Tracy Barnes.
Among principal questions, of course, were if and when the United States should break off diplomatic relations with Cuba; and after some initial hesitation, before the day was over the United States did break relations officially with the Cuban Government.* to those who were even marginally involved in planning the anti-Castro operation and contributed nothing in particular to Understanding of any of them.
Similarly, Barnes 1 memorandum for the DCI in preparation for a 3 January policy meeting, rehashed the same information that Barnes had presented to Chief, WH/4, just a few days before.
In the course of the discussion about the status of Agency planning for anti-Castro activities, the question was raised about increasing the number of trainees.
This was ruled out pending the suitability of training sites to handle additional numbers.
Training sites in the United States still were denied, in part, again, because of the fear of compromising the United States position in the Organization of American States or in the United Nations.
During this hectic period, the communications officer was instructed to pack up as much gear as possible and destroy that which remained.
In any event, however, the last message from Havana Station — on 7 January 1961 at 1638Z — stated This last msg from HAVA Station.
All files and crypto material destroyed . on evening 6 Jan Swiss amb placed ""Carta de Proteccion"" notices on emb doors minimizing possibility takeover of blda by GOC* 29/ y Even as the 'debate over the breaking of diplomatic relations was taking place within the Eisenhower administration, Col.
Jack Hawkins addressed a memorandum to Jake Esterline, Chief, WH/4 which provided an excellent summary of the policy decisions which needed * Authorization for complete shutdown had been set for 0300Z on 7 January 1961.
In the course of his eight page memorandum, Hawkins reiterated the need for resolution of the problem that had particularly bothered the Special Group — that was whether the Kennedy administration was interested in following through on the plans that had been made.
Assuming that the Kennedy administration did intend to follow through on the program which had been initiated, Hawkins suggested that considering the rapid build up of Castro's military forces the strike operations be conducted not later than 1 March 1961.
The question of air strikes was basic to Hawkins's planning — on this he was quite firm.
It is axiomatic in amphibious operations that control of air and sea in v the objective area is absolutely required.
The Cuban Air Force and naval vessels capable of opposing our landing must be knocked out or neutralized before our amphibious shipping makes its final run in to the beach.
That any move to curtail the number of aircraft to be employed from those available be firmly resisted.
That the operation be abandoned if policy does not provide for use of adequate tactical air support.
In order to insure the success of both the air strike and the air drop operations which would provide the logistical support for the troops holding the lodgment on Cuban soil, Hawkins urged, as he had in the past, authorization for the use of contract American pilots, the use of the airfield at Puerto Cabezas as an advance strike base, and the use of air bases in the United States for the launching of logistical flight operations.
Otherwise, much of the same focus was to be given to the questions regarding air bases, the size of the invasion force, and the number of trainees who could be accommodated in the camps, and other of the problems that had already been discussed time and time again.
Again he pointed out that this is an expensive program running to approximately $28 million.
Mr Dulles discussed the radio effort and paramilitary effort in some detail, indicating the numbers of Cubans being trained and the supply efforts and the bases.
White, Deputy Director for Support; Richard Helms, Chief of Operations for DDP; Emmett Echols, Director of Personnel, and John Warner, Legislative Counsel.
It also should be noted that Mr William A Tidwell, Jr. of Amory 's office was appointed in January 1961 to be Chief of the Office of Operations in Miami.
Believing that my successor might want some day to assist the refugee forces to move into Cuba, I considered that we were limited in what we could say about them.
Of the two candidates beipg considered to appear before the Senate, Thomas Mann, Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs, or DCI Dulles, it was decided to send Mr Dulles to appear before the Senate Committee.
However, President Eisenhower raised certain questions as to the right of a Committee to ask questions on foreign I KAR A CJ^O DA re^Sffigft policy affecting the security of the United States.
He commented that when this is demanded as a right you are ""sunk,"" and wondered how much right have they got, inasmuch as the Constitution says that it is the responsibility of the Chief Executive.
The conclusions were predictable — there were decisions that needed to be made, but these could not be made until the new administration became fully aware of the extent of the anti-Castro programs that had been evolving.
In the absence of these decisions, or at least most of them, there is a grave danger that the December 6 plan may have to be abandoned, as an effective means of overthrowing Castro without more overt support, and that the only practical course o£ action for the physical overthrow of Castro, will be either: open United States war with Cuba, or a seven-month overt training by the United States on United States soil of a Cuban-Latin American invasion force, which will be planned to strike with at least overt United States logistical support.
In our discussions we weighed without coming to a conclusion the advantages of a rapid, effective action by direct war in terms of getting matters over with without a long buildup of world opinion vs. the inevitability of such a build up under any seven month program.
One of the most immediate responses was found in Fidel Castro's virtuoso performance for the Cuban television audience on 23 April 1961 when he explained the invasion to them.
This danger always has been lurking about us and at certain times has gathered considerable support in the minds of leading circles of the United States.
Covert training of exiles for any possible future operations against Castro was going forward.
Units were growing steadily in strength and efficiency against the time when actual tactical planning could be undertaken.
V So, to the incoming administration, we left units of Cuban refugees busily training and preparing hopefully for a return to their native land.
Because they had as yet been unable to find the leader they wanted — a national leader to be both anti-Castro and anti-Batista — it was impossible to make specific TOP SECRhl"" NAR A CJ&O DATeS'i J NAB -J&P-ttCWEr plans for a military invasion.
However, their hatred of Castro, their patriotism, and their readiness to sacrifice for the restoration and freedom in Cuba could not be doubted.
The retiring President stressed that there had been no decision as to how the Cuban forces would be used, if at all.
Eisenhower had made . no commitments that might bind the new President in dealing with the Castro problem.
In fact, the armed refugee group was still so small and relatively unprepared that it could easily have been disbanded if the incoming administration considered its existence unnecessary.
And, more specifically, Eisenhower felt that Kennedy shared his judgment that the new administration need not rush a decision regarding the Cubans.
The definition of a military plan, however, seems to have focused on an actual site for the landing; and in this sense, Gray certainly was telling the truth because no such choice had been made at the time that Eisenhower left office.
There wasn't any military plan formulated by the time the Eisenhower administration Xtfent out.
Of course, the President was fully aware of and conversant with the decision to train and arm individuals.
And the concept was one that was sort of changing in the Eisenhower Administration.
First we were thinking in terms of the old infiltration of small groups.
Then they were thinking of the possibility of landing of people, unit sized groups.
WaS clearl y contemplated that there would be or could be a military action.
But it simply was not true that Kennedy inherited a plan that he couldn't change.
As a matter of fact, the planning that was done m his administration was changed.
But none or that, no planning process in the Eisenhower administration had got to the point of discussing what would be the landina point.
