The Secretary of Defence was Robert McNamara who was the former president of Ford Motor Company.
The Secretary of State was Dean Rusk who had been the president of the Rockefeller Foundation 4.
Military Strategy Flexible Response having various responses based on threats. JFK boosted spending on non-nuclear forces like troops, ships, and artillery. Also created the Green Berets and elite force who focused on guerilla tactics. JFK tripled nuclear capabilities. The problem with Flexible Response is that it limits the opportunities for diplomacy because there’s an endless array of responses.
Crisis Over Cuba A revolution was fought in Cuba between 1957 to 1959 between Fidel Castro and the dictator Fulgencio Batista. Castro had promised democracy but he eventually took over American and British oil refineries and farms in Cuba to give to them to the landless peasants.
He was also elected by a narrow margin so he didn’t have a mandate from the American people.
Stimulating the Economy They United States was experiencing a recession (reduced economic growth for 2 consecutive quarters) and unemployment was at 6%. The Department of Defense got a 20% increase in their budget. Minimum wage went up to $1.25 an hour. Extended unemployment insurance. Provided assistance to cities with high employment.
Addressing Poverty Abroad Kennedy created the Peace Corps volunteers went to developing countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America to be agricultural advisors, health aides, and teachers. By 1968, 35,000 had volunteered and had served in 60 nations. Alliance for Progress offered economic and technical assistance to Latin American countries. 1961 1969 the United States spent $12 billion in Latin America partly to stop the spread of communism.
Race to the Moon In April of 1961, USSR astronaut Yuri A Gagarin became the first man in space. In less than a month the United States had done the same. NASA began constructing a launch facility in Cape Canaveral, Florida and a mission control center in Houston, Texas. Kennedy pledged to put a man on in ten years. In 1969, Neil Armstrong became the first man to step on the moon.
It cost a total of $25. billion dollars in today’s money it would be about $158 billion dollars. Universities expanded their teaching of science.
Domestic Problems The Other American by Michael Harrington argued that poverty was rampant in the United States 50 million people lived on less than $1,000 a year. The Civil Rights Movement was also starting. JFK did very little although he did get Robert Kennedy to investigate racial violence. JFK presented Congress with a Civil Rights Bill and a $10 billion tax cut.
Kennedy’s Assassination On November 22, 1963, Kennedy went to Dallas to mend fences with the Republican party in that city. While driving through downtown Dallas and Kennedy was shot in the head. Johnson became president. Lee Harvey Oswald was changed with the murder he was 24 and was an ex marine who had been dishonorably discharged.
Oswald had lived in the USSR and supported Castro. While being transferred to a new jail Oswald was killed by Jack Ruby a Dallas nightclub owner.
