This publication has been reviewed and approved by competent personnel of the authenticating command in accordance with current directives on essentiality and propriety.
Although the bulk of the references pertain to the post-1960 period, many are to earlier materials.
The user will find that emphasis is given to economic, political, and historical topics, but consultation of the “Contents” and the “Subject Index” will reveal the great variety of other topics also included.
From the beginning, the compiler has hoped that through this volume he would be able to direct the user to numerous items that heretofore have remained “buried,” either because they have not been included in existing bibliographies, or because they appear in unjndexed anthologies or similar collections.
Users may note the arrangement and take full advantage of the SUBJECT and AUTHOR indexes.
They should also note that entries are arranged alphabetically by title within the different subject classifications shown in the CONTENTS, and that index references are to item numbers.
A brief study of the geography, people, politics, history, and foreign relations of Argentina.
Primarily, a study of forces that have influenced Argentine political and economic development in the 20th century.
Volume focusses attention on 19th century growth of the nation and its capital.
History, economy, society, influence of Perdu, political processes, governmental institutions, public policy.
Influence of political fragmentation and rabid nationalism; Frondizi's economic reforms and conflicts with the military.
A history covering the period from the end of the Rosas regime in 1833 to the revolution of June 4, 1943.
Volume I of the “Inter-American Historical Series” of translations of histories of the various Latin American nations.
An elementary review of significant events In Argentine history and of local customs and geography.
The United States Ambassador to Argentina, 1947-1949, presents a ""picture of the Argentine people,"" and shows why people often are In disagreement with their government on many issues.
A report, based on a year’s study in Argentina, of three types of rural communities.
A review of the growth of the Argentine idea of an economic union of southern South American states after 1943.
Development of economic policy in the first six months of the Onganfa administration.
An official survey of various economic topics, prepared for the British Board of Trade.
An outline of the Frondizi-Frigerio strategy of economic development and the author's conclusions as to the reasons for the failure of the economic program based on that strategy.
An historical approach to a study of the formation of the Argentine economy.
An analysis of the scope and influence of various economic controls instituted by the Argentina government after 4 June 1943.
A brief review of certain aspect* of the preliminary ver*k>n of the National Development Flan for 19G5-I9W in Argentina.
Githor :imic' th.it under certain condition, the automobile, producing iudu.tr> will help to ""accelerate Argentine development"" and uni. to justify government encouragemem of the industry through protective tariffs.
A scholarly examination of Ihc rulr that economic issues played in the political snuggles for power in the first three decades of Argentine independence.
A comparison of the economic growth of the two nations in several periods since 1900.
An inquiry into the economic justification for the establishment of the iron and steel industry in Argentina by the H ria governrreit.
A detailed study ot the causes for the drvliar in the pruductusn and »ale of cattle for slaughter in Argentina in ihc early 1930's Included aie mdis -.turns of the rrlause infharmrr of drought, gosernment price restrictions, and increased Argentine rnaivmr lion.
Notes t juso of the rfo»th of the Arcvnttiv ovicKim m*t*t*t rnnhs^ls uwd to coUrrr the flnrt. fleet %i*t, um] Dwt «rpioy ntriri 33.
Concessions, builders, role of British entrepreneurs and capital costs of construction, routes, gauges. mi leapt, earning*, dividends 36.
The story ot the construction ot Argentine railways, largely by British interests, and of the rvk of the railways In unifying the nation.
A revised versioo ol the author's Master’s ihesis writ te n in MIT’s School of induirinl Manspemeat.
Cames ot A rgenti n a 's post-WW II ba l anc e at pnymnts problem*. msunotui bmmmmb 41.
Author has had to d epend lararty on US. di p to wno c archtvaa h a ta ma of ki failure to gain access to Argnumt diptmnatic at c his ec 43.
The author*, pro fessors in Salvador Uaivoethy. ' preseaa an Arnenrine gu tva m e a f ot lha conduct of foreign r a tal m m during tfcn* rraacgl dteadtr in n u ad te n Ar g entine h U tnr y "" 44.
Index. l iterally, a day-hy-day recounting of developments from January 5.
A story of Na/i efforts in Argentina before and during lie early years of WW If.
A memorandum of the U S government < issued in February 194A) outlining evidence at Alls opetalums in Argentina during WW It.
How Prro« made rt imptnxMc fo* the Unwed u> jftiic-f the rrlattom a dnired 59.
Volume ""iMciMioiui »xpr\i» of the dor)""' «» *h*h loft lhaa half oI thr paff* arc dooted to thr Prtuo period sad to prafaciKMu of poa Pttoa 52.
A lengthy resicw at U J ami AreetHille positions im (he qwcuion of HMersemion. tntfnstuer. a uwdy at relations between the two natrons during WW It.
How Perm won thr supfvwt of sanosrs e lement s >f thr poputarum and I hr udluence ho tenure has had on pokiKs um.r hrs overthrow Si.
Heed, and «xiai .. shtsuu otdsinrsf dr •vesest hy fSmwc who me nutated hts power parnaSi tferouch a nauot prufreredr < ympeign 55.
Parallels in the political and personal lives of Juan end F.ncamacidn Rosas and Juan and Eva Perdn.
An assessment of the accomnUshmtnts and failures of Ptfdn’t IKc-Veur flan, announced in October 1944.
Brief reviews of Spanrsh-language books and pamphlets dealing with various aspects of Peton's -IC1 worship, including the ute r' nn with the Chur.n.
Most were published in Argentina after the overthrow of Perdn; a few were published in Uruguay or Chile before Perrin's fan and were reprinted in Argentina.
An analysis o> the influence of Perdn on Ar-wnttna’s traditional claim lo leadership in Latin American cultural, economic, and iMaeil affairs.
A »lu»h ol AfgrBt ar totrf B R HW an M t^vfllrd uadet Nf^ tk The muaN k tv rsciuht of a ytat \ rrodrac* t* Aiffotiai, for roar m»*Hhs of wtuth the author ’9 rorveh * 2 . (tNHrMc4 a* opwuit’ **• Ha ""BhMPfl"" Ihtrt «0 outlawed.
The statu* Arerotmj't rcc mry from the effect* of Ptrootsm. pirn ipallt untier IV administration of PrrsJdrm FroOdui after Mas l»)« 71.
Nature and depth of the political division ttuu divides Ateeniinr political panics, oreaai/ed lah.tr. ine military, tbt Prntnixt. and the rrtuluat effect on Artentine politics.
A description of the ten' ilivtu-a in iefms of ponies, issues, tes cot. and portent for the future.
Notes. thnnrslic and Iomen probtrnn of the admuustration of Ptts*drat tltia 74.
What the wasting at Prrsadent rail and (he dnatioa of uantl Oneanu to the perudency has meant to Argentina.
Aa anemia to dneremm %hy the 'Pefontst Mov em ent"" remaintst the -ttuaarst potaual tense Ms Arpmuaa tea years after Pel .vs •«> hnsed into eade 79.
Social Democracy or Social Authoritarianism'*"" Robert E ScottWestern Political Quarterly.
How the revolution wai accomplished—leaders, pta/ioing. propaganda. events.
Contradictory opinions aa to the K.ompUahmeab of Anuro Froodtd as President of Argentina, 83.
Author traces origin, education and influence of political ideas la Arteotini in the “cotoaiat."" the “creote,"" and the “atluviai"" eras.
An examination of the use by the Artentine governmer, 4 the right to intervene in the internal affairs of provincial g overnments.
A« e x a min at ion of the political thought of some of the ks4n of the R ev o l ution of WtJ as revealed in their speeches aad writings.
Argentine reaction to ike until ary seizure of power in September test 89.
American Universities Field Stuff Reports Service, West Coast South America Series, Voi.
American Universities Field Staff Reports Service, East Coast South America Series.
Woe*, uad Deeds-"" trace the unmeet of the guseramem of General Oagaufa from hs e ee w m p tioe of power on 2* fear so the end of October IMA 91.
Asher N Christensen, pp 86107, in Political, Economic, and Social Prob lem s of Political Science.
A lengthy review of the nature of the relationvhip eii'ting between President Illia. who assumed the Presidency in October 1%), and the military, and a suggestion of the likelihood of the military's intervention against the Illia presidential administration.
The author finds that Ihc sour.--, of many of Argentina's economic and social problems originated not with Per on (who often endorsed popular beliefs), but in the decades that antedated Per on's rise to power.
Economic and political highlights of the Onganfa administration. and a prognosis as to Ongania's future course.
Roof* of uni varum m*nlfcM«Uom of the political and ccoaomk erbo prevail!.** in AnrMioa after 1930.
It not an understandtog. of Argentine customs—economic, political, social, and others.
Diversity""; “The Peopte of Bolivia""; ""hCait-l anj Relationships”; “So-UI Institutions""; and ""Levels and Standards of Living "" 193.
A brief hist,ir> of rffocis 10 delinrai the boundary m Bolivia's eastern jungle 194.
Description of climate, people, land tenure practices, proponed land reforms in (ha two countries and politi c al developments in Peru in April 1*42.
A report on progress in opening and settling :hne etnas at the loot of the Andes » Bolivia.
Programs ftu settling fmgos at Aho Brwi and C v >IHrtwith sa nhsam of cans a mi atenthdagau 6 (’ohm sirs 114.
Report of the Permanent Subcommiitoo on Investigations of the Senate Committee on Government Operations.
I'D; developments, including a brief review of the types and amount of U S aid furnished the MNR government of Presidents Par and Siles.
Orvuni/atton of anti recommendations by the U.N.-sponsored kcenlcvi' tc Mission to Bolivia.
Prourams. leaders, and dollar amounts of assistance involved in international assistance efforts in Bolivia after 1950. lid.
Evidence from congressional hearings of how and why the United Stales supplied financial assistance to Bolivia, 121.
An inquire into the use by Bolivia of United States aid to meet national obligations to holders of Bolivian bonds or other evidences of indebtedness.
Essentially, the history of the operation of the Standard Oil Company in Bolivia from the early 1920's until ihe seizure of Standard's holdings in 1937.
A brief report on then-current economic conditions, prepared for the British Board of Trade. , , 124.
T-& An analysis of the economic effect of Bolivia's soda] frtrohs* non that began in 19J2.
An advanced text of an ECLA study requested by the Bolivian government 127.
A tracing of the steps by which social mobility was accelerated In Bolivia, and a demonstration of how the low level of economic development has acted as a brake on the movement for social mobility.
Effectiveness of methods used by Bolivia to protect its tin industry and to solve Its balance of payments problems.
Forces, Influences, and leaders in the MNR government of Bolivia, and various interpretations of the role of United States aid in supporting that government.
History, the Revolution, role of the MNR, economy, political processes, governmental institutions, national policy.
An evaluation of Bolivian accomplishments under the MNR tfter 1952, based on the author's tour of several regions.
Much of the information Ik derived from knowledge gained by the author on six trips to Bolivia between 1947 and 1937.
A Bolivian journalist outlines the steps by which the MNR-lcd revolution deteriorated under the leadership of President Paz to end as a totalitarian dictatorship honeycombed with fraud and corruption.
A description of the recent political hi-tory of Bolivia precedes a discussion of the work of a United Nations technical assistance team in Bolivia, beginning in 1932.
A study in frustration and vaccination, the dictatorial rule of General Busch as president from 1937 to 1939.
An analysis of the ideology of the MNR (Movlmirnto Sadonallsta Rtvoluclonario ) and a discussion of the events influencing the formulation of that ideology prior to the party's seizing power in the revolution of 1952.
The role of President Victor Paz Estenssoro in the MNR and the effect on the MNR of his decision to seek a third presidential term.
The influence of other MNR leaders and of United States aid are also discussed.
Natural resources, people, social problems, MNR reforms, role of the president.
Background to and events of May 19(3 when the Bolivian military acted to presetve its bold on the go ve rnm ent, end a brief review of pioblems confronting the Be la unde government In Peru.
Conversations of the author with President Paz Estenssoro, Vice President Lcchfn, and others.
Constructive Change in Latin America (Pittsburgh, Univ. of Pittsburgh Press, 1968), 309.18/C758.
An examination of significant aspects of the gaining of power by the MNR and of its failure to accomplish its program.
Events of the MNR Revolution of 1952 and causes and results of the “Revolution of Restoration” of 1964 in which Vice President Rent Barrientos replaced President Victor Paz Estenssoro.
The five goals of the MNR in 1952 and the relative success or failure of the MNR in attaining them.
A review of changes within the MNR organization and an indication of how they affect the governing of Bolivia.
An examination of the actions of the constitutional convention that incorporated new socio-economic rights into the Constitution of 1938.
A Soviet view of the problems of the land-locked South American nation.
A Brazilian writer compare* the growth of Brazil with that of the Untied State* from settlement to mid-twentieth century.
Reasons for construction of, unforeseen construction problems, influence on highway construction, future prospects for.
A collection of 28 chapters on various aspects of Brazilian history, society, culture, education, economics, diplomacy, and politics.
Society, economy, history, role of Vargas, political processes, governmental institutions.
Lesson includes an overall view of Brazilian developments as an introduction to an inquiry into (he role of coffee in the economy, the peculiarities of Brazilian politics, and a critique of U.S.-Brazilian relations.
People met , scene* glimpsed, and places visited by famous writer on trips to Brazil after 1948.
A collection of 19 essays on various aspects of Brazilian history and culture.
Freitas Marcondes, ""Social Legislation in Brazil”; Ear] W Thomas, “Brazilian Liter*' ire”; and Gerrit de Jong, Jr., “Brazilian Music and Art,” 171.
Volume’s five parts are devoted to the nation’s history, the constitution of the Estado Novo, the Vargas regime, public opinion and social life under Vargas, and an estimate of Vargas’ contributions to 1942.
Basically, a volume devoted to presenting ""some of the hard political facts that went into the planning, maneuvering and execution of the successful 1930 revolt,” but with some attention given to the pre-1930 historical background and to post-1930 developments.
The author's goal is to furnish an understanding and an explanation of his native land.
A history of the Braganza Empire designed for the general reader, ft is expanded from a series of eight lectures delivered in 1955 under the auspices of (he Lowell Institute.
Observations culled from books by 21 non-CatholIc British and US. visitors on topics of reiliion, social customs, and political and economic conditions.
The story of the growth of a tiny village, founded in 1554 by the Jesuits, to the giant Industrial city of the 1950’s.
Population growth, urban explosion, problems of slums, conflictsi aspiration and standard of living, chronic problem of shortages of things needed in an Industrialized society.
A scholarly study of settlement, people, agriculture, mining, missionary activity, and foreign interventions in Brazil in the period covered.
An outstanding history translated into English as the third volume of the translation program undertaker, in the InterAmerican Historical Series.
A translation of the 4th edition of Bello’s Htstdria da RtpubUca with the addition of Chapter 25 by Poppino.
The first four chapters cover the story of Brazil to the end of the Empire, the other 21 treat the Republic.
Economic conditions and social practices prevailing at the height of the Amazonian rubber boom.
A famous Brazilian author explains how Brazilians came to think and act as they do.
Reports by various authorities on Brazil’s history, politics, foreign policy, industrialization, economics, population, religion, language, and capital.
This revised version of a 1945 study, reviews Brazil's history, racial composition, society, civilization, foreign policy, influence of Slavery and monarchy, literature, and architecture.
Economic, educational, military, political, and Communist problems, and the status of U.S.-BrazlIlan relations are sketchily described.
The story of the Canudos “rebellion” in the interior of northern Brazil in 1896-1897.
An opinion, by one of Brazil's foremost students, of the roles played by slavery and monarchy in shaping modem Brazil.
A review of recent interpretations which emphasize “diversity” and “unity,” and the author's conclusion that institutions, history, and psychology were determined by accidents.
A report on the author's observations of economic conditions and political affairs in Brazil’s newest state.
A collection of black-and-white photographs, with descriptive text, of the world-famous carvings of the crippled Brazilian sculptor, Antdnio Francisco Lisboa, whose works stiU adorn churches in Congonhas do Campo and in Ouro Preto in the State of Minas Cierais.
Lending agencies, types of credit, interest rates, national agrarian financing.
Primarily a review of recent trends In agricultural production in southern Brazil.
Proposals for Increasing the production and movement of the two commodities to big-city markets.
A study of the life and agricultural practices of the lowest echelon ol Brazilian farmars, the subsistence producers.
A Brazilian examination of underproductivity, wasteful use of land, wide areas of uncultivated land, low level of farm existence, and dissipation of earnings through rents.
Analysis is accompanied by a series of indexes and other data on production.
An appraisal of Brazil's agrarian problems and prospects for their solution.
An indication of the role of land policy, commodity institutes, price policy, credit policy, and international trade in the development of Brazilian agriculture.
A survey ot the sugar industry—problems, proposals for Improvement. and prospects.
Tlie author’s report on personal observation of the proceeds of land registration as conducted by I.B R A (Inslituto Brasileira de Reforma Agriria) in rural Brazil as a basis for inaugurating a scries of land reforms.
A comparison of the results of surveys of the attitudes toward work of Brazilians and of residents of the United States.
An analysis designed to determine the advantages and disadvantages of l AFTA, created by the treaty signed in Montevideo in February 19*0.
Volume is the product of a 1947-1948 survey of the Brazilian economy by the author as head of a team commissioned by the Twentieth Century Fund, The team surveyed and reported on (he economy as a whole, income and employment, agricultural production, food supply problems, manufacturing, transportation. social conditions, public finance, banking and Investment, and international trade and exchange.
A review ot present plans for Improving roads, ports, railways, and telecommunications systems in the Immediate future (19681970), and over an extended period.
Pluses and minuses In Brazil’s economy, significant events in Brazil’s political history, and international relations of Brazil with the United States and with Communist nations.
A brief history of the planning, financing, construction, and operation of Brazil's great industrial complex.
A Brazilian economist suggests actions to be taken to guide Brazilian economic and political developments.
An appraisal of the roles of the Brazilian National Development Bank and the recently created Inter-American Development Bank in the development of Brazilian public and private enterprises.
The economic problems of the Brazilian Northeast are studied in terms of the history of the area, the influences that have shaped the region, the national and international attempts to solve the area's economic problems, and the prospects for the future.
A survey of certain economic phenomena and economic indicators of conditions in the under-developed area of Northeast Brazil.
An introductory text to the economic history of Brazil from the colonial period to the 1960's.
An attempt to present ""the salient features of economic policy evolution in Brazil"" in the period 1948-1962.
A very brief survey of Amazonian forest resources and a plea for a program to prevent their unplanned exploitation.
The Economic Relations of Portuguese and Indians in the Settlement of Brazil.
A study of the problems arising from the substitution of homemanufactured goods for imported goods.
Although written a decade and a half ago, many of the recommendations for improving Brazilian railway operations are still valid, for the inadequacies indicated still cxiai.
An attempt to estimate national income m different periods, •he source and role of savings, and the nature and amount of pri.nic Investment.
Volume’s attention is focused on Brazilian industrialization in the period 1947-1961.
A description of the types and functions of the various or ganizations involved.
Author establishes a model in which “inflation Is inevitable and beneficial up to a certain limit,” and then examines the Brazilian case in order to determine the appropriateness of the model.
A review of the role of economic cycles in Brazilian history that have been the product of dependence on a single product such as brazilwood, sugar, cacao, gold, tobacco, cotton, rubber, and coffee.
A volume designed to acquaint the international execuUve with opportunities for doing business in Brazil and to alert him to the problems he will face.
An analysis of the sources or revenue of municipalities, including those received from local imports and taxes and those received from or shared with state and national authorities.
Causes of high interest rates, roles of financial agencies in creation of inierest rate structure, and influence of the demand for credit.
Economic facts of life in the Brazilian Northeast and questions a\ to the future development of the region.
Theoretical explanaiions for the existence of differential regional growth rales precede an examination of regional imbalance in Brazil, particulart> between the impoverished Northeast and Ihe industrialized Center-South.
A contrast of traditional and modern systems of labor organization in rural Minas Gerais.
An analysis of the factors involved in the Brazilian decision not to raise transportation rates, but to subsidize the railways with government funds.
Volume is based on information gained In interviews with representatives of 36 U.S manufacturing companies and 7 United States non-manufacturing companies.
Interviews were designed to determine ""the impact of various Brazilian governmental policies"" on the investment decisions and business operations of these companies.
A description of the Amazon and its tributaries and histones of the nations in its drainage area.
Regional surveys of the various areas of Brazil by a leading student and teacher of Latin American geography.
The author, a poet and ten years a resident of Brazil, writes the tent to accompany a fine collection of photos depicting life in the varied regions of this huge country.
A typical alioi.nl Ceonraphic photo story of a 10,000-mile tour of Brazil's principal cities and of the interior.
Volume is a history designed lor the ""general .easier "" 259. frontier by An.
A brief pictorial story of the building of the earth-surfaced road from BeKm to Brasilia.
An examination of climate, soils, vegetation, and people of the Brazilian Amazon.
Area studied Includes states of Guanabara, SJo Paulo, ParanA, Santa Catarina, and Rio Grande do Sul.
A statement of and defense of Brazilian foreign policy prepared by the President shortly before he dramatically resigned the Presidency in August 1961 after seven months in office.
Mr Berle’s report of his conference with President Quadros of Brazil is contrasted with the widely variant stories of that meeting carried by international wire services and United States and Brazilian newspapers.
Grants, loans, and other cor tributions by foundations, religious groups, and other non-governmental organizations.
A review of Brazil’s foreign policy under ihe Empire and under republican government to the mid-l950’s, and a discussion of the agencies that formulate and execute foreign policy.
A survey covering ihc guiding principles of newly independent Brazil, Bra/ilian relations with European and Latin American nations and with the United States.
The nature of the 1958 drought in Northeast Brazil and the position of Ihc United States government toward the situation when the Bra/ilian government refused to ask for United States agricultural food available under United States Public Law 480.
A review of Brazil’s foreign policy from the time of the Baron de Rio Branco until the present.
Biographical studies of the life and works of Jos6 Lins do Rego, Jorge Amado, Cracilano Ramos, and Rachel de Queiroz.
The Development of Philosophy in Brazil and the Evolution of National History.
Author describes the “changes which foreign philosophical currents” underwent in Brazil and “the curious meanings they have acquired in the evolution"" of Brazilian history.
Die anthology contains works of some 20 writers and poets who address themselves to various Brazilian themes.
Background to the development of modernism in Brazilian culture, the influence of ""The Modern Art Week Exhibition"" of February 1922, and examinations of the contributions of several of Brazil's most significant modernists.
An Attempt to Give a Sociological Interpretation to the Brazilian Coup d'Etut of April I, 1964, Sergio Maturana.
A brief attempt to interpret events from facts presented in the Brazilian and United States press.
Goals and accomplishments of the Cestelo Branco administration In its first three years In office told against the background of the revolution of 1964.
Provisions of decree legislation controlling elections, role of the military in politics, new political parties.
Key individuals In Brazilian politics and in naUon’s commercial and industrial growth, and national economic policies.
A sympathetic treatment of the Brazilian Army and its efforts to prevent Brazil from falling prey to a dictatorship of either the right or the left.
A brief review of administrative reforms instituted in the Brazilian government by the Vargas regime after 1930, and especially in the 193S-I943 period.
A left-wing Mexican journalist’s interpretation of Brazilian developments.
A brief description of political processes and of the political parties in existence in the late 1930’s.
An attempt >o measure the influence of ’he struggle between public and private authority on contemporary local institutions in Brazil.
Historical background of Brazilian developments to the overthrow of Goulart in March 1964 and a review of the accomplishments of the Castelo Branco admlnjttration Countries 14 295.
A re-examination of longand widely-held notions that Brasil was the most peaceful and peace-toeing of Latin American nations.
The search for political stability since the coup of March IMS, the influence of populist leaders since Vargas, policies of the Castelo Branco administration, and the new economic reforms instituted.
A report on Brazilian economic and political conditions on the eve of the assumption of the presidency by the quixotic Janio Qusdrot. who was to resign for no clearly defined season within the first year.
Origin, development, and influence of federalism in Brazil from colonial times to the |930's.
An examination of the p ro b lems arising in the “litres tile ns s tonal renovation"" underway in the mid-1950's in Brazil's ccunompolitics, and social structure.
Aftermath »f the conflki between the go ve r nm en t and the UNE iVnUo Sat tonal dot f i r ti d n m er; and an examination of the thought and the operations of left-wing Cubobcs fas Brazil.
Political crises since 1961. inflationary problems, rote in LAFTA. and foreign policy arc each discussed.
Background to and consequences of the 10 N o vembe r 1937 actions by which Oetullo Vargas Imposed a new constitution on Brazil.
A review of the actioas taken by the dvBian leader of the State of Sio Paulo in the early 1I90‘« ""to ease the armed forces out of direct political cootrol"" of the BraiilUa gov ern m en 319.
It consists m major pan of traswlations of writings by seat of Brad's premtoeat poUtkai iMahsn.
A detailed review of the events leading up In and the ov tt t hre w of Presides* Goatees, and the “New Reform*"" initiated iheenafter by the an » »ra ment of Marshal Casmto Branco.
Knit of the nubiae* a Braokaa poUtscv nymtKSs «Jh Quadras and Contort, reason*' toOuenan in pot* MTV role of potaKal parens, and goisucal power of KuMuchnk.
Doctrine, hydro. smtor of h th tve r v and tnftorsvce of Beaeshaa Spirants. toOnnen of fcardaosen—a dnetrsar geeanut gated ongmaBy by the Frearhmsa.
AccompUshmati of Brazil'i Government Development Agency (or the Northeast which m created in 1*39.
Aa analysis at the results at <ht election at ) October 1950 which returned GetuBo Verge, to the Presidency.
IPES (Imthuto de Pesgubaa e Ewudiot Sociab—Imthute at Social Raiearch asd Studies) took the had ia organizing the opposition that o ee t t hr ew the Goulart Adadabiiatloa at the tad at March I *44. soam 311.
Brant, in the period, tune-September l*4S, by a party at social anthro potogbts headed by the author.
A socioiopkaJ study of Brant incorporated in a cortege textbook lor social science study.
A comprehewsm socrotogacel and demographic study o( Branliaa people sad the tmtMutiows they (uactsoa under 324.
A Bredhaa L X*I at hn fellow couatryasra and describes their Inttr habits. gsutl<. aad custom"" ia aa rflor“to eaakc dear the psychology si chmau of the coueury ~ 325.
The author, ea tatcraaUoaaBy lisus nutreuuest aad a pbnseiaa. waneruty teacher, and pohuctaa. and re ssdwa u nih u Pacts Stare HM. wears of hts saint SCSI too o4 Brazil la has uuubcim he says that has lively win not Ft a “neutral iturgmaw” but “a <acto4ogscal cab by oat who ts commuted to a prntsaa aad pragmstse potza of tvs "" 327.
A stvds of the SoethraucMi rri»w of taw somcege of com. asm ) desTfcgu u tm . sad of prospects ho aud btcdies toes.
A tracing of the robs of the family, marriage, aad divorce ia BradUaa history.
A so ci ologi ca l study of the rob gad iafkacncc of the F ortu gueae colonizer, the Indian. aad the Negro fat the shaping ef Brazilian society.
Basuhs of field teee a rc h oa roc* r elatio ns la thee* meal com t u nn ies ia the Size* of Bahia tad ia a meal uttumrm ia dm A mama Valley lacladid are Harry W Has chiasm. -Ban Halations ia a Rural C omnunjes of the Babin Bacdacauo""; Marria Harris.
A brief Ml at several i ndi cators ef Branban attitudes toward race 338.
A nrsese Of lhr process by which racial aud cuhural fuaiea oc <wrtJ ts Irml 339.
A devotee** <d thr people aad ol bwag condemn* ia the »Wtf Ilfs bit 348.
I Ultimo Olid nonunion l ife in Northeastern Itrazil. flam W Hutchinson.
Results of a field study conducted by the author in 1950-1951 in Vila Keedneavo In the Brazilian Slate of Bahia.
Economic and political problems of Latin American nations and colonial possessions in the area.
A wcll-wrillcn early study of the region by a leading United States authority, 359.
Students ofalin American affairs will be interested in the chapters on Cuba.
Ihe Dominican Rci blic amt (he final six chapters devoted lo general topics of economics, population, education, agriculture, nationalism, and foreign Influences.
A popular treatment. p( interest to the general reader, o( pirate operations against the Spanish in the Caribbean area.
The student of I alio American history will find much of interest in this most readable story of the settlement and rule of Islands and mainland areas that surround the Caribbean Sea.
A general survey of happenings in the area from 1492 to WW II of loitrcsi to the genrral reader.
An outline and an interpretation of the historical geography of Tima Firme as revealed in the first .10 years of Spam h exploration and conquest.
A reprint of a 1911 publication containing much that is of inlcrest to the student of Latin American history for it' story of the successful encroachment of an area the Spanish claimed by discovery.
Volume h ""to >how forth war of the thief jxpetii of Spemli Kolnoiat rwlt in Amerada ami lo fixpby the nature of Ion* conflict with her principal in the Umh bordertn* on the Caribbean Sea and the toufhern haH of the Gulf of Mcskov U ft.
A study of the development of United States foreign policy in the decades in which the Untied States extended its political power from the mainland into the Caribbean islands and Central America.
Confrontation of USA-USSR in Cuba in 1962. historical fear of USA of toman dominance of Caribbean, and inception and acceptance of hemisphere security concept.
Nicaragua, and Central America A lout-parr Appendix coatains II documents related to the subject.
Tstm-ui papers on the srsgrvl eotmtitts and lataows asgwets of t rati at Amrteca. gve-ented by me mb ers of the tundtj of the I'asrruii of Ibid) at the Iirmfc ( anbbean Conletmcc hrW at the Unseemly * Dxxte. bet IMP 377.
Index A rr»sr» vS thr troeftfiri. ptx^W. htuor> pofaiRa.' tHrUduiMUM. ntXMRK infkirhrtu. utd luk l ommimb to thr 4Jti h thr V i Aotoudef lo fl Sah*A*( i t**?-H*| 344.
A study of recent attempts to promote a reunification of the five nations of Central America.
The first four chapters. which discuss the eeo^raphy. histor>. people, and government oi the region under in.
Spanish, are followed b> studies of tl:* five individual nations, and a wind-up chapter on political developments in the period just prior to publication of the book.
A scholarly presentation in which the author's design is *’to provide the first survey in English of all of the known attempts to combine the Centra) American states, from the lime of independence until the present.
Their Political and Economic Development and Their Relations with the United States.
This volume, the result of two years’ residence in the different countries, is designed to furnish a ""better and more sympathetic understanding of the ideals and conditions of life"" in the Central American area.
An analysis of recent developments in and the search for stability by countries in the Central American area.
Henry Wells, ""the Dominican Search for Stability*'; Mario Rodrigue/, ""Guatemala in Perspective*’"" Dwight S Brothers.
A brief introductory volume of interest to a prospective fir:,t visitor to the five Central Amcrication nations.
Racial composition of the five nations; development under Spain and in the struggle for independence, and under a confederation 388.
Index. \ tracing of the ""lifeline of a culture"" us understood hy .mhropoiogistv Described are the geography, biology, languages, vulture, and growth of Middle America COMMON MARKIT 390.
Study is designed to answer question of the future of economic integration of groups of small nations.
A brief siuvcy of the accomplishments of the Central American Common Market.
Details of the agreements ol the Central American Economic Integration Program, which is better known as the Central American Common Market, and achievements to date of writing.
Background history of the Central American Common Market preliminary successes, future economic and political problems. and social obstacles to future progress.
A survey of the factors involved—ideals, cultural influences, costs, foreign influences.
An aitcmpt io identify and describe, through the answers to five general questions, the factors that influenced Costa Rican and Panamanian participation in Central American Economic Integration.
Program for development of a common market and economic integration based on the Prcbisclt-ECLA thesis.
Considerable information on the CACM is found in (his comparative analysis of economic integration efforts in the two areas.
An attempt to “isolate and analyse briefly some significant economic factors likHy to have a determining impact on the course of regionalism ’ in Ventral America.
An ECLA analysis examining the subject by country and by type of export commodity.
A review of agricultural production in the Pacific littoral (hat extends south from the Mexican border to Ihc Gulf of Nicoya in Costa Rica.
A demographic study showing the relationship of the population growth rate :o economic development.
An inquiry into the differences in “behavior and values of residents of private dwellings” as opposed to residents of public housing in the capita] cities of Costa Rica and El Salvador.
A review of the factors responsible for the existence of ""strong” executives in Centra] America and of the influence of such executives ie the several countries.
Author probes the economic and social development policies advocated by the Liberacidn National party in Costa Rica, by the PRUP movement of El Salvador, and by. the administration of President Castillo Armas in Guatemala.
U S contributions to the building of this highway through Central America after 1930.
A review of the two-sided policy of the United States— opening of interoceanic communication across the Isthmus and prevention of a European power gaining control over a Central American republic.
CoUNlKIES 20 rhe Harding administration's position on 'hr question of confederation, 1921 -I92.1.
History of C hilean occupation of Arica and description of recent development projects in the region.
A brief ttencral survey that devotes attention to the land, people, history, politics, economic and social conditions, and foreign relations of Chile.
The land, people, history, and current political and economic problems are described.
A lengthy, illustrated story of the geography, people, industry, and agriculture of Chile.
Society, economy, history, political processes, governmental institutions, socio-economic problems, public policy.
A brief survey of Ctcle’s geography, people, history, politics, economy, society, and of its place in the modern world.
The fourth volume in the “Inter-American Historical Series” translations of histories of different I.atin American nations.
A general survey of conditions in I.atin America precedes specific study of C hilean problems, including the role of C'hiistian Democracy, and U.S •Chilean relations.
In the revision he limits his discussion to the causes of, events of, and the subsequent effects of the student-initiated strikes of April 1957.
American Universities Field Staff Reports Service, West Coast South America Series Vol.
An analysis of Chilean economic, social, and political development, and speculation as to Chile’s future.
Evidence from on-the-spot checking of colonization efforts is presented in an effort to show the nature of the connection, if any, between agrarian reform and agricultural development.
Land tenure pattern and cultivation and pasturing practices in the northern desert highlands and in the far southern sector of the Araucanian Indians.
Background history of patterns of land ownership and of land reform efforts, and future prospects for land reform programs.
Problems of LAFTA and their influence on Chilean enthusiasm for the creation of an Andean regional market group.
A theoretical analysis of development theory and strategy as applied to the Chilean economy which has had a 1 percent per capita per annum growth rate for 50 years.
One In a series of official British publications prepared for the Board of Trade.
A review of production, exports and imports, and governmental planning.
A brief recapitulation of the Frei administration's economic accomplishments in 1966.
A cursory survey of Chile's economy on the eve of the 1964 election and a guestlmate of what the future held for United States corporations doing business in Chile.
Faclors responsible for or contributing to the Chilean inflationary spiral of the early 1950’s.
How Chile employed its foreign exchange policy to influence the rate of its economic growth through the process of determining the quantities of resources produced and fixing the rate of capital formation.
Background history of Chilean inflation and a detailed survey of the work of the Klein and Saks mission, a Washington firm of economic consultants employed by ihe Chilean government from 1955 to 30 June 1958 to advise on actions to be taken to control inflation.
Hearings of the House Subcommittee on International Organizations and Movements of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.th Cong.. 1st sess.
Chile and the United States.80-1962 The Emergence of Chile's Social Crisis and the Challenge to United States Diplomacy.
Ambassador under three Presidents of the United States and four Chilean presidents.
A well-documented exploration of four causes of U.S.-Latin American divergence as they apply specifically to U.S.-Chilean relations. poi tries 465.
Author describes the history and Influence of the Chilean socialist movement.
An analysis of the election returns of 1964 and what they mean in terms of the future of existing political parties and the governing of Chile.
A study of the role of the classes in Chilean politics and economics. and. especially, of the tendency of the middle class to join the upper class on political issues.
An analysis of the characteristics, the dynamics, and the timela te of reform management as revealed by PDC rule in Chile since 1964.
Historical, geographical, and mincralogical features and as pects of Chile are discussed as a preface to descriptions of the big city slums (catlamptu> and political party orginu-.ion, strength, and campaign activities since WW It.
An intertMin# account of Chilean political development* on the eve of the (treat Deprevvion.
Author** intent i* to provide a *unrt> of the ""rceent political evolution of Chile. with an interpretative convideratton of thove *ocial and *con*»mu factor* which have influenced thu evolution/* 474.
Geography, history, people, recent political developments, role of President Frel, relations with the United States and other countries and International organizations.
A brief review of 20th Century Chilean political history precedes speculation about the relative chances of presidential candidates in the upcoming elections.
Not unexpectedly, the United States is pictured as the villain and Chilean Communists and the FRAP coalition they helped to shape are characterized as the “patriotic and progressive” forces.
Problems confronting President Frei in his efforts to implement the Christian Democratic program on which he won election in 1964.
An assessment of President Eduardo Frei Montatva's accomplishments, politically and economically.
Socialist and FRAP leader criticizes United States goals for Chile arid Latin America and reveals his own Ideas for solving Latin American problems.
This insight into Chilean life is the product of a two-year assignment of the author In Latin America as a correspondent for Look.
A description of the changing political environment, an identification of the issues, and an interpretation of the voting patterns.
Although written a half century ago, this article, one of the early English-language studies on the subject, furnishes a good background for an understanding of more recent developments in Chilean politics.
An indication of how Peronism was reflected in the political doctrine of Carlos Ibdfiez del Campo. elected to the Presidency of Chile in 1932.
A very brief report on the political influence of the leaders of Chile’s estimated 3,000 citizens of Arab origin.
A study of the role of Marmaduke Grove Vallejo in the overthrow of the Moritern government and the establishment of the so-called Socialist Republic of Chile in June 1932.
Analysis of the 1964 presidential election and of what the new leadership may mean to U.S.-Cbilean relations.
Society, economy, history, civil and gue/illa warfare, political processes, governmental institutions, public policy.
Volume, based in considerable part on a series of newsletters written by the author from Bogota to the Institute of Current World Affairs in 1961-1962. covers the topics of geography, people, history, politics, agriculture, coffee production, the Peace Corps, industry, 'ibor, finance, the city of Call, the Roman Catholic Church, and Colombia's future.
Volume two in the “Inter-American Historical Series"" of translations of histories of Latin American nations.
Historical and geographic influences, political realities, onomic problems, social unrest, and agrarian reform problems are briefly reviewed.
A case study of agrarian reform focused on the Agrarian Reform Law of 1961—its antecedents, its provisions, Its implementation.
Colombian experience in land reform since 1961, with references to some previous efforts.
An examination of the accomplishments of the Social Agrarian Reform Law of December 1961 which created INCORA (Instituto Colombiano de la Reforma Agraria)—its financing, its settlement and resettlement achievements, its opponents and their influence.
A study of landholding patterns, agricultural practices, and agrarian reform programs, and of their relationship to settlement patterns, community development, and social class structure.
The author attempts to answer two questions he poses as to the existence of a land problem in Colombia and as to what United States policy should he in respect to a land problem in Colombia.
An examination of statistics on landholding compiled by INCORA , and a critical examination of the validity of the statistics.
Results of subdividing a commercial coffee plantation among 98 settlers.
A study of the relationship of education to the solution of Colombia's agricultural problems and an indication lhat Ihere is a need for more people from rural backgrounds to participate in agricultural education programs.
Author suggests a typology for the classification of minlfundlg In Latin America and selects one of these types, the dependent, and uses Colombian examples to describe the socioeconomic characteristics of several types of dependent mlnlfundla.
Nature and extent of title problems, approach lo the problems by INCORA , and a case study of title problems in the Eastern Plains area.
A paper recounting experience In Contadero, Colombia, to show the role of research programs in influencing change.
A revelation of the manner in which Colombia has levied four different types of taxes on coffee during the last decade and an indication of the reasons why the different taxes were levied and what they accomplished.
An economist’s experiences and impressions, the result of residence in Colombia from August 1958 to August 1960.
Nature of and benefits derived from the Colombian valorization tax, better known in English-language countries as a betterment tax.
Background history io me creation of and subsequent operation of the merchant marine company jointly owned by Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador.
An economic study of such subjects as taxation and expenditures and of fiscal policy and goals.
A brief report on the evidence obtained in interviews with 61 indiiidtial executives heading the personnel hierarchies in their individual firms.
Pros and cons of Colombia’s decision to build a national steel plant with capital borrowed from European bankers after the IBRD refused to approve an initial loan for the project.
Results of interviews with heads of 11 institutions as to courses, teachers, students, and salaries.
Factors influencing la vioiencia —background to, Liberal-Conservative conflict, Rojas diclatorship, Communist activities, student involvement—and prospects for the future.
An inquiry into the causes of. reactions to. and implications of the disorders that characterize.
Colombian life after 1948 and collectively known as ""la vioiencia "" 535.
Events in the civil war that began in i?""!, and the guerilla war that followed to the year 1961, that cost the lives of 200,uOO to 300,000 Colombians.
A review of Colombian history after 19.10 introduces a study of the various phases through which the pos -1946 civil war and insurtection passed in Colombia.
Goals and activities of CEAS (Centro de Estudio y Accidn Sociales), a nonpolitical pressure group of big businessmen in Colombia.
An examination of the influence of dictatorship and civil and guerrilla warfare on political institutions and processes.
Goals and achievements of CEAS (Centro de Estudio y Accidn Sociales), and left-wing opposition to it.
A scholarly study of political institutions and administration, of the tragedy of la vioiencia, and of the role of the elite in the post-WW It era In Colombia.
Author served from 1957 to 1960 on the United States Embassy staff in Bogota and in 1961 continued his research on a summer’s visit to Colombia.
Military Rule and the Social Revolution in Colombia, 1930-1956, Vernon L Fluharty.
History, organization, programs, and accomplishments of Liberal and Conservative parties in Colombia and of AD, COPEI, and UUI) in Venezuela.
An analysis of the campaigns and votes in the congressional elections of 20 March 1966 and the presidential election of 1 May 1966.
An analysis of the election returns for the above-mentioned .'ears and what the returns mean for Colombia’s political future.
Reasons lor weakness of the agreement of 1957 for the sharing of power between the Liberals and Conservatives lolu against the background of Colombian political history, and With a concluding summary of United States support for the Colombian economy.
Descriptions of Colombia's ‘envTonmcnt of political instability.” of the administrative organization which reduces the government s effectiveness, of administrative and economic studies of Colombia's governmental affairs, and of the prospects for administrative reform.
Orography, people, history, politie.il processes, governmental institutions, public policy.
Influence of volcanic eruption on national economy, status of U S -Costa Kican relations, role hi Central American Common Market, economic problems, and political parties and leaders.
A report of an investigation committee 11950-511 on the tlcpiec of Costa Rican economic development anti on types of assistance that might be useful in promoting improvements in the economic picture.
History of development of the Industry from IK7K to 1951, with discussions of cultivation practices of United Fruit Company.
Description of a Costa Rican plan designed to make the worker an owner of capital.
A statistical study of leadership characteristics in the Costa Rican village of I’ejivalle.
An analysis of demographic, geographic, and regional characteristics of the electorate which since IV44 has. without exception, refused to name the incumbent party's candidate to the presidency.
A comparison and a contrast of the political histories of neighboring Central American nations. i 559.
A use of the reputational method of determining the constituents of a local power structure and a further check on the degree of communications linking the elements in the power structuie.
A review of political parties and of Ihe recent political history of Costa Rica.
Historical patterns of scttlemrm, density of population, and concentration of races.
Knopf, mb. pp, 972,91 S65SK A collection of 25 writing on winoiis aspect* of Cuban life.
A mixture of hi*tor> and tin* aull».*r\ experience^ in postAVW II Cuba.
The Mory of the last years of Batista's rule and of Ihe revolutionary activities of Fidel Castro from December I 1956 to January I, Ivjv, by a longtime resident and Srv York Times correspondent.
The first authoritative English-language history of Cuba, by an eminent Latin Americanist who devoted three years to the research and writing of the volume.
An attempt to discover why the attempt by Cuban exile* to invt*ide Cuba In April 1962 ended In failure.
Notes An indictment of the CIA for its role in the episode and an attempt to diagnose the plans for the operation.
Manuel Artlme, Jose Ptrer San Romin, Erneldo Oliva, and Enrique Rulz-Willlams. i 581.
A study of newspaper reporting of the Bay of Pigs episode written In 1961-1962 and not revised since 1962.
A reporter attempts to determine why the Bay of Pigs invasion plans were altered and who suggested the alteration.
A very brirf examination of Castro’s attempts to spread his Ideas and his Influence in Latin America.
An examination of Castro’s policy of encouraging revolutions in Lalin America and how it may be affected by the death of Guevara and the collapse of his movement in Bolivia in 1967.
Evidence of the attempts by Castro to spread his cult in the different Latin American nations.
An analysis of the problems raised for the United States and the Inter-American community by the rise to power of Fidel Castro In 19S9, 593.
A report on the prngiam of the liieontincntal t onyress hehl in Havana m January l%h. of Castro's attack on Von Sosa Header of Guatemala's MR-1. movement), the ousting of Guevara, ansi Cuba's struggle for revolutionary reorientation.
Use hy Castro ami his representatives of the United Nations as a forum for his propaganda and lor drawing Cuba away from the t atin American block.
OAS, Special Consultative Committee on Security.th Cong.. 1st sess., 1963.
A brief OAS report on how Cuba is used as a training ground for subversion in the Western Hemisphere.
Impli • cations for the United States of thealin American Conference for National Sovereignty anil Economic Emancipation and Peace.
Thorning. and Appendixes containing newspaper clippings and iloctimms of the conference held in Mexico City.
An attempt to describe Cuban development*, their origins, and their consequence* foratin America.
Russianborn and (icrman-ediicatcd. speak* from a background, first ns a Socialist anil later as a Communist in (jetmany and still later as a non-Marxist in Cuba, where he resided from l*MI to 1*M»0.
Cuba'* rule in maintenance of S.mct system of spies and saboteurs in Western Hemisphere.
Castro** threefold program for encouraging revolution in I atin America -the training of goierritl.i*. the use of piopaeanda, and the export of financial assistance and weapons.
An analvsis of the factors ili.it contributed to the of the Castro movement.
April 17, IQ67, anil reports on Cuban Communist Parly strength anil photos of Its leaders, and mush other information on guerrilla aclivilics in Venezuela.
An attempt to determine the influence of Cuba onatin American political, social, and economic institutions.
Outlines of Castro's ideology and of Guevara’s doctrine and of lion they arc exported anil employed.
An carl, appraisal of what Fidelismo’s impact would be on alin Anict can institutions.
The uniqueness of Castro’s revolution and hmv his revolutionary program foratin America differs from that of Soviet-backed Communists in the area.
Castro’s efforts to develop a special role for Cuban Communism in the international Communist movement, particularly as it relates toatin America.
The Tricontinental Conference of African, Asian, andatin American Peoples.
A staff study prepared by a Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 89th Cong.. 2d sess., 1966.
Purpose of. pattieipants in, and accomplishments of the conference held in Havana in January.66.
Influences on Communist iloctiine for I atin America of the Havana Confluences of 1964 anil 1966 and United States intervention in the Uom'nlcan Republic in 1965.
A French view of Cuba's relations will) other powers translated from tin tie i/e /V/euic/fioji.i/ , Oct.
Effect of United States “consumers' revolution” on social chattel in I aiin America, how Castro pained tower, and his relations with Mexico, and the role of the Affiance lor Prop res* <17.
In the process they examine thrae stapes of iraaae deveiopmeot and vansformation <lt, Castro, Cuba and Justice.
A pro-Castro jou raa Ha tk account of the revolution that overthrew the Batista pov em m en <19.
A view of Cuban institutions as an extemsoe of Castro’s desi.t for power and fear to re li nq uish control of any aspect of political <tt.
An analysis of conditions in Cubs st nud-yest IW and an attempt to predict Cuba’s political future.
Castro's Cuba, Cuba's Fidel• An American Journalists Inside Look at Today's Cuba.
Author attempts to make a “fair” assessment of Castro’s Rcvotuiron and what it has meant to Cuba—its successes and failures The black-and-white photo coverapc. which ton*)Mutes a major portion of the volume, it ncrllrm.
Ulus, AMbne's olhctsjt»e>s -.'f the r'-dfrurof ntmenc ftustraitop and failure on a ihree week tom ot the oland 624.
An rsmiulec «d C aslre-’. petumalns in the tight o| roe etemem* el ch-tesmatu nature [S-List. d lMas Weber *25.
A study of Castro's use of violence, of the factors which led to Castro’s seintre ot power, and a number of yenerallntions and hypotheses useful In study ini guerrilla warfare’s nature and functions.
Reeders win ttnd hat the authors Instead have produced a typical Marxist iaterpr. at km in this rather ""oey-sided"" piece of reporting.
Included ere the lot lowing Robert J Alexander, ""Castro's Challenge to America” ; Samuel Shapiro.
Socialist or Totahtariaar Cedric letfrape""The Nature of Cuban Socialism ” <31.
The authors write that ihe-r volume ’’rndravors to understand the revolution ol 1*5* as a Cuban phenomenon, examining its local antecedents and ns re latum to Cuban values cad proble m *, with a minimum of duett reference to Ms sigmlunncx in tuc inlernational scene "" They have also been concerned wish “she putlent of political leadership—Ms values, goals, and techniques »» <32.
Internal %cart.h tot a viable political order .-ad a viable poitttcal party muk*fc. economic problem-^ reiattom with thr USSR, internal Mvvrih. foreign poik>. and refuge* problem* Cuba, thr Economic a:\d St\ial R<vt»iuium.
Seetv the editor. lv» coatributo a (Kgptn titled **The Economic and Social Backer mind ” A t htiean rvunoont.
PoIiihuI Systems ot taiiin Amenta.64 1520.9* NJ75p). kossrtv rsi-noeu. history, influence* .*f Rxims *nd Cmiru. ruinxxl processes. tosxinmrm untMunoes. public potsty 635. tube, fruerdv in our Hemisphere.
Reasons wav Castro's dreamf reshaping Unban society to attain “an ideal of social perfection"" »s doomed to fa.lure.
Castro's Cuba us It Really Is—an Eyewitness Account by an American Reporter.
India, workintt as a teporter for the Scripps Howard Newspaper Alliance, reports his impressions of Cuba which he visited as a tourist in 1964.
An interpretation of the events leading to the overthrow of Batista and of the rule of Castro by a United States journalist.
Tht author, a longtime Sew York Times correspondent, here relates his role in publicizing the Castro story from 1957 to 1961.
A typically Communist condemnation of the United States and an overly optimistic fori**\*%t of Cuba's economic production.
A 'iuioloyK.il siuil.v in determine whether an individual's employment experience influenced hi. attitude toward the Castro revolution.
Index. the author, a Brill'll journalist, reports his Cuban observations made on la visits to Havana in the period 1939-1965, 648.
A scholarly assessment of the rains ami failures ot Cuba from 1939 to 1964.
Index Author's analysis ot events that transpired during his service as Ambassador fo Cuba from 1937 to 1939.
Account is written by one who witnessed five actions >n November-December 1938 as a reporter for the Reader’s Digest.
A biased narrative by a former tclev.'ion reporter '.vho faccording to Victor Franco.
An uncomplimentary report on Castro's Cub* as the writer «*w it prior to 1963.
A rambling, disjointed story of the author’s conversations in Cuba on several trips beginning in December 1960.
Influences of low wages, unemployment, reliance on sugar, weakness of conservative forces, trade unions, civil iervice organizations, and revolutionary tradition.
A use of sociological methodology to determine the political reactions of different age groups to their historical experiences and the response of different generations to the Castro revolution.
Writer finds only words of praise for Castro and his efforts in Cuba and only condemnation for United States relations with Cuba before and after Castro.
A reprint of a 5 August I960 State Department Press Release of a 2 August memorandum submitted to the Inter*American Peace Committee.
A sociological study based on interviews in 1961 and 1962 with workers in 21 factories scattered throughout Cuba.
Background causes of Cuban revolution, roles of Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevara, shifts of movement in direction of USSR and Communist China, and defects of the revolution.
Author thowi how ihe Cuban Army failed to fight effectively against Castro’s guerrillas.
He also points out certain lessons reobserved in the course of the wer and Indicates the problems faced by anti-Castro guerrillas.
A lengthy inquiry into Castro’s relationship with the rest of the Communist world.
In the appendix, titled “Senator Fulbright and United States Policy,” the author examines and refutes positions taken by Senator Fulbright in a Senate speech of March 25. 1964 sod in a number of meetings on Cuba and Castro.
A supporter of Castro in the overthrow of the Batista regime and an office holder under Castro until his defection in 1961 has written this volume “to show how a communist minority under the guise of nationalism and social reform takes over a country against the will of its people 676.
Author searches through available literature to identify the ideology of Fioel Castro and to show how he betrayed the revolution he claimed to have fathered.
Article is of interest for the author's comments on; ro-Castro writings he analyzes.
A survey of the extent of Communist control and influence in Cuba in 1964.
A tracing of Castro’' relation' with Communists from the early ■lays of (he revolution in the Sierra Maestra through 1966.
United States policy toward Cuba, Cuban dependence on Soviet Russia’s and Communist China's financial support, Castro’s shift to a closer alignment with Communist Chins, the goal of the Alliance for Progress, and United States policy in Latin America.
Observations made on a four-week tour of Cube by the writer, who earlier resided on the Island from 1951 to 1959.
A search for the reasons why Castro has become more militant and why he has given Cuban foreign policy a belligerent lone that has largely estranged the Cuban Communist party from Com munist parties in other countries.
Full text of the report of the General Secretary of the Cuban PSP to the or.ny congress held in August i960.
Report is of interest for its evidence of an early linking of the Cuban Comtmunists and Castro.
Observations of a London Sews Chronicle reporter on a 1964 visit to Cuba.
An indictment of Castro for his conversion of Cuba to Communism, told in terms of the author's per*»on;il involvement us ( usiro’s handpicked President of Cuba from January 1959 until Castro ousted him from office in July 1959 because of his protests against the evident subversion of Cuban interests to Communism.
A journalist’s uncomplimentary review of Castro’s actions from January 1959 to 1964, and a criticism of the failure of the United States to take proper actions to halt Castro’s extension ot power or to insure his overthrow.
A sketchy tracing of the process by which Castro joined the Communists and a prediction that Communism under Castro in Cuba would not follow the program of traditional old-line Communism.
Volume is based on interviews with a large number of Cuban refugees in the United States and other countries.
Volume purports to be the ""exact"" speech delivered by Castro October 16. 1953, to the Court in Santiago.
Cuba, on the occasion of his trial for his role in the attack on the Moncada Barracks.
How the ""New Left” interprets the Castro revolution to itself and the world.
The second half of the volume contains observations by the author made on a brief stopover in Havana in July 1961.
How Communists employed the ""Guatemalan Way” in gaining control of Cuba, subsequent Soviet economic and niiltiary support of Castro, and use of Cuba as a base for spread of Communist subversion.
Author, one-time Communist (member of the party cell with Alger Hiss and an acquaintance of Cuba’s leading Communists), presents a strong condemnation of Castro for his leading of Cuba into the Communist orbit.
Volume is designed determine why and how the Cuban revolution turned Marxlst-Lenlnlst.
The author presents a five-part definition of the process of Stalinization and uses the definition to show how Castro has become Stalin-like in his rule of Cuba.
A West German reporter’s observations on the Cuban people’s reactions to Castroism.
The author, a journalist and university lecturer, writes of many aspects of the Castro revolution and the Communist takeover in Cuba.
A lengthy rambling discourse on a suggested United States reaction to world Communism.
Role of the United States Coast Guard in preventing raids on Cuba from United States territory and in rescuing Cubans who attempt to flee across the Florida Straits.
She later served as his Ambassador Plenipotentiary in Havana, and as Cuban delegate to the UN until she abandoned the Castro regime.
United States Coast Guard participation in the movement by small boat of thousands of Cubans permitted to leave Cuba by Castro's offer announced on 28 September 1965.
Work of the Coast Guard in assisting Cubans who sought to take advantage of Castro’s “open door” policy on emigration, announced on 10 October 1965. to leave Cuba by small boat for the United States.
An “obituaries"" section reports on the death and/or defection of many of the participants.
An examination of Castro's motives in permitting relatives of Cuban exiles to join their families abroad and in reorganizing the government-sponsored political party.
A personal account of the author's arrest and imprisonment for three years in Cuba, beginning in the summer of 1959.
Volume is a revised version of his memoirs commissioned by the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace.
Revision was accomplished with the assistance of Irving P and Melanie L Pflaum.
Basically, an antiUnited States explanation of the causes of Cuba's economic problems.
A revealing look at the Cuban economic picture—agriculture, industry, labor, dependence on Soviet sources of supply.
Nature, amount, purpose, and achievements of various Soviet aid agreements and also of Eastern Europe and Communist China.
A glance at the influence on several aspects of business of Castro’s actions during his first nine months in office.
Basically, an account of the proposals for CubanUnited States rapprochement voiced by Ernesto ""Che” Guevara to the author in Montevideo after the conclusion of the Punta del Este meeting of OAS Economic and Foreign Ministers in August 1961.
A partial tracing of Guevara's movements from his departure from Cuba in 1965 until his death on October 9, 1967.
Story is based in part on information coma tied in Guevara's diary and that of another guerrilla member.
Why Guevara's espousal of the Chinese Communist position led to his departure from Cuba.
Another in a Iona lot of speculation* as to the whereabouts of Che (iurvara in the period after his disappearance from Cuban political life after 15 March 1965.
The author's experiences from his landing in Cuba in December 1965 for the following right years, plus four previously written articles on various phases of the guerrilla struggle in Cuba.
A first presentation in English of an interview with Guevara reported by two Chinese Communist reporters in April 1959.
Volume purports to he Guevara's recollection, from the departure from Mexico in November 1956 to the takeover of Havana in January 1959.
There is nothing in this edition to indicate the source from which it was translated.
A collection of 15 writings produced from 1956 to 1964. plus four items dedicated to Guevara that appear in the Appendixes.
Gents of. actors in. and conclusions relevant to the development. of October 1962 involving the United States, the USSR, and Cuba.
I he tost pages \x| this article are devoted to the United States confrontation with the USSR over the missile installation, in Cuba.
Ol interest tor its story of the gathering and inti rpretmg of information on Sox ie' missile, and launching installation, in Cuba in 1962 735.
Notes. \n .thrulcdl U’Imhii \»( a paper Uchvtrcvl before thtr 1’iah AvjJorm of Science h> the author.
Robert J Alexander, ""Why President Kennedy Was Right in the Cuban Crisis""; Boris Goldenherg.
An exhaustive case study of United States and Soviet foreign policies In the ""before."" ‘‘during,’’ and ""after"" stages of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962. and an evaluation of United States policy in the crisis period.
A review of the events and a cataloguing of lessons learned in the USA-USSR confrontation.
A collection of 94 documents—statements, congressional resolutions. interviews, addresses, resolutions, executive orders, communiques. declarations, letters, and proclamations—dating from President Kennedy’s statement of Sep., 1962 to Secretary General U Thant's letter to First Deputy Minister Kuznetsov of Jan.
The author examines a number of arguments officially advanced to support the imposition of a maritime quarantine on Cuba in October 1962. and concludes that the United States ""acted skillfully to obtain the removal of the long-range missiles from Cuba."" hut maintains that the United Slates failed to live up to its legal obligations to respect the freedom of the seas, to submit disputes to the UN, and to avoid the use of force, except under specified conditions.
A Journalistic Narrative of Events in Cuba and of Cuban Relations with the Udi. and the Soviet Union.
A brief report on the extent of the Soviet buildup of personnel, missiles, missile sites, and aircraft In Cuba prior to October 22. 19(0, and the withdrawal of personnel and equipment after that date.
Report is based on testimony of the chiefs of various intelligcnce agencies of the United States government.
An examination of the law supporting (he United States action in quarantining Cuba and an analysis of some of the implications of applicable laws.
The Operations of the Military Air Transport Service prior to and during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.
The Naval Interdiction of Offensive Weapons and Associated Materiel to Cuba.
A profusely documented examination of several questions of international law that arose as a result of the United States proclamation of the maritime quanantine of Cuban waters in October 1962.
An examination of certain suggested motives that the USSR might have had in deciding to position missiles in Cuba.
A reporter cover* the event* of October 14-2*. t%2. pertaining to the Soviet installation and removal of missile* from < *r.i.
An inquiry into the justification for and legality of the United States quarantine of Cuba during the missile crisis of Ociober-Novcmber 1962.
Ilow the So,let press informed the Soviet people prior to and utter the United States ultimatum in October IV62.
A slep-bv-of"" report on the October 1962 crisis occasioned by Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba.
The author seeks to demonstrate that there ho, been a ""pattern” that determined the use of military force in the nbov conations.
He uses the es of United States iii.oi/emci,, tn Cuua and the Dominican Republic to set the stage for the bulk of his study, which is devoted to the Vietnam episode.
A scholarly investigation of United States government interest in Cuba in the prc-Civil War period.
A criticism of the State Department's attitude toward Cuba in Ihe face of Cuba’s obvious efforts to promote revolution in Latin America.
Tendency of United States courts to give relief to victims of foreign appropriations.
A collection of three articles on various aspects of the Cuban question.
In “A New Approach for the U.S.,” Roger Fisher I Yetc Republic, 15 Jun 1963). sets forth a suggested step-by-step proposal for United States dealings with Cuba.
An indictment of United States relations with Cuba by a longtime critic of United States policy in Latin America.
Some new insights into the operations of the National Security Council and of the President during the Cuban Missile Episode.
In contrast to wmc recent studies, thi* volume is sympathetic to the manner in which the United States tiovernmem handled its relation* with Cuba.
Note* A Soviet ""expose"" of the United States “Imperialistic"" policy towards Cuba from IfWK »o 1959.
The United States Ambassador to Cuba reviews U.S.-Cuban relations from 1K9H to 1959 and then describes the step-by-step breakdown of relations between the two nations to April 1961, and concludes with thoughts on the future of Cuba after Castro.
An examination of United States policy vis-a-vis Castro’s Cuba, and an argument for the initiation of an ideological revolution to effect a change in the Cuban policy of the United States States.
The president emeritus of Princeton Theological Seminary advocates a “softer line"" by the USA in its policies toward Cuba.
Cuba, the U.S, <£ Russia, 1960-63; A Journalistic Narrative of Events in Cuba anil of Cuban Relations with the United States and the Soviet Union.
A report, generally pro-Castro and anti-United States in its theme and its content.
Also a report on economic and social change under Castro and Castro’s promotion of guerrilla war in Latin America.
An analysis of United States foreign policy with respect to Latin America, and a discussion of the reasons for the failure of that policy.
A review of ihe developments of United States policy toward Cuba in several critical periods from the issuance of the Monroe Doctrine to the era of Fidel Castro.
A brief survey of the Castro-led revolution within the context of the Cold War.e„ in relation to its effect on United States foreian policy.
Prepared by United States Dept, of State for Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.
A brief outline of significant events in the last years of the Batista resume and the early years of Castro's rule.
Hearings before the Subcommittee to Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security Laws the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. 87th Cong., 1st scss,, April, May & Oct., 1960 and Jan.61.
A critical review of Senator Fnlbrighl’s ""great debate"" speech of 25 March 1964.
Vot I covering the period 1492-1845. is subtitled ""From the Conquest of Cuba to La Escalera”; Vol.
Author is critical of the motives of the United States government and of its citizens in their dealings with Cuba in the pre-independence period.
A critical examination of the ""role” of investment and of its ""effects"" on economic development in Cuba’s early national history.
An attempt to determine how the Cuban revolution will affect United States policy in Latin America.
A very brief statement by the author of his part, as Argentine ambassador lo Cuba in January I960, in presenting to Castro a United States proposal to assist Cuba with financial assisiance in return for Castro’s halting of his insults of the United States government.
A survey of opinions voiced in congressional hearings by congressmen and State Department personnel from 1952.
Interesting excerpts from campaign speeches, many of which were an indictment of the Eisenhower administration for permitting the development of the situation in Cuba.
Presentation is of particular interest in view of subsequent developments in U.S.-Cuban relations after January 1961.
Situation in Cuba, Hearing before the Senate Committees on Foreign Relations and Armed Services, 87th Cong., 2d sess., 1962.
Appendixes contain a nuiubcr of documents relevant to international relations in the Western Hemisphere.
Author, United States Ambassador to Cuba from 1929 to 1933, devotes most of his volume to the period 1898-1932.
Author views critically, if not unsympathetically, the role th:»t United States business interests played in the development of the Cuban economy and their influence on United States diplomatic relations with the island nation.
Ilis object in this article is to determine how United States investments i nC'uba influenced United States relations with Cuba during (’astro’s first years as Cuban dictator.
An Essay on the Dynamics of Revolution and the Dissolution of Dominican 799.
Society, economy, history. influence of Trujillo, polities, governmental operations.
A brief account of the nation's political instability introduces a longer report on economic development, population and settlement, and the prospects for the future.
A casual Mines of the history and customs of the Caribbean nation, includima brief section on native foods.
A journalistic review of the history, geography, people, and cconoim. and a touriM style description of the capital city anil tow its m the interior.
A brief historical review of United States intervention tn Cuba from independence to 195.1.
A study of the cvolvement of the policies adopted by the United States in its relations with Cuba and of the application of those policies.
The Under Secrefary of Stale discusses the nature of the Cuban threat, lines of strategy open to the United States, the purpose of the Alliance for Progress, the reason for and the nature of a program of “economic denial” directed against Cuba, and an assurance to the Cuban people.
Still, in spite of its age. one of the best histories of the Dominican Republic for the period covered.
Author was a career State Department official who served as American Commissioner in the country from 1922 to 1925.
A photo story accompanies the author's report on conditions In the Dominican Republic a year after the assassination of Dictator Trujillo.
President Balagucr’s efforts to restore economic and political stability.
A collection of lour articles that support the position of the overthrown Bosch regime.
Prospects for peace on eve of June 1V66 presidential election. t F S role in Dominican history, and a review of economic and social conditions.
Background to and cvrniand personalities figuring in the presidential election ol I June 1466.
A report on violence in the Dominican Republic under (he Balagucr government.
The search lor political stability since the assassination ol Trujillo, the overthrow of the Bosch administration, and the revolt. civil war, and United States intervention.
The author, longtime Dominican leader and President from February 1*6) to September l*u.'. tells the storv of Dominican political developments from May 1*61. when Trujillo was assassinated, to May 1*64.
The First Nine MonthsAn Interim Report on the Dominican Repin lie.” ibid., Vol.6.
I9h5, the date of the official r%taMt*hmrat of the InterAmerican Armed Force in the Dominican Republic.
Special Report Series No 2. pnrpared hy The t'entrr for Strategic Siudie* Volume tirwnhc* event* of the l'*' moll from April 24 to May 4 and m the Appemli&r* name* le> diplomat**. and military personnel and leading Communot* m>ohed.
Author'* personal m*ohrmrnt a* a \r» York Tumi reporter in the reporting of the new* during the 1965 resolution in the Dominican RepuMiv 821.
Ihc lK«*nm«att IXtemma"", |<dwt I f r*mr. ""fhr I'ulitRi s'l Mcttcrmvh ” 823.
A Washington Post correspondent reports on the 1*65 revolution in the Dominican Republic at be taw 825.
Volume Includes a chronology tram 14*2 to tune M, IMS. and 30 documents relating to United States relations wp the Dominican Republic.
Views on United States iatervemioa of April IMS end the future of the Dr -ninicen Republic expressed by Bosch, Reid.
Bethel, a reporter on the setae dura* the IMS Dominican up. rising, point by pout refutes the accuracy of s t e e rme n ts by Theodora Draper in ""The Do mi n i c an Crisis,"" Commemery.
A very brief e aammae on ol several questions prrtaimng to the ""totality"" ol United States and OAS uMerventton m ihc Dom i ni can Republic m April 1M3.
Tipresences at InterAanmraa Pence Feme a the Dominican ItrroNw teasism.
An elimination of the possible damage camed to the IwerA meric an bnaft of the United Staler by iu April 1963 Intervention in the Dominican Republic.
US.-Ecuadoran rvtauoov and the p r o b le m of achtevtag pototenl stability.
A brief survey of the geography, dam. people, hissoey. poke leal tauuMtom and peotewo. the onows esmutfmama, and the lai h a n proble m •49.
Prnnnsl cuter wear. d the min and h» tarnty cm a „cbr •nrag and Whrapdmil tour of rcuadoe 854.
Deputy Chief of Staff ClnClaat. describes United States military actions la the Dominican Republic in April-May 1*65.
A very brief review of the UA. portion vtn**ta the Trujfflo dictatorship.
U4. and OAS react ion to the ass ass ina t io n of Trujillo May I960) and subsequent events Is the D omi n i c i n Republic.
Aa anamination of te ams in the Dominican Republic and hoar they influenced U S policy toward Latin America. dm re) e Hc m h» of the OAS to US. policy, eluants to the theory and praam of acn-iaicnwMioft ** • principle •45.
A lengthy iisd waU-doc nmenie d el a mtom i o a of tevta factors that prompted ih Undid Stales to wiebtogw fee military forces tram the Dnmtoiraa Republic in 1*24.
A photo Story, the result of the author's four moot ha of travel m tor varied terrain and climate of this e qwa to r -str i dd W i g nation.
Society, endure, horary, pototeal protest**. i iwgav and iram political devgto gmams.
Aa attempt to tome a program te* m ete m ma the tvtssrm |Wa deem*) cd tor agriodtural wort tone 854.
Kcsiilts of lcuailor's at tempts .14*. foster indiisirtali/ation through the device of ""*utai initial” tariff protevtioti.
An examination of si/e of holding', land tenure, and systems of agriculture.
Men and issues Involved In the overthrow of Ecuadoran President Arosemena In July 1963.
A review of Ecuador’s political history and geographical features precedes a study of political instability, political parties and elections, and of the operations of the different branches of national. provincial, ami local government.
A discussion of the influence of personallvmo in Ecuadoran politics, precedes a brief glimpse of internal problems, political history, border conflicts, and U.S.-Ecuadoran relations.
A very brief report on the rote of Velasco Ibarra in recent Ecuadoran history, and a comment on the government of his successor.
Conditions under the Uhico dictatorship, role of the Communivts in the government of President Arbcn/. the Arbenz pro* itram >n one municipio, problems confronting the Castillo Armas government.
Primarily, the story of the Eastern Coast of Central America Commercial and Agricultural Company, aondon company, and Us efforts to establish a colony in Guatemala.
Although published some lime ago. it stilt contains much useful information on places and customs.
Author’s experiences in exploring ancient Maya ""urns and in contact with native peoples.
Reaction and Revolution in Latin America, 1966 . 1 he author's ""observations on problems, persons and events'* of ithe >c.ir following the overthrow 4>f the Arbcn/ government ). #67, ( itmfcniala: ,-f iiistariciif Survey.
V studs ot the political history, economic development (from the soioni.il era to tutUi, and social life id C.ua*cinala.
Communist influence in. political parties, governmental institutions, various policies of.
A history of Guatemala from colonization to I95S, with an additional chapter on British Honduras that carries the story down to 1962.
A brief review of the nation's history from Mayan antiquity to the present day fills the first 78 pages of this volume.
Sandwiched between the two parts arc 16 pages of photographs of a wide assortment of people, buildings, etc.
Author’s reminiscences of animal and plant life and of human relations in Guatemala. —.i, r — 41 Guatemala AGRICULTURE 875.
A review of past and present lmliun settlement, cultivation, and la nil holding patterns as a step in understanding the nature m the problems and prospects of any proposed solution of Gtiutcma‘a\ economic, social, and political problems.
An attempt to determine the contributions of the Guatemalan Rural Development Program for the purpose of making recommendations for the better handling of United States foreign aid committed to future rural development programs.
Recommendations in seven areas of the program inaugurated by the Castillo Armas administration for settling rural people on virgin jungle or on confiscated German farms.
An examination of employment practices, duration of employment. and relationship of wages to productivity on coffee, cotton, and sugar farms.
A brief review of some of the steps by which Communists gained power In Guatemala under Arevalo and Arbenz.
A detailed tracing of the steps by which a small group of Communists succeeded in gaining virtual control over the nation of .1,000.000 inhabitants, 884.
Ninth Interim Report of Hearings before the Subcommittee on Latin America of the House Seleel Committee on Communist Aggression, 83d Cong., 2d sess., 1954.
Volume deals with Communist Inliltratiun of the government of Guatemala during the .rrdvato and Arbcnz administrations.
Among those giving testimony were C&ifos Castillo Armas and John E Peurlfoy, 885.
Testimony to a House Committee by the former United States Ambassador to Guatemala on the extent of Communist Involvement In llie government of President Arbcnz overthrown in mld-1954.
Notes. \ f A description of Guatemalan conditions in 1944, an analysis of A the goals and methods of the leaders of the 1944-1954 revolution, and thoughts on why the Indian villagers responded as they did to the revolution.
A review of the steps by which Communists gained influence in the Arbcnz administration, the overthrow of the regime, and the role of the United States government in the developments. 8 ri9.
Index. t Ydfgoras Fuentes’‘experience with Communism in Guatemala before and after his tenure as President, an office he held from March 1958 to March 1963.
Threat to the Peace and Security of America and to the Sovereignty and Political Independence of Guatemala.
Notes, f > A study of the subject based on interviews with a number of the rural supporters of President Arbenz who were arrested after his overthrow in the summer of 1954.
Index. headers and events In the growth of Communist influence in Guatemala from 1944 ’0 the overthrow of the Arbenz government in 1954. j 895.
V u'V’oit pii'p.itVil t»v .* commission sponsored l»> the IIIKH in soopei.tCon wnh the iiiufem.il.inoveimnenc. topics surveyed nuhitle I lie eenef.il en*nomv. .irriculiuie. industry, mining and iviroleum. ir.msp«»i(.ition. lelekoimminic.ilions. power, public development polities, fin.inci.il rcsoiiices. and a recommended in* vestment proc.iini.
A ile*., option of tM l’ ""backwoods"" economv of the Indian village of I'anui.n-hcl ,n which ihe anthor lised inie nillentlv from l*U5 to 1911.
Index. \n analvsis id fisv.il operations |«»r the purpose of determining ht»w ihev have .n tested economic development and how the fiscal s*stun can aid u; the country's progress.
A statistical comparison of various aspects of educational development in the two nations.
An analysis of the role of the earthquakes of 177. in the movement of the capital from Antigua and of the new leaders who developed and who played dominant roles in the future political arena of Guatemala.
The author's understanding of the motives behind United States support of aid proprams and a brief report on United States assistance to (juatemala's Rural Dcvelopmenl Propram.
A review of ihe election—parties, candidates, platforms, results—in which, for Ihe first lime in the nation's history, a candidate opposed to the government's nominee succeeded in winning.
The author, a Guatemalan journalist, reviews the efforts of the Castillo Armas government to stabilize conditions in Guatemala after the overthrow of the Arbenz regime.
An inquiry Into ihe “organization and functioning of the Guatemalan government"" and an attempt to determine why the government functioned as it did.
A brief review of the IMS. role In Guatemala before and after Arbenz. , 912.
A well-documented study of United States government policy toward the Castillo Armas-le<l invasion of Guatemala (hat caused the overthrow of the Arhinz government In 1954. o • il-—,1 ex Copy 43 Haiti Haiti 913.
The -tnry nt lltiti fi,mi Spanish discovery tu the ssichUravs al of the United States marines.
Society, economy, history, political pri>ccs>es. governmental structure, influence of Duvalier. public policy.
History, geography, climate, people, agriculture, transportation. industry, and Hade of the Caribbean nation.
A study of the land, people, history, politics, society, and economy of the two island neighbors.
A study of Haiti's history, religion, family life, politics, and economics, and a survey of Haitian problems in the 1940‘s.
Geography, history, government, politics, role of Duvalier, and recent relations with the Dominican Republic and the United States.
A well-illustrated volume designed for the general reader, and, especially, for the tourist.
Appendix IM, titled the “Balance Sheet.” is devoted wholly to tourist information.
A photo story of social customs and economic conditions in Haiti in 1961.
A collection of writings in which Haitians describe the geography, history, religion, music, folklore, education, art. literature, and outstanding men of Haiti.
Highlights of Duvalier** rule and the deterioration of U.S.Haitian relations.
The first 96 pages give a cursory review of Haitian history to I J*7. the sear that Duvalier fir..t gained control of Haiti.
The former head of the United States military mission to Haiti describes conditions under the Duvalier dictatorship— United States aid. the role of Duvalier. the operation^ of the Ton Ton Macoute. and prospects for future United States relations with Haiti.
A photo story of conditions in Haiti in the early years of DuvaiierN dictatorship.
Tbe writer conveys the sense of hopelessness that exists under Duvalier’s rule in Haiti.
This study, originally written as a series of lectures delivered at several United States universities, surveys the influence Duvalier exerts on traditional life and institutions in Haiti.
A description of the Duvalier dictatorship and a revelation of the amount of United States assistance and of the projects supported by different assistance programs.
Terror under Duvalier. alternatives to Duvalier, opposition in exile, possible role for the OAS in Haiti, and the state of the Haitian economy.
Although written nearly 20 years ago, this study is of value for its information on labor and prices in Hai’i.
A study of the roles of the mulattocs and the Negroes in Haitian society.
A study of class and caste characteristics in economic, sociooccupational, and political status groupings.
A study of the native beliefs and practices (generally titled Voodooism) and of their influence on the Introduction of modern medicine into Haiti.
A statistical report on education in Haiti, United Nations ASSISTANCE TO 942.
A first report on the initial phases of a UNESCO project to reduce illiteracy in the Marbial Valley of Haiti.
A scholarly study of the reasons for the sending of the Marines and a review of the accomplishments and failures of the occupation force.
Author's experience as a USMC officer assigned to the Haitian Gendarmerie in the years after 1925.
Twenty Years of Organization and Training by the United States Marine Corps.
The story of the Gendarmerie d'Haiti and the United States Marines who served with it.
Contrasting views of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations cn the Duvalier government.
An assessment of United States accomplishments in Haiti by the author, who was Financial Adviser-General Receiver of Haiti in the period 1927-1929.
A brief review of Haitian history and of United States involvement in Haitian affairs.
An evaluation of the accomplishments of the mission initiated in the treaty of 16 September 1915.
Additional Light on the Genesis of the ‘Good Neighbor Policy/ ” Robert M Spector.
An appraisal of the influence of the Forbes Commission's hearings and report on President Hoover’s decision to withdraw the Marines from Haiti.
A comprehensive review of Honduran political and constitutional history precedes discussions of the law and the courts, political administration, party structure, election machinery, and legislative bodies.
The influence of the United Fruit Company, program ot the Villeda Morales administration, the ouster of Villcda Morales in October 1963, the rule of Colonel Lbpea Arellano since 1963, and the role of the USA in Honduran affairs.
Society, economy, history, political developments, governmental structure, public policy.
The author's search for. capture and rearing of. the transportation of Quetzals, the fabled bird of the Aztecs, on a visit to Honduras, In the years 1937-1938.
Analysis of story content of one San Pedro Sula and of tour Tegucigalpa newspapers.
A survey of Honduras geography, people, transportation and communication media, extractive industries, manufacturing, tourism, labor, trade, finance and development agencies, and conclusions and recommendations.
An evaluation of Honduras' success in administering the sales tax law that went into effect on 1 January 1964.
A review of United States actions from 1907 to 1932, actions governed by the Central American Treaty of 1907 and The AddiUonal Convention to that treaty.
A scholarly inquiry into President Wilson’s efforts to formulate a Latin American policy.
Twenty-one papers on Mexican politics, economics, society, culture, international relations, and historical writing, presented ut the Fourteenth Caribbean Conference held at the Univer-iiy of Florida in December 1963.
The most comprehensive account in English of the Maya opposition rule from 1848 to 1912, with a postscript covering the period to 1959.
A journalist's story of Mexican political developments, largely confined to the Cardenas era.
A revised versiori of the volume, first published in 1842, under the title Lite in Mexico During a Residence ol Two Years in That Country . covering ""Fanny’s"" residence in Mexico from 1839 to 1842 as the Scottish-born wife of the first Spanish envoy to the Republic of Mexico.
The original volume has been greatly supplemented by the editors with new material gleaned from Fanny’s private journals and other sources and is profusely illustrated with contemporary prints.
An intriguing introduction to Mexico, part history, part travelogue, part tourist guidebook.
The first uuthoritalive English-language, college-level textbook on Mexican history.
The author, after 20 years' residence In Mexico (19 as a naturalized citizen I, interprets Mexican history since independence.
Volume Is based on four visits to Mexico between 1922 and 1927 in which the author visited 24 of the 28 states.
A highly readable history of Mexico since independence by a journalist with long service in Latin America.
Three-fourths of the volume':, contents arc devoted to the period since 1900.
A brief account of Mexico's history serves as an introduction to a study of politics, political institutions, national and state government, and public policy.
In the process the author, with pen and brush, pictures the people, the animal life, the art. the archeology, the way of life of the residents present and past.
Sevcntern authorities (most are Mexicans' describe various aspects of Mexican economic, political, and social life.
Author, a longtime student and teacher of LttlnAmerican civilization, In this volume designed to prepare the visitor for what he will Ilnd In Mexico, presents the ""main currents in the ebb and flow of Mexican life,” and emphasizes the ""underlying feelings"" back of Mexican political developments.
Geographic, demographic, educational, and other aspects of modern Mexico.
A photo story of Mexico’s second largest city, the capital of the State of Jalisco.
The story of Cortfs’ use of his Mexican-built vessels In the Battle of Tenochtittfn.
One ot America’s outstanding students of and authorities on Mexico discusses race, religion, politics, revolution, land, labor, and education.
A brief history of the employment by President Diaz of his famous rural police force.
A photo story of the author’s exploration of Mexico from El Paso, Texas, to Puerto Vallarta to Guadalajara to Mexico City in July 1968.
A review of some of the highlights of Mexican history based largely on English-language sources.
Landholding systems, land use patterns, irrigation practices, and crops produced in irrigated regions of Baja California.
Problems besetting and accomplishments of the Mexican Agrarian Reform movement.
The authoritative work, at the time of its publication and for many years thereafter, on the Mexican government's attempts to settle its agrarian problem through the landholding device of the ejido. a collective holding.
Notes Slaughter and vaccination in the control of the a/iosa outbreak of 1946 and the role of the United States in the control program.
Steps in the opening up to settlement of an ejido pioject in the Mexican state of Campeche.
An examination of the ‘‘major features of Mexican agricultural development during the period 1925 to 1960.
Motivational forces in agrarian reform, ejido problems, and problems of the private sector of agriculture.
The life stories of a father and t uir of his children told by an anthropologist.
Mlrida, a large urban community; Dzitas, a trade center; Chan Korn, a peasant village; and Tusik, a tribal village.
Resulls of 1959 surveys designed to determine how Indians and mestizoes interact.
An anthropological study of human inter-relationships in a group of villages northeast of Mexico City.
Observations of Mexican life made in five months of visiting the out-of-the-way places, the ancient Maya, Aztec, and other ruins, the village markets, the home factories, and all other facets of life away from Mexico City and the border towns of the North.
Determinants of Mexican character, the role of machismo, the real power and influence of women, and psychoanalysts' views of national character.
A comprehensive sociological study of rural Mexico by a U.S.trained sociologist who was born in and spent much of Ids childhood in Northern Mexico and served from 1942 to 1945 as a rural sociologist attached to the United States Embassy in Mexico City.
C'ni'Nikir* * _ _ _ Amlixi irpml*. a* • tea-her .mil . vl'iUH. ml ('**' >"" •* s '”*’d iiju.j wli.mf »lifif 'hi' MMicil in livr,l fpi xh»H rviHKls m six lear.
A .null n( I'll.’ statistical infmnialinn fur lliv piirpnse >'f _ dele, mining' the iclalimi.hip of industriali/aluiii in social mobility 1027.
I It..mi 111.r v ails ihi. a ""pari of lliv biography"" of I lie Ym'.iU’C.m villaiiv* .if t hall Kmn. which hi* lust studied as . nivinl'vr pf . imcgic lii'lmiikm Irani fiom 1930i I9J3.
IHI phrnii. amt drawings liiui.l in blin k an,I ivime) ilepienng f ihrivs anti clothing woven ami smhii by 24 giimps .if name people .vallvieil Ibiiniglimil Mesien.
A photo snirv of Mexico's pre-Columbian eivili/nlions as told by the many exhibits in |hv* Nalional Museum of Aniliropoliigy in Me vivo City.
Index. 'the anihoi. one of lliv soldiers who accompanied Cories, wrote iliis accoiml al the age of S4.
Wf htack and-whitiati«i ** coU»r pl,uc\ is a historv of .hi .mil architecture unique tn I atm America. he ph.ilL»Lf.H*hs i epic sen i . lifetime of HT»rk I from Ilu* PWs lo 1041.
The changing role of the encomicnda as an institution for Ihe conlrol, employment, and Christianization of the Indians in Mexico after the Conquest. , 1045.
An illustrated Mory of the conquest of Mexico milking use of the account of Bernal Dia/ and of A/tec pictojiraphs of events made at the time of the conquest.
The conqueror's own reports to the l-mperor of events in the conquest of Mexico.
The History of the Conquest of Mexico, with a Preliminary l few of the Ancient Civilization ami the Life of the Conqueror.
A classic piece of historical research anti writing first published in 184.1.
An undocumented stoty of Cortes’ part in the conquest of Mexico designed for (he general reauer.
An historical account of the growth (principally in the 17th century) of the great landholding institution that so dominated the economic and political history of colonial Mexico.
Volume is based on service by the author as a royal functionary in New Spain from 1SSN to 1566.
This study, written in 1845. is one of the early Lnglish-tanguagc accounts of the conquest of Mexico and for long the best.
An abridged version of Prescott’s classic siory which omits his extensive documentation and makes other changes in an clfoit to modernize the text.
A scholarly study of Spanish expansion into the Gran Chichimcea and of the half-century struggle known as .he V*-r of the Chichime. is.
A look at the role of individual business and industrial leaders in Mexican development.
A review of various aspects of Mexican economic development for the period preceding 1959.
Causes for and results of the Mexican decision to suspend the purchase and sale of foreign exchange on 21 July 1948, a decision which, in effect, devalued the peso and caused it to depreciate from 4.85 pesos per dollar to about 7 pesos per dollar in Ihe first weeks after the act; n was taken.
An analysis of the relative roles of private enterprise and the Government in Mexico’s economic development.
An examination of “questions affecting income distribution and capital formation"" in relation to Mexico's rapid economigrowth in the period 1959-1950.
Problems experienced in raising the capital to finance Mexican industrialization in the period 1941-1947.
An analysis and evaluation of the industrial revolution that received attention after 1940.
Fxamptes of selling prices of various products sold by United States makers or retailers, with Sears' experience citcu as a particular example.
V hist,if\ *»f Mcxu'.in financial development anu an .uicmpi to 'h,i* ti,*5* the per alum of the financial system is linked to the stahiluv and growth of the Mexican economy.
Ihen current monetary policies and their cffcsUvcncss, and the economic outlook for Mexico.
An analiMs of how Mexico ha. need it. resources to effect shunges in it. .ticiely.
A San Anliinw* journalist's revi.ed and enlarged icr.ion of ,lie report tie t'lepared during a tear 1 , residence and travel in Mexico on a Reid Foundation lellow.lnp.
I vtmomu acwomplishniciits and program of the l>i.i/ Orda/ adnu nisi rat ton.
One of a senes »»f «dticiai studies of various countries prepared fur the British Hoard id Irade.
I inance. trade. aciKulture. iiuning and petroleum. industry, labor, and communications.
Ambassador ,0 the United Slate, describes area, ul economic progicw after Idol.
A scholarts studs of the role of national planning in Mexican economic life in the |\»it-W.UJ period.
Reason, for Mexico*, economic growth, especially in the tree enterprise agrarian sector.
Oitfeiem categories fiiuulnii in balance of paxiiK’iit. and an ivalnatloii ol the handllnn of the balance of payment, problem In Ihe 1941-1949 period 1078.
Policies. piogtams. and problems of nirriculture and Industry 1070, Mexico's I on iyn Trade and Economic Developmerit.
An analysis of Mexico's efforts to manage Its external economic problems since 1940.
Nacional E'inancirra and Mexican Industry; A Study of the Einanciul Relationship between the Government and the Private Sector of Mexico.
Business groupsiheir si/e, constituency, and influence tin the Mexican political process.
Hie role of Antonio J Bermudez in the operation of Peiroleos Xtei . iitun described in a review of ills volume.
A review of Mexican developments since I*a 17 that may have relevance to other I atin American nations as they attempt 10 meet the goals of the Alliance for Progress.
Interesting observations on liow a national corporation handled its bookkeeping and its finances.
Volume rifslofxn “the eittci of induMnaU/atiofi of an urb»n center upon a nrarbv small c«immunityof the eftpamim* tin of Guadalajara.
DixcfMkHb of the influence on Meaican foreign policy of the Revolutk'n of 1910 arul the po*t*WW II fcooromiv Resolution precede dfutmion of Mesico‘% relationships to different world areas and organizations. l#fl« Mexico and the United Nations.
F«cior. influr-K.ni Mruin (orn,n policy trorn ihr first days of iatirprndeocc to the l»50’s. and forces determining present policy toward Hit UN. ihr OAS, ihc 5o«iri Bloc, and n» Western neighbors.
A sketch of Mruco’i rrvctv foreign relations. particularly they prrtaia to ihc Unwed San |M6.
Index The dors of Maximilian and I arkwa odd tor thr central ft a Art 1M7.
The \efoliation and It.-caL. down of the Tripartite Convention of ton Jon.
As examination of Ihr international aims tad principles of the Mexican Resolution of 1910 1917 to determine whether they are valid and whether they should be reexamined and restated. iimanm and rweieNr 1M9.
Fngllsh translation of a textbook widely-used in tries lean schools and universities.
An examination of twentieth century philosophy and ptulosorhen in Mexico.
Is ihfs volume of the Lilt WorUt Library, a story-ami photo volume, the story is told by a veteran Time writer and reporter km* acquainted with Mexico.
Mexico fothlorr. part tact part fiction, gathered on numerous trips to Mexico by the inewnporehtx south-western si ary tr get.
A careful explication of the Mexican election process, especially as it operated in the I**5 k presidential election from ;hc nomination of Adolfo Lope/, through the role of the PKI in the campaign, to the inevitable victory of the PKI candidate.
An examination i>f the myth that Mexico functions as a federal f*'i»u of government mcicly because that form was provided l**r in the 1'ofisutution »>f IK24.
Relations; t4) Public Utilities and Public W,»iks. tM Agriculture; ibl Social Services, |7i Governmental Subdivisions. i x i ('(inclusions. f 1118.
A collection of papers on various aspects of the taw in Mexico, presented at a symposium sponsored by the liilernmcficun l egal Studies bianch of the Umvervlty of Miami.
An examination of the age, place of birth, educational and employment hack grounds, and other facets of the careers of 22 members of the Mexican Cabinet.
Il.isically, a tnief history of the events associated w ith the drafting of the Constitution of I82-) and of the forces, influences, and individuals involved.
A reseating analysis of the role of (lie President in Mexican politics, based on personal aequuaintanev of the author with most Mexican high officials from the 1920's.
A very brief scanning of the steps in the process by which Mexico achieved a so-called one-parly democracy.
A cataloging of the various ways in which rightist influence reveals itself in the Mexican government and marketplace.
Some information'on the one-party system that dominates Mexican politics.
A brief review of Ihc economic and so -in] accomplishments of the resolution ih.it began in |9||) and of current Mexican piold*ms m foreign relations.
I-mire issue. f A special edition. prepared hy a host of Mexican writers, oil talions aspcsl' of Mexican history. imlilics. wiomlcs, etc.
An analysis of Mexico’s population explosion, its i domic development, and In educational program.
Maps show Internal migration, population density, agricultural population,' illiteracy, percentage of teachers per 1.000 In pre-school and primary school grades.
A group of lectures delivered to the American Academy of Political and Social Science.
Alberto J Pan:, ""The Sanitary and Educational Problems of Mexico”; Juan B Kojo.
An attempt to ""shed new light upon the history of the remlut ion.try process in Mexico .it the pas wools level,” thiouch . sillily of che role of Oro/co in the Revolution.
Volume ells ihc story of the Resolution from the last davs of Ihc Diaz regime to the assassination of Modern, l-'rbruary It.
Index. 1ulers and battles of tile Mexican Revolution and I he attempts of the Cniivcminii to bring order nut of Ihc chaos that prevailed.
Lessons that the Mexican revolution of 1910-1917 holds for Latin America and the world.
An npprais.it of the significant aspects of Ihc Mexican Hcvolu lion that began in 1910.
A 'tear analysis of many aspects of the Revolution by the premier American student of the era and a friend and consultant u> mam leader* of the move mem 1152.
Aiitli.u l:n.lthat tlu*tc.is . the Mexican iy,„j„i ...... largely • homy grown,"" a-..| mtly iiilluciKvd tn tlic Imi.l v ’i Russian Kcv>. luMotis. np,< Available Copy CmiNTMES 54 1154.
A historical review of United States policy toward Mexico for the period ending in 1931.
A recounting of incidents of anti-American outbursts in widely scattered regions of Mexico.
Appendix D is a roster of the commissioned officers who participated in the expedition.
Events leading up to the Mexican War and the campaigns and battles of Monterrey and Buena Vista told in an entertaining style.
A scholarly survey of the period 1825-1829, in which Joel Roberts Poinsett, first U.S minister to Mexico, figures prominently.
A well-documented study of Daniels' role In U.S -Mexican relations during his nine years as United States Ambassador.
A brief ""topical” survey of the causes of the war, the campaigns, the inner struggles for power by generals and politicians, and the diplomacy involved in the war from beginning to end.
Volume consists of extracts from Ramirez’ diary and correspondence in the years 1845-1847.
Problems and perils, benefits and disadvantages to the United States and Mexico stemming from their sharing of a long land frontier.
An attempt to document the involvement of President Polk in Commodore Robert F Stockton’s plan to involve the United States in a war with Mexico over the question of Texas.
Basically, a history of Mexican internal developments—political, diplomatic, economic, and others—after 1910, but with a brief survey of earlier history and, throughout, a continuing linkage with the United States as expressed in the title.
A study of U.S.-Mcxican relations for the period 1876 -1880 that led to the recognition by the United States of the Diaz government.
A brief booklet composed of various kinds of writings (speeches, articles, letters, pamphlets, etc.) in four divisions.
The last three to three questions seeking to determine the reasons why the war occurred.
A brief tracing of the historical highlights of the negotiations for rights to construct a canal through Nicaraguan territory.
Economy, social structure, history, political processes, governmental institutions, public policy.
A very brief laudatory sketch of the political role of President Anastasio Somoza.
Problems in production, major export crops, other basic crops, and factors limiting agricultural development.
A report of an IBRD special study mission created a< the request of the Government of Nicaragua.
The report is based on the mission's study of the problem on location in Nicaragua from July 1951 to May 1952.
Covered are ,uch topics as development, industry, power projects, mining, agriculture and forestry, and the fiscal system.
The report describes the “environmental, institutional, and economic factors affecting private industrial enterprise in Nicaragua” and makes suggestions for improving existing conditions.
The report is based in large part on the findings accumulated by a three-man survey team, which spent the months of April and May 1961 in Nicaragua.
The story of United States intervention in Nicaragua and of the influence that the intervention had in shaping Latin American opinion of the United States.
The guerrilla career of Augusto C Sandino, leader of the Nicaraguan revolutionary forces from 1926 until his execution in 1934.
A presentation, based on congressional records, of the background history of the United States commitment to build a highway for Somoza of Nicaragua in the WW II period.
Another chapter in the evolution of President Wilson’s policy toward Latin America.
This volume in the “Rivers of America” scries traces the history of man’s use of the Panamanian stream from the early Spanish explorers through the construction of the Panama Railroad and the Panama Can.xl.
An entertaining. but undocumented. hiitory from Spanish dncnvery to ihe present, with thoughts on the role of nuclear ex plosives in the construction of a new canal.
Author In 1908 assembled documentary evidence for use by his employer, Joseph Pulltizer to defend himscit against a criminal libel suit ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt.
In this volume the author uses evidence collected at that time to begin his story of United States involvement in the building of the Panama Canal.
A report on various aspects of the Panamanian economy— agriculture, manufacturing, shipping, and Canal Zone trade.
Notes, A report on the findings produced by interviews with JO members of Panama's elite power structure on their opinions on the questions of membership in CACOM, a new treaty with the United States, reform of the bureaucracy, and preference as to political party.
Problems in operating the Panama Canal arising from United States and Panamanian positions on key issues, and a look at what the future holds for Isthmian canal operations.
Brief history of construction and operation of the Canal and a briefer description of projects within the Canal Zone.
Col Klette onetime member of the staff of USAFSO, discusses the issues and answers some of the questions involved in the construction of a future canal on the Isthmus of Panama.
An examination of the economic, pollilr1 . siratetic, *.:d technological factors to be coniidered In selecting the route for a new isthmian canal.
Background papers and proceedings of the Sixth Hammarskjoid Fotum held in May 1964 to study the January disturbances along the boundary of the Panama Canal Zone.
A WW II volume which discusses the diplomatic background to the present canal, the canal's operations and administration, and the economic significance of the canal.
Reprints of several speeches in Congress on Canal issues and an article by Mai Gen.
A ""new look"" at the relationship of the United States to Panama and the Panama Canal, and possible future widening of or replacing the present canal with a larger sea-level type canal.
Possible routs and possible construction of an isthmian canal to replace existing Panama Canal, and possible impact on the Panamanian economy if the present site were to be abandoned.
Possibilities of using atomic energy for excavating a new canal in Panama, and problems of fallout and cost to be resolved.
Results of a survey of the political orientation of two widely divergent secondary school groups in the City of Panama in January 1960.
A study of such features as social influence, legal and extralegal patterns in government, parties and power centers, and nationalism.
Results of surveys of 11th and 12th grade students in El Instituto Nacional in Panama City. sociirr 1215.
Primarily a study ot Panamanian attitudes toward the some 50,000 Negro residents of West Indian birth or ancestry.
A comparison of traditions in Panama with those In the Canal Zone and how the different races react to them.
A brief history of the Isthmus of Panama since the early 1500's and a presentation of some of the Panamanian arguments against the continued presence of the United States in the Canal Zone.
An up-to-date review of the issues involved in the renegotiation of the existing U.S.-Panama Treaty.
U.S.-Panamanian relations, the influence of the Canal on domestic politics, political party organization and political leaders.
In making what the authors call a ""candid reassessment of the strategic and economic arguments for . . . [the control of the Panama Canal) by the United States,"" the authors conclude by recommending that tbe Canal be internationalized.
A brief comment on U.S.-Panamanian relations in the aftermath of the January 1964 riots.
Factors influencing Panamanian desire for treaty revision, United States willingness to make concessions, negotiation of the revisions, and approval of the new treaty.
A re-lew of treaty negotiations leading to the construction of the canal and subsequent revision of he U.S-Panama treats-, recent ""area* of contention"" between the United States and Panama, and future prospects for the Canal and the Zone.
United States and Panamanian views on United States rights in the Canal Zone, status of treaty negotiations, and proposals for future internationalization of the canal.
Hearings before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, 84th Cong., 1st sess., 1955.
A took at the issues that lay behind the bloody events of January 1964.
Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs.
Report consists of a historical background to the construction and operation of the Canal, together with the Subcommittee’s findings and recommendations.
A review of the various revisions of the U.S.-Panama Treaty of 1903, with emphasis given to the numerous concessions made to Panama by the United States in the different revisions.
Army and Navy otlierrs and U S Canal Zone officials, supple nenletf by printed statements.
A detailed examination of U.S.-Panamanlar. diplomacy In the period eo* ;ed.
An informal historical and economic siudy "" bv o former U S C'ntti.ral Affairs Officer in Paraguay.
An und'icumcnted history of PaUioiay from prc-Sp. v ol.* nizationtn 1948.
Diary kept h> the anther on expeditions to Argentine and Paraguayan Chaco in 1889-1891 and 1896—1897.
Volume is bill'd on the official records and correspondence, and the war diary and memoirs of the commander in chief of Paraguay's field army throughout the Chaco War.
Note • *ef reviewof the causes and results of the Iec5-ifc70 war in wt. :h Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay defeated Paraguay. pcuncs 1251.
Origins and functions of political parties, role of the army in national life, and. an assessment of President Stroessner’s rule since 1953.
A study of the history, ideology, organization, leaders, and operations within Paraguay and in exile.
A study of the role of the priest in Capiata, a town of 2,000 located some 12 miles east of Asuncion.
Political restrictions on Paraguayan citizens; and contributions to the Paraguayan economy made by United States and other foreign aid.
A Peruvian writer vommuils <>n economic and social conditions ■n Peru which create the setting lor a luture revolution.
A brief look at Peru’s problems of geography racial diversity, and tension generated by the increase in und shifting of the population.
A ,u. t brief summary of Peruvian **v*nt« Ta ' ***?. and the U S. reaction to the overthrow of the Prado government by the military.
An illustrated look at Peru’s worlds o', the mountains, desert, jungle, sen coast, and cosmopolitan Lima.
The classical early English-language version of the Spanish defeat of the Incas.
Dc’criptions of the three main geographic regions and of the problems involved in incorporating the Indian into the national life of Peru.
A look at the history, g, 'ernment, people, geography, climate, transportation, agriculture, industry, and economy of Peru, with illustrative data as late as 1963.
Geography, people, economy, history, political parties and programs, and recent political developments.
Economic, social, and foreign policy problems arc described and the 19*2 election discussed.
Geography, society, history, political processes, governmental machinery, problems of policy.
A discussion ol factors that have contributed to Peru's success in avoiding a radical revolution such as those cxtwtienccJ by Mexico.
Types of land tenure, cultivation arrangements, sire of holdings, production, and earnings for uwners, renters, and lahorers.
The peasant sindlcuto movement’s success in the Andes, revolutionary operations among the Indians, and the problems they pose for the Peruvian governmen’ and for United States policy toward Peru.
A tracing of the evolution ot Peru’s present land system from pre-Inca times to the mid-twertieth century.
Systems of land tenure, relative size of land-holdings, agrarian reform proposals, work of the Institute ol Colonization and Agrarian Reform.
A detailed examination of many sections of ihe Agrarian Reform Bill passed by the Chamber of Deputies before March 1964.
Grace and Company plantation ot Parumonga in Peru and the role such employment has played in transforming an Andean Indian into an Hispanicized laborer of the coast.
A review ot the attempts of the administration of President Manuel Prado to institute agrarian reform in Peru.
A review of rural development programs in the southeastern part of the Province ot Cuzco.
An appraisal of the economic and political factors involved In the Peruvian plan to construct the steel mill at Chimbote, 1286.
Problems and difficulties encountered by Peru in maintaining the 1U45-IU4H form of controls.
Notes. inflation in Peru during WAV It. its causes and influences, and Peruvian attempts to control it.
A review of economic prohlems and of the role of government m regulating the economy.
An examination ot Peruvian tax >tructures and revenues precedes proposals for restructuring the tax system.
Author describes forces at work to displace or change the structures of the Peruvian elite, actions he secs as necessary for economic growth to occur.
A New Approach to Community Development ir Ren: "" inime f losa Larrabure.
Operation of the village cooperation program inaugurated by President iicl.iundc with the creation of the Inter-departmental sccutive Committee on Village Cooperation.
A studyoed on census returns tor the village of San Juan Bautista and the slums ot lea.
A Study of health problems in the Middle llualiaga Valley of the Peruvian mnntaflu.
For an Introduction to this two-pan u po.-t, see the author's ""A Strategy of Anthropological Research in the Nation."" tbht., Vol 12.
Program ot President Bctnunde’s ""Cooperacidn Popular” for improving the lot of the Quechua-speaking Indians of tt.s Andes of Peru.
An examination of changes in class structure and the social mobility of the masses in Peru’s slowly developing Industrial economy.
A dc'.'-rtptloof the ways in which the Cornell Peru Project on the hacienda of Vicos has affected the people in the community and how some of the population changes have influenced the efforts of the Project to develop the community.
Motivating forces that led a group of young Peruvians to take an Interest In politics and to create the political doctrine of Aprismo.
A brief examination of the workings of the cabinet responsibility provisions of the Constitution of 1933.
Origin of, founders of, and achievements of APRA (Allan/a Popular Rcvolucionorla Americana), L P M 61 CM* » 13#5.
The Old and the New APRA in Pe<u Mvtb ami Reality Fredrick 1) Pike Inter-American Economic A/luirt.
Notes. leaderand ideology in the ""old"" APRA. r-io.vencnt, 1924 1941 and “t the ""new” APRA movement.41-196-1 1306.
Reasons for the success of the revolutionary elite led by President Betaunde.
An evaluation of the prospective presidential candidate in the then-upcoming election.
Future prospects for agriculture, fishing, mining, and industry, and trends in politics and the social order.
A five-sided look at the manner in which violence fits into decision-making and leadership-changing processes.
Career and political philosophy of Pedro Beltran, Peruvian businessman.
An assessment of presidential candidates, and a report on polilicat developments under the ruling military junta.
The role of Fernando Betaunde Terry and his Popular Aeltoes polllisal party m the presidential election of 9 d ine IW. which elevated him to the presidency.
A brief description of President Belaundc's reform program and of the organizations and forces that have erected roadblocklr, the way of its implementation.
A survey of governmental machinery and its functioning at the national, municipal, and communal levels.
A scholarly study of official United States diplomatic relations with Peru and of private United States business activities and aid to the nation.
A review of charges of conflict of interest involving the Administrator of the United States aid program in Peru for the period 1955-58.
A review of changes Ivy the Uniicd States in its policy of recognition of foreign governments precedes a brief review of United States actions towards the Peruvian government following the coup of 1962. i 1322.
A report on port facilities, fishing vessels, employees, types of fish and other sea foods, marketing practices, consumer preferences, prices, and the government's rote In fishery development.
Social mid economic features of. political history, political processes, govtrnmenlnl Institutions, and public policy.
A brief survey of Urujiiia>'s ncu^rnphv. poopJv. history. econ* dim, foreign relations, ami culture.
A review of twentieth century I’ruguay an political history [*re,e 11 aothot's reeiviutnetul.itions as to which aspect of Urtigu.tv.m hie its neighbors shoulil emulate ttnvf which they should avoid.
Ilistotv. political firoiesses, governmental institutions, economy. puhlie policy.
V olume is hotli a history and a guidebook to the Uruguay of 1451. the vear ol the author's residence Ihcre.
Influence of lose Batlle v Ordonez on Uruguayan economic and political life, political parly structure, causes of economic st.icnntum. stifline influence of t olilical machinery, weaknesses ol the ""Welfare Stale"" system, and the necessity for a chance in the evlahlivhed order.
A chiotticle of the happier scats of slate socialism in Uruguay— the period from luu4 to tfie dale of publication—years in which flic influence of .lose Rattle > Ordonez, the father of most of the socialistic lev'isl.ition. was at its height.
Notes. lmfiistrt.il production. rote of nuricuhtiNil exports, labor's dominant role,ilance of trade in post-WAV II period.
A very brief attempt to ascertain how the Uruguayan economy deteriorated to the point of national bankruptcy.
A sociological study of the influence rf factory operations on prc-industrinl and Industrial communities.
An explanation of the provisions of and an argument for the adoption of the ""Basic Agreement of Tnter-American Economic Co-operation” called for In Resolution IX of the Rio Conference of 1947.
Systems of land tenure, cultivation and grazing; and the place of cattle and sheep in the national economy.
An historical tracing of the process by which Uruguay replaced its single executive with a plural executive in 1952, an executive form that proved so impractical that the people finally voted to return to the single executive form in 1966.
A description of Ihe system of proportional representation employed in electing members of Uruguay’s legislative bodies.
A Study of Uruguay's constitutional development, political parly history, election procedures, public administration, economy, and social welfare system.
A discussion of political parties, election procedures, pressure groups, city-country orientation, economic chaos, and of future prospects for the nation.
P.->,neat iIstvikmS traders. causes, ami nun. of so/urr of rmcrnmrm •-» (Vtor*al Gabriel Terra.
Notes. iliMorical background to Uruguay's abandonment of ihr oneman executive. amt the Installation of the i-(i/rel<iif(>. or government by committer. on f March 1952.
A story of the causes and events of the AnyJo-Cicrnian bonibanlmem of Venezuela in the 1902-03 period and the position of tin* United States with regard to the issues.
A comprehensive reviewof . political-and--economic developments in post-WW It Venezuela by reporters who were in Caracas at th» lime of Ihc November 1948 noire </e tslndo that ousicd President Gallegos and broinihl n milltnry junta lo power.
Geography, economy, society, history, politiea 1 processes and ic'iitutions, governmental striiciure. public policy.
A review of Venezuela’s history, economy, political dynamics, and international relations.
A fact-filled summary of economic and political conditions under the Betancourt administration.
An undocumented fvstory covetlag the period from pre-Spanish exploration to 1948.
The Venezuelan president describes his country, and reports on Venezuela's response to tlie Communist threat, the role of petroleum in national life, the agrarian reform program, and the Industiial program In the eastern Venezuelan slate of Guaynna. j ECONOMY 1362.
A look at many aspects of Venezuelan industrial development and a particular analysis of the influence of wages paid by the petroleum industry on wages paid in other areas of employment.
Causes and rcMilltj of capital outflow uftcr the overthrow of Pdrcz Jimenez.
Venezuela's use of state funds to finance rural development through the Contr/o de DteneOar in the period 1948-1950.
Background history Trom 188. or attempts to claim -nd mine Iron ore in Orinoco basin of eastern Venezuela, and more recent efforts of United States Sleep Corporation in develop Ccrro Bolivar deposits In the area.
Gonziilcz Oorrondona, “Monetary Conditions in Venezuela""; Bernardo Perrin, ""Venezuelan Agriculture”; John Illckcy, ""The Venezuelan Food Supply""; Juan Sardi.
With Some Applications to the Venezuelan Case”: J Fred Hippy, ""The Venezuelan Claims Settlements of 190.5-4)5"": Mcrnin Avcndailo.
For a later report on one aspect of development, see Hcliodoro Gonzilez.
Report of a survey mission organized by the IBRD at the request of the Venezuelan government for the purpose of recommending n long-term development program particularly designed to facl'imtc public Investment.
An ECLA study In depth of various aspecls of the Venezuelan economy, with special emphasis given to the role of petroleum.
An examination of the amount of foreign capital invested in Venezuelan oil production and the amount of earnings generated by these fluids. iost Available Cop) rnt'NIBlFS 64 1)7(1.
Notes. \ studs of the hjlatue of pavmtrnts rrsord lot the 1948-1951 Ih*i i>>kl .in.l .. the lei.uumxhip otil.m.i‘ ..fi.tivnh ""balance"" > uilt-in.d tot.il irivt mom-carv polics.
I ecoiumiv; (2( that Venezuela is overdcpcndrtM «>n oil. amt (U that Venezuela has failed to ""soil the pe l,ileum"" on national development.
Facts relative to land tenure in Venezuela and an examination of ihe nature of the program for land reform.
Aspects of Venezuela’s economic and political stability, with prospects for the 1968 presidential election.
A well-documented analvsis of the factors influencing Venezuelan economic growth in the indicated period.
I he role of oil revenues in Venezuela's development from 1944 to 1951.
I echnical. labor, ami legal prob If in'* afflicting Ihe oil indtisliv in (he mid-1950’s.
An ex.tmm.tlion of the economy of the dif’crent regions ... \ ciie/uela.
Ttuil*» Het.im.Miit toncenune oil compans operations in \ ene/i.ela 1383.
Areas of the economy which Venezuela, thiough its sow-rheoil policy, sought to develop.
Venezuela’s reasons for employing at. and why ihe IMF endorsed ihe plan.
An attempt to determine the relative roles of the caudillo and the military as political factors in a century ot Venezuelan history.
The role of violence in Venezuelan history, the influence in modern politics of the “Generation of 1928,” political party Jrganizations and leaders, and economic problems in fields of petroleum production, agrarian reform, and industrial development.
Origin, leaders, programs, and role in government of dominant Venezuelan political party.
A study of the ""evolution and application of executive power"" in a naiiun notorious for the prevalence of dictatorial rulers.
Ar. attempt to show how foreign influences (principally French, U.S., British.
Italian, and Swiss) have been reflected in Venezuelan thought, law, and culture.
Arguments ijsed by the executive authority to support the nationalization*of justice ordered by an executive decree in 1948, and an indication of how this action has influenced the administration of justice in Venezuela.
An exploration of Venezuela'* political climate in 1952 with a view of foreseeing development* that might occur in the 1957 election.
Political party structure, guerrilla warfare, oil production and foreign policy under President Raul Leoni.
A brief scholarly outline of the major political parties describing their histories, leaders, and principles.
A description of the “system” of political decision-making prevailing in the post-1938 slums of Caracas and other large Venezuelan cities.
Several generalizations as to future political developments, based in part on Venezuelan experience.
A study of the origin, evolution, and future of national planning, and of the role of regional plannina 1402.
The role of university students in the protest against the Gomez government in 1928 and the subsequent role in national politics of the leaders of the protest.
Notes. he Secretary of State's handling of United States claims against the government of Cipriano Castro in 1907 and 1908.
Subjects 68 A cultural study o' At.-can Indians before the Spanish conquest.
Volume incorporates much archaeological evidence revealed in the po't-ie-W iteriod.
A study of all aspects of Mayan life—agriculture, social customs. government, religion, education, and arts and crafts.
A collection of 60 rubbings of low relief sculpture from the principal Maya centers in Guatemala and Mexico.
A discussion of the origin, aims, and accomplishments of the program inaugurated by the IIO in 1953 for improving :heing conditions of the Indian peoples of Bolivia.
It is the «<’ry ot the Chichimecs. the Toltecs, and the Azt ;s, and of the building of Tula, Teotihuacan, and Tenochtitlan.
Volume is based on an exhaustive study of primary and secondary materials related to Indians it. .he > alley of taexit 1458.
An annotated translation of the Boolf of ChiUr.i Baiam of Tizimiu. written in 1593 and later years by Maya peoples of Yucatan.
In part, it is a compilation of the history, mythology, and religion of the ancient Maya.
Experiences of the author and his family on a movie-making visit to Brazilian Indian tribes.
A review ot the hlstotical evidence showing the Influence of the Spanish colonial institution of the encomienda on the extermination of the native races in the Caribbean islands under Spanish domination.
A collection of 37 papers prescuu... at the September 1949 meeting of the XXIXth International Congress of Americanists.
Changes were in part caused or influenced by the linking of the Andean highlands of Ecuador with the tropical rainforest area of the Pacific Coast by the construction of a railway.
A Reader in the Social Anthropology of Middle and South A merit . and the Caribbean.
A his.ory of tne Incas from earliest times to their conquest by Pizarro. x467. hall of the Inca Empire and the Spanish Rule in Peru, 1530-1780.
A Study in the Development in Spanish Indian Policy in the Sixteenth Century.
A very brief survey of early Spanish efforts to improve the conditions of the Indians in Latin America.
Findings of anthropologists who participated in the Viking Fund Seminar, August 28~Scptember 3, 1949.
The story of the von Hagen-led Inca Highway Expedition that from 1952 to 1954 retraced the Inca road system in Peru.
Author seeks to fill a long-existent gap in the pre-Conquest history of the two tribal groups by bringing together isolated bits of new evidence.
A report based on translations from the reports oi early Spanish expeditions to the Yucatan Peninsula.
The Inca Concept of Sovereignty and the Spanish Administration in Peru.
Volume joins in one the two volumes that first were published separately in 1553 and 1880.
Revolts against Spanish authority, reaction to the encomlenda .system. authority of corregidores dt tndios, reaction to the miia system, Spanish seizure of Inca lands, and Inca practice of .tative religion and response to Roman Catholic Church.
A new edition of Stephens* work, covering his observations of 1839-1841, which was first published in 1841. l ike the numerous earlier editions, this is illustrated with the drawings of Frederick Cathcrwood.
Chapters 17 through 25 are devoted to studies oi Indians in various sections of Latin America.
A collection of 87 photos by Pierre Verger described in a brief introduction by Valcarcel.
Volume is designed as a “general, nontechnical survey of the main aboriginal cultures"" of South America.
Sponsored by the British Institute of Race Relations, this volume discusses the role of the different races in the Latin American area.
A report on the role of Quechua Indians in Bolivian life, based on research conducted in 1951-1952.
Psychology of the Qucchua’s of Peru revealed in interviews with residents of Vicos.
Story of the author’s search for the Inca fortress city that had remained hidden by the jungle from the early days of the Spanish conquest until his discovery of it in 1911.
Volume makes use oi recent information to answer questions as to social and political order of ihe Mayas, the nature of their settlements and sacred cities, and economic base of their civilization, the subject matter of their heiroglyphic texts, and the background of their culture.
John Lloyd Stephens and the Lost Cities of Central America and Yucatan, Victor W von Hagen.
A fascinating story of Stephens’ explorations in 1839-1841, illustrated with copies of many of the etchings made on the spot by Frederick Cathcrwood.
Index, The story of the ri«e and fall of Maya civilization designed for the general reader.
Ethnic and cultural features of Indian groups residing in certain territorial administrative divisions.
Volume is designed to make readily available the significant information accumulated in the Smithsonian publication, the Handbook ot South American Indians, which appeared in six volumes between 1946 and 1950.
An annotated collection of black-and-white photographs of pre-Spanish archeological sites in Peru.
An anthropological study of a village that is a contact point for two civilizations—Indian and Spanish.
A review of Peruvian archaelogy incoiporating information on discoveries made in the period 1956-1962.
An inquiry into pre-Inca civilizations that makes much use of new discoveries revealed by archeological investigation since 1955.
A collection of 2. writings including studies of various aspects of various periods and sites.
An explanation of the manner in which change from a “political-traditional'’ to an “instrumental” society takes place.
A detailed presentation of the author's ideas on decipherment of certain Maya hieroglyphics.
A human-interest volume by one of the twentieth century’s best known explorers and writers, 1505.
A history of the Mayan peoples and detailed discussions of their customs, religion, and agriculture.
A photographic story of the Auca Indians of Ecuador by the wife of J<m Elliot, one of the missionaries murdered by the Aucas in January 19J6.
Author’s observations are based on a two-year (19631965) residence in Ecuador.
Results of a year's study of human relationships in the isolated Ladino village of San Miguel Milpas Alias, Guatemala.
An exhaustive study of the economic, social, and political systems of the Incas, first published in French in 1928.
Findings by Wagley in a research residency of two years in the State of Maranjiao, Brazil.
The stories of 17 archeologists who contributed to the rediscovery, unearthing, and preservation of Mayan cities in southern Mexico.
Observations by (he author in the course of his work in the I950's as a botanist and zoologist with the expedition studying Central Brazil under the auspices of FundapJo Brasil Central.
Experiences of the author and his wife on expeditions in 1915, 1920, and 1936 to Indian tribes along the Venc/uclan-Colombian frontier.
The author, a British aeronautical engineer, who had just completed a 4-year contract with the Brazilian Air Ministry, describes the status of aeronautical development of Brazil (including a description of the Brazilian Aeronautical Technical Center), details the design features of a proposed Brazilian executive aircraft, and outlines problems confronting nations xtik.it as Brazil in their efforts to develop an aviation industry.
Legislative and treaty history of the first two decades of aviation development in Chile.
An early account of the first two decades of aviation development in Colombia together with presentations of different sections of aviation law.
A brief account of the accomplishments at home and in Europe o( several aviators from the two South Atneiivan nations.
Primarily, a brief survey of United States efforts, private and governmental, to participate in the growth of aviation in Latin America.
An examination of Colombian law. as interpreted by the Supreme Court and commented upon by lawyers, on the subject of the contractual liability of air earners for the death or injur'to passengers.
A WW It study of commercial aviation oper-.tions in Latin America, based in part on an earlier work prepared by the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs in 1940-1941.
Much of the information was gleaned from the operating companies by the author in visits to company headquarters.
Brief story of the contributions to aeronautics of Alberto Santos-Dumont.
A very brief description of the operations of the International Civil Aviation Training Center in Mexico City.
A reprint uf a Rand study reduced in various parts and without the original preface and introduction.
A comprehensive collection of titles of publications (books, periodical articles, etc.) pertaining to industrial relations and labor laws in Talin America.
The '‘General"" section of 62 pages is followed by specialized treatment of 20 Latin American nations and Puerto Rico.
The most recent and most complete one-volume listing of ""scholarly writings on the non-Hi-panic Caribbean published in the twentieth century.
Although of limited value to students of Latin America, the volume is valuable for its references to demographic, anthropological, and other related topics.
Unannotated list-; of hooks, periodical arrielcs. and govrrnmental puhliealions I in English and other languages). arranged hv country except for a general introductory section.
A brief review of the works of the leading Cuban advocates of historical revisionism from 1927 to 1%2.
Of value for references to works appearing in the first two years of Castro’s rule.
A comprehensive list giving author, subject field, institution, and dissertation title.
A “partially"" annotated bibliography of nto't value to those interested in food marketing in I.atin America.
A comprehensive rcporl on manuscript records produced by the U S Pepts. of State.
Holdings in the various categories arc described as to si/e of holding and dale, together with a brief deseripiion of contents.
A projected second volume i' to describe records relating to Latin America held by other departments.
Annotations are frequently in Lnglish, but often are in the language of the original item.
AnM.mnotaied listing of 4,xt7 titles of hook*, pamphlets, periodicals ibut not periodical articles), and I atm American government publications pertaining to the areas of economics, education, geographv. history, international relations, law, and sociology.
A Bibliographical Guide to Economy, History, Law, Politics, and Society.
A selective bibliography limited to the areas listed In the subtitle. with the addition of the area of ""culture,” and limited to works in the English language.
It is designed particularly for the university student and general reader.
An attempt to explore the efforts of the USSR and the USA In outer space as revealed in a study of press reporting and editorial comment in Latin American newspapers.
A valuable tool revealing holdings by United States libraries and archives of material peitaining to Brazil.
The Latin American section of this volume will be of value for others Interested In the area.
Inter-American Review of Bibliography, Vol., Jul.-Sep.58, pp, 256— 265.
Contains references to works of history, literature, bibliography, philosophy, anthropology, geography, education, journalism, and miscellanea.
A review of work done or under way, followed by an extensive list of titles of completed research projects.
A review of a number of textbooks and other writings on sociology by Latin American authors.
Survey of Investigations in Progress in the Field of Latin American Studies, 1965.
A lengthy selection of books and articles of value for the student of Brazilian history.
Valdivia, Narvaez, Cabeza de Vaca, de Soto, Coronado, Alvarado, and others of the Spanish conquistadors, and a tribute to Bartolom6 de las Casas, the Dominican defender of the Indians.
An entertaining story of the filibusters who invaded Latin American nations from United States bases hi the period 1848-1861.
Here are told the human interest stories of events in the lives of Narciso Ldpez, Pierre Sould, General Henningsen, and William Walker.
Well-written stories of the parts played by the leaders in the fight for South America's independence.
Brief biographies of Touissant 1‘Ouverture, Morelos, Moreno, Rlvadavia, Feijd, Santander, Balmaceda, Irigoyen, Barbosa, Lizard), Bello, Euclides da Cunha, Dario, Rod6, Ingenieros, and Caso.
Arturo Akssandri, Victor Radi Hays de la Torre, Rdotulo Betancourt, Jos< Flgueres, Luis Muhoz Marin, Victor Paz Estenssoro, Getutio Vargas, Juan Domingo Per6n, and Fidel Castro.
More than 30 of the bestknown 19th century dictators are the subjects of study by A Curtis Wilgus, Lewis W Bealer, Andrew N eleven, J Fred Rippy, Alan K Manchester, and Almon R Wright.
Well-told stories of Spain's warriors who won the New World between 1492 and 1560.
The Gulifrrez-Magee, the Mina, and the Long filibustering expeditions from Louisiana into New Spain (present Texas and Northern Mexico) during the years of the Mexican Revolution, 1812-1821.
A three-part history of Peru tcld in the lives of the incas, the Pizarroi and their confederates, and of the men and women of the Church.
A scholarly study of the role of Vasco Nufiez de Balboa la the exploration and settlement of the Isthmus of Panama in the first decade of the 16th century.
A brief jM uiHkwumrntcU bho*rar*> ut mhaih the aotho# gusMrx freely irom umjvvifir J hriup 1598.
Volume ti desrurd to asprsts of the lihbgdr ta shttk he is irpresenteJ as Patriot.
The entertaining story of the royal family of Brazil to the cad of the F.mpire In IOT9.
A personal Insight into Castro’s political career by a companion In arms in the Sierra Maestri 1594.
Latin American correspondent for the Chicago Tribune, lost faith in Castro.
The life and contributions of Mexico's president in the years ISM-1940.
The most readable and most authentic account of Columbus’ voyages, whose routes the author retraced in a sailing vessel.
A piufusely illustrated retelling of the co nt emp o rary storks of Columbus' lour voyages.
Cot umbos' achieveme n ts t> seen through the eyes of Ms Has. the scholar.
A scholarly account of the I MO-1 Ml r s pcdH i oo , headed by Franc too Vizrjuez dr Coronado, that eapfckrd the Southwestern region of the United States.
A study of the roles of the Spemsh .crvyurviador and the Artec ruler of -Mexico in .he batiks for control of present Uni te City.
An exhaustive biography of one id the great historian. of the Spanish conqm 4 of Peru.
The author, a lefltst Arcrntinr lawyer, trlh of hit scars of acquaintanceship with fellow Artentittian fiur-ara.
A biography of Jrtofarr dr Ouesads. the Spanish conquistador who contaned present Colombia.
An eahamtisr study ol the hie of Bewtto Julie/ Mexican lewder of ihe nud-aiarscemk century 1614.
The auihtvf of iho sh«bil> f>Ht*uph) «»( f laMs'o tk Miranda hahad to mtxh material (hat was not a-aiUNc lo William V RoMwh »hmc authonixuc woxk aifcarrj in 192* 1423.
A biography ol ""Mowv/uma"" the l-'irM. grtaigfaftdfaiher of the A/to. leader who tided in I ^ tn> when C otxii Metko Author has deperw*v J targefv lor mmjIic mairrtai on the to* remaining anoctw pktuft inoftK mmlKO). anna s, and ctu onelrv 1624.
Crossbowman's Story of thr Firstjtploralion of the Amazon, George Millar.
P453I. iKr life utils* ate »*l Maria I *i Duaitr who toyr to mftdxwT ra Afrrnnu as the w»*e »*• Iktalie Juan friva 1626.
Bib Index. the i>4r« s«l iiiayiHst. iktuad* Juan aad U4W^> ts ihr aa«J nilmrti sM IVt« 1629.
X Hviaphv i<( (knrrjl lose tie San Marlin. the leaslcr s*f vtuihrin Vu.ih Vmen.j‘.strmrnt 11 »r independence from Spain 1652.
X t'touiarh* Annul* | .-pc.' dr Santa Anna, thr iIkijuh who sSiminaicd Ihc hislius id Ihc Mcik an njikHl [lien lib tosttv 1*54.
Index X Kholath hfetaphs d ’•frrnlma's pies idem HUM l*7ai. filiK biuAjuM. jfHi Uip4*.«<na( 1*55.
Chronology. \ ipuvfjfhuil xh*J> t>( the rt«4iU4i4(i »lKi4lx>r i til Irrvh 1*57.
Hib I istw«naii/e*l hi»4.*»^al jxiiHin »*l the Frcixh Roidirttof! -»oJ fiHjixsjnt rOuirflutc. thr kj4r( ol the Il4bun Roolutioe Uil thr Rlnct Sap *»/«**« fhr Mivv «>/ T*»kiiuint louvertuir.
A comprehensive review of the Ufe and political career of the Dominican dictator.
Author makes much use of ictervlevn with those who knew the diet for The author's decision not to tat foot notes makes it dtfitcuk for the scholar to make full use of the noirworthy bibliography1*45.
A scholarly biography covering the political career of Getullo Vargas from 1722 to h» death in 1754.
An atirmpt lo ""achieve an inclusive and unified picture of the thought of the Mexican philosopher in its entire range—a ranee that attempted to encompass everything oh earth and in hravra as aril"" 1645.
Church MonnaiiT 1441 /. **,-» «>; thi Yi » f'i-.ith t mitBOr (TnfUfr dftt/ f*i« Km* •*# pixtf* \ionttn *;«»/ Chile.
I ir-sTN'ift >*. »v»ctKwJ 4 feCi:V:»c -ss rvtdtfhs «s4sc«x ;c —r*i s » m s*J<t .f :harWnftAf 4*i dr %-f rextdht.
A comrsariva* at the totes of G erm s* aad Amaricaa froiruamism to htse.. aad a study at Prosevtaat ways w the two (rex . oeei.it to of Pedrtahat aad Caaba and she sahaeha* s smamt i of XlnaSr Alegre 1*51.
F ssrsyws is* Cephas frvwx •rhhh warms end c a as w Sv in m ■w pw u s h lord Pehnetwua mat am ta Aayat It5l.
The approach In the 'live problem bv the Roman t'jihnla Church in colonial Cuba i* ct.nlraxrd with that of (he Church of England in colonial Virginia 1453.
A umc of MaliMkat data pertaining io ihe Roman Catholic Chu n Latin America.
Principally, a description the purpme and accnmptishmrnt' of the periodical Btaul Vtttmt. ntiuu by K-aihcr Carlo Jmaphat. of the Dominican order.
How the Christian Democratic Movement in Bfa/U differs from ib manifestations in Spam-Jv-spcaking vouMrio ofatin America and rriMJtn why the movement has failed to develop a broad followinp among Roman CmMm in Brazil who h:»vc leaned toward the Catholic Left 1454.
A true teg of the Chuich »v State urugglc from ICI to thr l*»‘v with dwtuwioen ol Carbolic crtwaitoa and the >pread of Prorrtlawbm.
A vampfutg of t roth repealed at the annual C1COP ICathofte lnrer-Ametkan Cooperation Program I contention m St. l ovn in the »inter of 1*67-4* 1459.
Author * ""articulate rrflrvtiM »*f the mttwencc wuh witch ( at holier* m has pr(meaud. nr sought to pet ovate. the hods politic'’ constitute""an njusuwo of the principal ideas, thrones and trends which Argentine Cathohc thought ha* produced” «n thr century and a half since lHO 1444.
An nantMkd c4 the frig ""'*hf of thr Rmnan Catted* Owtift in ( «bi to < astro * l cm .mu state unt Ifh 1445.
This volume is mu a history as such, but an inquiry into the historical evolution of the political position of the Roman ( dlhoiik ( hutch iii f atm America Fu|‘. *i treatment is given to Mexico but ebapte's arr ahi ik-voted to Venrzurl.i.
A scholarly study, originally published in 1926. of the men and the event* involved in the struggle in which the ( nurch sought to retain its -cahh, »t> power and it* temporal mtiurncr m the first 55 years of Mexican independence.
An tnquirv into (he role played by the Roman Catho 1 * Church in the 1965 uprising in the Dominican R r -iblu.
Imci Amrfhui I'uopciataoa Pr 0*1 aml meet in* htM u '. fc*a«*v Jo I lisuar l«M thr U port* oh 'he foSt e4 the Cettoin ( VrtH te aud-tnentirth tratmi t atie tmrigj air la'hnwl h* a .urptemnM MM t aim Aaarixa te *»urf.' »hs*b H * b*«rf factual frt>«t o« thr gnxtoph' fwogwe gcowmew* a*J o' K*on ta r>.h of Jo ixtx*1472.
J22P635c. \ of writings, covtrnng the colonel, independence, and con:..inpnr.itv period'. bv such authorities as Jo*6 Toribio Me.'*:j.
Of interest to students of t utin American history for its revelations of the operations of the inquisitorial arm of the Church in Mexico Peru, and New Granada.
Ait examination, far North American Catholics, of the content of the ton-pane report written at Chimbotc.
Peru, in 1953 by representatives of Catholic Action organizations in the 20 Latin American nations.
The author, a Jesuit ptiesl. reports in very brief fashion his ohservatio . primarily as related to the Roman Catholic Church, at the cities of Santiago.
A reexamination of the origins of the Cris’ero conflict, an identification of its goats, and an explanation of the outcome of the mice between Church and Stale in 1929 that ended the threevear 1 19:6 -1929) conflict in which thousands of Calhoti,, rebelled and fought against the State.
The use by the Spanish crown of the Catholic Church on the frontier as a civilizing influence In the conquest of Spanish America.
A Roman Catholic writer reports on religion in Latin Amrrica as well as then-current historical developments observed firsthand .ui his travels.
A look at such trends as those typified by the Christian Democratic parties, papal encyclicals, labor organizations, and church relationships with dictators.
The story both of Catholicism and of more recent Protestant developments.
Eighteen papers presented at the Third Annual CICOP (Catholic In.cr-American Cooperation Program) Conference held in Chicago in January 1966.
An examination of the geographic, economic, political, and social factors tha* led to the development of the different sects and a study of the leaders and beliefs of the several different sects.
The Roman Catholic Church as a Factor in the Political and Social History of Mexico.
An exploration of the history of the Roman Catholic Church in Mexico serves as a prelude to answering five stated questions pertaining to the Church uud its operations under the Calles regime.
A review of the volume, produced after 10 years of research, revealing the great shortage of priests in all Latin American 79 Communism countries.
Review gives some clues to the allure end size of the personnel problem confronting the Roman Catholic Church in the area.
A collection of It writings by 19 authors, half of whom are Roman Catholic clergymen.
Political Considerations; III, Socio-Economic Considerations; and IV, Religio-Social Considerations.
An Essay on the Apostolate and the Evangelizing Methods of the Mendicant Orders in New Spain: 1523-1572.
Volume, first published in French in 1933. is the product of It years research by the author.
In it he reminds the Mexican nation of the ""colossal debt it owes the Catholic Church by bringing into focus the profound revolution in Mexican life brought about by the Mendicant friars of the Orders of St.
A Journalist's view of the Communist threat in the early poslWWII period.
A tracing of the Communists' role in Chilean politics from 1936 to 1930.
A very brief report on the problems posed for President Frei by Chile’s Marxist unions.
The author writes that . . communism in Latin America has not operated under the aegis of the traditional slogans of class struggle and proletarian revolution.Aware of the lack of solid tradition among the Latin American population, the Communists . . . developed what for Latin Americu was a new concept of nationalism and then proceeded to exploit it fot their own political purposes.
A brief report based on hearings conducted on the nature of the Communist subversive threat and its danger to hemispheric solidarity.
Hearings before the Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 89th Cong., 1st sess., 1965.
Testimony on Cuban developments in 1964-63 and reports on various topics, including the number of Latin American students in the United States.
The author points out that prior to the time of publication that the Communists’ performance had been poor in Latin America in spite of the relative freedom to propagandize and the distinction of many of its leaders.
He feels, however, that the Communists’ performance will improve due to a change in initiative in Moscow and Peking and to the changing political and economic climate in Latin America, which he describes.
Origin, history, political efforts, front activities, and influence of the Communist movement from 1919 to 1964.
History, organization, membership, programs, leaders, and prospects for the Communist parties in Mexico.
Hearings of the House Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs, 90th Cong.. 1st sess., 1967.
Testimony of United States Ambassadors to Guatemala, Bolivia, and Venezuela, and high Dept, of State and Dept, of Defense officials.
Report of Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 90th Cong., 1st sess., 1967.
A brief report on such target areas as Venezuela, Colombia, Guatemala, and Bolivia, with a very brief discussion of Cuba’s role in Communist activities in Latin America.
A review of ihe methods used by Communist groups io promote Communism inatin America.
How the Communists seek to take advantage of all situations favorable lo Ihe advance of their cause.
Testimony of ihe Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs before a House Subcommittee on Communist subversion methods and accomplishments before and since Castro gained power in Cuba.
Former Sc laior's observations on anti-Americanism and Communism made on a trip with Adlai Stevenson in the spring of 1%0.
Testimony by Congressmen and others and exhibits describing Communist activities in the Latin American area.
Hearings of a Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary to Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security Laws.th Cong., 1st sess., 1959.
Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 90tb Cong., 1st sess.
A multivolume collection of evidence accumulated during several sessions of Congress on the nature and extent of Communist activities in the Caribbean area.
A different assessment of the prospects for Communism in Latin A meric— The author, a Marxist intellectual, finds that United States ""imperialism"" is a force countering Communist efforts to expand their influence.
Hearing, Subcommittee on Senate Committee on Judiciary, 88th Cong., 1st sess., Oct., 1963.
Creation, purposes, and achievements of the leftist front organization.
A comprehensive survey by a Post team of the strength of the Communist movement and of Communist plans for gaining political control in Latin America.
Conditions conducive to the propagation of Communism, and actions required to halt its spread.
A brief look at government-to-government and party-to-party contacts and relationships.
Spanish, American, anil Sovietof the problem posed for the United States by the spread of Communism in Latin America.
A review of factors that made Latin America a possible Soviet target for Soviet political expansion.
Basically, a condemnation of the Mexican government's actions in imprisoning Communist artist Siqueiros and certain labor leaders for their roles in strikes and other disturbances 1737.
An explanation of the peculiar conditions under which the “Left” operates in Mexico.
In addition to a thorough discussion of the history of both nationalism and Communism in Chile, the author devotes chapters to the roles of socialism and the Christian Democratic movement, and to the 1964 election.
A very, very brief Appendix has a few comments on pro-Chinese and Trotskyist groups.
An analysis of the polili.-al consequences of the gaining of power by Fidel Castro, the efforts of Communists to operate in Mexico, Brazil, and Guatemala and the tactics employed in each nation.
A veteran Latin American correspondent for the Chicago Tribune and longtime foe of Communism surveys Communist operations in Latin America.
A survey of Chinese Communist efforts to ""wean"" Latin American Communist parties away from Moscow.
It calls attention to the discrepancies between Red Chinese declarations and actual policy in Latin America.
Hearing before a Senate Subcommittee of the Committee on the Judiciary, 89th Cong., 1st sess., 1965.
Testimony by Jules Dubois, Stanley Ross, Enrique Chau, and Emitio Julian Navarro on the subject.
A journalistic, country-by-country review of certain aspects of Communism, based in part on visits by the author to the different countries.
A brief tracing of the rise of Communism in Latin America from 1918 to 1962, with emphasis on the enlarged Soviet efforts after 1953, the enigmatic role of Castro, the arming of Cuba with missiles, and Communist activity in unions.
An examination of the events, individuals, and political influences involved in the seizure of the fundo of “Los Cristales” on 28 October 1965.
Leaders and policies of Communists, Socialists, and “UltraLeftists"" in Chile.
A review of the programs of the Soviet-backed Communist parties and of the Chicom-backed Communist parties and of how the two groups are ideologically split.
Latin America, by the Undersecretary of Commerce In the Eisenhower Administration.
An examination of Soviet influence on the political development of underdeveloped countries as it applies to Latin America.
A 20-polnt outline of the methods used by the Kremlin In Its efforts to extend Communist influence In Latin America.
The author, a native of Peru, tells of his experiences with Communism at home and abroad.
The subjects, here presented in Fnglish. have been amplified from two lectures the author gave in a number of South American countries in 1959 under the auspices of the Congress for Cultural Freedom.
A translation of Hidoria de ta entturu en la America hispunica (19471. a humanistic review of the historical development of Hispanic American culture, with a final charter by the translator.
A Reader in the Social Anthropology of Middle and South America and the Caribbean.
A study of “the total functional and integrational setting” of cultural change in Brazil.
Informative and interesting insights into Spanish American culture by a longtime student of the area.
Detailed descriptions of the various fiestas fiestas or Ittes), religious, civic, and tribal, arranged by months of the year.
A fascinating and rewarding treatment of the institution* and processes that have shaped the culture of the former colonies of Spain.
Patierns of settlement in Latin America and economic and other changes in the recent past.
A collection of the author’s writings that first appeared in various publications in the period.
The record of the attainment of cultural power and influence by Brazil's foremost industrial city.
The role played by the Spanish character in shaping the development and maintenance of the Spanish American class system.
The conference was concerned with the relationship of social policy to economic growth and the article treats a large number of topics such as education, population growth, pc. capita income, agricultural problem-, social security, and other related subjects.
A discussion of the economic policy revolution characterized by the trend toward self-sufficiency (the industrialization movement) that appeared in the bellwether countries of Mexico and Uruguay before the end of WW I and in other nations after the worldwide depression of the early 1930's.
Contributions by 17 authors, most of them at one time or another US. government employes., on various economic topics or on economic affairs in 10 of the counttfes.
It contains a brief survey of some of the major economic problem areas in Lati.
A revised and updated version of a paper summarized in the Federal Reserve Bulletin in October 1967.
An exposition on the vole of planning, and opinions as to the success of different Latin American nations in achieving their planning goals.
A difinltion of “indigenous"" economy and a study ofme of its manifestations in the countries having a high conce itr-.'.lon of Indian population.
Index A review of the role of science and technology in the development of Latin America’s resources.
A WW II analysis of Latin American economic problems and reco m mended policies and actions for the area.
A collection of artxhs and stt'istlcal xud.es on various aipects of the Latin American economy.
A study nf such aspects of the Latin American economy as development, aurarian reform, monopolies, primary products, inflation, foreign aid. and national planning.
See viil for author's statement of a truism that should be remembered by U S citizens who would criticize their own government to people abroad.
Statistical and other information for Latin America as a whole and for individual countries.
A Soviet writer briefly scans the causes of Latin America's economic backwardness.
Article, though more than 20 years old, is of value for its information on experiences of Latin American nations with oncproduct economies.
A survey of Latin American economic problems based on a summer's soil by the author to six Latin American nations.
The author heifins with a section tilled ""What's Clone Wrong.” then report*. hi. obset.alions on the three nations where he spent most of his time Mexico.
Brazil, Argentina -and winds up with a pessimistic assessment of the prospects for I,ALTA and a pair of siicifcstcd reforms.
Latin American governments and their state-owned oil companies', United States policy in support cf United States oil companies In Latin American operations; and the role of the Latin American oil Industry in regional economic integration.
Article was originally prepared to serve as the basis for discussion and analysis by an ECLA seminar on the subject.
Hearings of the Subcommittee on Inter-American Economic Relationships of the Joint Economic Committee, 88th Cong., 2d sess , 1964.
Testimony by United States industrial leaders and AID officials on the role of private investment in Latin American development.
An examination of Latin America 1 need for private investment capital (both domestic and foreign; pinpoints the reasons why private investors tended to avoid the Latin American areas in the early 1960‘s.
Developments jn foreign trade, planning, tax reform, social services, industrialization, stabilization, and capital formation in the 1960-1963 period.
An analysis of sources of saving for gross domestic investment in the period 1950-1960.
Types of tax incentives, reasons for adoption of tax incentive legislation, and the taxpayer’s response to such legislation.
A collection of the author’s previously published articles on developments in Venezuela.
Colombia, on the Carretera Marginal dc la Selva, and on transport strategy in Latin America.
A report on many aspects of the Latin American economy, based on the author's K-month trip to 15 countries in 1957-195* as an economic specialist on a State Department exchange of specialists program.
A survey of preand post-WW II Latin American export trends, influence of industrialization, the need for enlarged markets for Latin American goods, the role of regional trading systems, and obstacles to Latin American development.
Author recommends that Latin American governments abandon state socialism for free enterprise.
A catalog of elements required for the economic development of Latin America.
Proposals for damming river systems in the Amazon basin and in the Choco Valley of Colombia advanced by the Hudson Institute. corril PRODUCTION AND MARKITINO 1821.
Fact and opinion on coffee production and pricing and international coffee agreements and organizations reported by or in connection with the investigation of the 75% jump in coffee prices in the Scptember-Novcmbcr 1948 period by a 5 nate Subcommittee of the Committee on Agriculture and Forestry.
Congressional and other criticism of the manner in which the United Slates became a participant in the Treaty and of the actions that led to an increase in the world price of coffee and to a consequent increase in cost to the United States consumer of almost $500,000,000 per year.
An examination of the process by which United States policy on this subject “was made"" in Congress and by the Administration.
Influence of internal taxes in European countries on consumption of coffee.
Analysis of draft ol a “Long-Term Coffee Agreement"" released to the press by the United States in December 19*1 Article reports Brazilian position on stabilization of prices and presents a critical analysis of objectives of the Agreement, 1826.
Prospects tor and problems confronting the establishment of a Latin American Common Market.
Signposts of progress in the years after the creation of LAFTA in I960.
The author, in the face of announced support for economic unify by the presidents of 20 OAS countries, presents his case for opposing a unity, which he believes the Latin American leaders are not yet ready to support.
A theoretical approach to a problem illustrated by an examination of the LAFTA program.
I-\, and CACOM to achieve their goal* and argues for the creation of a Latin American Common Market as the answer to the Latin American nations' illi.
The author concludes that ""Latin America cannot establish a common market that has any meaning in the midst of economic and social stagnation.
An inquiry into the role and functioning of inter-American trade organizations such as CACM and LAFTA and the implications of the operations of these organizations for U S trade.
Ascompiishmcnia to the end of ISM itariff reductionst are identified, and obstacles to future growth are enumerated.
Background to and provisions of the Free TradZone Treaty signed by Argentina.
An analvvo of new proposal, de-ognrd t»* eliminate the weakr, -z. inherent in the t ALtA program toe stimulating interAmen, an tradr 1848.
The Latin American Free Trade Association after Four Years of Operation.
Authors tract the rata of LAFTA'i growth since its creation In 1961. its sty I* of making policy dg rirf ods, tha role of lu fsaritutknu in decision making, and an exploration of tha question of how LAFTA has adapted itself to poUtical realities in tha different member nations.
An enumeration of the “obstacles” to tha snecast of LAFTA precedes an assessment of the potential “benefits"" to ha derived from an effective integration of the Latin American economy.
An attempt to assess the economic future at the Latin American area in terms of traditional economic growth poneraa 1854.
An attempt to illuminate pecvttefiites is the sockt ecuoomsr structures which have served as a framework Kir the g ene ts* of growth of the lain American cosmic* during the tost decade* ” 1854.
The Development of Latin American Private Enterprise Frank R Brandenburg.
Fifteen pa pen prevented at a Conference of the International Economic Association. held in Rio de Janeiro.
Topics discussed included those of deve l opment, programming. inflation, growth, capital, foreign investment, trade theory, terms of trade, primary products, raw material export,, mvesunent priorities, agikuhurai d evelop men t, industrial development. and exchange controls.
Material is presented in a ""subject-matter"" approach rather than on a ""countrybj-country"" basis.
A theoretical study reviewin g certain aspects of the Economic Jersey of Larin America.S9. prepared by the Secretariat of ECLA of which Radi Prebisch was Executive Secretary.
A retJItreiy retreat survey of economi c trends, of preset* stage of ec on om i c end tocial deve l opm e n t , of d nriopm caa in sen are group* of coumnev and of exports 1864.
Index. tecludcd re ibt. study of ecuaonuc puvtlt are the tolkrerec page's on hr an' George Wythe.
A discussion of bask development problems, of internal pot tens end administration, of dorrstic and foreign adriinistrelion,' export markets and foreign exchange, and of U S policy probl ems in the area.
An rxposuion of how the Northern industrial nation, adapted to technological developments and a theory as to how most Latin American nations must reconstruct their society before te c hn ology can function within them.
An namiaatxre of Ihr ""external"" and ""internal"" obstacles to economic development—«or Id coanodu) prices, tents of uede. trade controls, inflation, and political uncertainty 1872.
V ol t >reuui of paper, s ub menu lo iv lipti Wurkuw Gnmp on Scwxal Aspect, of r« mums tV.yt. om u a . re I are Amerwa Mexico CUy.
Raduiiom anj Counh rmolutum Change umd Patutcmcr m Social 88 Subjects Structures , .120.
A 'lutlv variations in patterns of national development in Ando-America and I.atin America, with particular emphasis given to variations in levels of economic development.
West Herman pulilic and private .ml and investment in Sooth American industry.
A Case Slmly in the Operations of Private Enterprise in Retarded Rations.
A wealth of information on types of British investment ventures. their successes and failures, with specific treatment of several countries, and a comparison of British and I.atin American views on the relative value of these investments.
Volume’s purpose is to estimate the flow of capital between Latin American nations and other world nations since the end of WW If.
Nineteen studies of investors in Spanish and Portuguese America from independence to the present in such fields as mining, transportation, and retailing, of the investment climate in investment-receiving nations, and it) of the policies of the capital, exporting nations.
A Peruvian writer discusses the rotes of inflailon and foreign loans in internal politics.
An examination, from the I.atin American viewpoint, of the problems to be encountered in the development of closer economic and political relations with the Huropean Ixonomic ( ommumty.
A Yearbook of tltc tiraduate School of Public Administration, Harvard t'niversity, 1 9.
The conflict between the Industrialist and the laUlumllstti , and examples of the role of the Industrialist in several countries.
The full text of the report first published in 1950 In which the author laid the groundwork for a program of industrialization of Latin American nations.
The relationship of Industrialization to the population explosion and urban growth.
Answers to questions why there Is such an Intense desire for industrialization In Latin America.
Ten studies and a bibliography tell the story of Industrial development in Latin America in terms of its leaders, management, influence on agriculture, union labor, and United States foreign policy.
An examination of the extent and character of manufacturing establishments, and a study of forces and factors influencing the growth of industry.
A brief tracing by a Soviet writer of the growth of industrialization since the 1930’s, and the role of the United States in the industrialization of Latin America.
Results of a survey conducted by the National Industrial Conference Board of relative costs of production in the USA and abroad.
Executive Secretary of the U.N.'t Economic Commiuion fir Filin America.
P r oble m * involved in import substitution sad tariff protection in the Latin American area.
Article is iilusuat.d with a treat number of Heines and statist leal tables.
Volume Is designed for use both by the general reader and the social scienc. student who is not an ""economics major "" 1999.
Volume is designed as a “first introduction"" In the Latin American economy “for the leader who wishes to visit the Latin American countries nr taler to study their affairs more intensively"" 1919.
A short analysis of the roles of the “monetarist” and “structuralist schoob of economic thought on inflation.
A summarization of the ""osonrsa. nl"" and the ‘structuralist"" pom son, and proposed policies for asntusg ih» p robitms of us nation.
Appcndti Volume w«s V w w rJ hsfc r> . bs’-c-sJ survey *ad a i sHsu) tor survey causes on the Lars* Acsrr.se* n,wus 1999.
Exploration of revised met hods for computing terms-of-trade ratal ieftships and use of four methods for recomputing data for five years in the IWCs.
A brief analysis of significant factors in inter-American trade r eviewed by the Mexicar.
Although now, out of disrr. volume may have some satue for me in historical comparisons.
An outline presentitiou of drsrtafiucnt. taking fix c or undrt way in lunutswl tr*»*c policy and an argument for [hr taking of .ourifcnatrd action by the Larin American countries.
Jansen Usd*tm mto thr r slew* and saftawnre ls f ""Vno-Soswr Tradr with t mm ,-smrtKa ' ns. s mt Him sum nut 1919.
A siudy of factors influencing economic relations and prospccis for future developments 1922.
A statement of Hie need for capital , a cataloging of the barriers to rhe free flow of United States capital lo I atin America, and the role of United States government capital in the area.
Author probes the outlook for commodity exports in the 1960's, examines the problem ot increasing the rate of export growth tn the |9oo\, and studies the problems involved in enlarging the market for I atin American manufactured goods in the United States.
These are “A Latin American View*,"" ""Mittttel S Wionc/ek; -'An Argentine View,** Enrique (■arcia Vi/qurz; “A Brazilian View,” H<lio Jaguaribe; ""An Interpretation of the Mexican View,"" Raymond Vernon.
A special issue devoted to ten different aspects of problems confronting United States industrial or commercial operations in the Latin American area.
A typical Soviet condemnation of United States business interests operating in Latin America.
A philosophical exploration of the question of how United States business should conduct itself abroad.
Latin American misgivings on trade and business activities of United States private business interests, thoughts on how Latin American suspicions can be overcome, and a listing of United States public aid supplied to Latin America in the posl-WW 11 period.
Results of a survey of some three dozen United States firms, revealing the nature, location, and availability (for research purposes) of their corporate records pertaining to their Latin American operations.
Study concentrates on the banana producing efforts of United Fruit Company in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama, and of the domestic and international operations of the company in the movement and sale of bananas.
Conditions under which United States business organizations must operate in Latin America, influence of the Castro movement on business operations, and an assessment of prospects for the future.
The trial*, and tribulations experienced by American A Foreign Power Company in doing business in Latin America.
A description of the various types of problems confronting United States private Investors inatin America such as taxation, expropriation. cic.. and an indication of profits in the period after I960.
A Soviet writer describes V S private investment in Latin America and outlines nine ""specific objectives of United States imperialism in relation to Latin American industrialization.
A very brief review of the Services performed by the Pan American Union through its Library Development Program.
Brief comments on illiteracy and lack of schools, dropout problems in elementary schools, teacher training and salaries, forces at work in higher education, and new educational legislation.
Results of a 1960 survey giving information on the selection process for higher education, economic background of students, and student attitudes toward politics.
Eastern Regional Conference, Comparative Education Society, May 7-9, 1964.
A collection of papers examining several aspects of education in Latin America.
A look at the Cordova Movement and its influence, the composition and political complexion of student bodies, and four significant changes that have occurred within the last decade.
Educational establishments of Catholic, Jewish, and Lutheran denominations, with statistics on enrolment by types of schools.
A description of the university reform program that began in Argentina in 1918 and has touched all Latin American universities in one fashion or another.
A brief, cursory report indicating the extent of centralized control over education, political influences on teachers, curriculum, types of schools, methods of teaching.
A brief comment on Castro’s attack on illiteracy precedes translations of a poem dedicated to a teacher, an orientation and indoctrination manual, and an arithmetic workbook.
A brief overview of some of the significant aspects of education in Latin America.
Basically, a review of two Latin American studies of “education"", illustrated and enlarged with references to California’s experience in higher education.
An attempt to develop a formula for guiding investment in education in developing countries.
A contract study prepared for the Office of Education, U S Dept, of Health.
The author observed educational programs and institutions on visits to Chile in I960 and 1963 and made use of his observations in the preparation of this study.
A review of educational literature in English, Spanish, and Portuguese published between 1048-1952.
Organization of school system, curriculum, enrolment, and degrees awarded by universities.
A general survey of the Mexican school system, a study prepared by ihc United States Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare.
A study of educational policies and programs based on extensive travel and research throughout Mexico.
A note on Brazil's unsegregated educational system and the Negro's role as a student.
Influence of population explosion, urbanization, and industrialization on education.
A review of the processes by which Fldelixmo gained a foothold In or control of university student and teacher organizations.
Results of tests designed to determine the literacy level of mixed tndlan-Spanlsh peasants in five Andean villages.
A four part review of the role of the traditional university, recent university reform, the university a force for change, and comments on critical aspects of the total educational system.
An analysis of the provisions of the Brazilian education statute of 1952.
These annual volumes have reports on certain aspects of education in each of the Latin American nations.
A brief misiitlcd examination of the state of education in Latin America.
Brief comments on origin, history, influence of Cordoba Movement. faculty, relationships with North American universities.
A description ot teaching methods, teachers, curricula, etc., tempt to show how the past is in conflict with recent efforts to relate campus training and research to present needs of the area.
A description of leaching methods, teachers, currlculua, etc., as revealed by visits to 37 law schools located in 16 Latin American republics.
A study of the relative Influences of the Portuguese and Spanish languages as revealed In reseurrh in the schools In the towns of Uvramento, Brazil, and Rivera, Uruguay.
The author traces the steps by which the North American Intellectual community developed its interest in and kinship with Latin American institutions.
The program of and the vocational educational 'ole of the Cultural Mission Program inaugurated in 1923 and reorganized in 1942.
History of educational efforts, post-1920 developments, nature of government control, success in combatting illiteracy.
Mexico's successes and failures in its efforts to educate its masses, especially the rural population, since 1920.
Educational practices observed by the writer as a visiting professor at Buenos Aires.
A description of a teaching method perfected by Brazilian Paulo Freire for the teaching of adult illiterates in Brazil and Chile.
Achievements of AID'S ROCAP (Regional Office tot Central America and Panama) *n producing and distributing textbooks tor elementary schools in Central America.
Some of the papers presented at a five-week seminar held In Paris in April and May 1964 by the International Institute for Educational Planning.
Decree legislation, government control over education, teaching organizations and methods, student enrollment, and antiilliteracy drives.
An expose of the two types of legends that exist concerning Latin American universities.
Social philosophy governing thinking of national administrators, school enrollment, espenditures on education, future prospects for education.
The authors desire to reveal the workings of education In a modern society end to interpret Brazilian developments to the English-speaking pcoptea.
A very brief look at political practices in the universities, the building of new university campuses, the introduction of the coeducational school, and multifaceted university professors.
An inquiry into the nature and extent of political involvement of Latin American universities.
Student movements in several countries, characteristics of, and forces recently influencing them (Communism.
A collection of JO articles and reports on various aspects of the political role of the student in Latin American higher education.
A review of xuch aspects of education as national control, organization, administration, and curricula of primary, elementary, and secondary schools, 2007.
A tracing of student efforts to achieve or Influence changes in university structure and operation from 1920 to 1943 and an evaluation of the succewet and failures of the movement.
Study Is based on a survey in which 1600 Argentine students were questioned on how their university experience had influenced their political thinking.
An insight into the elements of student power, the role of the student in the large state university, the student as a political activist.
One of the more recent studies on university and cotkpc education around the world.
Section VI. pp *27-379 has reports on educational development, in Argentina.
Author traversed am) phoiaervphed the roots of the Htghwny. tw gmmn a ia Venenata. toOouing the West Coast count ri es to Chile, aad returning via the Ease Const countries to cod in BrariL 2019.
A somewhat different type of travel book by a well-known Venezuelan-Amerlcan writer.
The usott comprehensive textbook on Latin American geography available.
Volume is a goldmine of geographic, economic, political, and social Information.
Discussions of population. topography, resources, hisiory, political institutions, transportation, agriculture, mining, and manufacturing, precede studies of countries or regions.
It Is the result of hit 10year ""search for knowledge of Latin America,” a werch pursued in the library and in the field.
A rather elemental tr. atment of the lands, people and produce of the region, which gives special attention to the various agricultural crops native to or transplanted there.
A cultural anu historical geography of the Caribbean, Central America, and Mexico.
An interesting collection of black-and-white photographs lllustrtes the textual description of the cities and countryside through which the highway passes.
A photo siory of the authors’ 12,000-mile tour of South American countries and of plans of the various countries to preserve their national heritages.
A discussion of five problem areas for Latin American students attending United States Diversities, by the President of the National Association of Foreign Student Advisers, 1961-1962.
A very brief look at the Colombian Army's three-cornered program for combatting its guerrilla binds—offensive combat, civic action, and psychological warfare.
Postwar Experience in Latin America.” includes the foBowtng studies of insurgency and counterinsurgency: John J Finan.
The ""famous"" Guevara ""Wbte"" foe the revohutonary. many of whose portions he would probably rewrite, were he alive, to tsKocpocete the lessons learned IT. his unsuccessful Bolivian venture.
Article discusses the three-point program of rural subversion and guerrilla warfare (including a report on the capture of a band of Argentine guerrillas in the Province of Saha in 1964). of urban subversion and terrorism, and of underground supply and communications channels.
Colombia, and Vrotruels. and lack of support by Soviet and Chinese Communist Panics for the groups involved.
Article contain* Information on the MR-1,1 movement, the role of rebel leader Yon Sota, the legend of guerrilla activities, and an interview with guerrilla leader Francisco Amado Granados.
Extent of, theory and practice of, and conditions favoring guerrilla warfare in Latin America.
Debray, and others for application in Latin American situations, and comments on the unrealistic aspects of that theory, and on social and political factors influencing guerrilla operations.
A review in some depth of guerrilla warfare as practiced in Mexico against the French invaders from 1861 to 1867; in Colombia, in the period since |94x; known in Colombia as ""la violencia""; and the Castro-ied uprising against Batista in the 1956-1959 period.
Examples of guerrilla activity and urban violence in Peru, Venezuela, Colombia, and Guatemala.
Guerrilla action* of June 1965, and the nature of the left-wing and right-wing opposition to the Peruvian preildent.
A report on the activities of the Bolivian guerriUa movement and of the capture and execution of Che Guevara.
A lengthy presentation marked by the author's comments on the United States role in Latin America.
Paul Bethel presents brief reviews of Communist-led guerrilla activities in Bolivia, Guatemala, Venezuela, Colombia, Argentina.
Brazil, Chile, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, and Peru.
How the Peruvian government quelled the peasants' revolt in the Province of La Convend6n in 1962-1961.
Guerrilla warfare as practiced by the FALN (Armed Forces of National Liberation since 1964.
This general review of the development of an inter-American system, discusses the social and historical backgrounds of developments, comments on the present and the future, and presents, In the Appendix, a ""Synopsis of Inter-American Conferences, 1826-1948,” 2064.
An attempt to present within one volume the story of the boundary disputes that playued South American relations from the first days of independence to 1937.
The Appendix contains numerous statistical tables of recent economic and other information.
The text of the document signed at Bogoti, Colombia, 16 August 1966 by the Presidents of Chile, Colombia and Venezuela and by the representatives of Ecuador and Peru.
Speeches delivered at international gatherings by the author, a prominent Mexican delegate to the United Nations and a longtime advocate of disarmament.
A popular college textbook which devotes a number of chapters to Latin American topics.
A detailed examination of the reasons why Ecuador, as the host nation selected at the Tenth Conference in 1934, has not found it opportune to hold the Eleventh Conference originally scheduled to be held in Quito in 1960.
A discussion of the origin, powers, and activities of the Commission by a member of the Department of Legal Affairs of the Pan American Union.
Inter-American Efforts to Relieve International Tensions in the Western Hemisphere, 1959-1960.
A narrative summary of events, followed by a large collection of documents pertaining to the diplomacy of the period.
As explanation of the Atlantic Trlansle concept, a cc tcept embodyins an interrelationship of Europe, North America, and Latia America.
Article is based on a chapter in the author's Strategy lor the America's.
An attempt to convey an appreciation or an undemanding of how the Latin American people view the act loos of the United States and Great Britain.
An early examination of European, Asiatic, and United States interests in Latin America from independence to the poet-WW I era. and a brief review of inter-American problem s of the IWO's.
An examination of the status of efforts to protect human fights within the eaistine inter-American machinery.
A collection of the resolutions adopted by Ihc above conference AuiAMCt son nawit 2M7.
The Colombian Minister of Finance casts aew byte on (hr purpose ot the Affiance 2M9.
Comprehensive rev tens of ec ono mic. potiSKaL and bus infer deselopmefHs dump the first year of the AlUaarv written by Simon G Hanson, Htliodoro GotuSlex, and Jobs Hickay, respectively.
Qgmji of, fpf-k of. fffp ff i tf iHi to, *ad p nwpffti for cte AlUaaca.
A pies for a revision of the Affiance for F r o gi ees which dm author characterises as follows The Affiance lot Fragreas la a vapid iiam w i a t patched to ge ther to rerve dm nsadh ot Uatksd States dtpiomacy. an atsaapt to Cover Up dm feiMre of tha Cuba tnvaskm.
Agreement among dm Ladn Ama rtca n nathma eras boughs by the promise of United States esramy "" 2997.
A re-readies of lhe record of United States I n volvesn ea t in Latte American affairs from the foundation of the natron to lffil. and a Unking of dm Affiance to earlier U S poho.
Tha a ss ist an t Secretary of State tor tmer-Amartean Attain vutxuto t erjmmandmtent foe t llu n m tar Fragreas action to ihr ath aanual ms m a g of the Inter American tomnk aad Soctel Couura. guano* Aim.
Aa analysis of the Alliance and Its p roble ms , ahkfc Indicates the ''number and nature of the obstacles confronting"" it.
A look at the p roble ms coo'rootiog the A lli a nce and aa cv innate of the impact the A l li a nce has had on the penkipatla* Lada American nationsThis essay is illustrated with tlx tablet ""tsiusi rations indices of e c onomic gtosnh and development.
A survey of the mOhary. political, busu.es*. and ec ono m i c aspects of the Alliance's second year, supplemented by official UA doc ument 2197.
A revie* or the mthtary. poUtkaL ccoaomk. and business aspects of the third year's accomplishments of the Alliance.
CoMrftwtiM) by hi Smirt writer* who urn C nrn i f n < ton rpmuwm 10 tr* erifta fufwikootac uf (he A&vkc.
Chile', prrudrm traces the propmah and venous for krm.. phene eeoooaeic cooperation mat prvceskd the otabhshmem of the Athene* lor Proems, outturns the Alliance', ebytetnev and indie ti e I *Vtt and *hy they has* not hern attained 2119.
A ntvk* of the wane tdjRtsn. obstacles, aad (nidMM. aa* of the rote of tht Check at the AJbenct lor present.
A comprehensive review of AlUaact for Progress goals, aa examination of Latin American land reform p ro m u m . and a study of exisiiag tax structures and the need for reforms.
A study of tht prob km s confronting Latin American nations in the areas of do mes ti c dt v tl opm tn foreign trade, external assistance. and regional integration, and of the rote of CIAP in studying and proposing solutions to these probkms 2116.
Prob temt to be solved if the ABtance for Progress is tty attain its ltd ito prospects lot t u t ii lt; ec o nomic tiiiininw of the Latin American community.
Stasis bearings whh respect to United States support for aa talargiment of the Alliance for Progress program prior to the mart tag of A mttica a Chiefs of State, held in Puma del Earn.
Aa anatysts of the concepts of “law” and ""Justice"" aa a n d sr seood in alhn u teas of Latin American his tory, and an attempt to dturm n a the effects produ ce d by these c o nce p ts on the rate of law as a pe a ce fu l instrument for promoting social p fo ^rtM ltd, by tnrathm. to iMr niatioMlHp to tht tflom foe attaining the goals of the A lHa e re foe pragma.
Isrkgtiavaf to the creatioa ot Us, A n iao r t tee Pragm a and a re p ort oa the rate of to Fund at Experts.
Crtektam of *triom sep t e t s of the ARstawe pragma. tsg ot i a g y of the me of VSoastonara2123.
The Ui tv err aaa » Castro; U4. a g y a n *f the turns Car Pt unreal 2114.
An analiw* of the idcolofical challenec powd by the Alliance la ""challener which t* more intricate and more difficult than that of any international economic and .octal pc OUT am ever before initiated hy the Free World"") and ncommendation for meet aw the challenne 2126.
An apprai-ai of accomplishment* of the Alliance for Fn-gres* *ia tear* after n wn first approved at I hr 1141 meeting in Uruguay 2126.
Ike li 5 Coorduuioe cl the Alliance lot Progress t tt April 19*2 1 outline-, the ohyrctnc* at the program 2136.
If Sr r*fw*iatt* for chan chowmg growth raw of dJtereai conntrie* for prnod lent)194ft 2132.
Sccmit) KuvS A*vha-**0ur 1 inwti. <nd other* oft tvnt and r-rorsved future C S support lor the Alliance 2133.
A sutse* of cat program-. a* (.-All and track .* ks« 4r*rkrc4 counuir* the I '* I .nirtrtar on Its* and tk-tvI-c’Wvmt. the ; atm Anocan ttadv cap. a I atui \antco ..' tvtc* marlrl. the Intrtkat-Cjl t ottee lotrnrw. and a penned oeiu ag r r vm r w l 2134.
A brief survey of tie period Race IW) which gaandngt the estratnaitary function* Mid capabilities of the Latin American military. the present political role of the military in three caieeoriea of countries, <J) the mWuty's fuactiom and capabilities. and United States policy toward the Latin American military.
An exnaUn n t ion of the rotes of IndmiHnBrelton and the population eiptoMon to changing society, toe process of potokal d evel op m en ream political trends to Mexico.
The Alliance for Progress and the Politics of Development in Latin America.
An uptmusiic dwc titt lon of the need for ana prospects for ac h iev e m e n t* hy the Alb aura 2146.
A* attemto to tvalumc the ""ectmemy and efficinscy of VS atd oprrat tow*"" as a mea n s of pr n mo l la g the early aim etna of the *o*h of the Atbswre.
Purpose* and acramrtttimtat* of the AWaace aassessed by ■ Soviet wrtter.
A former member of the Inter-American Defense Board describes the machinery through which Inter-American peace efforts are channeled, 2145.
Work presents instances of employment of the Rio Treaty to effect peaceful settlement of inter-American disputes and also a brief review of the creation of the inter-American system of peace and security.
Progress in the program to negotiate the treaty designating Latin America as :• nuclear-free zone.
A study of the inter-American defense system to determine how it has met the threat of Communism.
A review of the content of the Rio Defense act of 1947 and of action scheduled to be or ""needed"" to br accomplished in Bogota in Use upcoming conference in 1948.
The Walter Lynwood Fleming Lectures delivered by the author ai LSU in 1941.
He discusses the evolution of ihe American system, the evolution of the American system, the resources and politics of South America, commercial relations in the area, and tierra dorado.
Creation, capital, accomplishments and role ol JDB in Atliani*' ior Progress.
Background to creation of. shareholders in. powers of and possible courses open to the Inter-American Bank.
Its prospective nature and organization, and its probable development*’* <0 ' al VO,Ume of re:>ourt ' s for Latin American 2153.
A review of the question of ''intervention"" as developed In interAmerican conferences since t928.
Author poses and answers the questions r 1 > Could the OAS provide for the protection of human rights in an enforceable treaty.
In their exploration of the subject of the development of tlte American doctrine of non-intervention the authors devote considerable attention to specific instances of United States intervention In the Western Hemisphere.
A collection of papers presented at the December 1948 meeting of Ihe American Political Science Association.
Evolving Pan Americanism”; Federico G Gil, “The Latin-Amcrlcan Viewpoint’ ; William Manger.
An examination of postwar problems in Latin America and of Latin American tendencies to associate their causes with United States actions in ihe hemisphere.
JAn examination of the issues involved and of the attempts to reach a settlement in the post-1962 dispute over diverting the waters of the Lauca River by Chile.
Nature and powers of the council, its performance, and comments on its potential for greater usefulness.
A review ol (he nivloricjl background ol the OAS. and an anulsvii of the virudure and operation of the organization since its reorganization :n iV4g.
Background history of the development of the controversy, its causes, and the role ol the OAS in its settlement.
A brief discussion of Inter-American Congress, conferences, nd consultations from the Panama Congress of 1826 to tne Tenth Imer-American Conference of 1954. with attention given to leading participants, actions prepared, and ac-ompiishnients.
Pro and con arguments on the proposal for the creation of a permanent peace keeping force by the members of the OAS 2169.
An tyrmin.tion of the role of the OAS in the arbitration of dispute, between member nations.
Three lectures delivered at Holy Cross College prior to the Ninth International Conference of American States.
March-April 1948, and subsequently revised to incorporale actions taken at that conference.
A comprehensive and scholarly history of the development of the idea and the machinery of the Oz\S and its antecedents.
Brief reviews of the role of the OAS in the mediation of disputes in the 1948-1950 period.
The nations involved in the disputes were i 1 1 Costa Rica versus Nicaragua, i2) Haiti versus the Dominican Republic, and t 11 the Dominican Republic versus Haiti.
A Soviet analysis of the role of the OAS anti of plans for its reorganization.
The Director Gereral ot the OAS gives a Latin American viewpoint 3t the handling by the United States of its rela'ions with Latin America.
An analysis of the role of LaUn America in world politics, designed for use as a text.
An examination of the changes wrought in the inter-American system by the Third Special Inter-American Conference, Buenos Aires.
A detailed examination of the contributions of two OAS units to ihe successful conclusion of the Dominican election of December 20, 1962—the Technical Assistance Mission of 1961 and the OAS Observation Team of 1962.
United States role so fostering Pan American movement, accommodation of U.SS policy to principles and procedures of OAS, and role of OAS in Western Hemisphere relations.
The author, long associated with inter-American affairs, is one of the hemisphere's leading authorities on the subject about whicn he writes.
A probing of the problems posed for the OAS by the turmoil in Middle America and the continued rule of Castro as the dictator of Cuba.
The Regional Problem in America, Economic Cooperation and Pan Americanism, and Political Cooperation and Pan Americanism.
An examination of the terms of the Protocol of Buenos Aires of 1967, which was offered as an amendment to the 1948 Charter of Bogotfi.
Report of the Secretary General of the Organization of American States Regarding the Dominican Situation.
A description of the activities in the Dominican Republic of the OAS Secretary General.
An indication of the danger that the ""United-World"" concept holds for the “Western Hemisphere” concept.
The Secretary General of the OAS compares and contrasts Latin America with Anglo America as to history, customs, culture, etc.; and speculates as to the future courses of action of the two areas.
A criticism of .he opening ELCA session of 1948 and of the decision to create that organization.
A review of international investment as treated in International Co-operation in a Latin American Development Policy, a report prepared for the Fourth Extraordinary Meeting of the InterAmerican Economic and Social Council oi the OAS, held at Rio de Janeiro.
A review of the ECLA doctrine, formulated and preached by Raul Prcbisch, which greatly influenced the planners of the Alliance for Progress.
Latin American approach :o, contributions to, and role in the United Nations.
An examination of 1400 votes in various United Nations meeting,'by Latin American nations during the first 10 years of the U.N.'s existence.
Included are reports on ECLA; technical assistance; the special fund; social activities; human rights; children's fund; refugee programs; ILO; FAO; UNESCO; Pan American Sanitary Bureau; IBRD; 1FC; IMF; ICAO; Universal Postal Union; International Telecommunication Union; World Meteorological Organization; IMCO; GATT; International Atomic Energy Agency.
An analysis of the three basic institutions on which the interAmerican system rests.
An explanation of the functions of the cuhitdos in Spanish America under the Hapsburg kings of Spain.
A three-part analysis in which Charles W Arnade discusses political causes.
Arthur P Whitaker describes economic factors, and Bailey W Diffic concludes with comments on various aspects of the independence movement.
The> cover a wide range of topics from native peoples and European colonists to colonial government, society, culture, economics, and the Church, to the movements for independence.
Five of the appendices are devoted to a study of histories and historians of the period.
A textbc.ik covering discovery, exploration, colonization, international conflicts, institutional development, and the wars of independence in both Spanish and Portuguese America.
Brief descriptions of the survivals of colonial institutions and practices and their influence in current activities.
The first seven chapters of this volume are devoted to a study of the role of the Spanish as explorers and colonizers in the southern United Stales and in present Mexico.
Siories from the early chronicles of the role of the dog in earls Spanish seitlemcm of America.
A very early textbook study of Spanish institutions and their functioning in the Western Hemisphere.
Volume is designed to “examine the evolution of the Latin American stales since the achievement of their independence.
As background for the story of the struggle for independence in the Spanish colonies, the author describes the racial groups in the colonies and their role in the revolutions, and the roles of Jews, Masons, and Jesuits in the wars for independence2222.
Largely the story of English and Irish volunteers who served under Bolivar in the wars of liberation in northern South America.
The nature and extent of involvement of German banking houses in the financing of Spanish colonization efforts in Latin America.
This two-volume set constitutes one of the most comprehensive collections of scholarly materials on Latin America readily available to the student.
The Latin American sections carry the story through the Wars of Independence.
Author is concerned with the gauchos of Argentina, with Mexican charros, corridos, and Calaveras, and with the North American cowboy.
Illustrations include copies of color paintings by Castells Capurro, Walker, Nebel, Pcnelon.
A detailed account of the causes for and the events of the war that ensued when a Spanish naval unit tried to restore Spain's control over the west coast of South America.
A brief review of significant developments In the first half of the Twentieth Century.
It undertakes to explain how Latin America has come to be what it is today.
Although a half century has patted since this volume went to press, the reader will find much to interest him In in pages.
A comprehensive college textbook covering the Latin American area from pre-Columbian natives to political developments in I960.
In spite of the author’s excuse for not bringing the subject matter up to dace, the volume will be of little value to those interested in post-1945 developments.
An anthology featuring the works o( the principal U S students and teachers of the various aspects of the history of Latin America.
Principles of international law and new declarations and maolutioos on the subject.
A reprint of a collection of variouc lecture* delivered in the period 1941-1942 and originally published in 194.1.
A Communist portrayal of the history of the Western Hemisphere by the long-lime Communist leader in the United States.
The first portion, lor the most part, surveys topics having application to the whole or considerable parts of {parish America.
A history ol the peoples and the institutions that had a pan in the Spanish colonial empire in America.
A reprint edition of a scholar I set. parts of which were orientally published in 1911 Volumes 2-4 contain chapters on Spanish colonial drsdopmrnis in the Americas.
A h»Mo*> loW »n I he Jurtcv jounuK. and ktrm ol the purItopanh in making 2266.
A Mud> of 'ifch Spanish intuiuitom in ihr New Wo*k as (he efKtvmeivjj. ihe t hurch. the Slate, thr voi»»n>. ami d*her s*prvt« of Spanish rule 2261.
Translations of tht Journals of Spanish land and saa explorers in the region from Texas to California.
Trade and Navigation between Spain and the Indies in the Time of the Hapsburgs.
The story here presented covers the vkc royahy as an instiurioo ha both New Spain {modem Mexico) end Spanish South America for the entire period of Spanish Colonial admMsiratioo In the Western Hemisphere.
It dr»c ri bes the Viceroy as an administrative. (udveiai. and military trader and as a patron of adocation. of hosptiats. and of charily.
Author ranees over Latin American history tram djarnviry to midTwentieth century and casts many a critical glndte at V S motors loaned Latin America2271.
A statistical comparison □( news coverage by representative U S and South American newspapers.
An Inquiry into the availability and influence of mass media In Latin America.
A brief report on facts pertaining to newspaper, radio, and TV subscription and listening.
L.sccrpts from a wide cross section of Western Hemisphere newspapers and periodicals on the subject of Mexican confiscation of American-owned property by the Cirdenas government.
The role of the proletariat in strikes, nationalization of industry. and agrarian reform arc described in brief terms by Soviet writers.
A three-part review of managerial attitusies toward executive training and productivity, pension legislation in Chile, and the role of the Chilean labor union leader.
An explanation of the different method* of handling labor relation* in the three countric* and observation* on ho« ihc*c method* have influenced the economic development process.
An riaminalHui of cmrioymerit structure and patterns in general and ol the employment of Use tabor force in varimrs fields of endeavor, especially in urban employment 2284.
A >*>ci«logical«ocul psychological inquire into the role of Hade union, in Use developing economy of Chile 228$. ”( ommunivm and the Labor Movemcnls of Latin America Charles A Page.
An examination of the success of Communists in penetrating and. often, in guiding the action* of Latin American labor unions.
The process by which labor organized and gained influence after the assassination of Trujillo.
A careful inquiry into the influence of Chilean social security legislation on the Chilean economy.
A Study of the Social Question and the Industrial Relations System in Chile.
His product is a “study of the genesis and the first fourteen years of development of the legal industrial re la tun, system in Chile.
An attempt lo show that ihc distribution in Chilean employment reflects urban concentration rather than genuine economic development 2299.
Results ol tjs intersicws in a 10 nation survey conducted in Ihc period l»S« l«u.
A brief history of the labor movement since the death of Dictator Gomez in 1935.
Findings as to the social and economic condition of Indians working on 30 coffee fincas in the 1946-1947 period.
An attempt to determine, through the use of sociological methodology, why Mexican farm laborers shift to urban factory employment.
Standards of living of Latin American laborers compared with those in the United States, labor organizations (national and international), and Communist influence in labor organizations.
The nature and estent of cooperation between United States and Latin American labor movements.
A study of labor politics and labor relations under the free government of Pardo.15-1919; Bustamante.45-1948; and Prado.56 19622299.
Problem-* trv.iicd by labor, and negotiation*, and settlements for.Oil on the >:o*ernmem corporation by labor after the < \pr-.*prt.Mion of foreign oil companies.
A brief review of the twentieth century efforts of organized tabor to participate in the political process in several countries.
Article is based on an ILO report used in a discussion of labor-management relations at an Inter-American Study Conference held at Montevideo in November I960.
An examination of guarantees for labor found in the constitutions and in legislative ac's.
A “broad picture"" of the Brazilian labor force, of employment problems and policies, and of the supply of and demand for trained manpower.
An examination of various aspects of the Peruvian situation by an official in the Ministry of Labor.
In addition to studies of individual labor movements in 19 countries , the author presents a picture of economic and political forces affecting labor and of the role of international labor organizations in the area.
The nature and character of Latin America's two principal non-Communist labor organizations and of the issues which divide them.
Accomplishments of the five congresses of the PAFL held during its lifetime, 1918-1927.
History of participation by bbor organizations In three different attempts to creme a national planning system.
A review of the attitudes of different groups toward participation by labor representatives in national planning operations.
Essentially, a thorough-going piece of research on the labor force In the Peruvian textile industry.
Problems in the administration of labor legislation revealed in a seminar participated in by representatives of Ministries of Labor and Departments of Labor held in Lima *n October 1955.
A history of the drafting and operation of the law to regulate the movement of migratory Mexican workers Into the United States and of its impart on Mexico and on United States relations with that country.
Nature and extent of labor's gains in the post-WW II period in various countries—labor organizations, leaders, strikes, wages.
Authors trace the history of organized labor In various countries, the growth of the Inter-American labor movement, and the role of labor In politics.
The Role of the Bracero in the Economic and Cultural Dynamics of Mexico.
An inquiry into the great existing gap separating tabor law and labor practices in Latin America.
A description of the “traditional pattern of labor organization” prevailing In the Zona da Mata in the Brazilian State of Minas Gerais.
Analyses of employment changes in the 1925-1950, and 19501962 periods, a review of present trends. i:nd the presentation of certain hypotheses relevant to changes that might occur by 1975.
A body of information on rights of employment, legislation, pay. conditions of employment, etc., assembled for use at an lLO-sponsorcd meeting in Lima in December 1954.
A review of Spanishand Portuguese-American literature from the sixteenth to the twentieth century.
C hoice products of the pen of leading I atin American writers (rum the colonial period to midtwentieth century.
Con venations with LatinAmerican Writers,uis Harss and Barbara Dohmann.
Studies of the lives and works of ten 1 atin American novelists banal on interviews and reading of their numerous productions.
Juan Kulfo, C arlos I nettles,ahriet C.areia Maiquez. and Maim Vargas I losa.
An anthology of poetry and prose compositions ot the major Spanish and Portuguese writerol Latin America who have wrutin in the period since 1940.
Ulus. \ ktn»»»rv oversii'w of the I’SAF mission svsiem in I alin \mcru.i uhicvtixe. personnel, *«sM»;ntt’cn|s. duties.
Vers brief d»%viisoon »»l employment of Bolts ian and Paraeuav.m An forces in ihe lut* lun conflict 2339.
American t'niversilies Field Stall Reports Sen ice. hast Coast South A merit a Series.
No May Jun 1959. pp 29 39. \ kt»»cu'Moii 'in N|*ar:»hJ »»f .»*|*cst* of m-litar-*m m farm \rnrnd 2342. i o f* ,/ til Central illld South til’ll 14 «l.
D.oid WihkI 1 orulon I lie ln*litntc for Strategic Slmlic* Nr*' 24 pp 9tri.
S It* »*>rj II M * 5 a Aspcv't' of the I aim American Policy ot Ihe United Stair*.” he ouilinr*. analy/r*. and rrtOci/r* United States p>'ticy. and add* a review of ( j'iro\ seizure o.vur,4 of Cuba.
Author idemilie* and de'cribr* ""new"" miluamm aroma in the pM-WW It period that 6 dorinaubhrd from (be ""old"" mllilarom prevalent wncr (he laios. and drvcribcv revotmiom by the ""new"" milnarbrv in Peru and Venezuela.
A hixlorivat review „f the rok ol duoaioe* and auhiaty kadrr* in republican llrpamc AmetKa.
An jiuIim* ' »*f the foie the iMtHof) pL»>rJ bft»rrti lAV) and IMS* joj >n jwcssmrM id mtittjf) ifltoti n wcBf :i fubtkal dltjff* m Ihc |s»J F*fH>d 2351.
Jun I-Z6S. pp sx lllm Ill Military Institution and Influences A brief catalog of lome of (be different civic action project* currently supported by the different branchn of the Argentine military establishment.
Chile, and Colombia; Volume J of Ccnta Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador.
An attempt to ""idtntify some of the ‘ Inar ed i ent* . . |and| patterns' of civU-mllfcsry relations that have developed in Araentina.
Chile and Peru since they achieved independence from Spain'' Appendtaes A B, and C list military revolt I in the three nations In the inentictb century.
The author runes and answers several questions concetniac the retatiombips that have cabled and non prevail la different Latin American nations and suggests approaches to be used in further study of these leieisooshtps.
A brief history of Colombian support for the U N mutual security efforts introduces the study of Colombian support for that effort, including a review of the impact of those support activities on Colombia's domestic affairs.
How Mrsico. bcginmag with Prestdem cirdross in 1933. reduced the power and influence of the Army ia oat to n al posit is2359.
A study of the “uadtiioaal vs. atodtraiaauoa’' dichotomy that has rent the armed forces since 1930.
Bricks, of histories of Honduran Air force, aad a report on ■hr types of aircraft o pe rated by the HAT—past, present, aad future.
Twenty Yeats of Orpoti.'elhw and 7famine by the l'ailed Stales Marine Corps lames H McCrockltn.
Background, geography, political heritage, industrial interdependence. history ol cooperation, defense planning, techniques of hemisphere defense, inter-Amerkan defense and the United States 2366.
Origin, organization, students, faculty, curriculum, and field trip (foreign visitation I program.
Compo*it»ofl ofatin American fleet*. vudabtbi) lor AiW »mkr, operation ol UN IT AS maneuver*, and future rede* of ihnr uuo in hcmrwpoetr defeme 2369.
A iracint of ihc antecedent* of the different role* of the I at in American military.
Volume is world-wide in us scope References to Latin America, though limited, can be readily located by use of I he Index 2372.
The lUBkliVRUiRU of tbc m»**iofi the o»f4i»i/iih« of (be Mrieafl army bomta and l*(l. »« term* of aunniftt , tratame. and ojwprartR. to the po*M »t could play a role tn tarflbophctw drfeme, al brad m Orfeme of the natwn'* tetfv tot* 2374.
A >rH*(8«ht of Bibtzfi taffacmr « tbr and l S fwtocy io«ard mbtafT frpnr* 2J75.
I9J-I99. \ tlkVt uuSui of tbr t-A fiatrd bx nuhizD Usft m I atm Aaarfat*& |W*tfc » rtt tbr 1*4 fbi 1 fWKd 1376.
An .imvtjtnl iramUnon of a ipmh dctivrrrd in September Iv** h> Alternate lieneral l uis Rodolfo (M«vSle/ Evsemiaili the ume iludi appears m ihe auihor’s The loa/lici Suettt> Hra-non and Rt'Oiuiion in Latin America.66 (9100.
A retie* of Edwin Lieuwtn'i Arms and Potato in Latin America iNr» York.
IfiUor* »*f I aitn \mtt%%ett* ccpciwn.e with (he milliard's involvement m political affairs. opectall* in ihe vhangev in the s’ffKr i>( chief rwsulikc 2312.
Notes. fiej»araiH'«>’i and events **f ihe (Klt*hrr I® to revolution (hat h f*Ht*hi \ areas is* power 2313.
Washington Institute for the Comparative Study of Political Systems.67 6* pp 319.984 B8J7m.
Ih( . .rate* (H imcrcM to Mudents of I alin American affairs are (he chapter* reporting on project* in Brazil.
Twentieth century hbtory of the Bo'trian Army, the subslitutioo of the civil mUtta tor the army by President Pax in 1*3}. hit rebuiidiaa of Us* army and ctmcentrattoo of ita tfforts os civic action pro t ects.
As inquiry into the poim-vi role ot the armed forces in the period tram 1*16 to April 1963.
A Mgxp «d fbr fk*hr <A thr nditon an thftr yMpeir* of ,sH4Rt«t thoa< ia *h*sh ci *»’ r* MMrtfctc*. ilki*e an «b«vh «* •4»dii iMmnra and I.Vwc a mbtll at o> mmwwfe i laic* F«fl 23*6.
An examination of the ""program, otiani/ation. political tactics and strains” of the ""tenenies” I lieutenants) in the Vargas led recoil of 1*10.
The author seeks to determine the relationship of the icnrnies to other croups and to evaluate their crlormanse as state and national officials.
Author constructs carious models and indexes and ton 104) presents a compilation of certain methods of sc of in* the dilfeiew nations on the number of military interxcntions in the political process from 1406 to 1465.
International Security Affairs, discusses the reason for U S political interest in and U S p-titles toward Latin America, lie devotes most of his attention. -never, to the Latin American military and its rote in deferin internal security. in civic action, and as a political p -err.
An 4«al> viv of the varied role* of the 1 alin Amerkan military, typrv of military establishment v budgetary MipfiMi of the mill* ur>. and U S policy in re (he I atm American military 24*3.
A very brief look at trend* in populat i«*n rrt»*lh. agricultural production, and educational development 24*5. la America iMlina de Hoy.
A collect ion of wniiRp by leading I alin AmrrKifl »mrr* on a variety of lopKv i* drugned a> a textbook for 'luJctHi of (hr Sfemvh language.
II rtuho. the Cuban Revolution Its Imp-xi oe AmttivjB f oertjn Mk> 24§7, -Andean Kepubiici.
A re*»e-* » f reveni i development* by mi specialist* Thex and th*.r appraisal* ale konaM M Vhr*c»dcf.
Mate t tuvc»'it> November I V l gf ’2 I v-je.l ue iMe loiion Ifavut l) Huiks.
Uemoeiacy. ednxatiot . urban development, and agrarian development and its influence on such countries as llrupuay.
Abridged texts of speeches, and floor comments thereon, delivered at an Overseas press Chib symposium in March 1V62.
One of the author’s typical “Inside” volumes, based in whole, or in part, on the author'* 18,938-mile visit to the twentv I.atin American republics.
Observations based on author’s 1966 visit to ten nations of South America.
Area I ""The Individual and the Family."" discusses such topics as birth control.
Area IV, “The National Level,” treats such vaiicd topics as socio-economic structures, the integration of the Latin American nations, and inter-Americanism.
Area V, Latin America in the World,” is concerned with such varied ,:ii national topics as trade, communications, military relations, food production and distribution, and the Universal Church.
Author analyzes the stages of Latin American growth and survevs the problems of Guatemala, Peru, Venezuela, Cuba.
Mexico, and Bolivia, and presents some rceonwvT.datioi > for future U S action in the area.
A small volume condensing much of what the author has written in separate volumes about the new nations.
Robert J Alexander. “l.aiMi America anu the Communist Bloc""; David Burks.
Communism, the Alliance for Progress, politics, and economics, precede reviews of the individual nations.
A hasty review of Latin America’s past and present with some attenticn given to its problems and its leaders.
A Fragmented Society”; Edmund S Urbanski, ""Ecuador’s Socio-Political Mosaic""; Ronald M Schneider.
Roberto Oliveira Campos, “Relations between the United States and 1 atin America""; Lincoln Gordon ""InterAmerican Tensions and the Alliance for Progress""; David Rockefeller, ""Economic Development: The Lessons and the Challenge”; Jos£ Figueres.
German Arciniegas ""I atin America in a Developing World”: l ran s ois Fontaine and Max Kohnstamm.
Wuw/ic"" MVefc. and similar publications on various aspect' of 1 atin American hi'torv and society for the period 1950-19«2.
A collection of II papers presented at a colloquium held by the Center for Strategic Studies.
James Petras and Maurice /ciilin, “M.ucrs and Agrarian Radicalism"": Torcuato S Di Telia.
The Rra/ilian Case”; F'duardo Galeano, ""Uruguay; Promise and Betrayal""; Pablo Gon/alr/ Casanova.
The Dynamics of an Agrarian and Semicapitalist Revolution""; James O’Connor.
A reprint, in large part, of material originally published in The Sinn.
Bolivia, and Cuba, the impact of foreign capital, and the role of religion.
A collection of ten articles presented at the April l%5 meeting of the American Academy of Political and Social Science.
S9-I960 by a Latin American studs group sponsored b> the Twentieth Century Fund.
An elementary survey of trends, problems, international relations. and the Alliance for Progress.
I ord Bryce, “The Relation of the Races m South America""; Arthur P Whitaker.
Similarities and differences of Latin American nations, and questions as to the need for large armed forces, raised by the former President of Colombia.
Chapter 8 in the annual foreign policy survey conducted by the Council on Foreign Relations.
The second half is a collection of readings on various topics and on the individual countries.
Author briefly discusses recent developments ir. eight South American nations and follows wiih readings by several authors on various topics and individual nations.
A “commentary on some of the similarities and differences"" between the nation-building process in Latin America and in other parts of the world.
Ten essays presented at the Conference on Obstacles to Change in l atin America, held in Chatham House, London, in February IV6.
A discussion of such obstacles as ""populist"" movements and anti-Americanism, and of such topics as the role of the urban middle sectors, post-WW It developments, inflation, and the attitude of the intelligentsia.
A collection of papers presented at UNESCO meetings in Sdo Paulo and Geneva in 1954.
Origins of I.atin American philosophy, most famous preachers of philosophical thought, and influences of on Latin American development.
Richard N Adams, “Political Power and Social Structures""; E J. llobsbawm.
Jos< Figueres, ""Tnc Problems of Democracy in Latin America"": Jesus de G dindez, ""Anti American Sentiment in Latin America""; Germin Arciniegas.
These include travel reports, fiction, editorial and journalistic comments, history, political analyses, poetry, art reviews, and book reviews.
A collection of papers, lectures, addresses, speeches, and unpublished manuscripts written by the Brazilian economist who served as Minister of Planning under the Government of Castelo Branco, 1964-1966.
A British author, the Latin American correspondent for The Observer since 1948. has written the text to accompany the excellent photo coverage in this Life World Library volume.
John P Gillin, “Some Signposts for Policy ’; Allan R Holmberg, “Changing Community Attitudes and Valles in Peru: A Case Study in Guided Change""; Richard W Pafh.
United States Assistance in a Revolutionary Setting”; Charles Wagley, ""The Brazilian Revolution: Social Changes since 19J0""; Richard N Adams.
A collection of 11) papers presented at the Conference on Latin American Studies held in R»o de Janeiro.
Included are discussions on economics, political science, history, sociology.
Observations by famous British political scientist on a fourmonth journey in South America before WW I 2482.
An rntrr.itnint; Mu lupin tmly that dcrivo much of itsiluc from ihc* hbcr.il lifting o # rn.iteri.il from original sources.
A revision of the author's 1W*2 volume of the same title in whuh he cvimines the ueoer.iph.v people, economy, labor problems.
A collection of 12 articles, most of which first appeared in Monthly /fewer. in 1962 and 196.1.
Andrew G Frank, ""The Varieties of Land Reform""; Paul M Sweezy, ""A Great American |Caruenas)""; Andrew G Frank.
Ihe Janus Faces of 20th Century Bourgeois Revolution""; Harvey O'Connor.
A Christian Country""; Sebastian Salazar Bondv, “Andes and Sierra Mantra”; Manuel Agustin Aguirre.
Fnev then enumerate a number of complaints .leainst ioici^n investors and describe foreign bunncs> practices that ate the suh^vt of criticism.
Ihe author's thesis i« that the absence ot a hi'lorv of actpiamtai'.scship with threeKtors accounts for ihc failure of I atm \ioerua to l-e icvcpti'e t«* I uropcan ideological currents lhe*e I.Klots .lie 'beuk ot on historical experience with feudalism, the absence of relictou* nonconformity. and the relative ab'iiue ot ftidividualb initiated industrial development He fm« • ihai ihe teeion's historical addiction to ventralism offers an evplanaiion*r resent developments and .« clue to the future of the area 2492.
V' M »t ; s m\x*bikl m ant n itt.malt m>i and flow the consent has ml bn tts cd development in the last three decades 2493.
R.xus ot amiUnited States feelings, source, ot Latin American nationalism. roles of middle class parties, and how the United States can best cope with nationalism.
Reports by 15 specialists on various aspects of nationalism in I atin America.
Definition of. growth of. and influence of nationalism in different 1 atin American nations.
A definition of nationalism and a discussion of its expressions In such aspects as patriotism, social value, and ideology.
Background to and characteristics of Latin American nationalism, the National Revolutionary Ideology, the challenge to nationalinm from the Jacobin Left, other Latin American ideologies.
An examination of several aspects of Argentine nationalism such as the nationalism of manifest destiny, creole nationalism. porteilo nationalism, integral nationalism, Pcron’s nationalism, economic nationalism, and military nationalism.
An analysis of significant aspects of Cuban nationalism, especially of (he influence of Jos< Marti on Fidel Castro.
Leaders, proposed programs, agitation, and accomplishments of the Student Federation of Havana Univetsily in the late 1920's and early 19.10’s.
Specific examples of nationalistic developments in Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico, and briefer accounts of examples in five smaller nations.
A review of Spanishand English-language literary references to machismo.
Origin and development of the institution, national laws endorsing it. and examples of Us application.
Historical fasts of life, and a view of prospects tor creating ' democratic and representative government tn 1 aim America "" 2514.
An analysts of the conflicting roles ol government bureaus rat' in the (asc of a changing economic, and or psilittcal environment 2515.
Ideas and movements that have influenced Latin American history since World War I 2516.
Charles G Fenwick, ""The Inter-American Regional System”; Arthur P Whitaker, “The Role of Latin America in Relation to Current Trends in International Organisation"": Russell A Fiugibbon.
An examination of the political institutions and the forces of political change in Mexico.
Volume affords an opportunity to view Latin American institutions through the eyes of the French writer and to compare his views with the rno-e widely available one' of Li.S. scholars.
Extended versions of papers read at the 1949 meeting of the American Political -Science Association.
A Study designed to influence students of Latin American politics to Slew their specialty as a pari of the broader area of comparative politics and modern political svicnce.
Author describes how ihe urban middle groups pained political power anil shows how they have influenced ihe social and econoniic orientation of the governments of Uruguay.
An attempt to dt-teimine the degree of correlation, if any. between Political development and socioeconomic development.
Robert IScott Hie Government Bureaucratand Political Change in latin America Neale J Pear-on. “l atin American Peasam Pressure tiroups ,mo the Modcrnizanon Process”; Kalman M Silseri tea.rrship / orm.it,on and Modetni/iiion in latin America""' ivi C hristian IVniocracy in C h,le"", Constantine t Menges.
Univ. of lexas Press.49. |<)7 nn i»«i»w T355p. papers read ... a lectme senes the l’nuersiti „i lesi. , Ihe spring of tuag Inctude.l arc Ache, V < hnsiemen.
Political Croups and Political Functions; 4 Governmental Structures and Authoritative Functions; and 5.
Observations by the author in Indian communities in Guatemala and Mexico.
A study based on the findings of three groups of Latin American Experts on Public Administration.
The use ot “non-Marxian class analysis"" to interpret I atin American political phenomena 2537.
Now out of date for a number of countries which have modified thalr constitutions since that date.
A list prepared especially for the use of students, attorneys, and others in translating Latin-American constitutions and laws into English.
He points out that “Nowhere are constitutions more elaborate and less observed.
An examination of the contents of Latin American constitutions and comments on the origin and efficacy of certain constitutional provisions.
An examination of social principles incorporated in Latin American constitutions in the twentieth century.
An exploration of the causes of caudilllsm and its influence, and references to some of its better known practitioners.
A listing of presidential assassinations since IKS. with comparisons of the incidents and some conclusions as to causes and future prospects facing chief executives.
A Soviet attempt to show that the United States was involved in post-1930 military takeovers of governments in Latin America.
In the light of recent event', the reader wiU find of interest this 44-year-old commentary on the Institution ol dictatorship in Latin America.
A brief review of the ups and downs of dictatorships In Latin Aoterkt after i9JJ, and particularly after 1952.
A brief general review of the reasons why dictatorship flourished and a brief characterization of a number of dictators.
The influence of such factors as foreign loans, rights of asylum and exile, foreign educational Influences, foreign philosophies, Communism, and neofasclsm.
A brief examination nf the reasons why caudillos exist and how they function.
An analysis of the exercise of executive power by Latin American leaders—past examples and present trends.
A brief compariso nof the accomplishments of President Victor Paz Estenssoro of Bolivia and President Rdmulo Betancourt of Venezuela.
Fiyures. \n attempt to understand the phenomenon of political W't.i fulit v >n a l uli'i in I aim Vinrrii.m f*■ v»*im».»n-h> rx. nimnc the prrtondilioiis"" i>f political instability and hv def min/ v .»nd sv -U'fn.itualls mr.oiinm’(hr ttunuu «•( (xditw.il inM.ihihn "" for . ..nnii Fi *m *he uh|i*Ki see pp n’ n""’ 25*4.
An attempt to malx/r |i»liiu.il »>r""*jopn.eni. through the 10c ol xt.itisttl trvhfi .jnrs 2561.
I jHt< S-n j-fn-p• • * r •* -rt* v . *■ ■ ' f ’ V “ • ' s . tTFOUTICM FAFTttt 2572.
Mow ( hftsttun deimtvraw »n | atm America differs from the f'uropcaninetv and i e«»untrv*hv-country examination of the spread of the movement 2575.
Of some v line to students of I atm America for its brief ref creme I** f at in Ameriun aspects of the movement.
Present •ntluefuc and future r»sle of Christian IVm*Kratu •*r/am/atiens m I aim Amciisd 2578.
Icejl and if»slitutu>nal pressnptt«*ns and imraf artv striKture and programmatic schema "" 2571. electoral Systems.
Rilvrt F MeNivotl pp 26< 281. m Paul Kramer and Kidvrt F McNic«'ll led' I J atm iraenean Panorama An in.
In the process the nut In tf roml« out the characteristics IhsM diflerrntiate the prevent (hft'lio.n Democratic pa ft lev from traditional Catholic parties 2584.
A ro»h 1 yenefal rekK» of influences and moccmrnt> at '•oik m I ;<nn Amcru.
Some comment »m the role of S*viali*t panics and d«Htrinr* m 1 atm Amcfuj Ms*stl> on a larger theme.
IVmorratK Parlro have an uirtlaMe have rn claw atIrarKo are invapahte of meeting a miliiarv situation. artvl ««vr in |S.«er vill reave lu ropcrl Jcrtserarv anj lihcrtv.
A stud* «*l '.vlitKdi nartws tt» term’s of *hctf dedtsattor tt» thetf prtAljiPevl idcvU>«tc-t ^ 2592.
PT 4 k > No«v V 7'C thweSts i* |\>'.itRol pan **%; rtr,u« t** tM jatr»f»« ivVa* «-n t hnat*.*s (kwt V«i o(o* arid* *-«;,*r*wH.iiiT rr» u-Wri*i 2595.
A iur**»f) *tud> of the ideologic* of the major political parliev 2597.
A rci«» ol the -uirin. development. and philosophic it themes ot < hiivitun IVm.Hi.itiv ideotoec and ol its appeal to t sun Ameiiran rioups 2598.
An tnuuirv mio the belief', the dextrine' c'fwui'ed. and the n»*ntr)butH»n' **f I atm Xmciaa * leading p*n*uJore» *uvh a* Kodo.
An anal"")* of %«*mr of the *ntmv' »d Wader* of “political thought"" co'enne vari**U' peru»d' s*r ituormcnt' 2682.
Vtitudcv among Ihe SpamshspeaLmg Imelligenivia in the ( aribhean “ Manuel Maltkmado Denis.
Notes \ siitds of the I at.n VrtHUvdh mteikstuat mask* ls*f the phupcssc »*l detefm.nttt,h**-* >n!!.*u,rr events m his jtvd ythrf vouwues Ve jIw Jujji I I atm Ametuan In ic5WsiuaS -*nj the P»**nkrm **t l Halts* ’ t K iJ rr 2684.
I,,,jir, ,n Pan II irrai dr,rlnpmmi, in ,pr,ilk‘ emintnc 2621. the People and Politics of latin America.
X tr,i*cJ ,ri,u,n nl a enllrifr Irxllss'k Ilf*l puhltdwd b> Wi” WiUum** »n WW) 2622.
V ..wlc*Jix*n *>f 21 'iwheN pfcrjrcJ cspr^Mlh fiv this volume tlw .miKdx jn«l their subjects arr Manin l bireslJer “Mexico.
Ut M Hf.i/il Paul M Prnv?*:t -v, l ' Vr.n. '*a; ; r j« Miulv ts i)**sik.nrit In rote* mhH Uem« »:fjphw vhjuvtrtMio ai i*i«*vtjphi. pjiintu of wtilcmcitt urhani/jiu-ti.
I 13. illuv \ t»N*k jt €Vr'v *NiMt6 {*•*>»'( immmv of f^nuU t*l4r.r5>ft^ jnJ th* |S'«i|i* , n >d ih t .ilh’ix < hi-r.h on ih 2444.iphic DivlnbutKtn of Ihc Pitpulahon i>i I atm AitKiK.i amJ kccMtr.il IVvcIitprsK-nt Pmtftitc' fan :tr flaltetin for lufu t Atiiema.
Pjcau-i» \ lann-* ti \ *»i It; * rp MS jlO •M 4 . lotvrr.'l VS; raSus. m Mos*' l VViwt :.n .mo.
Whal Price I vasnm ''* and Irene B Taetiber, “Population Growth in Latin America; Paradox of Development.” ibid.
Statistics 01 the imputation explosion in Mexico, Central America, and C u ribbean Islands, and the capability of the natural resources of the rcuion to continue to support the population.
C'huracivri>tic negative approaches to the subjects and more recent positive analyses.
An examination of Latin American reaction (principally in Brazil and Colombia) to United States and other efforts to encourage familv planning and other types of birth control programs.
A review of various factors influencing the increase in population and the influence the population explosion has on the economy.
A collection of to papers most arc directly related to Latin America) on population problc.. -. prepared as background reading for the delegates to the Pan-American Assembly on Population which met at C ali.
A brief review of the rate of growth in Latin America since 1900, and of causes fo rthe growth, and of the cencentrarion of people in the cities.
A study of individual countries and of related problems of economic development, industrialization, urban growth, amt education.
Descriptions of the various racial components and an attempt to gtiess what percentage each constitutes in the total population.
A scholarly look at estimates of population growth and the demands increased population will make on industry, agriculture, and social services, and a presentation of alternative possibilities.
Also included is his testimony at a Senate committee hearing on the same subject.
Types of demographic research conducted in Latin America and purposes for which used.
Author calls attention to population explosion, poverty, standard of living, natural resources, industrial possibilities, and future prospects.
Nature ami extent of the unrest among Argentine scientists following the June ls»fih ouster of President Jllia and the installation of nenetal Ongania as provisional president.
Notes. \ survey of Soviet research institutions dedicated to the stii.lv of I atin American topics.
A preliminary analysis of the status of planning programs in the Latin American area.
A Brazilian physiols* Indicates the role that science and tech nology shojid play in Latin America, and of the need for national and international support of training tr. these areas.
Fields covered include geography, history, anthropology, political science, economics, sociology, and law.
A brief review r' the many and varied types of space projects in which several of the Latin American nations participate on their own or in cooperation with the United States or other space powers.
Author outlines the ""positive advances” made in world-wide research in Latin American affairs, and his “doubts"" as to the future course of such study.
An outline of the problem in technological reseaicli confronting the manufacturing industry In Latin America.
Problems in the utilization of natural resources, implications of resource development, and possible actions to employ knowledge of technological developments.
A description of research projects conducted by Latin American organizations under contract to the USAF in the period 19511963.
Soviet writer locates and describes United States space research and tracking stations in Latin America and briefly describes the space programs of Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico.
A Mexican writer analyzes the economic and political factors that make inevitable a revolution in Laun America.
A Canadian journalist’s 50,000-mile search for revolutionary forces in Latin America.
An explanation of why political turbulence exists in Latin America and why it will continue to exist for a long time in many of the countries.
A description of the factors or forces that are conducive to revolutions.
The Intellectual Background of the Revolution in South America, 1810-1824.
A reprint of a volume first published in 1924 in which the author examines 'he mentai attitude of the colonists, the influence of foreign ideas, the Creole spirit, the Church's position, the influence of writers, the issue of monarchy vs. republic, and the role of Simon Bolivar and his political philosophy.
A brief introduction to such topics as Communist activities, left-wing intellectuals, Yankeephobia, nationalism and such nationalist movements as APRA, and Peronism, and, lastly, the problem facing the United States in dealing with the problems posed by these subjects.
A review of 20th century Latin American history, much of it with a distinct anti-U S bias.
A collection of 27 writings which describe, discuss, or analyze the role or influence of many forces, institutions, or ideas which may have played a part in the development of the revolutionary movement in Latin America.
An attempt to portray the forces of revolutionary change at work in Latin America.
Cuba, and Bolivia, the Caribbean countries, Central America, Venezuela.
Shah, ""Class, Politics, and Debray""; Cida Silva, “The Errors of the Foco Theory""; William J Pomeroy,” Questions on the Debray Thesis”; Simon Torres and Julio Aronde, “Debray and the Cuban Experience”; Robin SiH ff< I x fthnkburn .m*l Perr\ \ndeiMUi.
A collection of n aiiiclc-s or evens 1 Mini, previously put'IishedJ ih;it cx;iniinc IX'brav’s thesis on the l aim American roolmion as revealed in hi' 1 K*u*Uttion in the Re\olution.
A Brazilian professor reviews various factors contributing to social ferment in Latin America.
Cuban, and Uruguayan revolutions precedes observations on the demographic revolution and what it portends for Latin American nations, and an outline of ‘‘some political implications of the Church’s attitude and policy"" toward birth control.
An cxl nination of the three twentieth century capital ""R” Revolutions for the put pose of learning lessons applicable to today’s Latin America.
A generalized appraisal ol the Latin American middle class— its numbers, its origins, its composition, its heritages, its philosophy, its prospects.
An arrangement of the peoples of Central America into eight cultural categories, each of which is briefly described.
Observations of lhe author anti others of the influence on peasant society of changes accompanying the industrialization movement.
Characteristics of middle class groups and the political, economic. and social problems that confront them.
Racial groups, sociological problems, influence of indti'triaiization on interracial relations, legislation concerning race, class vs. race in society.
An extensively documented inquiry into the subject of the owning of Negro slaves by Peruvian Indians after 1600.
A look at the people, culture, natutal resources, agrarian problems, minina, industry, and political, reliaious and educational features of the IJ nations where racially mixed peoples predominate.
Evidences of and types of prejudices toward, legal equality of with whites, attitude toward religion. pre-capitalist mentality of, and problems in improving the economic, social and educational levels of.
Origin, definition, and influence of the above terms, especially as they affect the Latin American world.
An inquiry into the Latin American viewpoint on these subjects as opposed to some U S viewpoints and a report on the place in society of non-whites.
The influence of Brazil’s National Revolution (beginning in 1930) on the development of a middle class and middle management personnel.
A review of significant factors influencing the develonmcnl of atin American society.
A look at class structure in several countries past and present, with an indication of the possible effect of indu.-’riali/ation on the existing arrangements, 2719.
Suggestions as to how sociology can help in the solution of Latin American cultural problems.
Wilbert E Moore, ""Introduction: Social Change and Comparative Studies”; Peter Heintz.
Author constructs a tentative typology of peasant groups to be used as a basis for further research.
Strengths and weaknesses of middle-sector leader' and parties and their prospects for future political influence.
An inquiry into the causes for and the results of the diversification of function that has taken place in urbanization in recent decades, 2725.
An »*\amin.ition of the historical ami cut rent roles of municipal gouinments »n different 1 atin American nations.
Nature ami extent of urban housing shortage, different national approaches to solution to shortage, types of urban problems stemming from urban population explosion, and suggested solution to problems 2731.
Examples of housing development programs, how they arc conceived, financed, and administered.
In an attempt to determine whether people of rural or urban origin constitute the majority of urban slum dwellers, the author traced the mo\enients of a number of residents from their birthplaces to the luirrio cluntieMino of Pi farmer 2733.
An attempt to show how slums .ire not equals integrated into cities'mlitie ami services, and to idrrttifs ‘some aspects of social change . relevant to neighboring relations.” and to show how ‘“tension, antagonism, and <■ >nfhct” form recurrent waves that overrun (he slums.
I actors influencing site selection, layout, and growth of cities in I atin America in the first century after the conquest.
A pessimistic, but probably realistic, appraisal of what the future holds for Latin America.
A study of migration patterns from I9 iM) to 1950, revealing a long-term trend toward immigration to the larger cities, and a more recent trend toward decent rat i/at ion as revealed in the growth of suburban towns in the Mexico City metropolitan area.
A li'tus .ritiv.tl riuiew mu onlv ot ihe IVp.irimt-m ,*f the Aims’* pi.mned study of Chilean institutions, but of other research conducted by United States scholars ami students in the area.
A studs of the diplomatic role of the United States in the struggle between Ciiiie on the one hand and Peru and Bolivia on tiie other, in the period 1879 1883.
A collection of political essays on a wide variety of Mexican and I atin American topics, including some that examine the role t f the 1 nited States in Mexico and in other areas of I atin America.
I atin America’*, problems and United States role in I atin America, as viewed by the author, lor 30 >** .rs a journalist and univer ;ii> lecturer speaali inc in I aim American developments, 2745.
Are We Uood Seighhors / Three Decades of Inter American Relations, 19301960.
The author has “sought to get beneath the surface of the Latin Amciican mind and to interpret inter-American relations . in terms of the feelings of the people "" His work is especially va.aable for us footnote citations of sources in economic and international relations fields.
Types ot inlluercc exerted hy the United States inatin American affairs.
Instructions to diplomatic scents, names of agents involved, and the nature of the information submitted.
A review of U.S.-Latin American relations in the litrht of Cuban developments and the extension of the cold war.
Author’s approach is highly critical of the United States role inatin America when not outright opposed to it.
A well-documented presentation of the objections posed by Congress and United States livestock and business interests to the Stale Depattment's effort' in the 19.33-1942 period to permit the importation of Argentine meat and Paraguayan tea 2754.
Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States Concerning the Independence of theatin-Ameriam Nations.
A collection of diplomatic correspondence, conic printed and some never before published.
Index. t'mtrd Sta'. t ljttin American Relations * Sri’K*' b*i««en t’ S representative* in Spain and the i s and »iih rcprcHntativcs of ihc Spanish govern.
A critical appraisal of the accomplishments of Ambassador Adlai Stevenson as Presidential representative on a tour of South America.
Article is largely based on Stevenson's testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
In its holdings from 1912. when the AUL collection begins, through 1931, Latin American material is found in the various annual volumes.
Beginning in 1932, however. and continuing through the most recent publications, separate volumes on ""The American Republics"" contain the Latin American materials.
A brief history of intcr-American relations, dissimilarities between the United Slates and Latin American nations, and evidences of change in Latin America.
The 1965 revision of this work is titled The Great Fear in Latin America.
An uns>mpathetic treatment of United States relations with theatin American nations.
The author attempts ""to ascertain the natutc of naval activities olf the distant coasts of Chile and Peru in support of American commerce, the resulting relation hips of the naval commanders Sr* fern JJ2 **mH patriot .iml f<*.»bo '-'fft-.tjH the immediate effect* on '*■ t enon* of the United SiW* with Sewnh Amrrujn eovernmrrt*intt possiilr lorn.' t tmrc rffcvt* »«n inter Ament.tn relationship* 17*5.
A r* print of . iiiluitir ih;»t apprjtd in l<*2V which cxjmmed the Uiplom.rtii rcl.itions of the 1 .«nn Amcru.tn >n WW 1 I7r 6. / min America and I’nih il States Polit ic Report of Senator Mike Mansfield on <i Study Minion 3<> Latin America.
Senator Mansfield’s separate repsirt on His obsers .11 lolls a member of the fi-inan McUlcll.m jrroiip of scn.itur* who visited I atin America from November 1H to December 7 1^61.
An attempt to explain why there is such a striking contrast between the economic experience of the USA and that of Latin America.
Author defines the ■ new” Latin America as that part composed of Argentina.
Mexico, and Uruguay, five countries that contain two-thirds of the i .nd and two-thirds of the people, and analyzes the political and economic forces at work in these countries.
Included arc (he Senator's notion, on United States problems in Panama and C uba.
Kroons whs United States public opinion in 1^50 was more impatient than in earlier years *,*h I atm American failures in democracy, and act urns by which the United States was expressing and could express it* leadership in inter Am ncan affairs.
New t ngUnd. and Penns.l satir i and Spanish anJ I’ortucuot to Ionic* in the Amcruav 2773.
I the * nonintervention pmuiplv should avl .« |hc fa*.c ol dor'i-prumi' in tuba amt in the rest ,.f | .,tin \mcrtva 2774.
A collection >9 documents pertaining to the U N the OAS. inu-r-Afreri, jn treaties. the Alliance for F'-saress. foreign assistance. .he Inter-Antetteali rievelnpmeiH 8*. ,. and treaties with various countries.
Findings of a Subcommittee team composed of Representative* Selden and Maillard on a trip to the listed nations in the period November M-December 10.
A Review of the Relations of the United States and Other American Republics.
Hearings before the Subcommittee on Intcr-American Affairs of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 85th Cong., 2d sess., June-July 1958.
A comprehensive report, illustrcted with many d-tailed statistical exhibits, of the operation of LJ.S. civilian and military agencies in Latin America, together with much economic, political, and social information on the countries visited by Senator F.llendrr between October 26 and December 15, 1958.
Sen.sfrsr Fllendrr’s obse-vattom made on Sp --Sspccltoo lour tbn third) or South and Central American countries in the period.
A classic early work on United States diplomatic relations with the Larin American nations.
A measure of the various way* m which thr United Mate* vor.'twinly and mkiirkio«i*Ii influence* Latin An.if tea.
Thr United Shifts and South 4 ou t s o Thr \orthrm R, publicArthur P Whitaker r .inhridgt Harvard l niv.
Author iratt' the de*rl. pn.cni ot I'S rrlaiuin* m the area and analyze* tnc |‘f<H , »lem* ciKottmercd 2796.
A position paper foc. ocd on the L’ S stake in Latin Amctica and the threat leaternal and internal) to U S interests Study concludes with a look ai rrospccti.e desetopments to 1970 2797.
A comprehensive scholarly studs of developments and events tran*ptnnf ir the period 2798.
ShtiiDeptn intent T-ii'i-l Regulations iind I'.o-Cattio PiopiiKrinda lilii(fil l m the I 'ruled Stall % Hearings before the tloux* ( oiimntiec on *'n American Asiivilies.ih Cone., Isi and Id sessions.
I mitt \f\th and Peter NchemKiv New 3 oik Knopf, l%4. ’<10 pp 3C4 IH N39SI Author * dr^ien t* to ' unrnavk thr that block' omlrr'tanthijf «*f I jfin Amer»vJin» h> Vo*«h A*^rru.*r3v. and <*l NrKth Vmcfujn* hv I it in Amcfuafi'"" 2815. / onn * ttni. inm Krtentment.
A 'tud> «*f the adimni'iratoe am/at h>*i and pfixedure' of the irvhfiKd as'i'iance pft'cram' administered by the United State*, the United Natnmv and the Oreanr/ation of American State* and darn*, m the ca^ »»f the USA. from I9T9.
Healings before Ihe Senate Committee on horeign kcUlionv, S6lh Cong.. 2d vesv.
Pin III Washington C»P») '96* 55HI71 t U'tifl 1966 Tnitmom on V S t<» t anr.
United States Postwar Aid i»* I atm Amel ia An I ihmn of lncom*slete fMttrul ArroufOmy *‘ »A;«f Vol 14.
Organitulions—Obligations and Loan Authorizations, July !. l94S-Junr .10, I9M Special Report prepared for tlte H-.ujv; Foreign Affairs Committee.
Vest ihc t aiir AmcitvJft .umm rcis-ft anJ inUi.iJujl ..mam icr»tl. »'t l’s .i J fc.rnc-J -<r if 2<A< For ji.i receisrU 6.
In the process. the author findv examples in the controversies between the United Stalo and the nations of Bolivia.
Mexico, and Venezuela over the operations of l' S oil companies within (hen jurisdictions.
A condemnation of U S actions In Latin America by the tometime President of Guatemala who paved the way for the regime of Jacobo Arbenz Guzmin, who wax overthrown in 1954 after almost delivering Guatemala into Communist hands.
A lengthy appraisal of how the three mentioned practices influence U S.-Latin American relations.
Reception of United States offers to supply atomic materials ;»-.j generating devices and ""know-how"" to Latin American p ,ons.
A Soviet attempt to link the CIA with most military involvements in eofpei ./e eanJos in Latin America.
A Soviet “expose"" of USIA operations and expenditures in Latin America.
Volume is of interest to the student of ITS -1 atm American relations for its chapters dealing with United States intervention in the area.
An historical review of ■ \S. involvement in the election processes of ten I attn American nations of the Caribbean and Middle America.
An attempt to reveal [he impact of Samuel Guy Inman's above tilled article, which appeared tit the -ft/,.sin Monthly.
A look at United States interventions in the Caribbean and the results thereof, the evolution of the inter-American systewr and suggested revisions of the OAS Charter.
A detailed examination of day-hy-day diplomatic developments that led to United States intervention in different Central American and Caribbean nations in the first two decades of the twentieth century.
A biased indictment of United States policy tn LaUn America by the President of Guatemala who had much to do with preparing Guatemala for the developments that took place under his successor, Jacobo Arbenz.
Organization, personnel, and objectives of USAF mission program in Latin America.
Use of United States arms by military leaders in coups, post-WW II U S military aid program, and pros ar.d cons of continuing aid program.
The Commanding General, USARCARIB. briefly discusses ihe role of the Army’s mission program and other Latin America* oriented phases of Army’s Canal Zone activities.
Brief advice to prospective members of United States military missions in Latin America.
The Soviet view of the role and the extent of United States military assistance to Latin America.
An analysis of the role of USSOUTHCOM in United States relation-* with Latin America, the purpose and extent of the United States military assistance program in the area.
Thistide, adapted from a speech delivered to the Association of the United Stales Army in October 1967, is repented from Transition.
Reasons why the United States supplied military aid to Latin America, amounts and kinds of aid, Latin American use of military-assistance equipment.
Role of United States Army Engineer units in civic action projects in Latin America, including a report on rural school construrrion in Honduras.
Nature and extent of MAP aid ir.50-1965 period in 12 Latin American nations in Caribbean area.
Notes A cursory review of types of assistance—both materiel and training—supplied, and an assessment of the results of such programs.
The author asks and answers several questions concerning the need for and the employment of United States military assistance funds in the Latin American area.
A review of the manner in which the Monroe Doctrine had undergone and was undergoing evolution.
A re-examination of the Monroe Doctrine, of its original application*. of its extensions of Latin American views of.
A summary and a continuation of the author's more detailed studies of the Monroe Doctrine. whMi see.
A cursory revie* of the history of the Monroe Doctrine from 1823 to 1962.
In his efforts to present a “fuller understanding of w’.at is perhaps the most important single document in Americar diplomatic history."" the author consulted the manuscript records in the principal archives of the United States and Western Europe.
A collection of 26 writings on the Monroe Doctrine spanning the last half century.
A Soviet writer identifies the causes which influence United States policy in Latin America.
An examination of four general United States objectives in Iatin America aid a discussion of the negotiations carried on ard concessions nude in achieving them 1887.
The author and answers seven questions that might be asked hy a United States citizen as to why certain conditions prevail and what the United States policy toward Latin America should be.
Reflections on the socio-economic problems of Latin America and on the United States as a contributing factor to these problem”. and a suggested 10-point program for a reorientation by the United Stater, of its Latin American policy.
An examination of United States policy toward Latin America in the preand post-Castro eras.
This small volume is of inicresl for ils treatment of the role of the Monroe Doctrine ano toe Good Neighbor Policy in United States relations with 1 alin America.
For a more detailed study of these topics, see the author's other works.
A collection of a large number of presidential messages, addresses, papers, and congressional reports from 1706 to 1949, Four Appendices contain numerous agreements, resolutions, and corrections adopted by or presented to inter-American conferences.
The Eisenhower Administration's approach to the handling of United States relation with Latin America.
Emphasis is given to delineating the changes effected by Hoover’s policies in inter-American relations.
Factors influencing United States policy relevant to Latin American nations and ei&ht suggested “do’s and don’t’s” for dealing with the nations of the area.
An analysis of economic, political, and social issues presented for the purpose of furnishing the conccrred layman with a basis for reappraising United States policy toward Latin America.
Volume examines United States foreign policy in its ""political” as well as strategic context.
Hawaii and Latin America.93-1895""; Chapter 5, ""The Diplomat as Propagandist: William Lindsay Scruggs.
The term ""revolution” is defiiu j, forces and/or institutions competing ie fill the ‘motivation/organization"" vacuum are described, and how United States policy and programs are influenced by the revolution is revealed.
An eurly scholarly stu'.y of the attitude of President Theodore Roosevelt on such topics as Panamanian independence, intervention in Cuba, fore.gn debts of Caribbean nations, and mediation in Central America.
In the ptocess the study presents a ""strategic ov»rv:»w” that sheds some light on major Latin American tre Js that bear on United States foreign policy.
A statement of guiding principles of the U S policy toward Latin America.
A review of the development of United States policy toward Latin American economic and social revolutions.
The Vice President discusses relative priority of Latin American matters, basic United States policy in the area, and implementation of the policies established.
An appraisal of United States policy goals and objectives when confronted with military regimes, revolutionary disturbances, the ideals of the inter-American system, and the problem of military assistance as opposed to political development.
The author conclude with a recommendation that the United States should promote broad internal reforms and improved educational opportunities, and should cooperate in a search for solutions to commodity and trade problems.
Article is devoted primarily to the question of the recognition of new governmental administrations in the Americas and, only in incidental fashion, with the recognition of a new nation that has thrown off its previous colonial status.
An examination of the pros and cons of de facto governments, a subject of much interest to students of United States diplomacy, for the United States government has been often confronted with the question whether to recognize de facto governments.
An examination of the process by which President Wilson developed his policy for treating Latin American nations.
Numerous chapters in this work by the most erudite of United States diplomatic historians deal with United States diplomatic relations with Latin American nations.
Author devotes his attention to inter-American relations in the 1946-1956 period and gives particular emphasis to the role of economics in the developments of the era.
Much of use will be found in the nine chapters devoted to United States relations with Latin America.
A scholarly study oi the organization, strength, and weaknesses of ti.c inter-American security system and, especially, of the role of the United States in that system.
Of particular Interest to a study of Latin America are Chapters 3-5 and 15.
German interests in.-41; gross domestic product.: guerrilla warfare.33.
Church.65; Communism. 130, 1710, 1711; culture.2: Uebray in, 2054; F.CLA study of.6; economic assistance.6-121, 2749; economy.0.
Argentine, 60; bibliography on.35, 1536; Bolivian, 130; in labor unions, 2285.
C ommunism, 1708, 1709, 1728, 1736, 1738, 1739, 1741; confiscation of U.S.-owned property, 2278, 2343: Coronado Expedition, 1C41; Cortfa’ conquest of, 993, 1039, 1042, 1043, 1045-1048, 1052, 1053, 1564, 1570, 1601-1603: Cristero revolution. 1681: culture, 969, 975, 985, 990, 1013, 1105. 2456; customs, 975, 990.
Leftist parties and, 2599; military assistrnee.02, 2548, 2859-2873; Monroe Doctrine, 2448.
Nicaraguan operations, 1188, 1189, 1191 Urban Growth and Problems.24-2739: development of cities, 2484; political instability and.61: problems of, 2457; recent trends.32; squatter settlements, 2729; urbanization ecology.13 Uruguay.28-1351; agriculture.37, 1343.
Mexican educator.44; political doctrine of.00 Venezuela, 1352-1405: AD history.85, 1389.
IMF endorsement of exchange rates, 1384; imperialism and. 2489; industry, 1361.
Guatemalan leader.4) Z Zapata, Emiliano: career of Mexican revolutionist, 1647 GLOSSARY AD Accirin Democrftica AID— Agency for Irnemaiional Development APRA—Aliarua Popular Revotucionaria Americana ASW—Antisubmarine Warfare CACOM —C entral American Common Market CEAS—Centro tie Fstudio y Acci6n Sociales CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CICOP—Catholic Inter-American Cooperation Program CinCtaat—Commander-In-Chief.
