Richard M Nixon  First televised debates in history  PROCESSED POLITICIANS  Cold “WAR”riors  Narrow victory  “NEW FRONTIER” – CIVIL RIGHTS / SPACE / FIGHT POVERTY / LIBERALISM / PEACE CORPS John F Kennedy 1960-1963 The Election of 1960 The election of 1960 was the closest since 1884; Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon by fewer than 119,000 votes.
Clip Debate Kennedy’s Inaugural Address Kennedy was the youngest person ever to be elected president.
Ask not...speech The Camelot Years • YOUTH • TALENTED STAFF • GLAMOROUS WIFE • YOUNG KIDS • WEALTHY • CATHOLIC • HEROIC • GOOD LOOKS • Compared to Camelot King Arthur’s mythical court – perfect life Kennedy & “Camelot” President and Mrs.
Kennedy, 20 January 1962, Washington, D.C., The Kennedy Family and Family Dogs, 14 August 1963, John F Kennedy in oval Hyannis Port, Massachusetts office with son Kennedy and the Cold War During the Kennedy Administration, ongoing tensions with the Soviet Union led to crises over Cuba and West Berlin.
To contain communism and stay ahead of the Soviet Union in technology, President Kennedy created aid programs for developing nations and expanded the space program.
CONTAINMENT LEADS TO VIETNAM  Kennedy –  “Flexible Response” –  Buildup of troops and CONVENTIONAL weapons / expand Special Forces units  new elements in defense and foreign policy  “missile gap” – United States Term outlining the perceived superiority of the number and power of the USSR’s missiles in comparison with its own – especially referring to ICBM’s.
Stated mission is to provide technical assistance for helping people outside the United States to understand American culture, and helping Americans to understand the cultures of other countries.
CONTAINMENT LEADS TO VIETNAM  Bay of Pigs Castro & Krushchev, UN Nov 1960 The Bay of Pigs On the night of April 17,1961, some 1500 Cuban exiles supported by the United States military landed on the island’s southern coast at Baja de Cochinos, the Bay of Pigs.
The CIA and the exiles hoped it would trigger a mass uprising that would overthrow Castro.
Cuban forces, backed by Soviet tanks and jet aircraft, easily repelled the exile invasion.
Revolutionary leader, Fidel Castro, openly declared himself a communist and welcomed aid from the Soviet Union.
Kennedy Addresses the Nation Soviet missile installations in Cuba On October 22, Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent further deliveries of Soviet weapons.
On October 28 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile bases in response to Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba.
Kennedy and Berlin One of the high points of Kennedy’s foreign travels was a trip he made to Berlin in 1963 to dramatize America’s commitment to West Berlin and West Germany.
In a speech at the Berlin Wall, Kennedy electrified an audience of about 150,000 Germans by stating , “Ich bin ein Berliner” , thus declaring the solidarity of all free people with the people of West Berlin.
CONTAINMENT LEADS TO VIETNAM  Nikita Khrushchev  Berlin Wall Soviet and American tanks face off.
President John F Kennedy and President Lyndon B Johnson supported programs intended to end poverty and racism at home and promote democracy abroad.
The War on Poverty and the Great Society programs marked the greatest increase in the federal government’s role in society since the New Deal.
Kennedy’s aid programs for developing nations also marked a dramatic shift in American foreign policy towards President Kennedy shakes hands with future President of the United promoting States Bill Clinton economic development abroad.
JFK and Moon Landing To provide volunteer assistance to developing nations in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Warren Court Reforms Under Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Supreme Court issued a number of decisions that altered the voting system, expanded due process, and reinterpreted aspects of the First Amendment.
His car raced to a nearby hospital, where doctors frantically tried to revive him, but it was too late.
In 1963, the Warren Commission investigated and concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had shot the president while acting on his own.
CONTAINMENT LEADS TO VIETNAM  First Indochina War  Vietminh  Ho Chi Minh  Dien Bien Phu  Geneva Conference  Ngo Dinh Diem  National Liberation Front  Viet Cong  Second Indochina War – Vietnam War  domino theory Ho Chi Minh, 1946 Pres.
CONTAINMENT LEADS TO VIETNAM  LBJ  “quagmire”  Robert McNamara  Gen.
William Westmoreland  Ho Chi Minh Trail  “pacification program”  “hearts and minds”  Tet Offensive (Jan 30-Feb.
Michigan teach-in was a forum on the Vietnam War and attempting to decide the best way for 12 faculty members to protest the war rather than strike from teaching.
We don't smoke marijuana in Muskogee; We don't take no trips on LSD We don't burn no draft cards down on Main Street; We like livin' right, and bein' free.
I'm proud to be an Okie from Muskogee, A place where even squares can have a ball We still wave Old Glory down at the courthouse, And white lightnin's still the biggest thrill of all We don't make a party out of lovin'; We like holdin' hands and pitchin' woo; We don't let our hair grow long and shaggy, Like the hippies out in San Francisco do.
Repeat Chorus Leather boots are still in style for manly footwear; Beads and Roman sandals won't be seen.
Football's still the roughest thing on campus, And the kids here still respect the college dean.
Gotta get down to it / Soldiers are cutting us down Should have been done long ago.
