And certainly on one occasion these dialogues generated some of the more significant insights into understanding and conceptualising the nature of trust in international politics.
Unfortunately, as we’d both drunk far too much on that occasion, neither of us can remember what these insights are.
I should add that when I use the term dialogue, this refers to an interactive process in which I talked and Professor Wheeler listened.
This is another way of explaining that my engagement with, and awareness of, the literature on trust in international politics, is limited.
Now when I first thought about this paper I anticipated it would be a straightforward narrative of how Khrushchev actively deceived Kennedy about the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba, betraying Kennedy’s trust.
And then how as the crisis developed that trust was rebuilt under the threat of nuclear war.
Before I provide that account, though, let me make one critical reflection on the narrative and its assumptions, which raises some broader themes and issue in the nuclear history of the Cold War.
Such differences are as semiotic as they are semantic, in that they denote differing perspectives on the nature and origins of the crisis.
In Havana, where the threat of American attack persisted on a continuing basis after 1961, the time horizon was more like thirteen months”.1 In the context of trust, deceit and betrayal, this is an important point.
In focussing on the Soviet deception in 1962, this isolates one element in the relationship between the Soviets and Americans and between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
The previous year, the American Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, initially told the UN Security Council that the United States was not involved in the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
Since 1960, American officials at the UN had regularly and indignantly denied Cuban allegations about American subversion and assassination attempts directed against Fidel Castro.
We have known since the Congressional inquiries of the 1970s that the CIA was very much engaged in trying to assassinate the Cuban leader, and we continue to learn about American attempts to subvert and overthrow Castro’s government.
Much has been rightly made of Kennedy’s attempts to reform American and NATO strategy, and with Robert McNamara, his defence secretary, to move toward no-first use of nuclear weapons.
Having campaigned against Nixon on the missile gap – the perception of emerging Soviet strategic nuclear superiority – by the autumn of 1961 the Kennedy administration accepted that the missile gap did not exist; indeed it was the United States that was well ahead and moving further ahead.
Nevertheless Kennedy with McNamara’s blessing embarked upon a further build-up of Polaris and Minutemen ICBMs – with the aim of preserving United States nuclear superiority.
This also touches upon some broader issues of Cold War nuclear history and in particular Soviet perceptions.
This was a period in which thanks to the work of Fursenko and Naftali, we know that Soviet intelligence – both the KGB and the GRU – were telling Khrushchev that the Pentagon had been preparing a nuclear first strike.
It is also worth noting the rekindling of the old debate about why the Soviets deployed the weapons in Cuba and whether this was primarily to address the strategic nuclear balance.
One of the features of much recent historiography has been to emphasise the defence of Cuba as a key goal for Khrushchev.
Fursenko and Naftali in their 2006 book Khrushchev’s Cold War have now rekindled this debate by arguing that what sparked the deployment in Cuba was the realisation in February 1962 that after the first generation Soviet ICBMs had proved an almost total failure and the second generation were either not ready for deployment or were vulnerable to pre-emption.
None of this is an apologia for Khrushchev’s actions, but it is essential context.
It seems to me how we see trust and honesty in this context surely needs to be informed by at least some attempt at empathy with Soviet leadership.
Here I think there are parallels between the early 1960s and early 1980s when the Soviets perceived themselves to be in positions of strategic vulnerability.
In the early 1960s, however, Soviet worse case analysis – insofar as we can discern their threat perceptions was at least based on a realistic assessment of the correlation of forces.
Now I began by talking about Khrushchev’s deceit and Kennedy’s trust in other words framing the international relations of the crisis in interpersonal terms.
But equally of course we need to examine the range of systemic, ideological, cultural and bureaucratic factors that may shape and govern relations between states or governments.
Certainly any assessment of the role of weapons in the crisis and in particular the risk of inadvertent nuclear war requires understanding of the operational level, and a focus on the command and control of nuclear weapons, which is a particularly fascinating aspect, well developed in the recent literature on the crisis.
And equally equally, looking at the inter-personal level, begs the question of how far and in what ways we explore the values, beliefs, norms and states of mind of the decisionmakers.
Certainly psychological perspectives are a potentially crucial if underexplored dimension to the crisis.
The contrast between the interpersonal and the intergovernmental is nicely illustrated in the initial reactions of the Kennedy brothers to the discovery of the Soviet MRBMs.
The literature on Soviet policy-making during the crisis has drawn from a degree of controlled access to Soviet archives, and provides us with new insights, perspectives and information, though key debates remain.
We now know – to use the phrase of John Gaddis that the decision to install Soviet Medium Range Ballistic Missiles and Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles in Cuba was taken by the Presidium in May 1962.
There remains debate about Soviet objectives including whether or how far West Berlin was the key objective.
There is a very clear consensus in this literature that Operation Anadyr was the initiative of Nikita Khrushchev.
And from the perspective of trust it is clear that it was Khrushchev who decided that the operation was to be kept secret, and the Americans were to be deceived.
Various commentators have suggested that if Khrushchev had made public his intention to deploy missiles in Cuba then the crisis would have been very different.
And later reflected on what he saw as ‘a very big mistake’ by Khrushchev.
Cuba was an independent sovereign state whose avowed purpose in accepting Soviet missiles was to strengthen the socialist camp in the correlation of forces in the global struggle against imperialism.
Various ExCommites have indicated that if they had faced a public announcement from Khrushchev to deploy missiles in Cuba, the confrontation with the Soviets would have been different.
And it now seems evident that the secrecy and deception fuelled Kennedy’s belligerence on 16 October and contributed to his conclusion that day that a military response was necessary.
We’re going to take out these missiles,’ he said, though he was not yet decided on a general air strike or an invasion.
If the Americans had believed a decision to use force was necessary that day, Khrushchev’s tactics could have tragically rebounded.
In the event, Kennedy and his colleagues were able to give more thought to the potential consequences and reconsider the military option.
Khrushchev had made clear to Kennedy that he did not intend to create political problems for the Democrats in the mid-term Congressional elections in November.
Announcement of the existence of the missiles would be made when Khrushchev visited the United Nations and Cuba in November, when the MRBMs would be deployed and the IRBMs would be nearly ready.
This was part of the deception but it also reflected Khrushchev’s intentions.
He did not intend to fire any missiles merely to deter an attack on Cuba.
Since he did not have the intention of using the weapons in an offensive operation, he considered them defensive.
He was looking at the kind of weapons whether or not they were strategic weapons.
According to Robert Kennedy, both Ambassador Dobrynin and Khrushchev’s emissary, Georgi Bolshakov, stated that no nuclear missiles capable of reaching America were being placed in Cuba.
On 11 September, the Soviet News Agency TASS stated there was no need to deploy nuclear weapons in other countries because Soviet rockets were so powerful.
When Kennedy met Andrei Gromyko on 18 October, the Foreign Minister reiterated the general Soviet line that aid for Cuba was not offensive in nature.
Soviet secrecy and duplicity rebounded on Moscow by diverting world opinion from the fact that Soviet missiles in Cuba could be readily compared to American missiles in Europe.
It was very difficult for the Americans to condemn the Soviets for doing in Cuba what they had done in Europe.
Moscow’s attempts to deploy the missiles in secret gave the Americans the opportunity to portray the Soviets as aggressively undermining the status quo.
The secrecy and the deception also helped frame American debates about policy–options.
How far deception and how far secrecy were crucial in this respect remains a matter of debate as does the question of why Kennedy felt the need to act even when doing so raised the prospect of war with the Soviets.
Let me then skip very briefly skip through the trajectory of the crisis.
Kennedy's initial reaction to use force against the missiles gave way to a strategy based on a partial naval blockade announced on 22 October coming into force on 24 October.
This was accompanied by nuclear mobilisation, with Polaris submarines flushed from their ports, the B-52s of Strategic Air Command ’s airborne alert circled toward their fail-safe points; and the DEFCON alert state was raised to DEFCON-3 on 22 October.
We now have a clearer picture of how Khrushchev and his colleagues reacted to some of these events, though this is still based on limited access to Soviet archives.
We do have insights into the debates within the Presidium about how to respond.
Khrushchev’s initial response to a possible blockade, for example, was to delegate authority to Soviet commanders in Cuba to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of invasion.
There was also heated debate within the Presidium over whether to allow four Soviet submarines to run the blockade.
These submarines we now know were each carrying nuclear torpedoes, unbeknownst to the United States navy which took to dropping explosive devices on them to persuade them to surface.
At the diplomatic level most historians would follow Lebow and Stein in observing how in the next few days both leaders manoeuvred to accommodate each other, trade-off some of their own objectives to avoid escalation and empathise with their adversary’s predicament.
How we conceptualise – what explanatory framework we might use raises some interesting questions.
James Blight for example proffers a model of adaptive fear which seeks to explain how both leaders drew back from the brink.
It is now clear that Kennedy was prepared to ‘go the extra mile for peace’ and undertake to withdraw Jupiter IRBMs form Turkey and Italy.
There is now though a debate about whether that offer had any significance on Khrushchev’s thinking, but what is clear is that Kennedy made his offer on the explicit basis that NATO was not to be told.
And what is equally clear is that Khrushchev honoured the agreement – even to the point where he did not reveal the arrangement in his memoirs when they were published in 1971.
So how important was the loss of trust and Kennedy’s sense of betrayal – the nuclear affront – to use McGeorge Bundy’s later description.
That the crisis ended in mutual accommodation is apparent, although equally apparent is the Soviet retreat to use the word that Khrushchev used to the Presidium on 28 October.
Whether this period can be associated with trust is more open to doubt.
And finally let me observe that the American offer to withdraw Jupiter IRBMs from Italy and Turkey was conditional on the Soviets keeping the arrangement secret.
It was indicative of the relationship at the time between Khrushchev and Kennedy that it remained so.
After the crisis, Kennedy sent Rusk and McNamara off to lie to Congress on whether there was any arrangement with Khrushchev over the withdrawal of the Jupiters from Turkey.
But we also might conclude that given the circumstances that was rather a good idea.
