Castro has two brothers, Ramón and Raúl, and four sisters, Angelita, Juanita, Enma, and Agustina, all of whom were born out of wedlock.
He also has two half siblings, Lidia and Pedro Emilio who were raised by Ángel Castro's first wife.
By the early autumn of 1960, the United States government was engaged in a semi-secret campaign to remove Castro from power.In September 1960, Castro created Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, which implemented neighbhorhood spying in an effort to weed out ""counter-revolutionary"" activities.
Giancana and Miami Syndicate leader Santos Trafficante were contacted in September 1960 about the possibility of an assassination attempt by a go-between from the CIA, Robert Maheu, after Maheu had contacted Johnny Roselli, a member of the Las Vegas Syndicate and Giancana's number-two man.
Hugo Chavez of Venezuela is a long-time admirer and reached agreements with Cuba to provide subsidized petroleum in exchange for Cuban medical assistance.
Succession issues According to Article 94 of the Cuban Constitution, the First Vice President of the Council of State assumes presidential duties upon the illness or death of the president.
Speculation on illness 1998-2005 Due to the issue of presidential succession and Castro's longevity, there have long been rumors, speculation and hoaxing about Castro's health and demise.
In 1998 there were reports that he had a serious brain disease, later discredited.
In June 2001, he apparently fainted during a seven-hour speech under the Caribbean sun.
Later that day he finished the speech, walking buoyantly into the television studios in his military fatigues, joking with journalists.In January 2004, Luis Eduardo Garzón, the mayor of Bogotá, said that Castro ""seemed very sick to me"" following a meeting with him during a vacation in Cuba.
Eugenio Selman Housein said that the ""press is always speculating about something, that he had a heart attack once, that he had cancer, some neurological problem"", but maintained that Castro was in good health.On October 20, 2004, Castro tripped and fell following a speech he gave at a rally, breaking his kneecap and fracturing his right arm.
He was able to recover his ability to walk and publicly demonstrated this two months later.In 2005, the CIA said it thought Castro had Parkinson's disease.
Castro denied such allegations, while also citing the example of Pope John Paul II in saying that he would not fear the disease.
Fidel Castro was too ill to attend the nationwide commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Granma boat landing on December 2, 2006, which also became his belated 80th birthday celebrations.
Castro's non-appearance fueled reports that he had terminal pancreatic cancer and was refusing treatment, but on December 17, 2006 Cuban officials stated that Castro had no terminal illness and would eventually return to his public duties.However, on December 24, 2006, Spanish newspaper El Periódico de Catalunya reported that Spanish surgeon José Luis García Sabrido had been flown to Cuba on a plane chartered by the Cuban government.
García Sabrido is an intestinal expert who further specializes in the treatment of cancer.
García Sabrido's traveled in also was reported to be carrying a large quantity of advanced medical equipment.
García Sabrido held a news conference in which he answered questions about Castro's health.
He stated that ""He does not have cancer, he has a problem with his digestive system,"" and added, ""His condition is stable.
Although most Cubans acknowledge that they are aware Castro is seriously ill, most also seem worried about a future without Castro.On January 16, 2007, the Spanish newspaper, El País, citing two unnamed sources from the Gregorio Marañón hospital —who employs Dr.
García Sabrido— in Madrid, reported Castro was in ""very grave"" condition, having trouble cicatrizing, after three failed operations and complications from an intestinal infection caused by a severe case of diverticulitis.
Also, a Cuban diplomat in Madrid said the reports were lies and declined to comment, while White House press secretary Tony Snow said the report appeared to be ""just sort of a roundup of previous health reports.
On January 30, 2007, Cuban television and the paper Juventud Rebelde showed fresh video and photos from a meeting between Castro and Hugo Chavez said to have taken place the previous day.In mid-February 2007, it was reported by the Associated Press that Acting President Raul Castro had said that Fidel Castro's health was improving and he was taking part in all important issues facing the government.
On February 27, 2007, Reuters reported that Fidel Castro had called into Aló Presidente, a live radio talk show hosted by Hugo Chávez, and chatted with him for thirty minutes during which time he sounded ""much healthier and more lucid"" than he had on any of the audio and video tapes released since his surgery in July.
Later in the conversation , he made reference to the fall of the world stock markets that had occurred earlier in the day and remarked that it was proof of his contention that the world capitalist system is in crisis.Reports of improvements in his condition continued to circulate throughout March and early April.
On April 13, 2007, Chávez was quoted by the Associated Press as saying that Castro has ""almost totally recovered"" from his illness.
That same day, Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Roque confirmed during a press conference in Vietnam that Castro had improved steadily and had resumed some of his leadership responsibilities.
In January 2009 Castro asked Cubans not to worry about his lack of recent news columns, his failing health, and not to be disturbed by his future death.
At the same time pictures were released of Castro's meeting with the Argentine president Cristina Fernandez on January 21, 2009.
Fidel Castro, July 21, 2006 In a letter dated February 18, 2008, Castro announced that he would not accept the positions of president and commander in chief at the February 24, 2008 National Assembly meetings, saying ""I will not aspire nor accept—I repeat I will not aspire or accept—the post of President of the Council of State and Commander in Chief,"" effectively announcing his retirement from official public life.
Succession On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People's Power unanimously chose his brother, Raúl Castro, as Fidel's successor as President of Cuba.
Family By his first wife Mirta Díaz-Balart, whom he married on October 11, 1948, Castro has a son named Fidel Ángel ""Fidelito"" Castro Díaz-Balart, born on September 1, 1949.
Antonio, Alejandro, Alexis, Alexander ""Alex"" and Ángel Castro Soto del Valle.While Fidel was married to Mirta, he had an affair with Natalia ""Naty"" Revuelta Clews, born in Havana in 1925 and married to Orlando Fernández, resulting in a daughter named Alina Fernández-Revuelta.
Fidel has another daughter, Francisca Pupo the result of a one night affair.
Gonzalez asserts that Comandante's reserves have been linked to counterfeiting business empires and money laundering.As early as 1968, a once-close friend of Castro's wrote that Castro had huge accounts in Swiss banks.
Among other things, he asserted that Castro has a personal guard of more than 9,700 men and three luxurious yachts.In 2005, American business and financial magazine Forbes listed Castro among the world's richest people, with an estimated net worth of $550 million.
Those who support his government generally state that Cuba has one of the world's highest literacy rates and most effective healthcare systems, low wealth inequalities, a stable government, and record of supporting international populist struggles in Africa.
Categories Categories Pages using ISBN magic links Articles with content from Wikipedia People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church Atheists Religion and Politics Living people Heads of state Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted.
