Home Explore Submit Search Upload Login Signup Upload Home Explore Login Signup Successfully reported this slideshow.
The Soviet Union tailed the United States in the Arms Race and their missiles were not powerful enough to be launched against the United States.
President John F Kennedy claimed that the United States had fewer missiles than the Soviet Union, but Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev still felt wary.
As Premier of Cuba, Fidel Castro, searched for a way to keep his nation safe from a United States attack.
As a result, Castro approved Khrushchev’s idea to station missile sites in Cuba.
The Soviet Union secretly built these sites during the summer of 1962. </li></ul><ul><li>On October 15,1962, photographs of the Soviet’s missile sites were revealed to the United States.
President Kennedy was riefed on the missile installations the next day.
He quickly called a meeting of his twelve most important advisors to deal with the crisis.
On October 28, 1962, they agreed to remove all missiles and put the crisis to rest.
One cause of this crisis was due to a missile gap President Kennedy spoke of during his campaign in 1960.
Although the United States had more missiles than the Soviet Union, he stated otherwise.
As President, it was up to Kennedy to decide whether or not to react to the serious nuclear threat from the Soviet Union.
The Soviet feared attack from the United States because they did not have missiles powerful enough to be launched against the country.
Khrushchev produced a plan to place intermediate-range missiles in Cuba to reestablish the balance of power in the Cold War.
Nikita Khrushchev had no intentions of starting a war but he knew the United States was serious about an attack.
High Communist party officials were displeased with the agreement between the two and two years later, after further discontent, he was removed from office.
When Castro came into office, Cuba’s relations with the United States weakened.
President Kennedy attempted to overthrow Castor in the Bays of Pigs Invasion, but failed.
It did, however make him take precautions for another United States attack.
When Nikita Khrushchev proposed his idea to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, Castro approved.
Before the United States presidential election John F Kennedy repeatedly spoke of a missile gap between the two nations.
The Pentagon reported to the Soviet Union that the United States had more missiles but Kennedy stood behind his words.
After Kennedy was elected president, Nikita Khrushchev began to “test” him.
In response to his actions, the Kennedy Administration felt to reveal to Khrushchev that there was no missile gap.
The Americans now knew that Khrushchev had always known they had more missiles.
Since the Soviet Union lost the arms race so badly, he worried of an attack by the United States This lead him to conceive the idea of placing missile sites in Cuba with hopes of countering the United States’ lead in a nuclear attack. </li></ul><ul><li>When Fidel Castro came into power, the United States made multiple attempts to rid of him.
These attempts included the Bay of Pigs Invasion, which failed, a military exercise in 1962, and a mock invasion of a Caribbean island.
The United States also developed a plan to invade Cuba in order to make Castro nervous.
As a result, Castro was assured the United States was serious about invading Cuba. </li></ul> 8.
After discussions between the Soviet Union and Kennedy’s advisors, an agreement was reached.
President Kennedy agreed to dismantle all United States missiles stationed in Turkey.
Nikita Khrushchev also wanted Kennedy to publicly announce to never invade Cuba.
Because he did not announce it publicly, he was said to have lost and become weakened.
The people in both Kennedy and Khrushchev’s government did not completely agree with their decisions not to take action.
It did, however, keep the lives of their country’s citizens of out of danger.
U-2 <ul><li>Spy planes, such as this one, were used to capture photos of the missile sites in Cuba. </li></ul> 11.
January 3, 1961 United States rids of diplomatic and consular relation with Cuba.
April 12, 1961 Kennedy pledges the United States will not use military force to overthrow Castro.
EX-COMM Meeting Meeting of President Kennedy and his advisors discussing possible ways to handle the crisis.
From Khrushchev to Kennedy This is a letter from Nikita Khruschev to President Kennedy.
Instant access to millions of ebooks, audiobooks, magazines, podcasts and more.
Clipping is a handy way to collect important slides you want to go back to later.
Enjoy access to millions of ebooks, audiobooks, magazines, and more from Scribd.
