Sergei Khrushchev said his father decided to send missiles to Cuba because he felt an obligation to defend it.
The crisis ended two weeks later when Mr Khrushchev promised to remove the missiles in exchange for a promise by Mr Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
George W Anderson Jr., chief of naval operations during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, died Friday of congestive heart failure at the Arleigh Burke Pavillion in McLean, Va.
Anderson, who retired from active service in August of 1983, and whose leadership during the crisis drew high presidential praise, was known for his outspoken views concerning civilian officials' involvement in weapons systems' development and operational tactics.
This led to disputes with then-Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara during Anderson's two-year tenure as CNO which included the Cuban missile crisis in the autumn of 1962.
Anderson also reportedly clashed with McNamara over nuclear-powered aircraft carrier construction and Navy fighter aircraft questions.
Born in Brooklyn, Y.Y., Anderson was graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1927.
During World War II, he was a carrier navigator and tactical coordinator and later was assistant to the deputy commander of the Pacific Fleet.
He commanded the Mediterranean carrier division during the Lebanon crisis of 1958 and later commanded the United States Sixth Fleet.
Following his retirement from active service in 1963, Anderson served as ambassador to Portugal and was chairman of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
Co pyrig ht 19 9 2, Unite d P re s s Inte rnatio nal, Inc., All rig hts re s e rve Cit at ion 'Adm.
Johnson, said Soviet forces in Cuba had 36 nuclear warheads for the 24 intermediate-range missiles that were capable of hitting the United States.
At the time, the CIA said it didn't believe there were any nuclear warheads on the island, Mr McNamara said after the last session of a U.S.-Russian-Cuban conference on the crisis.
At the Jan.-13 meeting in Havana, Mr McNamara said he also learned that Soviet field commanders in Cuba had been authorized to use the nuclear warheads ""without further authorization from Moscow' in the event of a United States invasion.
In addition, the Soviet Union deployed six dual-purpose tactical launchers supported by nine tactical missiles and nine nuclear warheads to be used against a United States invasion force, Mr McNamara said he learned.
The confrontation began after the United States verified reports that Moscow was building launching sites in Cuba for offensive missiles that could easily reach the United States mainland.
On Oct., 1962, President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade around the island and demanded the withdrawal of all missiles.
After two weeks of high tension, Soviet leader Nikita Khrush-chev yielded and agreed to withdraw them.
Mr McNamara, one of dozens of Kennedy-era officials from the United States, Russia and Cuba attending the Havana meeting, said the new information showed that the world was perilously close to the brink at the time.
Associated Press Section: Front 1032 Words Page: F8 OpenURL Link Fidel Castro's beard is gray and his voice has a slight tremor, but the man who built a Communist state just 90 miles from America's shores seems as strong and defiant as ever as he turns 70.
Despite numerous predictions to the contrary, the Cuban leader who has outlasted nine successive American presidents doesn't seem to be going anywhere anytime soon.
Although the revolution that triumphed in 1959 has been battered, security forces have kept a tight lid on internal dissent.
He gave up his trademark cigars years ago for health reasons, is said to exercise regularly and has a team of physicians watching over him.
Continuing to declare ``Socialism or death'' in a world now covered by mostly Western-style democracies, Castro presides as ``maximum leader'' over one of the last remaining communist societies on Earth.
He no longer seems to try to actively shape Cuba's society as he once did, and the economic crisis brought on by the collapse of the Soviet bloc has Cubans grumbling about job cutbacks, food shortages and low salaries.
Eco nomic figures issued last month show Cuba's gross domestic product grew 9. percent in the first half of 1996.
Reforms allowing Cubans to own small businesses and hold once-forbidden dollars have created more economic options.
A SLOW ECONOMIC RECOVERY ``The country is recovering slowly,'' Castro told tens of thousands gathered for last month's address.
The Helms-Burton law, backed by anti-Castro Cuban exiles, is aimed at toppling Castro's government.
It was rushed through after the Cuban air force shot down two civilian planes in February that anti-Castro exiles had piloted off this coast.
Castro jabbed his fingers in the air, waved his arms energetically and praised the men who died 43 years ago in the first revolutionary attack, a disastrous assault on the Moncada army barracks in the eastern city of Santiago.
Castro's most fervent admirers are middle-aged Cubans, who remember when dictator Fulgencio Batista fled Cuba on New Year's Day 1959 and the ``barbudos'' bearded rebels fighting Batista's army marched triumphantly into Havana.
RESTLESS YOUNG CUBANS It is the younger generation, born after socialism took hold, that tends to criticize.
They dream of new clothes and freedom to do whatever they like in the United States.
But even Jose Antonio, who refused to give his full name during a Havana street interview, said he did not back the kind of violent overthrow espoused by many Cuban-American exiles.
While the Castro government admits dissidents exist, it rightly points out that they are not organized.
Most seem more inclined to leave the country than stay and fight the system.
Gribkov, who was in Cuba at the time of the crisis, disclosed in a conference in Havana last week that the Soviets had given authority to the local commander in Cuba to fire the missiles in the event President Kennedy ordered an invasion.
Gribkov, who was in Cuba at the time of the crisis, disclosed at a conference in Havana last week the Soviets had given authority to the local commander in Cuba to fire these missiles in the event President Kennedy ordered an invasion.
Robert McNamara, the United States defense secretary at the time, said yesterday it was ``99 percent'' Kennedy would have ordered nuclear retaliation on Cuba and perhaps the Soviets as well if United States forces had been attacked by the short-range missiles.
McNamara, a participant at the meeting, was quoted by The Washington Post as saying he didn't know about the presence of the short-range nuclear warheads in Cuba until the Soviet general's disclosure.
He told the Post that the revelation changed his assessment about how close the missile crisis came to nuclear conflict.
He took off his glasses and waited for the Russian ambassador’s translated reply.
Across America, some 55 million TV viewers President Kennedy amongst them watched with keen interest.
Stevenson reinforced his point when several blown-up photographs of the Cuba missiles, taken by U-2 spy planes, were placed on an easel, publicly embarrassing the Soviets.
He said America welcomed the fact that the Soviets had avoided direct confrontation in the quarantine zone off Cuba and that Nikita Khrushchev had signalled that the Soviet Union would take no reckless decisions over the crisis.
But Washington, he said, was most anxious to reach a peaceful resolution.
Aware that some of the Cuban missiles were operational, Kennedy would reply later that day to a letter from Khrushchev and urge him to alter the course of events.
The Glasgow Herald said U Thant, the UN’s acting-secretary general, was talking to the US, the Soviets and Cubans in an effort to find a peaceful solution.
Khrushchev had agreed to suspend arms shipments to Cuba for two or three weeks if the blockade was halted.
Time running out for peaceful solution Co pyrig ht 20 17, Ne ws que s t Me dia Gro up Ltd.
The 72-year-old Ontario resident remembers the relief of not having to have fought a nuclear war with the Soviets thanks to the efforts of President John F Kennedy.
He was shocked to hear that the president, beloved by many, had been assassinated.
During the initial stages of the story, Martinez initially thought the assassination was the result of a Cold War plot.
Soon after however, the suspected assassin Lee Harvey Oswald was captured by police.
Martinez, a former copy boy at the Newburgh News, snatched up all the newspapers related to the story from the printing press and saved them.
He still keeps them today, including an edition that was published in the press though never distributed because of new information that had come in later in the day.
All rig hts re s e rve Re pro duce d with the pe rmis s io n o f Me dia Ne ws Gro up, Inc. by Ne ws Bank, Inc.
The $2,500 cost of the monument -a marker and an adjacent bench -was raised by the Boynton Beach Veterans Council to mark the 13 tense days in October 1962 when the world stood on the brink of nuclear war after the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
In February, commissioners approved the monument for the crisis, as well as other markers honoring the various military branches -Coast Guard and Auxiliary, Marine Corps, Army, Navy and Air Force.
The city rejected one to mark the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961.
It had been proposed by Mayor José Rodriguez, who is Cuban-American, and who had agreed to raise the $4,000 to pay for the marker.
A city board recommended against it, and the idea stalled after the mayor was arrested Jan. and then suspended. ekleinberg@pbpost.com Co pyrig ht 20 12 P alm Be ach Ne ws pape rs , Inc.
The pencil scribbles on a yellow legal pad suggest an impending crisis.
Over and over, John F Kennedy wrote the words ""decisions"" and ""leaders"" on his pad as his advisers debated the next step in the Cuban missile crisis.
In the middle of the sheet of paper is a set of concentric circles perhaps representing a blockade of Cuba.
That sheet of paper is among the artifacts displayed at the John F Kennedy Library and Museum in an exhibit marking the 40th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis.
The exhibit features a 20-minute film of newsreels, television news footage and a December 1962 TV interview with Kennedy, as well as correspondence between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, showing how relations between the two men evolved during the 13-day crisis.
But Kennedy's doodles on yellow paper a habit of his, museum curator Frank Rigg says seem to have the most resonance with visitors.
Rigg says he hopes visitors come away with ""a sense of how Kennedy remained open to discussion and different viewpoints how he did not jump in and take the most obvious course right away.
The exhibit traces the timeline of the crisis with photos, meeting minutes and letters to and from Kennedy.
And a handwritten letter from 10-year-old Betsy Pieters of Mishawaka, Ind., tells Kennedy, ""We are praying that all your decisions will be right.
Four days later, Khrushchev, toning down the volume and the rhetoric, offers to withdraw the missiles from Cuba if the United States pledges not to invade Cuba.
The letter is known as the ""knot letter"" because Khrushchev said if two sides kept pulling on the ""knot of war,"" it would be pulled so tight only war could break it.
For Beltramo and her husband, Walter, the exhibit brought back memories of the tension the entire country felt those 13 days.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion Greg Sukiennik; The Associated Press, 'EXHIBIT'S LETTERS, NOTES BRING CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS TO LIFE', St.
Just ask housewife Jennifer Barnes, whose only wish was to please her husband, until the Cuban missile crisis drove her desires south.
In Triangle Productions' uproarious version of Doug Field's ""Down South,"" the bombs Americans fear lurk in offshore silos and evil goes by the name of Fidel, but Jennifer's anxieties range beyond Cold War politics into the nether land of latent desire.
Wearing a platinum bouffant hairdo and a succession of dresses from pink rayon to gauzy evening wear, Jennifer reacts to the crisis by peeling layers from her sheltered life.
First she learns Spanish (""If we survive the radiation,"" she says, ""I'd like to be able to converse""), then Cuban love songs, and finally a sex act that makes her husband dispensable.
Oozing verve and allure, Daria O'Neill is hilarious as Jennifer, whether happily stockpiling canned goods or suggesting her coming liberation in the way she wiggles through a doorway.
Don Alder is equally funny as husband Bob, managing to be both vain and bewildered as he becomes increasingly superfluous.
The show's real heat, however, comes from Jennifer Niederloh, who sashays onstage in a red satin dress as Bob's friend Eddie's sultry, sex-obsessed wife, Cheryl.
When she and O'Neill share the stage, the steam is as thick as the laughs.
Dale Johannes uses a Jersey accent to suggest Eddie's lowbrow life, Patrick Holden veers between camp and caricature as the closeted neighbor Stephan, and Sharon Mann is straight out of ""Bewitched"" as Stephan's Gladys Kravitz-like wife.
Director Don Horn uses lighting efficiently to suggest scenes outside the single set, a modest '60s home.
Unfortunately, the set's obvious period adornments -hi-fi-console and Spam-filled cupboards, for example -make the script's stock '60s images more apparent.
Just an hour and 10 minutes long, ""Down South"" rushes too quickly to its close.
A slightly slower pace would let those final laughs breathe, allowing the audience to savor the fun a little longer.
Because of adult themes, those under 18 must be accompanied by an adult.
The ""Cuban missile crisis"" has gone down in history as the near-meltdown moment of the cold war, the confrontation that took the world to the brink of nuclear war.
As one who sat in on some of those White House deliberations in the president's cabinet room, I believe that the case can be made that the dangers of that 13-day interlude in October 1962 have been greatly exaggerated.
From the moment the United States discovered that the Soviet missile emplacement was underway, the odds that President Kennedy could face down Nikita Khrushchev and force him to withdraw the weapons were overwhelmingly in Kennedy's favor.
You need to examine the facts that were available to both sides, either explicitly or implicitly, overtly or subliminally, at the time.
This did not make the missiles in Cuba acceptable, but it surely defined the threat as essentially psychological, a potential blow to America's psyche and a probable inconvenience to future conduct of American foreign policy.
The first recommendation of a majority of the president's advisers (the so-called Excomm of the National Security Council) was to blast out the missiles and their emplacements with airstrikes.
The president wondered whether any American action, either an airstrike or blockade, might precipitate yet another Soviet action against the Western presence in Berlin.
But it was as evident to the Soviets as to the Americans that any act that sought to depose the West and threatened to set overwhelming Soviet land forces against the 200,000 United States and NATO forces in Europe would leave the president with only two alternatives to surrender those forces or retaliate with nuclear weapons.
The Soviet Union possessed at that time as few as 75, and no more than 300, strategic missiles.
The United States could target and deliver perhaps as many as 5,000 nuclear warheads.
To some American theorists this passed for a ""parity"" of sorts, but surely it could not look like that to Moscow, even without factoring in Soviet paranoia.
If Khrushchev were so lunatic as to launch a first strike and kill thousands of Americans, it would be but a terrible prelude to having his country wiped off the face of the earth.
Khrushchev was impetuous, bombastic, reckless; he was also a bluffer, as Eisenhower discovered when he faced him down over Berlin in the 1950s.
But in my several years of experiences in and out of government I never heard anyone, not even CIA analysts, suggest that he was insane.
Indeed, in the most crucial of the messages he exchanged with Kennedy during the Cuba confrontation, he said ""only lunatics or suicides, who themselves want to perish and to destroy the whole world before they die,"" would push the confrontation to conflict.
There was no other way to translate that message except as a plea from a man who knew he'd gone too far.
And keep in mind that he was dealing with the one country that had already demonstrated a willingness to use the nuclear weapon against human beings.
It seemed to me during those 13 days, as it does today, that all those factors dictated a peaceful settlement.
There can be miscalculation of even the most carefully calculated risk.
In the 35 years since, the participants on both sides of the confrontation have continued to say that it was.
They have held three conferences at which they exchanged information, traded theories and canonized each other for having saved the world from cremation.
At the most recent one in Havana, in 1992, a Russian general went so far as to say that Soviet troops in Cuba had been given authority by Moscow to fire nuclear missiles at the United States if they felt the need to.
The general was a pompous windbag, and his claim proved to be patently untrue, but former defense secretary McNamara returned to the mainland to state that we had come ""even closer"" to nuclear war than he had believed in October of 1962.
Even selfless participants in a dangerous confrontation can come to see it as more threatening than it was, thereby making the defusing of it more heroic.
The French daily Le Monde carried what it said were the most extensive excerpts ever published of Castro's account of the crisis and of White House meetings during the stand-off over Soviet nuclear missiles stationed in Cuba.
Vincent Touze, a French academic who obtained a copy of Castro's secret account in Cuba and found the Kennedy passages in newly declassified tapes, told Le Monde the documents showed how little control Castro had over Soviet arms and the crucial role Kennedy played in avoiding a nuclear war.
The crisis, which could have been the opening to a third world war, began Oct., 1962, when United States spy planes spotted Soviet missiles on Cuba and ended Oct. when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev said they would be withdrawn.
Castro was less sure about his ally Khrushchev, who he says bungled from the start the risky bid to deploy missiles just off the Florida coast, and admitted the Cubans were naive.
Castro said the Soviet troops' failure to hide the missiles was so blatant some Cubans suspected it was done on purpose.
Castro said he suggested 1,000 missiles when a Soviet field marshal visited Havana to propose deploying the weapons.
Castro said he had wanted to inform Washington of the Soviet-Cuban defence agreement before the missiles could be spotted.
The bombs will be launched and will erase 15 cities from the map of the United States.
Kennedy, backed by defence secretary Robert McNamara, announced instead a blockade of Cuba Oct. 22, and Soviet ships carrying strategic missiles to the island turned back two days later.
The excerpts show that Kennedy was still considering bombing or invading Cuba as late as Oct. but preferred to stick to a diplomatic showdown.
Castro was less sure about his ally Khrushchev, who he says bungled from the start the risky bid to deploy missiles, and admitted the Cubans were naive.
The White House tapes, which Le Monde said were declassified in October, 1996, showed America's leading military men pressing hard for an invasion of Cuba and civilian advisers torn between intervention and the naval blockade Kennedy finally chose.
The excerpts show Kennedy was still considering bombing or invading Cuba as late as Oct. but preferred to stick to a diplomatic showdown.
Some Russian nationalists said the Russian leader should threaten the West with nuclear missiles, as Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev did during the 1962 crisis.
Russia bitterly opposes plans to include former Soviet satellites in the alliance but tacitly acknowledges that it cannot stop the move.
Yeltsin, under tough criticism from nationalist and Communist opponents at home, has been trying to limit expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The deployment of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba triggered the 1962 missile crisis.
Both sides considered the possibility of a nuclear confrontation, but eventually the missiles were removed.
Russian ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky, who is given to extreme statements, said yesterday that Moscow should use the same tactic against NATO now.
NATO wants an agreement with Russia before its July 8-9 summit in Madrid, Spain, where the alliance plans to name its first members from Central and Eastern Europe.
Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic are believed to be the leading candidates.
They also mustn't deploy weapons and military hardware, especially nuclear, in newly accepted NATO members,"" Yeltsin said yesterday.
Negotiators have agreed to create a Russia-NATO council that will allow Moscow to have a direct voice, but not a vote, in NATO decisions.
NATO has said that it has no plans to move nuclear weapons or combat troops to the territories of new members, but that it will not rule out such a move in the future.
NATO also will not promise to refrain from building military infrastructure on those territories, including airfields, communications and air defense installations Co pyrig ht 19 9 7 Star-Te le g ram, Inc.
