Clarification of Question by top19-ga on 14 Sep 2006 19:19 PDT I'd like a simple summary, maybe a page to a page and and a half.
Also I'd like the summary to include quotes that Kennedy and his advisors were recorded as saying.
If you need anymore clarrification, please don't hesitate to ask again.
In the early sixties, the Cold War (the tense, conflictive status-quo between the United States and the Soviet Union that lasted from the aftermath of WWII through the fall of the USSR) was in its height.
The Soviets had reached a considerable technological and war industry development; they were slightly ahead in the space race since they had put a man to orbit the Earth before United States did; they exerted a strong control over Eastern Europe; the Chinese giant was consolidating its own way of communism; and all over the world -Latin America not being the exception -insurrections were taking place, many times openly communist or else sympathetic with communism.
One of these insurrections, and a paradigmatically successful one, was the Cuban Revolution.
It overthrew dictator Fulgencio Batista and his oligarchic regime, and soon would start a series of economic measures that harmed United States interests in the isle, what, in an escalation that began with economic sanctions by the United States -combined with a number of factors such as the active willingness of a group of Cuban exiles -led to a failed attempt to invade Cuba, performed by Cuban exiles trained by the CIA, called Bay of Pigs after the name of the coastal area where the disembarkation took place.
In this context, Cuba and the USSR found that they had quite a few converging interests besides a probable ideological similitude.
The USSR, which was some steps behind the United States in the nuclear weaponry race, knew that US already had many nuclear missiles spread over Europe and Turkey aiming at Soviet targets.
Soviet military aid to Cuba had already begun by sending troops, scientists and conventional weaponry.
John McCone, director of the CIA, during his honeymoon in Paris had been told by French Intelligence that the Soviets were planning to place missiles in Cuba, and so he warned President Kennedy that some of the ships were probably carrying missiles.
Kennedy, his brother Robert , Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara concluded that the Soviets would not try such a thing -they relied on claims from Soviet diplomats that there were no missiles in Cuba, nor any plans to place any, and that the Soviets would not start an international drama that might impact the United States elections in November.
A U-2 flight clearly showed the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal.
Reconnaissance data revealing Soviet nuclear missile installations on Cuba is shown to United States President John F Kennedy.
President Kennedy, in a televised address, announces the discovery of the installations and proclaims that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union and would be responded to accordingly.
The word quarantine was used rather than blockade because a blockade would be an act of war, and war had not been declared between the United States and Cuba.
Khrushchev sends letters to Kennedy claiming the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union.
First deal: the Soviets offers to withdraw the missiles in return for a United States guarantee not to invade Cuba or support any invasion.
Second deal: a call for the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey is added to the demands of the 26th.
Kennedy responds by publicly accepting the first deal and sending Robert F Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to privately accept the second, but requesting Khrushchev to keep it out of the public domain, so that he would not appear weak before the upcoming elections.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev announces that the installations would be dismantled.
A byproduct of it was the creation of the Hot Line, a direct communications link between Moscow and Washington D.C., meant to have a way for the leaders of the two Cold War countries to communicate directly in order to solve crisis like the one in October 1962.
Zorin responded, 'I am not in an American courtroom, sir, and I do not wish to answer a question put to me in the manner in which a prosecutor does-' Then Stevenson interrupted and said, 'You are in the courtroom of world opinion right now, and you can answer yes or no.
Regards, Guillermo Request for Answer Clarification by top19-ga on 15 Sep 2006 13:24 PDT Krushchev made a quote about tightening a knot and then having to cut that knot in a letter to kennedy.
For a $15 dollar bonus (its entirely up to you to answer this last question) please tell me in detail, exactly what happened between the time kennedy was shown the photographs, to him going onv. and announcing to the world about the missiles in cuba.
I'm only interested in things that happened in front of Kennedy and in his prescence, much like the way 13 Days was filmed.
As far as I could find, there seems to be no conclusive data regarding the number of missiles.
I really enjoyed researching on this topic, and am glad that the outcome met your expectations.
The United States still wasn't sure that the situation had been settled, however; GIs in Germany were given yellow fever inoculations on 8.
Answers and comments provided on Google Answers are general information, and are not intended to substitute for informed professional medical, psychiatric, psychological, tax, legal, investment, accounting, or other professional advice.
Google does not endorse, and expressly disclaims liability for any product, manufacturer, distributor, service or service provider mentioned or any opinion expressed in answers or comments.
Please read carefully the Google Answers Terms of Service.If you feel that you have found inappropriate content, please let us know by emailing us at answers-support@google.com with the question ID listed above.
