That was four years before the Iraqi war and 2Vz years before Bush was President.
On September 11,2001,19 Muslim Arabs flew airplanes into the Twin Towers and the Pentagon, killing 3,000 innocent men and women at their jobs.
On December 25, 2006, the Japanese newspaper Sankei Shimbun published a government document dated December 20 about Japan's intention to develop small nuclear warheads.
There were more articles on my computer, but you get the idea... it wasn't ever a question of if, but only when and what.
I felt there would be some event that would loosen the strings on nations' nuclear arsenals causing a regional nuclear war and a respondent terrorist attack on the Great Satan, us.
There were several possibilities, including a Pakistan-lndia exchange or less likely, an attack by China.
That produced an equivalent to nuclear winter that probably lasted for thousands or 10 of thousands years.
Our more recent exchange was nothing by comparison; hence the aftereffects wouldn't last nearly as long.
For my part, my life expectancy could be measured by the available medications.
I needed insulin, additional oral diabetic drugs, control for a sensitive digestive system and something to keep my hypertension in check.
I could substitute to an extent, Actos and Amaryl for Avandaryl, eliminate the Plavix when it was no longer available and try various other anti-hypertensives, although from years of trials, we found that Diovan HCT worked best.
My big worry was the Xanax, it was necessary to turn my brain off, hence was number one on my list of meds.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers can be used to treat heart failure in some people who cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors or who have kidney disease from diabetes and in people with type 2 diabetes.
If we could establish an operating recovery system with the things to provide for our needs and reasonable security, we'd more or less be back where we started.
Just exactly where that would be on the evolutionary scale of civilization, I couldn't say.
As long as we could keep the machines running, it would remain close to our starting point, minus advanced communications and advanced medical treatments.
So many of our communications systems depended on satellites, I doubted we'd have our former level of phone service, or internet.
Conversely, as long as hams could generate the necessary electricity, we'd have some communications.
There was one string attached, I had to quit avoiding Aaron's efforts to see that my needs were being met.
I also assigned a group of chores to him, cleaning the firearms, keeping the pickup ready to roll and taking care of Sharon’s and my horses.
He adjusted far quicker than I did; I was used to staying up until 1 am and getting up at 10am.
We also took to carrying what Aaron called the 'old man's medical kit' that contained a bottle of oxygen, a portable defibrillator, nitro tablets, plus an advanced first aid kit.
He was trained to establish an IV with Ringer's or normal saline, and administer drugs like Lidocaine, sodium bicarb, epinephrine 1:1000, dextrose 25%, etc. getting instructions via radio.
Out in the shed were several of those bioconverters that produced 55 gallons of biodiesel in 3 hours.
They were still in the shipping cartons, I'd never bothered to set them up.
The replacement generator they found was also a Kohler, 2 150REOZJB, each capable of -417 amps of prime power.
Running 3 generators gave us -1,250 amps, more than enough for our expanding trailer park.
It took a while to locate a synchronizer, Damon did that by reading the instruction manual for the new generator and determined that they were built in.
One of Mary's cousins was a diesel mechanic and could rebuild anything, provided you could find the parts.
I had a set for the smaller Kohler, and we went looking for parts for the larger genset.
They brought back drums of Methanol from both Tucson and Phoenix, once the radiation died down a little.
With that and a few cases of sodium hydroxide , I think we were set to go.
Taking care of Dad was becoming more of a chore since he had gotten up from his chair and started shuffling around more.
Battle of wills was a perfect description for what he and I were doing, with poor Aaron caught in the middle.
That asked a lot of discretion from a guy just now becoming a man who loved us both and didn't want us fighting over how much Dad was doing.
Since we were one of the last bastions of democracy we needed an elected council to run things.
After a little organizing, I nominated Dad to serve as treasurer for the community.
It made sense to me, seeing as he was already the de facto banker and richest man.
It didn't do him much good, though; he was elected by 80% of the vote in a 5 way election, a landslide in every sense of the word.
His duties in his newly elected office added a couple of hours of paperwork to his morning, keeping him in his chair long enough for Aaron to finish all the little tasks that Dad gave him.
The United States Marine Corps was organized as the land combat portion of the United States Navy.
This happened way back when there were only two branches, each had their own Cabinet secretary, and they were constantly fighting with each other over everything from funding to facilities.
The Army handles all aspects of land combat except amphibious assault, with a few exceptions.
The Navy handles all aspects of maritime combat, again with a few exceptions.
The Marine Corps by its very nature, though, has to incorporate all three areas into its sphere of control.
The primary purpose of the Corps is to punch a big hole in the coastal defenses of its enemy up to an operational depth of roughly 50 miles.
Because of the ""limited"" nature of its sphere of influence the Marine Corps is usually the last on the list for new equipment and funding.
Every piece of equipment that the Army uses is evaluated for application to the Marine mission.
A typical Marine in the same situation will look for potential targets and shoot them.
The removal of one step makes the Marines faster to react in combat and deadlier, whereas the Army soldiers are less likely to create collateral damage.
If I knew I was going into an ugly fight I would want at least some Marines because they would kill an awful lot of my enemies in short order.
If discretion was required, though, I wouldn't want them within a hundred miles of my operation.
The big problem for all the jarheads in Iraq was that the American public, coached by the mainstream media, wanted discretion when we needed destruction.
Dad and I probably disagree on this point because of the fourth generation war, but there you have it.
Maybe more of those reporters should have come with us on convoys in Iraq.
From experience, the first time you have a roadside bomb nearly kill you and people that you are responsible for, it changes your way of thinking.
Maybe then they would have concentrated less on the methods our boys and girls used over there and more on what we needed to do back home to fully support them.
They had two BRDM-2 recon trucks with 14.5mm machine guns mounted, and a total of 8 troops between them.
The convoy reacted swiftly, though, opening up on them before they could bring their guns to bear.
Less than 15 seconds later both trucks were burning and my truck commanders were trying to get the gunners to stop shooting the survivors as they bailed out without much success. .50 caliber bullets don't just make holes in people.
There wasn't enough left of those Mexicans to identify as human beings, much less figure out which unit they were with.
We had to act fast, before that patrol was declared missing and the Mexican General decided to send out a search and rescue patrol.
We loaded everything that we could, until the springs on the trucks groaned.
Everything else was transferred to three shelters and rigged up with C4 and det cord.
I spooled out a thousand yards of fuse for the charges and rigged it to light off all three charges at once.
It seemed to take forever, but the charges all went off as planned as far as I could tell.
Even at a few miles of distance the shock wave was strong enough to push the trucks around a bit, and one of the gunners who didn't like earplugs had to be relieved while the medic treated him for a pair of ruptured eardrums.
Pretty in the dying light of a setting sun, but it told the Mexicans that there were insurgents in the area as surely as sending them a telegram.
He was using a tabletop trainer he had swiped before he left Iowa to hunt for a tank crew.
Remember to move the reticle to the target, dump your lead, lase, and blaze.
Damon still seemed to think that Bill was a lower rank because he wasn't blood kin.
None of them was looking forward to another session with Bill’s acid wit and sharp comments.
One by one, the group of hopefuls shuffled off, griping about the pointlessness of filling sandbags.
Remember to dump your lead by releasing and grabbing the palm switch again.
The screen began to scroll as Mary scanned back and forth, looking for the telltale bright spot of a target signature.
Bill noticed that she only missed it by a few seconds when it appeared and that it took less than the usual time for a new gunner to get on target and lase.
She pressed the trigger and the screen jumped, just like it would in a real tank from the recoil of the main gun.
On a real target, this would probably scare the bejeezus out of the crew inside but not destroy the tank.
One limiter on the tabletop trainer was that the computer always awarded a kill on a second hit, even if the round would have glanced off of a corner.
You jerked the trigger both times, pulling the round up and right on the target.
Ain't no porta potty's in a tank, I couldn't see why Mary couldn't be a crewmember.
I had stuck my head in a gutted out Sherman they had at EAFB for an observation post, but that didn't tell you anything, because of it being gutted.
Besides, Derek said he didn't want anyone knowing we had it; it was an open invitation to the Mexican Army to invade the area.
Still, once they had the crew trained, they had to take it somewhere and fire it, crew orientation or whatever.
I was feeling somewhat constrained, they wouldn't let me off the acreage now.
You'd have thought that anyone with half a brain would have beat feet south.
But no, they waited for the radiation to die down and continued their invasion.
My Dad tells a story about a gopher snake and an air force buddy that always tickles me.
Dad and some others coiled up a dead gopher snake in a candy machine that the buddy in question visited every night and scared the guy half to death.
The reason I refer to this story is that it applies to keeping on your toes.
In Iraq we had to keep changing our schedule so that no pattern emerged.
Thus, Airman Second Class Dukes got frightened badly by a dead gopher snake.
All the activity we had going on in and around the compound set a pattern.
Some bright eyed Mexican Sergeant had noticed that Fort Huachuca was too well defended for a deserted Army post.
It was just his bad luck that his lieutenant couldn't place an ambush in hiding very well.
Ok, so one satchel charge, two HE and one WP 155mm shells, and a proper detonation rig that will function with a remote trigger.
We rig it all to go on one clacker, so that the whole convoy gets hit at once.
A few brave souls armed with antitank rockets and heavy machine guns to clean up the mess, and transportation to get them out of dodge.
Convoys and patrols that disappear are a big morale problem; one that is sure to attract the attention of even the most idiotic officers.
We were bringing the war to us; I got out all of my weapons and cleaned and oiled them, getting ready for the fight.
I had my weapons lined up, but kept going back to my favorite, my original MIA Loaded.
I must have loaded up about 60 of those 20-round magazines; we're not going to have much time to reload.
Nitromethane is racing fuel; you should be able to find it in and around Tucson.
I was surprised to learn that Derek didn't want to drop the sides of all these attack sites to block the roads.
I guess that he wanted to keep the roads easily repairable for some reason.
Who knows, sometimes I think that the only one who knows what's in that kid's mind is him.
Even with all the Claymores we set, there would be very little overlap between them.
I flipped the safety down and clicked the detonator three times, just like he showed me.
I stuck my head up and aimed my rocket launcher at the biggest chunk left.
Around me, all of Derek's guys were doing the same thing or raking anything that moved with .50 caliber machine guns.
I remembered all those little things Derek was fond of talking about when his mind wandered back towards tanks.
They were the only things that I think he was afraid of when inside his tank.
The only real difference between it and a ground tank is that it flies.
It has good armor, carries a butt load of ordnance, and can attack from a good ways off.
When tanks see them, they can only freeze and hope that they can point the big gun at them because even the .50 cal will bounce off.
Derek might have his tank, but if those Hinds showed up we were in a lot of trouble.
I figured if we could teach the Mujahedeen to shoot them, we had enough talent we could get them assembled and learn to aim them.
I did have part of the manual, in document form (Stinger FM Excerpt.doc), I just didn't realize it at the time.
It was in the subdirectory titled Field Manuals and was the sole document file.
At least it gave them a fighting chance, provided they wanted to take it.
I can bounce the signal through a couple of calling center switchboards and they will be chasing me all over Omaha.
I bet Dad was having a fit over his harvest, which wasn't half done yesterday when I left.
Bill grabbed the computer and we headed out the back to where the pickup was parked.
We had deliberately come in a civilian vehicle to keep a lower profile.
Hopefully it would work because the rotors were getting louder and I could see 2 black dots coming in from the west.
It takes a while to train a chopper pilot, and not even all pilots can learn how to fly one.
Sure enough, the pair of them set down one at a time in the Safeway parking lot.
Once the rotors spooled down, the crews popped the canopies and headed for the liquor store next door to the main grocery.
Dad bought it for me a while back so that I would quit ""borrowing"" his.
Bill eased his Lee-Enfield forward and drew a bead on one of the rear Mexicans.
Even after years off of tanks we both used the same crew fire commands to talk to each other.
The other two whipped around in short order, bringing their pistola's up.
Strangely enough, that's how long it took Bill to load up several cases of Glen Fidditch from the abandoned store.
Some of the remainder of the vegetables came in, but in smaller quantities.
We got enough wheat to produce a few tons of flour, but it will have to be whole grain.
Bill and I killed the pilots and I detonated thermite grenades in them to destroy them.
I suppose I didn't mind being pushed aside, it looked like we had a war going and war is a young man's game.
According to 2006 Census Bureau estimates, the population of the city is 4,934.
The city was founded in 1880 when the Southern Pacific Railroad came through.
It was named after Judge William B Benson, a friend of the President of the railroad.
The city is perhaps best known as the gateway to Kartchner Caverns State Park.
According to the Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 92. km 2 , none of which is covered by water.
As of the census of 2000, there were 4,711 people, 2,084 households, and 1,346 families residing in the city.
The racial makeup of the city was 89.32% White, 19.85% Hispanic or Latino (of any race), 1.29% Native American, 0.72% Black or African American, 0.47% Asian, and 0.13% Pacific Islander..69% were from other races, and 2.38% from two or more races.
There were 2,084 households out of which 18.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.5% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.4% were non-families..0% of all households were made up of individuals and 17.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
The average household size was 2.22 and the average family size was 2.72.
The 2010 census was never tabulated and between the disease and the war, the population was seriously reduced.
Which, by the way my mind works, brings me to another subject, the trust fund.
I told him that I didn't like the looks of things and suggested, rather timidly, that they get very conservative with the investments.
For all I cared, the bank could eliminate all nonIowa investments and keep the money local.
I told him that we didn't want the trust to disappear, just because the market collapsed.
That was during the period associated with the first terrorist attacks.
For a long time, we didn't associate the plagues with a second set of terrorist attacks and ultimately, the third world war made the mission of those submarine delivered terrorists moot.
Putting that gold and silver into circulation, was the best idea that Jerry ever had.
With me setting the fixed exchange rates at $30 an ounce for silver and $1,500 an ounce for gold, we basically doubled the value of our holdings.
I suggested that Derek simply locate the trailers and rent them from the owner's if they could be located.
We'd be taking a total of 6 vehicles, 2 pickups, 3 HMMWVs and the fuel hauler.
I figured we could pull 5 trailers and that should provide sleeping accommodations for as many as 20 people, maybe more.
Mary said she was coming along to drive the fuel hauler; Derek had given his power of attorney to her.
Shortly after moving to Whetstone, I went to MSN Maps and Directions and got a route for the shortest trips from Whetstone to Charles City.
After we hit Iowa, I wouldn't really need the map, but had it just in case.
Aaron continued his role and drove Sharon and me in our pickup with Damon bringing his pickup and extra stores.
They wouldn't be accurate, but no doubt we'd find other areas of construction, especially as we got further north.
I couldn't help but think of the reaction we'd get when we pulled into the bank in Charles City and filled their parking lot with armed military vehicles.
Floyd County, Iowa is very conservative, and that even goes for the Democrats.
Shortly after the outbreak of those plagues, we cashed out all of your securities and converted it to gold and silver.
With the price of gold and silver what it is now, the trust has appreciated significantly.
Down in Arizona, I've pretty much become the local banker because we converted half of our lottery winnings into gold and silver.
We took 21 ounces of gold and the balance in silver, 1,035 ounces, all in one ounce coins, -86.25 pounds.
The bank had taken a fee of 0.9% per year for managing the gold and silver.
They converted it when gold was at $900 an ounce and silver was $18 an ounce.
If you're interested in the numbers, the boys would each get $322,000 and the girls each get $161,000.
A more fair distribution would have been to give each of the 4 of them $241,500.
We had talked it over on the way back from Iowa and had decided we'd even it out with our money, giving each of the girls $161,000 and then divide the estate 4 ways.
The kids got together and said that they wanted to merge their money with ours, especially since we were earning -15% a year.
I thought it would be dangerous to keep any of the gold and silver in the house, thus it ended up stored in the armory.
The armory had emptied out a little when I finally gave the remaining Mauser’s to residents in Benson.
Considering what I'd paid for it, I get most, if not all, of my money back on the rifles. cases at $250 each equaled more than I had invested, and the early ammo sales went at 25b a round, $225 a case.
If a product shortage occurs, for instance, its price rises, creating a profit margin that creates an incentive for others to enter production, eventually curing the shortage.
Even as profits are zeroed out at the ""natural price,"" there would be incentives to produce goods and services, as ail costs of production, including compensation for the owner's labor, are also built into the price of the goods.
If prices dip below a zero profit, producers would drop out of the market; if they were above a zero profit, producers would enter the market.
Smith believed that while human motives are often selfish and greedy, the competition in the free market would tend to benefit society as a whole by keeping prices low, while still building in an incentive for a wide variety of goods and services.
In microeconomic theory the partial equilibrium supply and demand economic model originally developed by Alfred Marshall attempts to describe, explain, and predict the price and quantity of goods sold in competitive markets.
It is one of the most fundamental models, widely used as a basic building block in a wide range of more detailed economic models and theories.
The theory of supply and demand is important in the functioning of a market economy in that it explains the mechanism by which many resource allocation decisions are made.
However, unlike general equilibrium models, supply schedules in this partial equilibrium model are fixed, as the long run reciprocal relationship between demand and supply is ignored.
Although Marshall's theories are dominant in universities today, other economists have disagreed with it.
One theory counter to Marshall is that price is already known in a commodity before it reaches the market, negating his idea that some abstract market is conveying price information.
Modern producers often have market studies prepared well in advance of production decisions; however, misallocation of factors of production can still occur.
Keynesian economics also runs counter to the theory of supply and demand.
In Keynesian theory, prices can become ""sticky"" or resistant to change, especially in the case of price decreases.
Modern supporters of Keynes, such as Paul Krugman, have noted this in recent history, such as when the Boston housing market dried up in the early 1990s, with neither buyers nor sellers willing to exchange at the price equilibrium.
Stick around a while, there's a lot I still need to teach you about the big, bad world.
Life is a learning experience. ~20 years of life's experiences are equal to a 4-year college education.
Thus a Master's degree is equal to ~25 years of life and a PhD to about 40years of living.
All schooling really does for you is offer you other people's life experiences, condensed, like the soup, only much more condensed.
I know from personal experience that you can't directly apply the book learning; it's only a tool to help direct you.
One of the most important things a person can learn in a school is how to think.
Besides, with Derek helping on this tome, you get a little current military thinking to add to my less than spectacular military education.
Back in '06, when they came to visit for Christmas, we took my new rifle to a range.
We first set up a target at 50 yards and ran 60 rounds through the rifle.
I don't know why Mary was shooting left handed, but she shouldn't have, she could barely hit the target.
Our ammo was some of the South African surplus, I wish I had bought more.
We count down seven ways in which the world as we know it could meet an abrupt and untimely end, from a mammoth asteroid strike to the eruption of a super volcano.
Scientists, experts, and witnesses describe these and other vividly pictured disaster scenarios, from super bugs created in secret labs to black holes that could suck earth into oblivion.
Using state-of-the-art computer-generated graphics and interviews with the world's top scientists, we will leave viewers pondering humanity's place in the universe and will reveal the most terrifying truth of all that our greatest enemy is ourselves.
The ancient Maya made this stunning prediction more than 2,000 years ago.
Journey back to the ancient city of Chichen Itza, the hub of Maya civilization deep in the heart of Mexican's Yucatan Peninsula, to uncover the truth about this prophecy.
The Maya were legendary astronomers and timekeepers their calendar is more accurate than our own.
By tracking the stars and planets they assigned great meaning to astronomical phenomena and made extraordinary predictions based on them many of which have come true.
In insightful interviews archaeologists, astrologers, and historians speculate on the meaning of the 2012 prophecy.
At 7:15AM on June 30, 1908, a giant fireball, as bright the Sun, explodes in the Siberian sky with a force a thousand times greater than the Hiroshima bomb.
It decimates 1,200 square miles of forest over half the size of Rhode Island, and was the biggest cosmic disaster in the history of civilization.
Over a hundred theories surround what is called the Tunguska event, varying from asteroids and comets to black holes and alien spaceships.
Most scientists agree the Tunguska event will happen again, and next time, the human toll could be unimaginable.
Now, NASA and other organizations race against time to stop the next planet killer before it ignites Armageddon.
You really should have watched TV; it's gone now, along with the radio stations.
Still, it seems that I have guard responsibilities, I'm their fall back plan, in case the bad guys overrun us.
It could all be in my head but it doesn't matter because I didn't have any venison in my stomach.
According to the Mayan Calendar, the world ends this year on December 21st.
A nuclear summer is a hypothetical scenario resulting from nuclear warfare that would follow a nuclear winter.
In this scenario, the amount of water in the stratosphere would increase, causing greenhouse warming of the surface.
The nuclear detonations would also produce oxides of nitrogen that would then deplete the ozone layer around the Earth.
This layer screens out UV-B radiation from the Sun, which causes genetic damage to life forms on the surface.
Possibilities of any existing species to survive in this extreme condition will be less.
The absorption of ozone also results in a heating of the stratosphere, which results in a further contribution to greenhouse heating.
The only problem was that they weren't as efficient when the relative humidity reached 50% and above.
I thought about it and couldn't imagine what it would be like to be really hungry.
I'd seen fuel crisis, like in 73, so I knew we'd have to have fuel for the vehicles and our generator.
Bad things happen in threes and we've had at least four; that means we're going to get nine.
Most of the country has been destroyed and it will take years to get manufacturing reestablished, if ever.
The state of California probably invested that money in Treasury Notes.
Don't confuse that with salvaging, unless the property you recover is actually owned by the state of California.
If you feel like driving out there, you could dig around and see how much gold and silver you could find.
I read that they had an expansion project that wasn't scheduled to be completed until 2011 -12.
There should be equipment sitting there that you can load up and bring home.
They had been on a kick pushing those small florescent bulbs that screwed into regular light bulb sockets.
Most of the time, nobody bothers to turn off the garage lights and they made sense.
Costing about 8 times as much as regular bulbs, they lasted 10 times longer.
This 4Vz n tall, 13 watt mini compact fluorescent light bulb saves energy, last longer and is equivalent to a 60 watt standard bulb.
This bulb lasts up to 8,000 hours and will save you more than $45.00 in electricity over the life of the bulb.
Every time you turned on the light switch, you saved 47 watts of energy and it does add up.
We also got our portable generator from Costco right after we won the Lottery.
They had the Onan Homesite Power 6500 on sale for $200 off the regular price through January 31,2007.
We found 56 V80, 1.80 megawatt wind turbines sitting in the original packaging at Tehachapi and we didn't bother with Palm Springs."" ""56 times 1,80mw will produce 100.8mw.
We'll have an earthen mound to hide behind, if the Latino's come calling.
Assuming that the average home uses 12kw, and that there are a total of 1,100 homes in Whetstone and 2,900 in Benson means that we only need 4,000 times 12kw or about 48mw.
If you install half of the turbines, you'll have 28 times 1,8mw or 50.4mw.
Mind you, I don't know if it's a good or bad idea, but if you tell them that they'll only get lights if they help, that will put most folks in the position of volunteering.
Some people won't be able to contribute physical labor, but there ought to be something for everyone to do.
A very large share of the liberals was sitting in the major cities waiting for the government to save them.
It seemed obvious that I wasn't needed for the moment so I went down to the shelter, that's a real pain in the butt you know, and turned on the radios.
We had our lottery winnings in gold and silver, the money from the Charles City bank and what we'd saved.
If they had been forced to recover our money from the mint in silver, they have needed a train to haul it.
That consisted of the people who had gone with Derek plus the members of our family.
Realistically, 'precious metals' have no intrinsic value, they’re just rare and people want them.
A man dying of thirst might part with an ounce of gold for a canteen of water.
It might not be to the person that had lots, but even a domestic animal sometimes has value.
One couldn't flood the market with gold and silver or it would lose its value.
He could also use the gold and silver to purchase labor, at a fair rate.
The real problem arose when he overvalued the metal and undervalued what he took in exchange.
Everything had to maintain the proper relationship, ergo, the value of an hour of labor had to equal something that a person was willing to work an hour to acquire.
Hence, seeds had an intrinsically high value because they a source of food.
I caught the tail end of a conversation between two hams on the west coast.
As near as I could tell, one was from Spokane and the other was from Yreka.
Anyway, I just caught the tail end and they were talking about the quake and the water.
It's a good thing you can't really die from curiosity, or I'd have been on the floor of the shelter shouting, It’s the big one Elizabeth.
Didn't happen so I got in my chair and raised myself back to ground level and went into the house.
I was a little hungry so I popped 2 poppers of that popcorn we got from Sam's Club.
It was just under $12 for a 50 pound bag and it was fair to middling popcorn.
We only had about 5 bags left, I made a note to myself to try and grow some next year.
I caught the back end of a conversation from a guy in Kalifornia and another in Washington.
It was a Sunday, if I remember and they had that problem in Miami with that semi.
All it was was old footage and some guy speculating about the semi they'd stopped at 8am.
Then a tornado warning was issued to Alabama and they had 2 breaking news alerts.
Before it was over, a subway train derailed, I think in DC, and they had 3 breaking news alerts.
The Lavi fighter development began in October 1982 under the help of the United States, and the aircraft made the first flight in December 1986.
However, the United States was not prepared to finance an aircraft that would compete in export market with the F16C/D and F/A-18C/D, and a dispute arose on the final cost.
The Israeli Government was unable to finance the project alone and the development program was finally cancelled in 1987.
The Lavi technologies including its aerodynamic design and software for the “fly-by-wire” system were later transferred to Chengdu to help the J-10 development.
With the help of the Israelis, the “Project 8610” entered full-scale development.
Russia became involved in the J-10 development program by contributing its LyulkaSaturn AL-31F turbofan engine.
However, to accommodate the bigger-size AL-31F engine, Chengdu engineers had to go through a major redesign on the aircraft’s rear fuselage as well as the air-inlet shape.
Plus they had to do a first strike before we got enough of our ABM missiles in place.
Between the bombings of our cities, the plagues and WW III, I'd guess we must have lost 70% of our population.
Today, he believes the United States must no longer rely on nuclear weapons as a foreign-policy tool.
It is time well past time, in my view for the United States to cease its Cold War-style reliance on nuclear weapons as a foreign-policy tool.
At the risk of appearing simplistic and provocative, I would characterize current United States nuclear weapons policy as immoral, illegal, militarily unnecessary, and dreadfully dangerous.
The risk of an accidental or inadvertent nuclear launch is unacceptably high.
Far from reducing these risks, the Bush administration has signaled that it is committed to keeping the United States nuclear arsenal as a mainstay of its military power a commitment that is simultaneously eroding the international norms that have limited the spread of nuclear weapons and fissile materials for 50 years.
Much of the current United States nuclear policy has been in place since before I was secretary of defense, and it has only grown more dangerous and diplomatically destructive in the intervening years.
Today, the United States has deployed approximately 4,500 strategic, offensive nuclear warheads.
North Korea now claims to have developed nuclear weapons, and United States intelligence agencies estimate that Pyongyang has enough fissile material for 2-8 bombs.
The average United States warhead has a destructive power 20 times that of the Hiroshima bomb.
Of the 8,000 active or operational United States warheads, 2,000 are on hair-trigger alert, ready to be launched on 15 minutes’ warning.
The United States has never endorsed the policy of ""no first use,"" not during my seven years as secretary or since.
We have been and remain prepared to initiate the use of nuclear weapons by the decision of one person, the President against either a nuclear or non-nuclear enemy whenever we believe it is in our interest to do so.
For decades, United States nuclear forces have been sufficiently strong to absorb a first strike and then inflict ""unacceptable"" damage on an opponent.
This has been and must continue to be the foundation of our nuclear deterrent.
The President always had at hand nuclear release codes in the so-called football, a briefcase carried for the President at all times by a United States military officer.
The SAC commander’s orders were to answer the telephone by no later than the end of the third ring.
If it rang, and he was informed that a nuclear attack of enemy ballistic missiles appeared to be under way, he was allowed 2 to 3 minutes to decide whether the warning was valid (over the years, the United States has received many false warnings), and if so, how the United States should respond.
He was then given approximately 10 minutes to determine what to recommend, to locate and advise the President, permit the President to discuss the situation with two or three close advisors (presumably the secretary of defense and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff), and to receive the President's decision and pass it immediately, along with the codes, to the launch sites.
He could decide to ride out the attack and defer until later any decision to launch a retaliatory strike.
Or, he could order an immediate retaliatory strike, from a menu of options, thereby launching United States weapons that were targeted on the opponent’s military-industrial assets.
On any given day, as we go about our business, the President is prepared to make a decision within 20 minutes that could launch one of the most devastating weapons in the world.
To declare war requires an act of congress, but to launch a nuclear holocaust requires 20 minutes' deliberation by the President and his advisors.
With very few changes, this system remains largely intact, including the ""football,"" the President's constant companion.
My colleagues and I started arms control talks; we installed safeguards to reduce the risk of unauthorized launches; we added options to the nuclear war plans so that the President did not have to choose between an all-or-nothing response, and we eliminated the vulnerable and provocative nuclear missiles in Turkey.
I wish I had done more, but we were in the midst of the Cold War, and our options were limited.
The United States and our NATO allies faced a strong Soviet and Warsaw Pact conventional threat.
Many of the allies felt strongly that preserving the United States option of launching a first strike was necessary for the sake of keeping the Soviets at bay.
What is shocking is that today, more than a decade after the end of the Cold War; the basic United States nuclear policy is unchanged.
Plans and procedures have not been revised to make the United States or other countries less likely to push the button.
At a minimum, we should remove all strategic nuclear weapons from ""hair-trigger"" alert, as others have recommended, including Gen.
That simple change would greatly reduce the risk of an accidental nuclear launch.
It would also signal to other states that the United States is taking steps to end its reliance on nuclear weapons.
The United States is focused, for understandable reasons, on persuading North Korea to rejoin the treaty and on negotiating deeper constraints on Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
Those states must be convinced to keep the promises they made when they originally signed the NPT that they would not build nuclear weapons in return for access to peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
But the attention of many nations, including some potential new nuclear weapons states, is also on the United States.
Keeping such large numbers of weapons, and maintaining them on hair-trigger alert, are potent signs that the United States is not seriously working toward the elimination of its arsenal and raises troubling questions as to why any other state should restrain its nuclear ambitions.
A Preview of the Apocalypse The destructive power of nuclear weapons is well known, but given the United States' continued reliance on them, it’s worth remembering the danger they present.
A 2000 report by the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War describes the likely effects of a single 1 megaton weapon dozens of which are contained in the Russian and United States inventories.
Within one second, the atmosphere itself ignites into a fireball more than a half-mile in diameter.
The surface of the fireball radiates nearly three times the light and heat of a comparable area of the surface of the sun, extinguishing in seconds all life below and radiating outward at the speed of light, causing instantaneous severe burns to people within one to three miles.
A blast wave of compressed air reaches a distance of three miles in about 12 seconds, flattening factories and commercial buildings.
At least 50 percent of people in the area die immediately, prior to any injuries from radiation or the developing firestorm.
Of course, our knowledge of these effects is not entirely hypothetical.
Nuclear weapons, with roughly one seventieth of the power of the 1 megaton bomb just described, were twice used by the United States in August 1945.
Around 80,000 people died immediately; approximately 200,000 died eventually.
Nagasaki became a city of death where not even the sound of insects could be heard.
After a while, countless men, women and children began to gather for a drink of water at the banks of nearby Urakami River, their hair and clothing scorched and their burnt skin hanging off in sheets like rags.
Their annihilation, though not the objective of those dropping the bombs, was an inevitable result of the choice of those targets.
The statement that our nuclear weapons do not target populations per se was and remains totally misleading in the sense that the so-called collateral damage of large nuclear strikes would include tens of millions of innocent civilian dead.
They indiscriminately blast, burn, and irradiate with a speed and finality that are almost incomprehensible.
This is exactly what countries like the United States and Russia, with nuclear weapons on hair-trigger alert continue to threaten every minute of every day in this new 21st century.
No Way to Win I have worked on issues relating to United States and NATO nuclear strategy and war plans for more than 40 years.
I have made this statement in front of audiences, including NATO defense ministers and senior military leaders, many times.
To launch weapons against a nuclear-equipped opponent would be suicidal.
To do so against a non-nuclear enemy would be militarily unnecessary, morally repugnant, and politically indefensible.
I reached these conclusions very soon after becoming secretary of defense.
Although I believe Presidents John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson shared my view, it was impossible for any of us to make such statements publicly because they were totally contrary to established NATO policy.
After leaving the Defense Department, I became President of the World Bank.
During my 13-year tenure, from 1968 to 1981, I was prohibited, as an employee of an international institution, from commenting publicly on issues of United States national security.
After my retirement from the bank, I began to reflect on how I, with seven years' experience as secretary of defense, might contribute to an understanding of the issues with which I began my public service career.
At that time, much was being said and written regarding how the United States could, and why it should, be able to fight and win a nuclear war with the Soviets.
Having studied these views, I decided to go public with some information that I knew would be controversial, but that I felt was needed to inject reality into these increasingly unreal discussions about the military utility of nuclear weapons.
In articles and speeches, I criticized the fundamentally flawed assumption that nuclear weapons could be used in some limited way.
There is no way to effectively contain a nuclear strike to keep it from inflicting enormous destruction on civilian life and property, and there is no guarantee against unlimited escalation once the first nuclear strike occurs.
We cannot avoid the serious and unacceptable risk of nuclear war until we recognize these facts and base our military plans and policies upon this recognition.
I hold these views even more strongly today than I did when I first spoke out against the nuclear dangers our policies were creating.
I know from direct experience that United States nuclear policy today creates unacceptable risks to other nations and to our own.
What Castro Taught Us Among the costs of maintaining nuclear weapons is the risk to me an unacceptable risk of use of the weapons either by accident or as a result of misjudgment or miscalculation in times of crisis.
At about the same time, Cuban President Fidel Castro asked the Soviet ambassador to Cuba to send a cable to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev stating that Castro urged him to counter a United States attack with a nuclear response.
Clearly, there was a high risk that in the face of a United States attack, which many in the United States government were prepared to recommend to President Kennedy, the Soviet forces in Cuba would have decided to use their nuclear weapons rather than lose them.
Only a few years ago did we learn that the four Soviet submarines trailing the United States Naval vessels near Cuba each carried torpedoes with nuclear warheads.
The situation was even more frightening because, as the lead commander recounted to me, the subs were out of communication with their Soviet bases, and they continued their patrols for four days after Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba.
The lesson, if it had not been clear before, was made so at a conference on the crisis held in Havana in 1992, when we first began to learn from former Soviet officials about their preparations for nuclear war in the event of a United States invasion.
Near the end of that meeting, I asked Castro whether he would have recommended that Khrushchev use the weapons in the face of a United States invasion, and if so, how he thought the United States would respond.
I hope that President Kennedy and I would not have behaved as Castro suggested we would have.
Had we responded in a similar way the damage to the United States would have been unthinkable.
However, if mistakes were to affect decisions relating to the use of nuclear forces, there would be no learning curve.
The indefinite combination of human fallibility and nuclear weapons carries a very high risk of nuclear catastrophe.
There is no way to reduce the risk to acceptable levels, other than to first eliminate the hair-trigger alert policy and later to eliminate or nearly eliminate nuclear weapons.
The United States should move immediately to institute these actions, in cooperation with Russia.
A Dangerous Obsession On Nov., 2001, President George W Bush announced that he had told Russian President Vladimir Putin that the United States would reduce ""operationally deployed nuclear warheads"" from approximately 5,300 to a level between 1,700 and 2,200 over the next decade.
This scaling back would approach the 1,500 to 2,200 range that Putin had proposed for Russia.
However, the Bush administration's Nuclear Posture Review, mandated by the United States Congress and issued in January 2002, presents quite a different story.
It assumes that strategic offensive nuclear weapons in much larger numbers than 1,700 to 2,200 will be part of United States military forces for the next several decades.
Although the number of deployed warheads will be reduced to 3,800 in 2007 and to between 1,700 and 2,200 by 2012, the warheads and many of the launch vehicles taken off deployment will be maintained in a ""responsive"" reserve from which they could be moved back to the operationally deployed force.
But its emphasis on strategic offensive nuclear weapons deserves vigorous public scrutiny.
Although any proposed reduction is welcome, it is doubtful that survivors if there were any of an exchange of 3,200 warheads (the United States and Russian numbers projected for 2012), with a destructive power approximately 65,000 times that of the Hiroshima bomb, could detect a difference between the effects of such an exchange and one that would result from the launch of the current United States and Russian forces totaling about 12,000 warheads.
In addition to projecting the deployment of large numbers of strategic nuclear weapons far into the future, the Bush administration is planning an extensive and expensive series of programs to sustain and modernize the existing nuclear force and to begin studies for new launch vehicles, as well as new warheads for all of the launch platforms.
New production facilities for fissile materials would need to be built to support the expanded force.
The Bush administration also announced that it has no intention to ask congress to ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty , and, though no decision to test has been made, the administration has ordered the national laboratories to begin research on new nuclear weapons designs and to prepare the underground test sites in Nevada for nuclear tests if necessary in the future.
Clearly, the Bush administration assumes that nuclear weapons will be part of United States military forces for at least the next several decades.
Good faith participation in international negotiation on nuclear disarmament including participation in the CTBT is a legal and political obligation of all parties to the NPT that entered into force in 1970 and was extended indefinitely in 1995.
The Bush administration’s nuclear program, alongside its refusal to ratify the CTBT, will be viewed, with reason, by many nations as equivalent to a United States break from the treaty.
If the United States continues its current nuclear stance, over time, substantial proliferation of nuclear weapons will almost surely follow.
Some, or all, of such nations as Egypt, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Taiwan will very likely initiate nuclear weapons programs, increasing both the risk of use of the weapons and the diversion of weapons and fissile materials into the hands of rogue states or terrorists.
Diplomats and intelligence agencies believe Osama bin Laden has made several attempts to acquire nuclear weapons or fissile materials.
It has been widely reported that Sultan Bashiruddin Mahmood, former director of Pakistan’s nuclear reactor complex, met with bin Laden several times.
Were al Qaeda to acquire fissile materials, especially enriched uranium, its ability to produce nuclear weapons would be great.
The knowledge of how to construct a simple gun-type nuclear device, like the one we dropped on Hiroshima, is now widespread.
Experts have little doubt that terrorists could construct such a primitive device if they acquired the requisite enriched uranium material.
Neither the Bush administration, the congress, the American people, nor the people of other nations have debated the merits of alternative, long-range nuclear weapons policies for their countries or the world.
They have not examined the military utility of the weapons; the risk of inadvertent or accidental use; the moral and legal considerations relating to the use or threat of use of the weapons; or the impact of current policies on proliferation.
We must move promptly toward the elimination or near elimination of all nuclear weapons.
For many, there is a strong temptation to cling to the strategies of the past 40 years.
But to do so would be a serious mistake leading to unacceptable risks for all nations.
Imagine replacing a fine weapon like the Ml 4 rifle with that Mattel toy gun.
I can understand adopting it as a second gun, much like we did during WW II when we had the Ml Garand MBR and the Ml Carbine which provided a bit more power than the Ml 911.
The Ml 4 wasn't well suited for the jungle, but that didn't make it a bad rifle.
The United States Army's Ml Garand rifle was originally developed to chamber a lighter .276 round, but this design feature was cancelled in the early 1930s, delaying the introduction of the rifle until 1936.
This, along with lessons learned during earlier wars, observations of conflicts during the 1930s, and dissatisfaction with existing submachine guns and rifles contributed to the development of the Ml Carbine.
Troops in the rear, paratroopers, or frontline troops required to carry other equipment had found the older full-size rifles too cumbersome, and pistols and revolvers to be insufficiently accurate or powerful.
Much the same constraints applied to airborne infantry, a concept that was also under consideration at the time.
Prior to the development and issue of submachine guns such as the M3 ""Grease Gun"", a submachine gun like the Thompson was also much more expensive than pistols and most rifles of the period.
The .30-06 Garand, then entering into service in the late 1930s, was as heavy and cumbersome as the existing service rifles.
A carbine version of the standard-issue semi-automatic rifle was considered, but the .30-06 round for which the Ml Garand was chambered was found to be too powerful.
The requirement was for a weapon lighter and handier than the Garand, with less recoil than the rifle, but at the same time, greater range, accuracy, and effective stopping power than the Ml 911A1 pistols currently in use.
The Ml Carbine was intended for use by soldiers who required a more compact, lightweight defensive weapon, and for soldiers who did not utilize an infantry rifle as their primary arm.
Nevertheless, the carbine was soon issued to infantry officers, machine-gun crews, paratroopers, and other frontline soldiers.
Some infantrymen and Marines, especially those who did not use a rifle as their primary weapon, preferred the carbine over the Ml Garand because of the weapon's small size and light weight.
The carbine also gained generally high praise from airborne troops who were issued the folding-stock Ml A1.
The carbine's exclusive use of non-corrosive primered ammunition was found to be a godsend by troops and ordnance personnel serving in the Pacific, where barrel corrosion was a significant issue, though not to the same extent in Europe, where some soldiers reported misfires attributed to bad primers.
In comparison, a .357 Magnum revolver fires the same weight bullet at about 1,300ft/s for about 41 Oft-lbs of energy, though the .357 is of larger diameter, and often equipped with an expanding bullet design.
Nevertheless, reports of the carbine's failure to stop enemy soldiers are well documented in individual after-action reports, postwar evaluations, and service histories of the United States Army and Marine Corps.
Where the Bombs are, 2006 By Robert S Norris and Hans M Kristensen Katharine Lee Bates, the author of ""America the Beautiful,"" could not have been referring to the expanse of the United States nuclear arsenal when she penned the lyric ""from sea to shining sea,"" but it is fitting.
Though it is the smallest it has been since 1958, the United States nuclear arsenal continues to sprawl across the country, with thousands of weapons deployed from the coast of Washington State to the coast of Georgia and beyond.
In total, we estimate that the United States deploys and stores nearly 10,000 nuclear weapons at 18 facilities in 12 states and six European countries.
The Pentagon developed this extensive network of installations over the past six decades in order to ensure the survivability of its nuclear arsenal.
Pinpointing the whereabouts of all United States nuclear weapons, and especially the numbers stored at specific locations, is fraught with many uncertainties due to the highly classified nature of nuclear weapons information.
Such images are available to anyone with a computer and internet access, thanks to Google Earth and commercial satellite imaging companies such as DigitalGlobe.
This development introduces important new tools for research and advances citizen verification.
The statistics contained in this article represent our best estimates, based on many years of closely following nuclear issues.
The nuclear weapons network shrank during the past decade, with the Pentagon removing nuclear weapons from three states and the size of the stockpile decreasing from about 12,500 warheads to nearly 10,000.
Consolidation slowed considerably compared with the period between 1992 and 1997, when the Pentagon withdrew nuclear weapons from 10 states and several European bases, and the total stockpile decreased from 18,290 to 12,500 warheads.
Approximately 62 percent of the current stockpile belongs to the Air Force and is stored at seven bases in the United States and eight bases in six European countries; the Navy stores its weapons at two submarine bases, one on each coast.
The ballistic missile submarine base at Bangor, Washington, contains nearly 24 percent of the entire stockpile, or some 2,364 warheads, the largest contingent.
The Bangor installation is home to a majority of the navy's nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines and a large number of surplus W76 warheads that will eventually be retired and disassembled.
Its counterpart on the Atlantic coast, Kings Bay Submarine Base in Georgia, is the third-largest contingent, with some 1,364 warheads.
The large underground facility at Kirtland AFB in Albuquerque, New Mexico, stores more than 1,900 warheads that are either part of the inactive/reserve stockpile or awaiting shipment across Interstate 40 to the Pantex Plant outside of Amarillo, Texas, for dismantlement.
During the Cold War, the United States deployed a large percentage of its nuclear weapons in other countries and at sea.
At its peak arsenal size in the late 1960s, the United States stored weapons in 17 different countries.
By the mid-1980s, there were about 14,000 weapons in 26 United States states, 6,000 more at overseas United States and NATO bases, and another 4,000 on ships at sea.
It withdrew all of its nuclear weapons from South Korea in 1991 and thousands more from Europe by 1993.
The Army and Marine Corps denuclearized in the early 1990s, and in 1992 the Navy swiftly off-loaded all nuclear weapons from aircraft carriers and other surface vessels.
By 1994, the navy had eliminated these ships' nuclear capability, and many Air Force, Navy, and Army bases and storage depots closed overseas as a result.
In sum, my best judgment is that based on current trends, a nuclear terrorist attack on the United States is more likely than not in the decade ahead.
Developments in Iraq, Iran, and North Korea leave Americans more vulnerable to a nuclear 9/11 today than we were five years ago.
Former Defense Secretary William Perry has said that he thinks that I underestimate the risk.
In the judgment of most people in the national security community, including former Sen.
Sam Nunn, the risk of a terrorist detonating a nuclear bomb on United States soil is higher today than was the risk of nuclear war at the most dangerous moments in the Cold War.
Director of National Intelligence John Negroponte and the director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, Lt.
Michael Maples, testified before Congress that the threat of terrorist attack with WMD was ""more likely"" than an attack by any state, including Iran and North Korea.
Negroponte reported, ""In fact, intelligence reporting indicates that nearly 40 terrorist organizations, insurgencies, or cults have used, possessed, or expressed an interest in chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear agents or weapons.
But perhaps the most well-communicated United States nuclear threat was made prior to the United States intervention during the 1991 Gulf War.
I suppose the hands of the Doomsday Clock are frozen in perpetuity at 3 minutes to midnight.
I'd like to figure it all out before I go, so my family will understand what happened.
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it. George Santayana.
That bunk about the Mayan Calendar didn't bother me, it simply started over.
The trigger event was probably the Israeli bombing of those Middle Eastern countries.
It took time for our military assets to return to the AO where the Latinos were operating.
That Ml A3E3 was an experimental tank; nonetheless it would have been good to have 3 more so we could have a full Tank Platoon.
I strongly suggest in my notes that Israel's attack had probably led to the war, Russia had agreed to protect Iran.
Had I not been forbidden to participate in the attacks Derek's group was making on the Latinos, I wouldn't have had the time to figure it all out.
After that nuclear summer event, I noticed that it cooled more than usual.
We could adjust, after all, we had 80 acres, plus we had a good well and could irrigate, if we had to.
Arizona doesn't get many earthquakes, that was the first one I'd felt since we'd moved.
Every place seems to get an earthquake periodically, in Kalifornia, it was an hourly occurrence.
Because nothing was damaged, I didn't include it the list of 9 disasters.
More than 20 earthquakes with magnitudes greater than 5 have occurred in or near Arizona since 1850.
Sonoran earthquake of 1887, which was centered about 40 miles southeast of Douglas, caused 51 deaths in Sonora and extensive property damage throughout southeastern Arizona.
Substantial damage occurred in the Yuma area as a result of the magnitude 7.
The Flagstaff area experienced moderate damage three times during the early 1900's because of magnitude 6 earthquakes.
I got on the radios in the shelter and started listening to the ham net, sooner or later someone, somewhere, would mention the shaking and we could begin to narrow down where it occurred.
There is no such category on this scale, and any mention of a Category 6 tropical cyclone is fictitious or incorrect.
According to Robert Simpson, there is no reason for a Category 6 on the Saffir-Simpson Scale because it is designed to measure the potential damage of a hurricane to manmade structures.
However, the result of new technologies in construction leads some to suggest that an increase in the number of categories is necessary.
A ham in Greeley, Colorado reported that the shaking in his area tipped over cabinets.
Then I talked to a fellow in Truckee, California who said he thought Long Valley Caldera blew its top.
All of a sudden, I was beginning to miss cable news, they over reported everything and you were left guessing.
I guess that's not totally true, sometimes the media speculated so much you couldn't sort fact from fiction.
WW I was The War to End All Wars; WW II should have been The War to End All Wars; and, WW III was, in fact, the War that Ended All Global Wars.
We were experiencing falling temperatures, in contrast to global warming just 5 years before.
To top it off, I was getting reports on the ham bands that either Long Valley or Yellowstone had erupted.
He told me that Cascadia had subducted the previous week and what had been left of Seattle was first hit with an earthquake followed by a major tsunami.
I talked to hams in northeastern Colorado and California and it appears that both Yellowstone and Long Valley erupted.
I contacted a ham in New Jersey; he said they hadn't seen any water, so it appeared that all of our problems were coming from the west and the south.
That 2 million man army from South and Central America hadn't given up.
They'd simply broken into smaller units and were raising Hell everywhere.
It occurred to me that this was becoming Biblical, like the flood and Sodom and Gomorrah.
Maybe I should take my pal Clarence's advice and keep an eye on the sky.
Perhaps God was mad because we destroyed His planet and killed about half the inhabitants.
If Long Valley and Yellowstone let loose, that made 7. and if Cascadia subducted, that made 8.
Oh no, if both the San Andreas Fault and the New Madrid Fault let loose, we'd reach 10.
Oops, I forgot the Cascade Range, it sounded like it was going to erupt and that got us to 9 without any major earthquakes on the 2 major faults.
We were up to our butts in something, but there weren't any alligators in Arizona.
The scales of recent winters are more modest but their effects can be significant.
A paper written by Ben Franklin in 1783 blamed the unusually cool summer of 1783 on volcanic dust coming from Iceland, where the eruption of Laki volcano had released enormous amounts of sulfur dioxide, resulting in the death of much of the island's livestock and a catastrophic famine which killed a quarter of the population.
Temperatures in the northern hemisphere dropped by about 1 °C in the year following the Laki eruption.
In 1883, the explosion of Krakatoa also created volcanic winter-like conditions.
The next four years after the explosion were unusually cold, and the winter of 1888 was the first time snow fell in the area.
Pinatubo, another stratovolcano, in the Philippines cooled global temperatures for about 2-3 years, interrupting the trend of global warming which had been evident since about 1970.
So it appeared we could still be in an overall period of global warming and have cold temperatures at the same time.
Nearly as I can tell, we've now had 9 disasters without a major earthquake.
The Texas Rangers currently operate as the elite investigative branch of the Texas Department of Public Safety.
It is part of the recreated Fort Fisher, a Ranger outpost established in 1837 along the banks of the Brazos River.
Fort Fisher is now the headquarters of Ranger Company F The museum includes exhibits tracing the history of the Rangers, including audiovisual presentations, dioramas, and paintings.
There is also a library, a collection of Ranger memorabilia and gun collections.
On page 5, it shows all the tuff beds, 3 from Yellowstone and 1 from Long Valley.
If Long Valley erupted, I think it's more than likely that it was an explosive eruption.
There's been lots of carbon dioxide in the soil out there, trees been dying for years.
They say, 'Measurements of the total discharge of carbon dioxide gas at the Horseshoe Lake tree kill area range from 50150 tons per day.
There is no obvious trend of either increasing or decreasing gas flux at this area; we conclude that the total gas flux coming to the surface at Horseshoe Lake has remained at these relatively high levels since 1996.
What a mess... terrorist attacks, surrounded by the South American Army, most of the major cities and several military bases destroyed, sickness, bad weather and now the possibility of volcanic ash.
Worse, I had the best rifles in the area and they wouldn't let me go on patrol.
I could carry more ammo than I'd ever shoot, 10 magazines loaded with 18 rounds plus one battle pack of South African.
To keep the load light, I only carried one LAW and almost always use my original Loaded.
That Super Match with its fancy scope was too temperamental while the iron sights on my original rifle were all but indestructible.
The McMillan TAC-50 was a better sniper rifle, but it weighed too much.
In those days, a man could buy an HK91, HK93, FN FAL and several different main battle rifles for a grand or less.
Today those same guns were worth 5-6 times as much and the prices of ammo had probably gone up about as much.
Then, the damned UN got involved in the small arms trade and we couldn't buy surplus ammo any more.
Rather than shipping 10s of thousands of rounds of .308 NATO to the US, South Africa was obligated to spend more money and demil it.
The Lake City had been ok, when you could get it and provided is wasn't mixed lot ammo.
The good news was that the 'eruption' at Yellowstone was a very large and violent hydrothermal explosion, independent of associated volcanism.
We wouldn't be seeing an ash cloud from there, according to the ham from Greeley.
He said that Long Valley had, indeed, erupted, but for some strange reason, they weren't getting ash in Truckee.
We were in southern Arizona, a very good place to be in the event of a nuclear or volcanic winter.
The only downside I could see was that Latin Army and they hadn't proved to be effective.
While we didn't have them out gunned, we could make them wish they'd tried hitting an easier site.
Besides, Sharon and I had built a substantial physical plant, 450kw of electricity, more with the soon to be installed wind turbines; a large underground shelter, underground diesel and propane tanks, a large multiuse building called the machine shed, a barn with livestock, etc.
I wasn't buying it, but if they needed a 72-hour bag, just in case, that was fine with me.
I'd taken Flight ER Doc's advice and rotated my ammo; apparently the vibration broke down the grains of gunpowder and caused excessive pressure.
Derek wouldn't let us go anywhere beyond Whetstone and Benson without a convoy of at least 3 HMMWVs and a fuel hauler.
According to the ham net, California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, Idaho, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas got some of the ash, with the heaviest ash fall being in northern Arizona, Nevada and Utah.
After I got out, or was that because I got out, the Air Force turned into a real military service.
There was a time, before the Vietnam War, that only SAC maintained real discipline.
I sure that must have applied to TAC, but I never saw any of them at Edwards.
I had wanted to reenlist, back in '65, but my Dad made me an offer I couldn't refuse.
Besides, to stay in, I would have to quit drinking and probably smoking.
They adopted new physical standards and I would have to shed 25 pounds, began exercising and even jogging.
If I had it to do over, I wouldn't have started drinking in the first place, but I didn't know I was an alcoholic.
On the other hand, I'd have probably died from a heart attack at age 42, like my father almost had.
Two other sites, a heavy water plant at Arak and a uranium conversion plant at Isfahan, would be targeted with conventional bombs, the Sunday Times said.
The UN Security Council voted unanimously last month to slap sanctions on Iran to try to stop uranium enrichment that Western powers fear could lead to making bombs.
Tehran insists its plans are peaceful and says it will continue enrichment.
Israel has refused to rule out pre-emptive military action against Iran along the lines of its 1981 air strike against an atomic reactor in Iraq, though many analysts believe Iran's nuclear facilities are too much for Israel to take on alone.
The newspaper said the Israeli plan envisaged conventional laser-guided bombs opening ""tunnels"" into the targets.
Nuclear warheads would then be used fired into the plant at Natanz, exploding deep underground to reduce radioactive fallout.
Israeli pilots have flown to Gibraltar in recent weeks to train for the 2,000 mile round-trip to the Iranian targets, the Sunday Times said, and three possible routes to Iran have been mapped out including one over Turkey.
However it also quoted sources as saying a nuclear strike would only be used if a conventional attack was ruled out and if the United States declined to intervene.
Disclosure of the plans could be intended to put pressure on Tehran to halt enrichment, the paper added.
Washington has said military force remains an option while insisting that its priority is to reach a diplomatic solution.
Israel, widely believed to have the Middle East's only nuclear arsenal, has said it will not allow Iran to acquire nuclear weapons.
I can't explain why it didn't show me Long Valley blowing its lid, maybe it's tuned to nuclear war.
A nuclear war is inevitable because the number of nuclear powers keeps increasing.
When there were just 5 of us, and 90% of the weapons were in the hands of Russia or the Americans, it was manageable.
It wasn't much, an inch or two, but you'd have thought it was worse than Denver.
Those folks, who say the greatest danger is a global climate change, are right.
You don't have to be a rocket scientist to realize that a few nukes set off in some cities, followed by WW III, followed by Long Valley blowing up will change the atmosphere for a very, very long time.
That's a whole lot of dust in the air and there has to be a lot of carbon dioxide floating around.
Unfortunately, an ANDAIR air filter won't do you much good; you need a carbon dioxide scrubber to clear the air.
Only then did they nuke Iran and while they were at it, they nuked some of their neighbors.
That probably led to those Muslim extremists nuking our cities and releasing a plague or two.
In some ways, I was about the closest thing as we had to a rocket scientist.
Although, it was really stretching things to say that an Instrumentation Technician was a Rocket Scientist.
Now Phelps Dodge trained people to be Instrumentation Technicians at their place in Thatcher, AZ, or they used to.
I doubt they were really trained in the same things we were, but technology had changed so many things.
When it came to pure electronics, Damon was far better trained than I was.
Derek was about the closest thing we had to a pure soldier; him and his friends, to be accurate.
I could shoot fair, but he embarrassed me when we went shooting together at the range.
Of course, anyone but a blind man could shoot well with that Tac-50, Night Force scope, MUNS and Jet suppressor.
There is no doubt that Israel's fighter-bombers have been training for a long-distance mission; NATO sources say they have for weeks been watching Israeli warplanes running flights the length of the Mediterranean to Gibraltar and nobody expects an Israeli strike on Gibraltar.
In Washington, the transfer of Admiral William ""Fox"" Fallon from Pacific Command to run Central Command startled the Army and Marines, who had seen these as ground wars.
Fallon's appointment comes as the White House wants to increase the military pressure on Tehran.
Fallon is heading to the region with some heavy reinforcements of two aircraft carrier strike groups, led by the USS John C Stennis and the state-of-the-art new USS Ronald Reagan which left San Diego last week.
And then there was the remarkable suggestion from Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, one of the Sunni leaders appalled by the fate of fellow Sunnis in Iraq and the growing prospect of a Shiite alliance led by Iran.
The abrupt resignation last month of the Saudi ambassador to Washington, Prince Turki, reflected the sharp debate in Riyadh over the best way to respond to the Iranian threat.
Prince Turki's predecessor in Washington, Prince Bandar, is now acting as the Saudi equivalent of the national security adviser and he is a hawk, convinced that the Saudi monarchy must rally the Gulf States and the Sunni nations against the prospect of a Shiite empire led by a nuclear-armed Iran.
Prince Turki was a dove, who wanted dialogue and negotiations and feared that military strikes against Iran would set the entire region ablaze.
Pessimists among the Saudiwatchers say that he lost; optimists say that he returned to Riyadh to continue the argument.
Meanwhile back in Washington, the new House majority leader, Democratic Congressman Steny Hoyer, gave an interview to the Jerusalem Post, published Sunday, that declared a nuclear-armed Iran would be unacceptable.
On the possible use of force to end any Irani224 an ambitions to deploy nuclear weapons, Hoyer said, ""I have not ruled that out.
The Iranians, for their part, seem to be closing ranks against what they perceive as the mounting threat of military action.
Rafsanjani warned the ""arrogant powers"" against launching a new crisis in the Middle East.
This closing of the ranks in Tehran is significant, since many top Iranian officials make little secret of their distaste for the rhetoric and populism of Ahmadinejad.
However much they may sympathize with Ahmadinejad's statements that ""Israel must be wiped from the map,"" or that the Holocaust was an ""invention of the Zionists,"" or that the ""Zionist state is illegitimate,"" they have found him to be an embarrassment.
Most striking was the message by Supreme Leader AN Khamenei to the pilgrims to Mecca to celebrate the Haj, which endorsed Ahmadinejad's skepticism of the Holocaust and Israel's right to exist.
Khamenei has not spoken in such extreme terms for some years, and his rhetoric points to the nervousness, perhaps even verging on panic, which seems to be gripping the Tehran leadership.
Larijani stressed that Iran had not abrogated the nuclear nonproliferation treaty nor had it stopped its cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Iran remained open to negotiations, Larijani said, and pointedly referred to the close economic relations that now existed between Iran and China, symbolized by the privileged role China now enjoyed in helping to develop Iran's oil and gas reserves.
Yet the political mood in Tehran does not seem conciliatory, and the military pressure is building ominously.
The Israelis were ready for whenever they needed to conduct the mission to Tehran.
The difference was they intended to use low yield nuclear weapons this time.
My only explanation of why they didn't is that someone changed his/her mind.
My reasoning should be obvious, if Israel used nukes, it would be the first time since 1945 that any country used nuclear weapons, other than testing them.
Russia had finished building the Iranian reactor and they couldn't be expected to act like the French after the Israelis destroyed the reactor they built for Saddam.
Moreover, the Chinese could be expected to be involved because they needed the Iranian oil.
I keep going back to the war because I wanted to understand what WE did to anyone to get them to attack us.
One of the few times I can remember our interfering with their plans when we prevented them from retaliating against Iraq when Saddam fired Scuds at Israel during Desert Storm.
I know my tales wander around from here to there and back again, wait until you get senile and trying writing a cohesive story.
This story started out to be about how Sharon and I would prepare when we won the lottery.
It didn't take long for that to go to hell; I couldn't remember the story line.
You want food, see TOM; ammo, that too; and, precious metals we have a lifetime supply.
We weren't secure in our homes, but that was nothing new, we hadn't been secure in our home since '82 when we moved to Kalifornia.
We moved from the middle of the terror zone to somewhere out in the middle of nowhere in Arizona.
Built our dream shelter, got the barn, machine shed and a few miscellaneous outbuildings.
Springfield Armory had to put on a second shift for a week when I got to buying rifles and McMillian Brothers were happy to sell another of their fine rifles.
I don't know if it's an analogy or a metaphor, but the closest I can to describing the way life had been running is a funnel.
The world's trouble seemed to get closer and closer with the passage of time, ah, the information age.
When we didn't know for a couple of days about things happening in a far off land, it wasn't a big deal.
If some world leader broke wind, we all knew about it before the smell was gone.
After that came the competition and several cable news network’s sprang up, each one trying to outdo the others.
When there was a shooting, they finally got to where they were speculating on the types of bullets used.
I sometimes got the feeling that we'd have been better off if we'd nuked 'em and let God sort 'em out; the uproar in the media wouldn't have been any worse.
Some guy would go postal and the media would speculate about his motives.
Eventually, the media pressured the terrorists into committing terrorist acts and finally the major nuclear powers to go at it.
We had a 10 year supply of propane and enough diesel fuel to wear out the engine.
Except... the terrorists pulled off at least 3 attacks that we knew of, bombings and two different bioweapons.
Hugo Chavez wasn't content to create a Marxist Country, he wanted to export it.
The Israelis got tired of worrying about their neighbors and eliminated most of them.
Now most of the world lay in ruins, the weather sux and nature decided to go on a rampage.
Bottom line was Cascadia adjusted, Yellowstone sort of burped and Long Valley went postal.
That was after the bombings of the cities and before the bioweapons release.
At the moment we still didn't, which led to an interesting the summer the following year.
Derek's patrols kept the Latinos off our back and we got through the winter without any action.
Walt had a dairy cow he kept for milk, hogs he raised for meat and a couple of feeders that he butchered and shared with his sons.
He said they kept six hens and when they quit producing, they became baking hens.
Walt said he leased out most of the land and just grew a little, he was semi-retired.
When he had his heart attack, he turned the farm over to his oldest boy and moved to Benson.
He'd run into Derek in Benson and learned that I was from Iowa, wanted to know what I thought of the coming growing season.
Long Valley is in the Owens Valley of eastern Kalifornia, it blew its top, a massive volcanic eruption.
He's the one who came up with those wind turbines and has overseen getting them installed.
It permits effective use of a new APFSDS-T round, DM53 , with a longer rod penetrator.
As to your original question, I have no idea what to expect this next growing season.
There was no way that I'd tell a man I just met that we had to convert one of the bedrooms in the shelter into a vault to hold the gold and silver.
Or, that valued at $600 an ounce for gold, we had $45 million in gold and silver.
In fact, we kept about a million of it in the house because the vault was full.
With our new standard price of $1,500/$30 an ounce, we were on our way to catching up to Bill Gates.
I knew we were going to have devil’s food cake tonight; if I was lucky, with coffee frosting.
I knew that Aaron had gotten our hand cranked ice cream freezer; I was hoping he turn out some vanilla to go with the cake.
If we limited the 'celebration' to family only, we could get by with a single cake and one freezer of vanilla.
When they come out right, one cake will feed at least 20 people, large servings.
I never counted, but between the diesel tankers and the JP-8, we weren't short on fuel.
We had gotten short on PRI-D, but a trip to a marina solved that, they bought it back by the 5 gallon pail.
Between keeping the no-man’s land clear and salvaging, we were busy whenever the weather permitted.13 was revealing itself to be a solar maximum, ergo, communications were awful.
There are 2 theories on that, the eleven year cycle described by Schwabe-Wolf and the 22 year cycle described by Babcock.
Some radio frequencies are absorbed and others are reflected, leading to rapidly fluctuating signals and unexpected propagation paths.
TV and commercial radio stations are little affected by solar activity, but ground-to-air, ship-to-shore, shortwave broadcast, and amateur radio are frequently disrupted.
Radio operators using high frequencies rely upon solar and geomagnetic alerts to keep their communication circuits up and running.
I was totally shocked when the sky cleared enough that I saw them, it was one heck of a birthday present.
You know, I should have figured on creamed cheese frosting, she bought 2 cases of it at Costco, way back when.
I had wanted to go to the range today; it was too cold and then Walt showed up.
Even though I have a parka, I seem to have trouble keeping warm, must be my poor circulation.
That's one I haven't figured out, my bp is normal, 110/70 and I take aspirin to keep my blood thinned out.
Plus I take Prevacid to keep the aspirin from giving me my ulcers back.
We had a real problem finding extra disposable insulin syringes and I started doing like my Dad, using one syringe for a week at a time.
Missy passed in '08, effectively doubling the number of syringes I had.
I began to notice I was running short and asked both Damon and Derek to keep an eye out for 3/1 Occ (30 unit) insulin syringes.
They gathered what they could find and I used up the larger syringes first.
You can't use those short needled syringes for IM injections and at 31 gauge, they're almost too fine for IV use.
They happen once in a while, but I don't know if it's on an 11 year or 22 year cycle.
One degree of latitude equals 60 nautical miles and each second 1 nautical mile.
The conversion factor for kilometers is 1 nautical mile equals exactly 1.852 kilometers and 1 statute mile equals 1.6093 kilometers.
There used to be a table on Wiki that allowed you to look up units of measurement.
Yes, both of us, she wanted to get out of Kalifornia so badly, she could taste it.
If I had a dollar for every time I heard her wish we could move, I wouldn't have needed the lottery ticket.
We hope to start planting a garden in mid-April, possibly later, that depends on the weather.
We've increase our herds of livestock slightly, it wasn't easy because we hadn't started out to have herds.
The chickens were the easiest part; we stopped gathering eggs for a while.
Damon and Aaron looked around some and came up with more hogs, cattle and horses.
It was never intended to be a row crop tractor and was too small to mount much equipment on.
We could mount a mower, pull the manure spreader or a wagon and not much else.
We'd get grain and bedding from the oats and wheat, livestock feed from the corn and alfalfa.
Some of the corn could be turned into people food, corn meal and the like.
We weren't the only family planning on some sort of farm; I think maybe Walt was going to give it a try.
From then until we won the lottery, my health continued to fail, little by little.
By the time we'd gotten settled in here in Whetstone, both of us were getting around much better.
I can remember telling Sharon that the war in Iraq had cost the Republicans the White House in '08.
Bill O'Reilly had it right, one last shot and then regardless of the outcome, come home.
I doubt anyone expected Hugo to do what he did; thank God the troops were home.
We'd have been better off if they'd gotten that Ml A3E3 beyond the testing stage, they'd have made a difference on the border.
It wasn't that big of a deal, the new tank was still the basic Ml A2 with a new gun, engine and fire control system.
DOD was looking at a 5-6 year conversion, beginning after they approved the new model.
They had to license the L55 gun from the Germans, get Honeywell to build the engines and probably General Dynamics to build the new fire control systems.
I half wonder if Derek could get the parts and convert 3 of the A2s to the new A3E3.
There probably hadn't been one survivalist who hadn't seen the war coming.
I knew I should get to the range and practice, but it was almost to Saugus and I didn't drive at that time.
I just wanted to leave a record of how things were both before and after.
I guess the real focus has to be WW III, which was the real turning point.
The first attack was in '93, when some Muslims tried to blow the place up.
The second attack wasn't Muslims at all, just some wanttabe bad guy named McVeigh who blew up the federal building in Oklahoma City.
Two of them were flown into the WTC towers, one into the Pentagon and the fourth crashed in Pennsylvania.
First we went into Afghanistan, looking to find and kill Osama bin Laden.
It took a while, but we found him, the Iraqis tried him and they hanged him.
The problem was we didn't have a good plan of what to do with Iraq when we beat them.
In '07, just before we won the lottery, Dubya decided to ignore everyone and increase our troop presence over there.
Like I said, the survivalists around the country knew what was coming, they just didn't know when.
It had somehow turned into a religious war, the Muslims against the infidels.
Chavez accused the government of the United States of attempting to turn Colombia into Venezuela's adversary, after United States Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld suggested that Colombia and other countries would be concerned over Venezuela's recent military purchases.
Dubya imposed sanctions on 3 Russian firms... like Russia really cared.
When I read that and the article about China protesting sanctions we imposed on some of their firms over arms sales, I pretty much knew we were getting close.
I must say, I was happy when Mexico went with the version of the H&K G36, it was a 5.56x45mm cartridge.
We all know how I feel about the 5.56, but the Venezuelans used 7.62x39mm cartridge in their AK-103s.
The principal problem was that the earthen embankment only went across the front of the acreage.
If these people were coming cross country, they could hit us from the flank or back.
That's some heavy duty stuff and I was certain that those artillery shells could probably reach out and touch someone, like Derek.
Some of them had G3 rifles, some the G36 and the rest either FX05s, AK-47s, AK-74s or AK103s, not to mention plenty of RPGs and a few medium and one heavy machine gun.
The maximum effective range of the Mk19 and Ma Deuces notwithstanding, Bill and the others never let them get really close.
The firefight no more got going then Derek and his patrol showed up, creating a crossfire.
I suppose the thing that helped us the most was the defensive positions I hadn't known about.
I was trying to follow the action on the radio, but they were too busy shooting to talk much.
Then, I heard the boom of the M256A1 and figured they were probably using HEAT rounds.
The round provides effective rapid lethal reaction against massed assaulting infantry armed with hand held anti-tank and automatic weapons at close range thereby improving survivability.
Additionally, the round significantly increases the tank's lethality and enhances the tank crew's survivability.
The additional capability gives the Abrams Tank the ability to survive RPG ambushes and to fully support friendly infantry assaults.
Didn’t sound any different than any of the practice rounds they'd fired.
It was late afternoon before the firing died off and Derek stuck his head through the shelter cover and said we could leave.
When I got topside, they were busy stripping bodies of anything useful and loading them on the 4 trucks.
I noticed right away that there was a growing pile of weapons and munitions.
I pulled my coat a little tighter and stood there guarding the collection; it was fresh meat for the table, as good as money in the bank.
World War III, or the Third World War, was a term used to describe a hypothetical conflict on the scale of WW I, WW II or larger.
Most usages of the term assumed the use of weapons of mass destruction such as nuclear weapons, biological or chemical weapons.
Before the collapse of the Soviet Union and end of the Cold War, an apocalyptic war between the United States and the USSR was considered likely.
Some American politicians suggested an invasion of East Germany, however Truman was dissuaded from this by analysts saying that the risk and fallout of WWIII would be too great.
The conflict pitted Egypt against an alliance between the French, the United Kingdom and Israel.
When the USSR threatened to intervene on behalf of Egypt, the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B Pearson feared a larger war and persuaded the British and French to withdraw.
The Eisenhower administration, fearing a wider war, had applied pressure to the United Kingdom to withdraw, including a threat to create a currency crisis by dumping United States holdings of British debt.
The conflict pitted the United States against an alliance between the USSR and Cuba.
The USSR was attempting to place several launch sites in Cuba in response to the United States installation of missiles in Turkey.
For a brief while, the United States military went to DEFCON 3, while SAC went to DEFCON 2.
The crisis peaked on October 27, when a U-2 was shot down over Cuba and another U-2 flight over Russia was almost intercepted when it strayed over Siberia, after Curtis LeMay had neglected to enforce Presidential orders to suspend all over flights.
As the Yom Kippur War was winding down, a Soviet threat to intervene on Egypt's behalf caused the United States to go to DEFCON 3.
The Soviets quickly detected the increased American defense condition, and were astonished and bewildered at the response.
Brezhnev decided that the Americans were too nervous, and that the best course of action would be to wait to reply.
The next morning, the Egyptians agreed to the American suggestion, and dropped their request for assistance from the Soviets, bringing the crisis to an end.
The United States made emergency retaliation preparations after NORAD saw on-screen indications that a full-scale Soviet attack had been launched.
No attempt was made to use the ""red telephone"" hotline to clarify the situation with the USSR and it was not until early-warning radar systems confirmed no such launch had taken place that NORAD realized that a computer system test had caused the display errors.
A Senator inside the NORAD facility at the time described an atmosphere of absolute panic.
A GAO investigation led to the construction of an off-site test facility, to prevent similar mistakes subsequently.
In the panic the United States government had confusion on who was in control.
The DEFCON status was raised and intelligence showed movement of Soviet forces.
Soviet early warning systems showed that a United States ICBM attack had been launched.
Colonel Stanislav Petrov, in command of the monitoring facility, correctly put the warning down to computer error and did not notify his superiors.
The USSR mistook a test of NATO's nuclearrelease procedures as a fake cover for a NATO attack and subsequently raised its nuclear alert level.
It was not until afterwards that the United States realized how close it had come to nuclear war.
At the time of the exercise the Soviet Politburo was without a healthy functioning head due to the failing health of then leader Yuri Andropov, which is thought to have been one of the contributing factors to the Soviet concern over the exercise.
A Norwegian missile launch for scientific research was detected from Spitsbergen and thought to be an attack on Russia, launched from a submarine five minutes away from Moscow.
Norway had notified the world that it would be making the launch, but the Russian Defense Ministry had neglected to notify those monitoring Russia's nuclear defense systems.
In addition to the above there are two other points during the Cold War that could have resulted in world war.
These, however, are not generally listed as they do not relate to the United States-Soviet Union rivalry, but rather the events following the Sino-Soviet Split of 1960.
The ideological split between Maoist communists (represented primarily by China) and Stalinist communists divided the entire communist movement worldwide which controlled governments or significant rebel factions on most continents.
Thus a war between China and the Soviet Union may well have resulted in world war, while not necessarily involving the United States and the capitalist west.
At the time there were almost one and a half million troops deployed along the border. • 1978 and 1979, in which pro-Soviet Vietnam invaded pro-China Cambodia and removed Pol Pot.
China in turn invaded Vietnam in retaliation and the Soviets denounced this action strongly, although it fell short of taking action.
The next year the Soviets invaded Afghanistan and the Chinese claimed this was a continuation of a strategy of encircling China with Soviet allies that had begun the previous year with the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.
I had as many things wrong as I had right; still we did confirm the nuclear winter theory and appeared to be confirming the volcanic winter theory.
The thing about terrorists is they don't always tell you when they do something.
They didn't announce those two pandemics; they just spread the primary pneumonic plague and smallpox without a word.
As we were soon to learn, there were 3 pandemics, not 2 and no amount of isolation, no amount of antibiotics, nothing could protect us from the third.
I'm not telling you because I'm waiting to receive the explanation from Gassville, Arkansas.
I believe the longest barreled cannon is the German PzH 2000, a 155mm selfpropelled cannon with a 52 caliber barrel.
Nobody asked, but I think we should buy our self-propelled howitzers from the Germans, theirs seem to be better.
The maximum range on the Ml09 is 30km , but it only has a 39 caliber gun.
Rather than let the Germans build our weapons, we could license theirs.
We licensed the L55 gun for the Ml A3E2 and H&K was working on the XM8 and 25mm XM25.
Speaking of which, The XM25 precisely delivered air-bursting munitions in all conditions, including MOUT and complex terrain.
It's five times more lethal at the M203 maximum range and provided lethality well beyond the M203's maximum ability.
But, they did perfect the thermobaric round and added a Flechette round.
In my very first story, I proposed using flechette rounds in Thumper, my 12 gauge Gatling gun.
It's ok, I have some, I just don't talk about it anymore they punch right through soft body armor.
Soft body armor is available that is stab resistant, but used primarily by prison guards.
Next time I talk to Derek, I'll ask about getting some of XM25 grenade launchers and all of the rounds.
I have a gun rack on my wheelchair that resulted from modifying a commercial gun rack.
I used a shrouded brass 177D Master padlock with 4 numbers set to the 2 nd 5 th digits of my SSN, although most of the time I don't lock the padlock.
Right, Derek will just run down to the hardware store and Benson and buy some.
Wrong, longer... first one has to figure out how to dismantle them, clean them and reassemble them.
By the time I had the guns cleaned and put away, they were planting the garden and the crops.
I claimed the weapons as trade goods and was told I could clean them myself.
The attackers had multiple cases of ammo, hand grenades, RPGs and ammo for their machine guns.
I used FM 3-23.30 to identify the various grenades, it was quite the assortment, although, most of them were RGD-5 fragmentation grenades.
I didn't like them because a person could only throw them 40 meters and they had a blast radius of 15 meters so they became trade goods.
The folks in Whetstone and Benson were more than ready to trade off the Mauser’s to get real assault rifles.
I let the grenades go for 5 ounces of silver per, the RPGs for 5 ounces and replacement rockets for 2 ounces, plus a trade in for any rifle.
I traded the ammo, round for round; the Mauser’s wouldn't do me any good without ammo.
We were doing a lot to get the economy up and running in hopes of maintaining the system of capitalism.
I also wanted to get politically active, but at 70, wasn't sure I still had the energy.
Interestingly about 3 years after the war we had virtually no idea who was running the country.
Most folks, myself included, expected FEMA to come dragging in sooner or later and try to take over what remained of the country.
Apparently the government figured that the big cities needed more help than little rural locations like Benson and Whetstone.
Those stupid SOBs didn't even realize we had 7 train loads of military equipment and supplies.
Derek's friend Joe had made that possible, it was just a shame he couldn't get here.
If you can find an old map of Arizona, you'll soon realize that it was mostly desert and mountains.
We could have had enemy combatants hiding anywhere and if they were wearing civilian clothes we may never have known.
You're half right, don't beat yourself up; it was a life and death struggle, our primary enemy being Mother Nature, not the Latinos.
One thing you can say about nuclear winter and volcanic winter is that they're not over until they're over.
The effect of the caldera eruption served to contain the nuclear summer, keeping the weather cool, almost too cold to grow crops where we were.
I did get a combat wheelchair, the one I had couldn't support me, my gun rack and the weapons.
I even had a small trailer to hold my spare ammo, rockets and grenades.
Bill or Derek had replaced that standard wheelchair battery with a big one giving me as much as 12 miles cruising range compared to my previous range of ~5 miles.
I was more concerned about another group like the last one showing up and trying to take what we have.
As far as the acreage goes, I know there's enough food to get through for 2-3 years.
We already had about as much as we could take as a nation, my only solace was more liberals died off than conservatives; maybe there was still time to save our Republic.
I should have pulled my head out of the sand; there were forces out there that were going to 'save' us.
A few countries managed to avoid any serious damage from the war and were just now getting their act together, preparing to help us.
Sorry, that's not the disaster I was referring to; it first appeared in late summer.
Our crops were doing so well; right up until the plants began maturing when something hit them, a blight of some kind.
Perhaps Derek or Damon can explain it better than I; we'll get their input in a minute.
At a particular point, each crop began to die off leaving us with nothing.
According to the ham bands, this was widespread, affecting the entire country.
Suddenly, we had troops back on our southern border, this time erecting a blockade.
Worse, Canada did the same thing, hoping against hope that whatever was ruining our crops didn't get theirs.
Blight refers to a specific symptom that can be expressed by plants in response to infection by a plant pathogenic organism.
It is simply a rapid and complete chlorosis, browning, and then death of plant tissues such as leaves, branches, twigs, or floral organs.
Most blights are caused by a fungus or a bacterium, each different according to the plant species involved.
If he'd have taken his tank, I'd have probably accused him of being out playing Patton, a man we both admired.
They left the tank and the artillery units sitting right where they were, they could always call back if they got in trouble.
Most of the time they had 3 HMMWVs, equipped with the Mk19, a Ma Deuce and an M240.
That's about as much firepower as they had on the Swift Boats back in 'Nam, hopefully it would be enough.
Patrol Craft, Fast Swift Boat, Eighty-four Mark I I could be wrong, but I believe that's when they came up with what evolved into the Mk19.
Dad always figured that I was too busy being a soldier to worry about civilian concerns.
Civilian concerns become military concerns when they affect the safety, security, and stability of the region.
So when my finely-honed Iowa farm boy instincts homed in on the corn crop Dad was raising, a little investigating caused me enough alarm to go for a little trip.
Corn, wheat and rice, among them, accounted for 87% of all grain production, worldwide, and 43% of all food calories in 2003.
Several developing nations depend almost exclusively on cereal grains for their food supplies.
All major cereal grains grown in North America are cereal grains except buckwheat.
That means that they are grasses, just like sorghum, sugar cane, and bamboo.
To round things off, around 50% of the world’s calories come from cereal grain and sugarcane.
That twitch that got me was a premature firing of the corn, before the ears had fully formed.
Poalic Grain Blight was a broad-spectrum disease that killed any plant in order Poales.
From what I was seeing on the way up to Iowa, it looked like we had an honest-to-goodness epiphytotic on our hands.
Now God could certainly manage to come up with such a disease, but I’m pretty sure that man came up with this one.
It was more effective than aflatoxins in that it was selfpropagating and ruined the entire annual crop of cereal grains in North America in a matter of weeks.
The scientists there are always figuring out the newest and greatest developments in agriculture before most of us normal folks have even heard of biotech hybrids that allow the farmer to directly spray them with Round-Up.
Shoot, the anthrax strain involved in the mail-order terrorism several years back was the Ames strain first identified at the USDA veterinary facility in Texas, having been taken from a Texas beef.
I figured that if anyone knew what was going on, the eggheads at Iowa State would if it was still there.
Along the way, I gathered as much data as I could on the move, including samples of various crops affected by the disease.
My military ID was still valid so I pretended to be one of the National Guardsmen ordered to gather samples and learned whatever I could.
The disease was not very effective at self-propagation through a hard freeze since it destroyed the seed in more than 90% of the cases.
The seed heads that showed signs of ergot-like growth could not be eaten or used for anything because the growth was a composite of carbon left over from the metabolism of starches and toxins.
Any livestock that consumed the toxin was inedible even if they did not die due to accumulated toxins stored in body fat.
Infected livestock had to be slaughtered and the carcasses destroyed to prevent further circulation of the toxins in the food chain.
Before I was so rudely interrupted by the storyline, I was talking about the Mk19.
The first version was a hand-cranked multiple grenade launcher called the Mkl 8.
In 1966, the need for more fire power inspired the development of a self-powered 40-mm machine gun called the Mkl 9 MOD 0.
This model was neither reliable enough nor safe enough for use as a military gun.
Product improvements begun in 1971 resulted in the 1972 MOD 1, of which only six were produced.
The MOD 1 performed effectively in Navy riverine patrol craft, and broader applications for the Mkl 9 were found.
In 1973, the Navy developed the MOD 2, which featured improved reliability, safety and maintainability.
In 1976, a complete redesign resulted in the Mkl 9 MOD 3, which the Army adopted in 1983.
The Army uses the Mkl 9 within the tactical environment for defense, retrograde, patrolling, rear area security, MOUT, and special operations.
If I had it right, the corn, wheat and oats were a total loss, but the alfalfa was ok.
Alfalfa is a legume so that means we'd get beans but the guy growing the rice was out of luck.
As far as our garden crop went, it appeared we'd be ok, only losing the corn.
He went on and on, talking about growing cotton, flax, Mulberry trees and what not.
It really gave me a headache because I had no idea what Mulberry trees had to do with anything.
Mulberry leaves, particularly those of the White Mulberry, are also economically important as the sole food source of the silkworm, the cocoon of which is used to make silk.
When I was his age, I was always about a decade ahead of where I needed to be.
I explained that I saw it on the History Channel... how you make denim out of cotton.
The History Channel, Discovery Channel and National Geographic should be required watching for would be survivalists.
If you need to break it up a little, watch the Military Channel, I did.
It was about troops in Afghanistan and Iraq and made me happy I didn't go there.
At least it wasn’t a total disaster; the livestock would have to eat leftover feed and fresh hay.
We wouldn't have wheat or oats and the man down the road wouldn't get any rice.
However, the terrorist attacks took place almost 4 years ago, so I'm not so sure about that.
That's sort of ironic, since the biggest military threats to democracy in the last century came from atheists.
Five years into the ""global war on terror,"" the evidence suggested that Islamic radicals were real good at blowing each other up, but not so good at projecting power abroad.
As long as western nations maintained halfway decent domestic security arrangements, the fundamentalists seem to be hobbled in repeating their one major success of Sept.
Given that fact five years and counting without a second big terrorist attack in America maybe we ought to be paying more attention to the kinds of state-based challenges that roiled the world so much in the past.
No one gave much thought to Russia's vast nuclear arsenal, which could still obliterate America in a few hours, even though that nation was reverting to authoritarian rule.
Nobody seemed to care about China's buildup of naval forces, its development of long-range missiles, or its new fighter.
And nothing decisive had been done to prevent North Korea's march towards an indigenous nuclear arsenal.
Each of these countries wielded far more destructive power than the handful of nuts scattered across Arabia that we call al-Qaeda.
But because al Qaeda was a current irritant and other concerns seem less pressing, the capacity of United States forces to cope with state-based challenges was allowed to atrophy.
The decay was most pronounced in the United States Air Force, the service that would have to take the lead in coping with urgent threats posed by Russia, China and other industrialized countries.
After 20 years of neglect, the Air Force's fleet of combat aircraft was older than the Navy's fleet of warships.
During his four-year stint as defense secretary, current Vice President Dick Cheney killed the service's cold-war fighter programs, terminated the next-generation B-2 bomber at a mere 20 planes, slashed the future C-17 cargo plane program, and decimated every other facet of United States air power.
Clinton's defense secretaries added back some planes that Cheney had cut, but delayed and decreased the next-generation F-22 fighter that was the centerpiece of plans for future air dominance.
Then President Bush's long-serving Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld launched the entire United States Department of Defense on a leap-ahead trajectory to military transformation that ignored air power for another six years.
The end result was that the United States Air Force flew 45-year-old aerial refueling tankers using a plane retired by commercial airlines a quarter-century ago; its F-22 fighter program had been cut 75 percent even though the aging fighters it would replace were so old they operated under flight restriction; its production lines forC-130 and C-17 transport planes were scheduled for closure despite lack of adequate airlift; and the service had canceled its planned family of aircraft for replacing cold-war radar and reconnaissance planes.
The only bright spot on the horizon was the tri-service F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, but Navy efforts to slash funding for JSF suggested the Air Force can't even count on that program going to fruition.
David Deptula was flying his F-15 over northern Iraq in 1999 when cockpit gauges went haywire and the fuel reading plummeted to zero.
It turned out insulation on the plane's wiring had rotted away with age, shorting out the electrical system.
Deptula was flying the same F-15 he had flown 20 years earlier as a young captain.
Deptula's son, a first lieutenant, is now flying the same plane in the Pacific nearly 30 years after it was built.
Maybe it's time the Air Force finally gets some new planes, before a real threat comes along.
Dust off is the term those in the military use to describe a helicopter rescue of a wounded soldier or Marine.
The pilots are flat out crazy, flying into the face of death to extract the wounded.
Nevertheless, it was a capacity that resulted in 97% of our wounded soldiers surviving in 'Nam.
By Desert Storm and the 2nd Gulf War GWOT those figures had been increased, primarily due to the medical staffs available when the injured soldier or Marine reached the hospital.
It was, in 2013, mostly a fleeting memory; we didn't have a pilot to fly the old, worn Huey we found.
However, the Lord works in mysterious ways, it turned out we did have a pilot a former Army dust off pilot, no less.
He claimed he didn't say anything because he wasn’t current, no longer had a flying license and had too many Huey's shot up in 'Nam.
We persuaded a mechanic familiar with the Iroquois to go over the bird and come up with a list of parts he'd need to get the bird in 'near perfect' condition.
The ammunition storage system for the new Dillon Aero M134D includes one magazine with a capacity of 4,400 rounds of linked 7.62mm percussion primed ammunition.
It is a crew served, electrically driven, 6 barreled, rotary action, percussion fired weapon, with a maximum rate of fire of 6000 rounds per minute.
In the current crew served application the rate of fire is selectable at either 2000 or 4000 rounds per minute.
The XM214 Automatic Gun was developed for use mounted in and on helicopters and light aircraft.
Like most GE Gatling gun type weapons it had six rotating barrels and the potential for an absolutely incredibly high rate of fire.
It was electrically driven, and had a firing rate that could be adjusted from 1000 rpm all the way up to a 6,000 rpm.
In addition to that, it could be set to fire bursts from 30 to 1000 rounds.
A real drawback to the higher rates of fire was the huge ammunition usage (166 shots per second), and the power requirements, because firing it at full power it required some 3. hp to drive the barrel assembly.
First seen in the movie ""Predator"" in 1987, the hand-held Minigun has captured the hearts and minds of He-Men everywhere, be it in games or in real life.
Apparently some of America's Special Forces guys saw Predator and realized that a hand-held Minigun would be a great asset for clearing out landing zones real fast.
Having ample access to the needed equipment, they started experimenting.
The first was that the Minigun weighed in at thirty pounds, which was heavy, but carryable.
A backpack with a thousand rounds of ammunition and a linkless belt to the Minigun weighed in at another thirty-five pounds.
Backpacks with two thousand rounds weighed in at sixty-five pounds, and were totally unrealistic in size.
The second was that in the movie, the power for the Minigun had been supplied by a pair of truck batteries through a cable that simply ran over the ground, and up into the Minigun.
And this amount of force increases geometrically in proportion to the rate of fire.
Firing a large burst would result in the gunner being spun around by his weapon, and spraying everything around him indiscriminately with bullets.
After some experimenting it was thus realized that the gun would simply be too heavy and cumbersome to be ever used in real life combat, and the concept was abandoned.
Hadn't seen Ron and Clarence since '07, figured they were probably both dead by now.
Palmdale wasn't that far NE of LA, 70 miles from downtown and about 50 miles from the Valley.
She and my sister were down at Ports of Call Village shopping for Christmas presents.
Even though I got a driver's license and have a pickup, I don't get out much and don't know most of the people in Whetstone or Benson.
We didn't really get much fallout from the terrorist bombs and once they got everyone quarantined during the pandemics, both the pneumonic plague and smallpox died out.
By the time the war came, I'd pulled the swimming pool and replaced it with a shelter.
Scrounged around Palmdale and the Antelope Valley and found enough to get by.
Anyway, Clarence and I decided to see if there was anything left of the country.
We cleaned the gun stores and several other places out because they were abandoned.
It isn't really safe to be out without an escort, a few of the leftover Latinos from the border war are still around.
We sorted through the leather we'd collected and both found gun belts, holsters and scabbards for their carbines.
I suppose we sat there most of the day talking about old times and how things had all turned out.
Mary and Amy looked and found a pair of new trailers we can pull in, if you decide to stay.
There are times when I'd have killed for a drink, but it wasn't available.
Those people in town will have to get by on MREs when they run out of food, don't worry, we have plenty.
Before the two of you try to go see the country, you'd better talk to Derek.
A bunch of them went out to check on the crop situation and checked out much of the Midwest.
From the time the good citizens of Kalifornia passed Prop 13, it wasn't a good place to live.
That was back in 78, just before I moved to Davenport for the Department of Revenue.
I had wanted to return to Kalifornia because I remembered what it was like in the '60s.
By the time we made it in '82, Kalifornia was reaping what they'd sowed.
The schools went from being tied with Iowa as the best in the nation to 50th place.
By the time Sharon and I won the Lottery, half of the homes in our housing tract were occupied with illegals.
One of the symptoms of what was happening was the 'white flight' to places like Reno, Las Vegas and Phoenix.
I suppose I should point out that both Nevada and Arizona had one other blessing, reasonable gun laws.
From what I've heard, the bottom of Lake Mead must be solid steel, what with all the guns that got lost on fishing trips.
I'm rather certain that if we hadn't had the terrorist attacks and WW III, Obama would have succeeded in trying to seize many of the weapons.
They could have my guns only when they pried them from my cold, dead hands.
To do so now, they'd have to get by the 155mm artillery and several trainloads of equipment and ordnance.
Arizona is also known for its exceptionally hot summers and mild winters.
Less well known is the pine-covered high country in the north-central portion of the state, which contrasts with the lower deserts of the state.
One of these days, we might get in the diesel Beemer and go sightseeing.
Fleataxi gave us the name, The Three Amigos, probably based on the movie of the same name.
A well-meaning doctor had put Fred on Prednisone and it eventually killed him.
Prednisone is a drug that must be used cautiously, it affects the adrenal glands.
Steroids, such as prednisone, are often used to treat asthma, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, and other inflammatory conditions.
When taken for more than a few months, steroids can cause bones to become brittle and break.
Back when I developed food allergies from too many years of drinking too much coffee, the ER frequently gave me a shot of epinephrine, another of ACTH and an Rx for 20 tabs of prednisone.
I'd start with 4 tabs the first day, 3 per day for the next 2 days, 2 per day for the next 3 days and 1 a day for the next 4 days.
I have some, although I'd have to think twice about using it, it raises a diabetic's blood sugar level.
I suppose if I got a several allergy attack, I might do the 20 tab routine.
Speaking of drugs, I had a 6 month supply of everything before we won the Lottery.
I'd take in the empty Vicodin bottle and my doctor would write me a new Rx.
Anyway, it worked for me and after I had my stash built up, we started in doing the same thing for Sharon.
Ron and Clarence were driving a Nissan Titan, a flex fuel vehicle with the 5. liter V-8 Titan engine.
We had a problem though; no corn meant no alcohol which meant no E-85, this year.
Most of you know that after WW III, the odds favor the elimination of much of technology.
In time, the satellites will stop working or fall to earth, no one will be building automobiles and there will be few food processors.
For the prepared person, the transition will be mild, depending, of course, on your age.
We seniors won't see a whole lot of the change and with any luck we'll get you younger folks started on the road to self-sufficiency.
My vision of the future doesn't see a lot of effective government for a very long time.
That same vision sees at least two-thirds of the population eliminated.
You can't make it on your own, while a small to middle sized group might.
However, with that comes a certain amount of insecurity, presuming there is in-fighting.
If there is a major disparity between the haves and have not's, there is sure to be trouble.
The reason I brought that up was what I learned from Jerry D Young in Percy's Mission.
While Jerry and I may not agree on what weapons to include in our survival packages, we do agree on including guns.
Even back in Palmdale, I got a rifle and a couple cases of South African.
I had enough oil to change the oil in my 7kw portable genset at least 10 times.
Our shelves were fairly well stocked with enough food to last 6 months.
The LDS Church recommends a 1 year supply, but a person has to start somewhere and I'm a Methodist.
No one man or woman can know everything there is that a person needs to know.
With age comes patience and let me say, right here and now, that the value of patience can never be overestimated.
I'll admit that I probably should have done more to get ready, but that woman I was married to could be more stubborn than you can ever imagine.
When you didn't have a gun to your name, I had to buy a second and eventually a third gun safe.
There was a time when, if my rifle hadn't been leaning against my wheelchair, I'd have ended up dead.
After they'd gone to the motel the previous evening, I'd returned to the shelter and got the last 2 remaining Loaded model Ml As, 2 Tac-Force chest harnesses and 18 loaded magazines.
I put 3 grenades each of the end pockets and took everything up to the house.
You have 8 mags in the vest, one in the rifle and 3 hand grenades in each end pocket.
Condition 0 A round is in the chamber, hammer is cocked, and the safety is off; Condition 1 Also known as 'cocked and locked', means a round is in the chamber, the hammer is cocked, and the manual thumb safety is applied; Condition 2 A round is in the chamber and the hammer is down; Condition 3 The chamber is empty and hammer is down with a charged magazine in the gun; and, Condition 4 The chamber is empty, hammer is down and no magazine is in the gun.
I have a couple of the Super Match Ml As and they have very good scopes.
Clarence admitted he still kept an eye on the sky, a person could never be too careful.
I told him that I'd never completely given up hope and as far as coffee went, when you're a millionaire, you can afford to stock up on the important things.
I’d given them each a carton of Marlboros the day before, primarily to keep them from bumming my Kool’s.
Out in the shed were several cases of cigarettes but we didn't announce the fact.
If you wanted something that was almost worth its weight in gold, it had to be cigarettes.
After breakfast, I made sure they were properly dressed, ergo armed, and we went to check on their new trailers.
The girls had been very busy, they'd stocked each trailer with food, ammo, smokes, linens and they had several pairs of jeans available so the fellas could dress in western attire.
It was the official hat everyone wore, especially the cavalrymen whose hats were different in that they were black and had been soaked in beer to break them in.
Just to be contrary, I didn't wear my Stetson; there was nothing wrong with the black hat I had.
It's a combined pistol and rifle range, you can shoot from 7 meters out to 1,000 meters.
It seemed like the 3 of us were all moving slower, I'd met Ron in '92 and Clarence in '95.
I had just quit my job with Iowa and was working for a CPA in San Francisco.
I was the numbers guy; Ron knew propane and Clarence road construction and repair.
We harvested all the food that could be saved from the blight and relied on stored goods to fill in the grass crops that had been destroyed.
In a way, the blight had done us a favor, highlighting how precarious our situation truly was.
Most of the things we took for granted would soon be totally unavailable things like pharmaceuticals, all manufactured goods.
Basically that meant that one of these days none of us would have the drugs that were keeping us alive.
He told me that the Army considers the life of a pair of BDUs to be 6 months.
Typically I kept 3 pairs of jeans so I always had something clean to wear.
I had taken to wearing golf shirts a number of years ago and had plenty.
Still, by the fall of 2013, our clothes were beginning to look a little threadbare.
You don't hear about the worst tornado in Iowa history much, but I wrote National Geographic Channel anyway, asking if they were biased or ignorant.
Every one of the calamities I've described has the potential of happening, the real issue is timing.
We've had terrorist attacks, wars with Mexico, and just under 800,000 years ago, Long Valley blew its top.
Cascadia has subducted before and half of the fault line was locked, just waiting to let loose again.
Like most Americans with a bent toward preparedness, I did what I could to get us ready.
Considering the odds of winning the Lottery, everything else in this story pales in comparison.
By now you all know me well enough that you know how I'd spend the money, I'm just confirming it.
Kalifornia doesn't much seem like it is part of the United States anymore.
When we moved to Palmdale, we lived in a nice little housing tract, just a typical middle class neighborhood.
In 2006, we couldn't speak to most of our neighbors, we didn't speak Spanish.
After the border war, there were the local Hispanics, soldiers from south of the border and the illegals.
The soldiers must have known in advance about the planned attacked, they moved south before the missiles started to fly.
I really had no idea how many of our cities, military bases and infrastructure had been nuked, it had to be considerable.
Ron and Clarence seemed to think that as many as a dozen locations in Kalifornia had been nuked.
I used one of those measuring things that you use to measure medicine for kids.
We emptied the house out, got it repainted and sodded and came looking for a place in Arizona.
Sharon talked to a realtor in Tucson; that's where she found the listing.
We started out with 20 acres then added another 20 and finally another 40.
If you wanted, we could put together a mission to go and look for them.
Unless you know almost exactly where they ended up, we might never find them.
As far as meds goes, we probably have some of what you take, we cleaned out several pharmacies.
We have to take one or two fuel haulers, a couple of supply trucks, the Hummers plus several operators.
If she's willing, we'd have to run it by Derek, he's in command of the military group.
Ron and Clarence will only stay for a while and then they plan to move on.
Clarence pointed out that we had Hummers with machineguns for security.
You’d need either a tanker or two HEMTT fuel haulers, a HEMTT for food supplies and another for ordnance.
That diabetic neuropathy took out my taste buds; it all tastes about the same.
I looked at the map and figured if we got as far as El Paso, we'd be doing outstanding.
It was hard to tell from the map I had, but most of the journey looked like open desert.
Truthfully, I'd have rather taken a sharp stick in the eye than see America.
It's hard to judge the country from one city, but in the 3 years since the war, there hadn't been much done to clean up Tucson.
What was left had been thoroughly picked over, about the only reason to go there was for spare parts for a vehicle, if you could find them.
Soy beans are a legume, we'd have biodiesel but no crops to produce alcohol.
We'd finally set up those biodiesel converters and were running them 24/7.
Given the transition time, that meant about 5 loads a day times 4 or 20 loads of 55 gallons a day.
By the time we had the soybean oil converted, we were out of storage places.
The way Derek's bunch was running through fuel, it was a temporary problem.
After batting it back and forth Derek announced that he couldn't provide an escort for us to tour the county.
He would, he said, provide Ron and Clarence a fuel trailer with 1,000 gallons of fuel and enough rations to last them for the trip.
I looked at the map and from here to San Antonio; you'd only go through a couple of large cities.
I told Mary to clean up the trailers and keep them ready for the fellas return, although I had little confidence I'd ever see them again.
Apparently that blight was a one-time deal intended to starved us all to death.
Starting that fall we got many more people coming into the area trying to find food.
There is a limit to Christian charity, although it's hard to say exactly what that is.
Perhaps if someone is honest and says they're starving but are willing to work to earn food, one might be inclined to find some work.
On the other hand, when they come in guns first, they get an entirely different reaction.
I burned through the South African and was now using Lake City surplus.
The grapevine also must let them know that we were more than willing to fight to keep what we had.
Sometime just before Christmas 2013, a very large group came in on 1-10 from the west.
The freeway and ditches had been blocked with those portable concrete medians.
It was a short shot for the Paladins and a medium to long shot for the Ml A3E3.
Our artillery was pre-sighted for several distinct locations, like every place we had barricades and troops.
A Paladin is capable of a maximum rate of fire of 4 rounds per minute and a sustained rate of fire of 1 round per minute.
I can't tell you because the Air Force didn't have cannons when I was in.
To put it bluntly, that meant there was an area free of artillery fire that these bad guys were all trying to crowd into.
The artillery was working its way back in the column and the tank was mowing down those in the front.
While it was possible to destroy an Abrams with a rocket, you could only do it from the side or the back.
I figured this was our practice battle, when Obama figured out we had food, we'd be fighting the United States Army.
The opposing force had about a 50% fatality rate from the initial combat and a 100% fatality rate after we'd checked the wounded.
I think Derek said that about half of their wounded would have died without treatment.
After Derek's secret trip to Iowa (it was a secret to me) we pretty much knew what we were facing.
As long as we used our seed, we'd be ok unless the wind brought in that what-you-call-it toxin, Poalic Grain Blight.
Anyway, one model of the MIA rifle is known as the 'White Feather', the M25.
Like James Earl Jones voice over for CNN was so famous, Dennis Haysbert was the announcer beginning in 2004.
You know him; he used to do Allstate ads and played Jonas 'Snake Doctor' Blane in The Unit.
Or, you might have seen him in Breach , which was based on the true story, FBI upstart Eric O'Neill enters into a power game with his boss, Robert Hanssen, an agent who was ultimately convicted of selling secrets to the Soviet Union.
The U212 submarine is capable of long-distance submerged passage to the area of operation.
HDW is responsible for the bow sections and TNSW for the stern section.
HDW is assembling the first and third vessels, TNSW the second and fourth.
U31, the first of class, was launched in March 2002 and commissioned in October 2005.
The third, U33, was launched in September 2004 and commissioned in June 2006.
U34 was launched in July 2005 and was scheduled for delivery by the end of 2006.
In September 2006, the German Navy ordered two further U212 submarines, to be delivered in 2012/2013.
The new vessels will have improved network-centric communications, combat system and sensors.
Two U212 submarines are being built by Fincantieri for the Italian Navy.
The first, S526 Salvatore Todaro, was launched in November 2003 and was commissioned in June 2005.
The second, Scire, was launched in December 2004 and was commissioned in 2007.
The submarine is equipped with the DM2A4 heavyweight torpedo weapon system from Atlas Elektronik.
EADS Systems & Defence Electronics and Thales Defence Ltd have been awarded a contract to develop the FL1800U electronic warfare system for the German and Italian Navies' U212 submarines.
The 1800U is a submarine version of the FL1800 S-ll which is in service on the Brandenburg and Bremen Class frigates.
A consortium led by ATLAS Elektronik and ELAC are responsible for the development of the TAU 2000 torpedo countermeasures system.
TAU 2000 has four launch containers, each with up to ten discharge tubes equipped with effectors.
The effectors are small underwater vehicles, similar in appearance to a torpedo.
The effectors are jammers and decoys with hydrophones and acoustic emitters.
Multiple effectors are deployed in order to counter torpedoes in re-attack mode.
The active high-frequency mine detection sonar is the Atlas Elektronik MOA 3070.
The propulsion system combines a conventional system consisting of a diesel generator with a lead acid battery, and an Air-Independent Propulsion system, used for silent slow cruising, with a fuel cell equipped with oxygen and hydrogen storage.
The system consists of nine PEM fuel cells, providing between 30kW and 50kW each.
For higher speeds, connection is made to the high-performance lead acid battery.
An MTU 16V-396 diesel engine powers the generator from Piller GmbH for charging the battery installed on the lower of the two decks at the forward section of the submarine.
The diesel generator plant is mounted on a swinging deck platform with double elastic mounts for noise and vibration isolation.
The propeller motor is directly coupled to the seven-bladed screwback propeller.
The first, Papanikolis , was built at the HDW Kiel shipyard and was launched in April 2004.
Hellenic Shipyards will build the second and third vessels at Skaramanga, for commission in 2008-09.
A fourth vessel, Katsonis , was ordered by Greece in June 2002 and is expected to commission in 2010.
South Korea has also ordered three Type 214, to enter service in 2007, 2008 and 2009.
The first, to be called Admiral Sohn Won-il, was launched in June 2006.
The Black Shark is a dualpurpose, wire-guided torpedo which is fitted with Astra active / passive acoustic head and a multi-target guidance and control unit incorporating a counter-countermeasures system.
It has an electrical propulsion system based on a silver oxide and aluminum battery.
Performance of the AIP system has been increased with two Siemens PEM fuel cells which produce 120kW per module and will give the submarine an underwater endurance of two weeks.
The Integrated Sensor Underwater System ISUS 90, from ATLAS Elektronik integrates all sensors, command and control functions on board the submarine.
The sensor suite of the U214 submarine consists of the sonar systems, an attack periscope and an optronic mast.
The submarine's electronic support measures system and global positioning system sensors are also installed on the optronic mast.
It's the quietest submarine in the world when it's running on fuel cells.
The first operational submarine was built by the United States in the eighteenth century.
A second was built during the nineteenth century and Holland made them work in the early twentieth century.
I can't remember anymore, but I think Ron is the oldest followed by Clarence and I am the youngest.
It might not be important, but after the shoot out last week, I became very conscious of my age.
Ron and Clarence would be lucky to outlive me, all they had were FX05s.
We couldn't recover all of the weapons this time, you'd be surprised what those canister rounds do to a weapon.
The attackers had been organized to a degree; the guys in front mostly had AKs or a variation.
Those variations included the AKM, SKS, AKS and the rifles built in China, the type 56, etc.
With a little help from Damon and Aaron, we managed to collect ~40 rifles. of them were Ml As, I was in heaven.
I could clean a G36 but the HKs and FN FALs required a new learning tree, despite being a modified G3.
At least these guy had a fair number of magazines, finding a rifle with only a couple of magazines was frustrating, to say the least.
On the list of the top 10 military firearms of all times the Ml 4 came in 10th, the Mattel toy gun came in second and the AK first.
I didn't care what the Military Channel thought; the Ml 4 rifle would have been near the top if it had a longer service life.
Adopted in 1959 and mostly replaced by the toy gun by 1970, it remains TFIE WEAPON OF CHOICE for many operators.
Damon tried to grab as many of the LAW rockets as he could but we had those and I was more interested in the rifles.
Still, he didn't do too badly; he collected 60 of the LAWs and another 24 of the Ml 36 AT-4s.
The thing I like about the LAW rocket is that it gives you a miniature, highly portable cannon.
Although the new M72 family of weapons is designed primarily to defeat light armor, these weapons retain a moderate capability against main battle tanks when engaged from top, side and rear angles of attack.
They are also effective against concrete and brick walls, as well as both hasty and prepared field fortifications.
These next generation M72LAWs are affordable, highly proliferable weapon systems, compatible with the needs of most modern armed forces.
The new M72LAWs offer greater lethality, increased range, better accuracy, and more versions of the M72.
These improved capabilities are provided without significantly increasing system size, weight, complexity, or cost.
During Operation Iraqi Freedom, the military ordered more of the LAWs rockets.
They were a slightly improved version with a slightly improved range and more accurate fire.
Regardless, the main thing was you could carry from one to three of them on the wheelchair.
HKs are tougher on the brass than the FNFAL so if you're a reloader, be warned.
The receiver did have to be stiffened to reduce the twisting on firing.
On the HK, handle is on the tube mounted above the barrel and requires an extension of the arm to cock it.
HK use to make it for the FN-FAL, but I don't know if any were imported into this country.
Well, it's easy to do simple armorer's work on the HK with a few punches.
There are surplus parts kits, but these are from retired service rifles.
BTW, the trigger group is not that hard to disassemble, but don't try it with a Set-Trigger of the MSG90 or PSG-1.
You have to be a clockmaker to understand their set trigger and even my instructor had to pull a fresh one off the shelf to reassemble one.
FN-FAL requires about a dozen tools for a basic armorer's kit and like the HK, really isn't too hard to work on.
Another advantage is that there's a domestic source for new receivers here in this country.
It is unknown whether they obtained blue prints from FN or whether it is a product of reversed engineering.
Manuals are out there and an excellent book to supplement it with is Blake Steven's $110 masterpiece, The FN-FAL Rifle.
This is a version of the standard USMC Shoulder Mounted Assault Weapon but with a new warhead.
Described as NE ""Novel Explosive""it is a thermobaric mixture which ignites the air, producing a shockwave of unparalleled destructive power, especially against buildings.
The NE round is supposed to be capable of going through a brick wall, but in practice gunners had to fire through a window or make a hole with an anti-tank rocket.
The SMAW-NE has only been procured by the USMC, though there are reports that some were 'borrowed' by other units.
However, there are also proposals on the table that thousands of obsolete M-72 LAWs could be retrofitted with thermobaric warheads, making then into effective urban combat tools.
But in an era of precision bombs, where collateral damage is expected to be kept to a minimum, such massively brutal weapons have become highly controversial.
These days, every civilian casualty means a few more ""hearts and minds"" are lost.
The Soviet Union was heavily criticized for using thermobaric weapons in Afghanistan because they were held to constitute ""disproportionate force"" and similar criticisms were made when thermobarics were used in the Chechen conflict.
According to Human Rights Watch, thermobaric weapons ""kill and injure in a particularly brutal manner over a wide area.
So it’s understandable that the Marines have made so little noise about the use of the SMAW-NE in Fallujah.
But keeping quiet about controversial weapons is a lousy strategy, no matter how effective those arms are.
We didn't find any of the SMAWs, but we didn't really know what we were looking for.
In the case of FAE, when a shell or projectile containing a fuel in the form of gas, liquid or dust explodes, the fuel or dust like material is introduced into the air to form a cloud.
This cloud is then detonated to create a shock wave of extended duration that produces overpressure and expands in all directions.
In a thermobaric weapon, the fuel consists of a monopropellant and energetic particles.
The monopropellant detonates in a manner similar to TNT while the particles burn rapidly in the surrounding air later in time, resulting an intense fireball and high blast overpressure.
The term ""thermobaric"" is derived from the effects of temperature and pressure (the Greek word ""baros"" means ""pressure"") on the target.
Performance enhancement is primarily achieved by addition of excess metals to the explosive composition.
The detonation of Composite Explosives can be viewed as three discrete events merged together.
The initial anaerobic detonation reaction, microseconds in duration, is primarily a redox reaction of molecular species.
The post detonation anaerobic combustion reaction, hundreds of microseconds in duration, is primarily a combustion of fuel particles too large for combustion in the initial detonation wave.
The post detonation aerobic combustion reaction, milliseconds in duration, is the combustion of fuel rich species as the shock wave mixes with surrounding air.
Aerobic combustion requires mixing with sufficient air to combust excess fuels.
Some low pressure shock wave enhancement can also be expected for personnel defeat.
Boron, Aluminum, Silicon, Titanium, Magnesium, Zirconium, Carbon, or Hydrocarbons.
Thermobaric materials can provide significantly higher total energy output than conventional high explosives.
The majority of the additional energy is available as low pressure impulse and heat.
You may recall that one of the new munitions for the M25 was also thermobaric.
Derek couldn't understand why we needed thermobaric grenades or rockets.
In MOUT operations, they'd be the perfect weapon for clearing a house or whatever.
Damon and I took the guns and ammo to Ron's trailer along with the 60 LAWs and 24 Ml 36s.
He helped me get an empty Mauser rifle rack from the shelter and we proceeded to clean the weapons, setting up an armory in a spare bedroom.
I don't like politicians, lawyers and reporters, in no particular order.
FEMA had been delayed getting to New Orleans back in 2005 because the Governor wouldn't let the President federalize the Louisiana National Guard.
Anyway, I collected any weapons worth having, cleaned them and stored them in your spare bedroom partner.
There are also some of the newer version of the LAW rocket and a few AT-4s.
The day may dawn when fair play, love for one's fellow men, respect for justice and freedom, will enable tormented generations to march forth triumphant from the hideous epoch in which we have to dwell.
We have hundreds of square miles of desert that we know and they don't.
If they use an aircraft to take recon photos, there is nothing visible from the air to give them a clue as to our military power.
If the United States ever has another internal war, like the Civil War or the War of Northern Aggression, it will no doubt be a 4th generation war.
Given the absolute power of our modern military, it would be nearly impossible to go head-to-head with them.
It is nearly inconceivable that any President could manage to get the American military to wage war on the American people.
However, there is nothing to preclude a President from calling on the UN to help restore law and order.
Until George Bush became President, I couldn't conceive of any President turning on the American people.
That's not to condemn Bush, but to identify when the concept became plausible.
In this final work, I have examined a series of disasters that could happen.
Not one of them is impossible although having them ail occur in such a short sequence is highly unlikely.
The answer, my friend, is blowin' in the wind, The answer is blowin' in the wind.
There are still plenty of us left who were born in the '40s and '50s who remember when this was mostly a free county.
He knew we had enough heirloom seeds to outlast the Blight and could, with care, continue to produce food.
The problem with people who have low self-esteem is they don't handle criticism well.
My mama always said, If you can't say something nice, don't say anything at all.
We never saw a contrail, but that didn't mean much, some planes don't generate one.
Besides, maybe the government still had a satellite they could use or some of those Predators.
Derek had to pull double duty; he knew about the Blight and was our military commander.
I unloaded all of my magazines to let the springs rest and later reloaded them to capacity.
I loaded them into surplus gas mask bags because they had a shoulder strap.
There were advantages to winning the Lottery, if you felt like having 20 of those 5-round magazines for your Tac-50, the fact that they listed for $330 each didn't bother you.
Neither did paying some Sergeant First Class an inordinate amount of money for a few rounds of Raufoss.
Once I even got together with a class III dealer and loaded up on those fancy suppressors Surefire makes.
They cost about 3 times as much as your average suppressor but last about 5 times as long.
I have a car load of Thunder Lizards but not a single Chicago Typewriter.
An original Model of 1928 in working condition can easily fetch $20,000 or more.
The M1A1, formally adopted as the United States Submachine Gun, Caliber .45, Ml A1, could be produced in half the time of the Ml 928A1, and at a much lower cost.
By Spring of 1942, cost reduction design changes had brought this down to US$70.
In February of 1944, the Ml A1 reached a low price of $45 each, including accessories and spare parts.
The Tommy Gun wasn't worth a crap in dense jungle because of its low muzzle velocity.
A frequent topic of conversation was the government and when they'd come after us.
If they got a Predator drone up with FUR and DLIR they'd almost know our exact population.
After a while, the nose of the plane gets in the way, making it impossible for the pilot to keep an eye on the target.
Today, the Auto Ordnance Corporation of West Hurley, NY is a company that has expanded its product line to include Submachine guns, Tommy gun patterned semi-auto rifles, Ml 911A1 pistols, and a host of spare parts and accessories.
For domestic sales, they have three versions of a Tommy Gun styled semi-auto rifle; the 1927A-1, 1927A-1C, and Ml semi-auto.
Owners of Thompson submachine guns, new or old, can find a wide assortment of parts and accessories in the Auto Ordnance catalog.
Wait, that's not true, he said, / could tell you, but then I'd have to kill you.
I think I read somewhere that there was about 4,600 tons of gold at Fort Knox.
I think those Russians must be deep in snow and the Chinese are mostly crispy critters.
The Ml As should be our primary guns and the submachine guns the backups.
The people who lived in Palmdale were luckier than residents of other cities; they had a huge wind turbine generating nearly 1 mw of power for the Water District.
Palmdale had water while many cities lacked the power to pump their water.
The Aqueduct came through the area, but without the electricity, the water couldn't be pumped over the Tehachapi Mountains.
I suppose we should have felt bad over reallocating those wind turbines from Tehachapi, but we didn't.
Derek didn't say that anyone was there that objected to his group taking them.
Obama had probably outlawed guns by now, either by persuading Congress or by Executive Order.
I didn't feel a bit bad having those Tommy guns, hell a BB gun was probably illegal.
We'd been attacked by a hungry family, Latino troops and a big group of bad guys, managing each time to successfully resist their overtures.
We hadn't had to go up against a modern, mechanized military, possibly one with aircraft.
A jet flew so fast you couldn't line up a gun on them; you either used a missile or got bombed.
There might be a lucky shot, it happened a few times in 'Nam, where a person brought down a jet with a rifle.
Things like tires, batteries, belts and hoses for vehicles were getting hard to come by.
Regardless of your feelings on salvaging supplies, eventually the cupboards were bare.
It was one of the reasons we standardized most of our firearms to certain calibers, it lessened the type of supplies.
Even reloading ammo had a limit, eventually the brass would be beyond use, provided we still had powder, primer and bullets.
Per Derek's instructions all the grass crops were gathered up, taken a few miles out and buried.
The winter was very hard considering we were in southern Arizona, it would have seemed like nothing to the Iowa folks.
It got down to 0°F for several nights running, hopefully low enough to destroy any leftover seeds we'd missed.
Can't tell you how nice it was to have Ron and Clarence back, even if it meant I got called asshole a dozen times a day.
I put Damon on finding them a means of transportation, thinking he'd come up with a couple of wheelchairs.
When he found them, he didn't say anything, opting to have one of Mary's relations work 'em over just a bit.
Using my 9 rifle rack on my wheelchair as a pattern, he welded together a 6 rifle rack for each of the ATVs.
Then, he mounted one of those window rifle racks on the backside of each one to hold 3 LAWS rockets.
When they had the project done, Damon came with a hat containing 3 slips of paper and said the 3 of us should each draw a slip.
They'd done something to the exhaust system to make them reasonably quiet, we could get within walking distance of any bad guys.
Noise disciple was something they talked about on the military channel; you could hear us coming at least V* mile away.
It was mostly a mix of name calling, curse words and suggesting what we'd try to do if the bad guys showed up.
Maybe the nicest suggestion was to cut his heart out and feed it to Max, sounds like animal cruelty to me.
It wasn't as if we were in any real danger, Derek and Bill had patrols out 24/7; every road into the area was heavily barricaded and each barricade manned.
Most of the people in Whetstone and Benson were concentrating on trying to grow enough food this year to get through the coming year and maybe resupply their dwindling pantries.
Give us 10 and then escort their OIC, his driver and their NCOIC down to the ranch.
The fellow on my left is Ron Brown and the fellow on my right is Clarence Floyd, my advisors.
Be that as it may, we're here to collect the available food so it can be redistributed.
It also provides that no property shall be seized without due process of law.
You go, Captain, and tell those in charge that we don't have any food or weapons to spare.
Tell them that we will resist any and all attempts by you, or anyone, to take what we have.
You tell them that Caesar also said, veni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I conquered.
Finally, tell them that George Santayana said, Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.
If we get some of that material that they make Space Blankets from we can suspend it over the buildings and reflect any infrared signature they might have.
We have plenty of the camouflage netting and can suspend that above the blanket.
Those silver oak leafs looked pretty good on Derek's lapel, he might as well keep wearing them, for all practical purposes they didn't mean any more than the butter bar.
I got on the ham set that evening and spread the word about Obama and what he was doing.
Strangely, I got quite a few acknowledgements and an indication we weren't alone in the fight.
One fella said that the only thing worse than them damned Yankees was them damned furiners.
In the US, space blankets are made by vacuum depositing a very precise amount of pure aluminum vapor onto a very thin, durable film substrate.
Space blankets are included in many emergency, first aid, and survival kits because they are usually waterproof and windproof.
We explained to Derek what we had in mind to protect the buildings on the acreage.
If the UN thought it was up against a brigade sized force, their first step would probably be a recon.
If they sent in spies, through the desert, they were as likely as not to start at our place.
We'd screwed the pooch not putting up the netting and space blankets earlier; they already had pictures of the entire area.
Didn't think of it at the time, I was too concerned with getting a Tommy gun.
The 3 of us weren't in charge of security and just ran the fence line to free up a couple of the troops.
What I know about fighting a battle could be written in large letters on a sheet of paper that would get lost in the eye of a gnat.
It never occurred to anyone that they might wait until later in the year to attack.
The gardens were growing very well and the grass crops looked like they might be ok.
In times past, disasters were speculative, one could expect them, but they might never happen.
This was different; they knew where we were and had as much as said, well be back.
If you could get your dragster to accelerate that fast, you'd always win the drags.
They were close, before I could bring my rifle to bear, Ron cut them down.
This was the first time in a week that Max was with us; remind me to give him a steak.
The truck came, picked up the survivor and the body and returned to the house.
Sharon and the girls were in charge of the house and garden, Derek was in charge of security and Damon in charge of recovery.
Next to me, Damon had the fewest duties, there wasn’t much left to salvage.-10 wasn't nearly as busy as 1-40 in northern Arizona and he'd gone almost to the state line in both directions.
Most of his efforts were now centered on Tucson; there was always something there to find.
I took my lack of duties seriously; the 3 of us patrolled the fence line on the even hours, then sat and smoked and drank coffee the remainder of the time.
From the time of the shooting, we didn't have any more trouble and Max seemed almost disappointed.
The wounded guy got an infection and what antibiotics we had failed to save him.
Near as we could tell, he didn't speak English and we'd have never understood him.
It was a good thing we got a corn crop, we needed alcohol to make biodiesel and E-85.
What little corn we did get went into livestock feed, I had to let loose of some of those one ounce gold pieces to get corn for alcohol.
The planes that dared to fly over soon learned we had Stinger missiles, lots of Stinger missiles.
In case you're wondering, the boys came up with a TRUCKLOAD of the things.
They wouldn't say where they found them, but they did say there were no Marines at Yuma or Barstow.
More importantly, they found a few stragglers, of military origin our military.
The 2nd Amendment, America's Original Homeland Security we mused about the coming battle.
They had to spread the tens of billions in development costs over fewer planes.
They're complicated to build; I think they were only building something like 20 a year once they got rolling.
Which brings to mind the old saw, it's not the size of the dog in the fight, it's the size of the fight in the dog.
The few additional men they added gave us maybe 3 Companies of soldiers.
With 6 artillery pieces and now 4 tanks, we couldn't last very long against a sizeable, organized force.
The main difference was we were fighting for our homes and they were half a world away from theirs.
If these guys attacking us had watched the History Channel, they'd have known how to get past our little Siegfried Line.
With our registered arty and a pair of tanks at each barricade, they weren't getting anywhere.
The sneaky SOBs had a third force to the south, some on 80 and the larger force on 90.
While we watched the action, we were busy topping off mags and loading the extras.
We had dragged all of our guns up to the fighting positions and had 5 LAW rockets apiece.
They were driving commandeered vehicles which didn't give them much protection.
I tried to block the road by blowing up the engine in the front vehicle.
That worked, for all of 10 seconds, then they tried to go around and I murdered a second vehicle.
Meanwhile Ron and Clarence were shooting at the guys bailing out of the vehicles.
All of our soldier's, you see, were sent to the barricades except for those using the arty and the Stingers.
It looked like a Platoon sized group and there were only about 10 of us on the embankment.
I was being careful not to damage their guns; I could easy get $4-$500 apiece for them.
Ping, a round hit right in front of my foxhole, spraying sand and dirt everywhere.
I thought I spied that SOB who shot at me and introduced him to Mr McMillan; it cut him near in half.
That rifle must have been 1 in 1,000, no old guy like me should be able to shoot that good.
I swear these guys had the range; they were chewing up the ground around all of our fighting positions.
I was slammed to the back of the foxhole, that Dragon Skin had just earned its pay.
Knocked the wind out of me, I struggled to get my breath and stand back up.
I could hear Ron and Clarence shooting theirs, so I racked back the action and opened up.
Even with their moderate rate of fire, these things give a new meaning to the term spray and pray.
I looked over and Udell, Jr. had his Ml 6 set on full auto and was spraying, if not praying.
I must have been pumped; I reloaded every magazine I had before I noticed it was very quiet.
I stood and looked around; everyone was out of his/her fighting position, just standing around visiting.
There was a row of slugs across the front of Ron's Dragon Skin, but he didn't seem to be hurt.
Clarence must have avoided getting shot; he had a big grin on his face.
Derek and Bill have their people out collecting weapons, ammo and supplies.
In a national security policy review session held in the White House on October 6, 1993, Clinton directed the acting chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Jeremiah, to stop all actions by United States forces against Aidid except those re302 quired in self-defense.
He also reappointed Ambassador Robert B Oakley as special envoy to Somalia in an attempt to broker a peace settlement and then announced that all United States Forces would withdraw from Somalia no later than March 31, 1994.
On December 15, 1993, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin stepped down, taking much of the blame for what was deemed a failed policy.
A few hundred Marines remained offshore to assist with any noncombatant evacuation mission that might occur regarding the 1,000-plus United States civilians and military advisers remaining as part of the United States liaison mission.
They'd paid dearly for the attack, but only they could decide if it was worth the cost to get what little food we were growing.
Those Stingers were consumables and we didn't have another source of supply.
When they were gone there wouldn't be much we could do to stop their planes and choppers.
Sometimes military commanders react to a force getting wiped out by re-attacking the same place to put down the resistance.
Still, the rule of thumb is that if you kick they're butts; they'll be back, just like Arnold.
Derek continued to send out patrols; it appeared that we were generally hemmed in, by three Regiments.
This, in turn, ended Damon's salvage operation, if we didn't have it now, we couldn't get it, unless we could grow it or manufacture it out of available materials.
The only problem with the Hind is that the engine exhaust is directed right under the rotor shaft.
Those heat seekers tend to home in on the jet engine exhaust and blow off the rotor.
Between battles, I hopped on the SINCGARS radio and put out a net call on 33,000, the single channel plain text frequency for real world emergencies.
If they didn’t know that I was only a pretend colonel, then I was happy to pretend.
Right about then a drink would have gone down smooth, it was just a shame I couldn't stop at one.
How they were going to get an armored cav squadron past the UN was way above my pay grade.
The choppers could probably sneak in during the dark, I wondered if they were Huey's or Blackhawk's.
According to the information I copied to my computer from global security they use Blackhawk's for medevac.
If one of them went down with a full load of people, that meant a whole lot of dead people.
I knew you could shoot one down with an RPG-7; 2 in fact, they did that in Mogadishu.
I had felt like telling him to speak English before I realized he was using the phonetic alphabet.
I'd learned Able Baker Charlie Dog Easy Fox George How Item Jig King Love Mike Nan Oboe Peter Queen Roger Sugar Tare Uncle Victor William X-ray Yoke Zebra followed by Alfa Bravo Coca Delta Echo Foxtrot Golf Hotel India Juliett Kilo Lima Metro Nectar Oscar Papa Quebec Romeo Sierra Tango Union Victor Whisky Extra Yankee Zulu and finally Alpha Bravo Charlie Delta Echo Foxtrot Golf Hotel India Kilo Lima Mike November Oscar Papa Quebec Romeo Sierra Tango Uniform Victor Whiskey X-ray Yankee Zulu.
About the time I get this one memorized, they'll probably change it again.
In my opinion, Kenwood gives you the most bang for the buck although loom and Yaesu are both very good radios.
If you add a CB SSB base station and some business radios, you've got everything covered except the frequency hopping military radios.
You'll probably have to steal one of those to get one and then you need the code disc to program it to the current operating frequencies.
SINCGARS are 28 volt radios except for the man-pack which operates on 12 volts.
If you have an antenna capable of 10 and 12 meters, you don't really need an 11 meter antenna, you can retune your other antenna.
I think it's better to have a separate 11 meter antenna plus a Comet tri-bander that will cover the higher frequencies.
The X part of the TS-2000 is a plug in card you can always add later it covers 1.2ghz.
More watts of output power are nice, but you really should spend the extra bucks on the antenna.
When my brain still worked a little, I could think well enough to try and avoid giving bad advice.
Derek assigned Aaron as my driver, not because I couldn't drive, but because my brain slowed to the point that I would be like an epileptic and might go a mile or more and not know I did it.
There isn't much practical difference between being epileptic and hypoglycemic, you're totally out of control.
The statement from the Bible is, physician heal thyself and it was more like no way, Jose.
I'm assuming Derek will tell you more about the guys when they show up.
It sounded like we'd more than double our force and pick up all kinds of things we didn't have.
Dustoff showed up first, of course, with six nice, new Blackhawk helicopters.
Their nickname was the common call sign for ail Army medevac units, but in this case it was the 498th Air Ambulance Company.
I assume that they got in partly because they were all marked plainly with nice, big red crosses on the sides.
What the UN pukes forgot was that even medevac choppers carry miniguns now, thanks in no small part to some of the insurgent activities the Army had faced over the last several decades.
Your average official soldier from another country saw the red cross and knew that the Geneva Conventions banned attacks on it because of the rescue missions being flown.
Your average insurgent, on the other hand, saw the red cross and thought the Americans very stupid to put a crosshair on the side of their aircraft.
Thus, even medevac choppers could put an amazing amount of firepower on target to secure the landing zone, and so long as the fire remained defensive Geneva couldn’t say anything.
The other reason they got in was that this was the 498th, a unit made famous for its daring rescue missions flown during Vietnam.
Nap of the Earth flying, an ugly method requiring the pilot to dodge the ground at high speed, was practically invented by the 498th and units like them.
I felt better knowing that we had the best chopper pilots in the world at our disposal.
Bataan showed up next, and boy was I glad to see them.st Battalion, 168th Armor Regiment was a bunch of Minnesota National Guards that belonged to the same brigade as I did back when I was in the Iowa Guard.
Normally, their complement was 58 tanks, 8 120mm mortar carriers, and various support vehicles.
They did not have mechanized infantry, normally, unless they had exchanged a company of tanks for a company of Bradleys’ from another command.
These guys were every bit as antisocial as any cavalry scout, though, and decided that they didn’t want to act in support of UN invasions.
Thus, they headed south at a medium pace, picking up as many stray soldiers and equipment along the way as they could.
I’m sure that all those tankers were slightly insulted by my comment to that fact.
Armor units know that the Cav sux, just like Cav units know the reverse.
One other nice little fact was that their Bradley's were Infantry models.
I joked with the Bataan commander about retasking his unit as cav; one look from that grizzled old light colonel said more than enough.
This was a unit whose proud history included surviving the Bataan Death March.
This unit held the distinction of being the original Battling Bastards of Bataan, a fact that they were extremely proud of.
Hence the unit call sign Bataan and their unofficial nickname, the Bastards.
This unit had no history, calling themselves the 1st provisional volunteer infantry.
Their CO was a retired sergeant major from the 101st who bled red, white and blue, and the men were mostly former soldiers who had the same sort of bloodstream.
That crusty old Sergeant-Major had whipped them into shape, forging perhaps the finest militia unit in history.
The Ugly Stepchildren could march 36 miles in a day, every day, for weeks on end.
What’s more, their composition told me that we weren’t the only ones out there who would stand up for our beautiful, sacred land.
These days, it was What's mine is mine and what's yours, is mine, if I can get.
There wasn't any reason for Ron, Clarence and I to patrol the fence, so we did it anyway.
I went to bed early that night and never heard the Thump, Thump of the Blackhawk's when they arrived.
The day after the armor unit showed up, they had tanks, Bradley's and even mortars.
Derek explained that 6 Paladins made an artillery unit called a battery.
We had people from Minnesota, the southeast and the rest from here and there.
Sabot ammo is made in Iowa at the Iowa Army ammunition plant in Middletown, Iowa.
Derek claimed if we could get new rounds from Middleton they could swap out the warheads.
Meanwhile we could use up most of the old ammo, depending on the condition of the disintegrating cartridge.
With them having 2 Regiments and our having a short Brigade, we were outnumbered maybe 4-6 to 1.
If we were to get beyond them, it would take a concentrated attack against only one of their Regiments.
The answer was if we didn't break out, they'd eventually come for us and take everything we had.
Derek said if we could punch a hole in their lines, he could get to Iowa and locate more tank ammo, or the components.
I sometimes wondered if we wouldn't have been better off if we had been in Tucson, shopping, when the war occurred.
It must have been the depression that sometimes crept in despite the Zoloft.
I'm not sure why we had a stalemate, maybe they actually believed we had a full Brigade with more coming all of the time.
They had to see the evidence, you can't move that large of an armor force without leaving signs.
That would have been nice, a detachment of Apaches, equipped with Hellfire missiles, Hydra rockets and those 30mm cannons.
Like all of our equipment they were vulnerable to machinegun and rocket fire.
After several days of scouting, a patrol found a gap in the encirclement.
It was still a long way to Middleton but after checking all of the tanks rounds, they found enough swelled they didn't have much choice.
Bill and Derek decided to make the mission with 10 vehicles, 4 10-ton trucks, 1 fuel hauler and 5 HMMWVs.
If they found more ammo than that, they'd appropriate a civilian tractor trailer.
Derek would lead the mission and with good travel times said they could be back in 5 days.
At oh dark thirty, one cold and blustery morning, they launched the mission, sending scouts and infantry ahead to clear the way.
My contribution was to supply a dozen suppressors that they promised to return.
I wasn't really contributing much these days, my banker duties had been taken over when I made a math error.
Every morning The Three Amigos bundled up to keep warm and patrolled the acreage, a make work project.
The nearest troops were probably 15km out just maintaining the encirclement.
One scouting party reported that not all of the troops assigned to the 2 Regiments were concentrated on keeping us in.
Instead, they were ranging much of southern Arizona, confiscating food and guns.
They were finding some food, but no firearms, an unlikely scenario in Arizona.
There were camouflaged containers everywhere and we had more ordnance than we could shoot up in years.
My new goal, everyone has to have goals, was to shoot down a Hind with my Tac-50.
I was counseled that only a hit to an engine would do and I'd have to find one hovering fairly close to pull it off.
The crew compartment of all series of Hinds was well armored; I couldn't simply shoot the pilot.
After I got up, showered, dressed and had breakfast, I found them in my den drinking coffee.
Give us a squadron of fighter bombers and it would be over in nothing flat.
Back in the '90s, they kept changing the Squadron sizes, last I knew a Squadron had 24 planes and a Wing, 72.
What I didn't know was that Congress, after Iraqi Freedom ended, diverted large sums of money to both the F-22 and F-35 programs.
The government clamped a lid on the news and the American public was unaware that the Air Force was, for the first time since 'Nam, almost over strength.
In a move that would have made a conspiracy theorist proud, ordnance for the aircraft was widely distributed, with a vast quantity stored at Ft.
The apparent explanation was that the money had already been allocated to the war and homeland security sucks.
You know how the government is, once they allocate money, they're loath to not spend it.
The buildup ended when the war came but the F-15s and F-16s hadn't yet been retired, the phase out was gradual.
Thankfully, the Idaho city has the 391st Fighter Squadron and their 24 F-15E Eagle fighters.
Disgusted by the UN tactics and the unjust mission, the pilots and ground crews had decided to look for something else to do.
Best of all, it was the 162nd Fighter Wing, a unit that I was sure had been wiped out with Tucson.
The 162nd boasted 3 full squadrons of F-16E/F fighters before the additional squadrons were attached.
In total, we had 24 F-15E Strike Eagles, 72 F-16E Block 60 fighters from the 162nd, and 24 A-1 OC Thunderbolt II ground attack fighters.
Now they would fly missions in support of us instead of the UN, with a little help from some fellow officers that were fed up with the Commander-in-Chief to cover their tracks.
Obama would crap his drawers if he knew we were commandeering his expensive hardware and highly-trained pilots.
With a bit of luck, we might get even more units sent our way in support of contingency operations that would remember their allegiance was to the Constitution, not the President.
Although Ron never said anything, I believe that he was concerned about our having automatic weapons and suppressors.
They were strictly controlled by the NFA of 1934, another example of the government meddling in our lives.
First off, a suppressor doesn't silence a firearm; it reduces the sound to a bearable level.
You could have one, provided you were willing to cough up $200 for the tax stamp and pass the background check.
Think about that in the terms of the economy in 1934... $200 was nearly a fortune when many were working for $1 a day.
Next, there was the question of where the gangster came from in the first place.
Yes, Virginia, we've always had criminals, but Prohibition gave them a new source of money and they had millions of more than willing customers.
The government created the situation in the first place; then when the bad guys took advantage of the latest weapons for their rivalries, rather than legalize liquor, they outlawed certain firearms and accessories.
To make matters worse, many states outlawed all of the NFA weapons and even if the feds approved the purchase, you still couldn't legally own one whatsoever.
Having lived in Kalifornia since he was 2 weeks old, Ronald had been taught from day one that NFA firearms were bad things that only criminals had.
Thus for whatever rea316 son, he was very uneasy with the selection of weapons we had.
I was the opposite and always felt the government had overstepped its authority when they outlawed machine guns, short barreled rifles, suppressors, destructive devices, and that special class, any other weapon.
Hillary's husband got through an Assault Weapons Ban when he was Prez, but it had a sunset clause, thank God.
When the fat was in the fire, none of this kept good ol' Ronald from using the weapons, although I still could tell, it bothered him.
Had it been up to me, I'd have mounted Mk19s on our front and back decks, but we didn't have enough to allow that.
Given a choice between spraying and praying vs. one well-placed shot, the latter always prevailed.
I keep the 10 round magazine that came with the rifle loaded with Black Hills 165gr BTSP point ammo, 'cause you never knew when an edible critter might get into your sight picture.
Like I'd ever see an edible critter now that we spent most of our days in my den.
At best, the 3 of us were consigned to monitoring the radios Damon had moved from the shelter to the den.
I kept the volume up on the SINCGARS so we'd know immediately if the UN were attacking.
By stationing a Regiment on each side of us they hoped to keep us contained until they were ready to do whatever evil deed Obama assigned to them.
Meanwhile, they controlled most of southern Arizona, except for Davis-Monthan and Ft.
They weren't about to go up against 5 Squadrons of Air Force or the remaining force at the Fort.
It was rumored that Obama was at Cheyenne Mountain and SecDef Clinton was at Holloman.
Although most former members already know these things, many civilians don’t.
Every service member, from the rank-and-file enlisted to the highest officers, swears an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States and to obey the orders of the President.
National Guard members add the Constitution of their respective state and their Governor to this oath, following the same patterns.
If the oath was to the Government, the service member would be pledging themselves to serve the people elected to represent the nation and the people who elected them instead of the nation itself.
Thus, the services would become the property of those elected officials and the people that elected them.
Now, the elected President had decided that the mounting crisis within the borders of the United States justified his declaration of martial law, nationalization of critical resources, and invitation of foreign troops onto American soil to maintain public order.
In doing this he subordinated the authority of the Constitution to that of the United Nations.
As every graduate of public high school can tell you, civics class teaches you that the Constitution is the supreme law of the United States.
When these acts happened, the members themselves each faced a personal crisis.
The answer is that we continue to serve the office until such time as we can act to restore the Constitution.
Now, Dad didn’t know that we were using what connections we still had to contact the Armed Forces of the United States as often as we were able to remind them of their oath to the Constitution.
I was a bit afraid that if I told him that I was doing this he would feel that I had subordinated the wellbeing of our family and friends in our small community to that of the same corrupt government that took away his rights before the crisis.
Nothing could be farther from the truth, but he was getting old enough that I feared the kind of roaring argument that would follow might threaten his health.
The truth is that the folks like Dad, Sharon, Ron, Clarence, and the other older people that remembered the freedom we youngsters could only dream about were depressed because they could remember that freedom and mourned its loss.
Those of us born after the slow decline of freedom that the older folks mourned now fought to restore a level of freedom that we had never really had.
One speech was usually enough to spark the interest of other freedom-minded individuals our own age.
That fact makes service members easier to remind with a little speech of their true allegiance.
The word was out through the rumor mills and scuttlebutt that there was a bunch of service members standing up to the occupying army of the President down around the Four Corners.
Every once in a while a few service members would disappear because of this rumor.
Most reappeared in a few days to a few weeks somewhat closer to the Four Corners area.
As we made our way across the country we ran into patrols, checkpoints, and units deployed to police up firearms, food, and medical supplies.
The UN troops got a line of bull about how we were transferring the vehicles to another garrison that was always just a few more miles up the road; it worked, too, thanks in part to acting classes I took in college and in part I think to Divine Providence.
I was legally a Lieutenant Colonel because of a very old tradition known as Full Faith and Credit and the fact that the legally constituted government of the state I served kept their own promotion lists.
So long as I was in the National Guard, my rank was determined by the elected government in Arizona.
All of the American units I ran into were sympathetic when I explained to them.
Service members are a pretty loyal bunch when it comes to America and we were all sick and tired of the way the government was running things.
None would volunteer any information about us and our whereabouts to the UN officers they reported to by Executive Order.
This time, the enemy was inside the gates before we knew what was happening.
The civilians that saw us proudly flying the Stars and Stripes from our radio antennas definitely loved us.
We had hot meals all the way there and back, even when the families providing them looked like they needed them more than we did.
To repay them for their hospitality we gave away the food we didn’t eat thanks to them and arranged quietly with our ever-expanding network of “bat319 tie buddies” to misroute some of the food seized by Obama’s troops to them.
We were at each of the two depots less than two hours and got a full load between them of everything we needed, from bullets to grenades to rockets.
Someone even conjured up some fake orders for us, labeling this shipment as necessary ordnance for the contingency operations in Arizona.
Huachuca would now be getting occasional resupply from the ordnance depots and Obama would never be the wiser.
Officially, the resupply convoys would be headed for the UN forces stationed there.
Unofficially, each convoy would have whatever we asked for to be delivered to Ft.
The additional items would never be on the books so there would be no paper trail, either.
Thankfully, they were elsewhere during the strikes and had survived mostly intact.
We now have all the ordnance we could ever use set up to be delivered to Ft.
They are part of a new off-the-books taskforce of Americans who will eventually drive the UN out of Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff don’t know it yet, but they’re not in command of the Armed Forces.
There’s a civil war brewing right now, Dad, and our quiet little town is getting famous as one of the last bastions of freedom.
Some guy up in Utah is doing something similar up there, and the native tribes like the Navajo are making sure that the UN can’t enter reservation lands pretty effectively.
Whetstone is one of the principle rallying points for the Four Corners, Dad.
There are folks all over that want to know why it is that we are left alone for the most part, including Obama.
Truth is that most of the forces he wants to pacify the Four Corners are getting into trouble before they leave Texas and Oklahoma.
The locals all over the country have brought back some time-honored traditions like tarringand-feathering.
The UN has its hands full rounding up the leaders of such rebellious acts and hanging them publicly.
It was just a shame you couldn't get into West Point when you graduated from High School.
He had surrendered at Skeleton Canyon, located 30 miles northeast of the town of Douglas, a ways southeast of here on 80.
It seemed more than fitting in a way; the 2nd Revolutionary War would be fought by Apaches.
With what little information he gave me, I couldn't tell if we'd ended up with a Brigade, Regiment or Division.
A Bird Colonel could command a Regiment or Brigade and a Brigade could be as large as 2 Regiments.
The reference to gold is because the Spanish were rumored to have hidden 2 tons of gold in a cave in Skeleton Canyon.
It's a long way from Phoenix, so I guess it's not the source of the Dutchman's gold.
I'll be darned if I can remember the name of the mine, but when I was there they had a mining demonstration and a store where I bought a book about the Lost Dutchman Mine.
We were a fair distance from the four corners, the junction of Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Colorado.
I wouldn't go there anyway, they charged admission, $3 a head before the war.
Man things had changed in the 8 years since we bought that PowerBOSS 7000.
Those were simple times, I only fired my rifle on the range and we only used the generator once a month for 15 minutes to exercise it.
We hadn't burned any more calories doing that than we did sitting in the Den.
Once upon a time, there was a mountain that represented the heart and soul of the United States Department of Defense.
After all those years in uniform I was used to someone telling me what to do from time to time.
I was also used to the relative bliss of having a small area of responsibility compared to what I had now.
Not one soldier to ever put on the uniform got through so much as a week of serving without thinking that he knew better than his officers.
The Four Horsemen were the commanders of the groups assigned to the various areas leading up to and around Cheyenne Mountain.
In the north was Whitehorse 6, a screwball infantryman with nearly a full division of irregulars behind him, all from former Confederate states.
From the west would come Redhorse 6, two brigades worth of Midwestern farmboys in heavy combat vehicles led by an old friend of mine, Matt Bogardus.
I knew him back when he wore three up and two down; now he wore a single star.
They would cut off everything from the east and set up their headquarters in Security, Colorado.
From the south, my new boss would lead the rest of Blackhorse up through Four Corners and Pueblo.
Between the three forces, the foreign invaders that Obama was using to protect himself would be pinned against the Rampart Range.
Somehow, somewhere, someone in Kalifornia had managed to gather up some of the best warplanes ever built.
I’m talking about F22s, F-35s, B-2s, and that wild weasel version of the F-16.
They were assembled into a huge mega-group nicknamed Taskforce Death by some melodramatic idiot.
Behind them would follow several massive cargo lifters loaded to the gills with paratroopers from every airborne unit still in service.
All five patches were supposed to be represented in the second half of Palehorse, nicknamed Taskforce Hell.
Those brave paratroopers would drop in on NORAD and penetrate the mountain after we isolated it.
Overall command was in the hands of what was left of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Their callsign was Pentagon 6, but we were beginning to call them the Pens-are-gone 3.
For that matter, I sometimes wondered if they had caught on that we were in the middle of one.
The Pens-are-gone 3 did give us some crypto gear so that we could encode our radio traffic and a mountain of operational orders and acetate map overlays so that we could see exactly what their massively complex and ultimately doomed plan of action was.
I loaded the cryptographic sets into my SINCGARS radio and used the rest to start fires in burn barrels so that the men could warm themselves.
Now, one piece of this overblown plan I liked, but only from a point of honor.
They were organized on the 13th of August 1943, sent to Europe in January of 1945, and sent right back home in August.
The Black Cat Division never saw much of anything except for a regiment transferred in from the 82nd that never respected the rest of the soldiers in this hard luck division.
The All-Americans and the Screaming Eagles laughed at their less storied cousins in the 11 th, 17th, and especially the 13th.
They would make the first drop, followed by the fearless paratroopers of the 82nd and 17th and finally by the air assault divisions.
Never mind the fact that the 13th was a bunch of civilian skydivers and parasailing adrenaline junkies.
As for a backup plan, the braniacs had reactivated the 2d Cavalry Division.
The 2d Cavalry was cursed by the permanent tan many of the members wore.
Originally organized with the 9th, 10th, and 11th Cavalry Regiments assigned, it finally gathered together all the Buffalo Soldiers into one division.
I was surprised only that they weren’t used in some farcical mission, like Operation Human Shield or Operation Cannon Fodder.
The natives of the Plains tribes respected the tenacity and fighting ability of these soldiers for decades before that war, yet the unit was never trusted to face actual combat as a division.
These fellow soldiers had a deep pride and a burning need to redress past wrongs.
The Pens-are-gone 3 didn’t know it, but they couldn’t have assembled a more unlikely bunch.
I lined up my guys abreast of each other and told them to hold formation no matter what happened.
We were the eastern flank of Blackhorse, so we had the most level terrain to work with.
In front of us we could see the Great Plains meeting the foothills of the Rockies.
Now it was our job to make sure that nothing got between us and the southern flank of Redhorse until we linked up with them.
I reminded them that no job was unimportant but they wanted to see some action.
He was telling me that he saw something, and I wanted to know exactly what it was.
Echelon right formation is simply a diagonal line with the trailing edge on the right side.
I wanted to set my lines so that we would hit them in the flank all at once.
I brought up my binoculars and took a look over towards the reported position of the enemy.
It doesn’t seem like a long time, but when you are waiting to kill someone, 2 minutes is an eternity.
The fire started immediately and burned its way through my senses to my stomach.
Bill put the crosshairs on a tank and pressed the button again.00 flashed in green under the crosshairs.
Bill pulled the trigger on that big gun, causing the breech to rock back about a foot and drop the brass from our first round.
Through my hearing protection I could hear the thunder of dozens of similar explosions.
I kept my eye in the sight and toggled over so that I could designate the next target for Bill while he watched the round in.
The big gun swung over to line up on the second target I had picked out.
We cycled through the firing process four more times before I couldn’t find a new target.
I popped my head up and looked through my binos, taking a quick scan of the horizon.
A hundred columns of smoke remained to mark the burning hulks that once were combat vehicles.
I could also just pick out the dismounted infantry as they finished ducking into the brush.
The framers of the Constitution saw the possibility that someday, someone would take it into their head that they were Above the Law.
I could quote a hundred sources, but they all say the same basic thing, if the government gets too big for its britches, the people have a means to resist tyranny, that's really what the 2nd Amendment is all about.
Somewhere along the way the country got too civilized for its own good and lead us down a path to destruction.
The eastern world, it is exploding Violence flarin’, bullets loadin’ You’re old enough to kill, but not for votin’ You don’t believe in war, but what’s that gun you’re totin’ And even the Jordan River has bodies floatin’ But you tell me Over and over and over again, my friend Ah, you don’t believe We’re on the eve of destruction.
Yeah, my blood’s so mad feels like coagulatin’ I’m sitting here just contemplatin’ I can’t twist the truth, it knows no regulation.
Handful of senators don’t pass legislation And marches alone can’t bring integration When human respect is disintegratin’ This whole crazy world is just too frustratin’ And you tell me Over and over and over again, my friend Ah, you don’t believe We’re on the eve of destruction.
Think of all the hate there is in Red China Then take a look around to Selma, Alabama You may leave here for 4 days in space But when you return, it’s the same old place The poundin’ of the drums, the pride and disgrace You can bury your dead, but don’t leave a trace Hate your next-door neighbor, but don’t forget to say grace And... tell me over and over and over and over again, my friend You don’t believe We’re on the eve Of destruction Mm, no no, you don’t believe We’re on the eve of destruction.
On the right, a group called The Spokesmen released an answer record entitled The Dawn of Correction.
A few months later, Barry Sadler released the patriotic Ballad of the Green Berets.
The song was banned by some radio stations in the USA as well as by the BBC and Radio Scotland.
Of all the tragedies in this tale, two stand out, WW III and the government's usurpation of power.
I'd like to thank Derek for his collaboration, especially on the military stuff.
We started our preps; I only hope we have time finish them before the world situation gets totally out of hand.
If you live in the country, you probably have a farm tank, but try putting in one of those in the PRK if you live in a city.
