The Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had asked the Cuban president Fidel Castro if he could plant the missiles there in the May before.
Two days later the photos are analyzed and showed that Cuba had medium, and long ranged missiles that could easily reach the U.S.A, after more analysis they estimated the missiles could travel over 2,200 miles.
Three days after, president Kennedy speaks out to the nation and is carried live on televisions across the U.S.A, to inform the Americans that there are missiles found armed in Cuba, pointed directly towards America.
He also informs that he has ordered a Navy quarantine to surround Cuba and orders the Soviets to remove and disarm the Missiles.
As the debacle continues, now October 23rd, Soviet ships that are heading toward Cuba are halted.
Khrushchev orders that the Soviet ships going to Cuba halt in the Atlantic Ocean close to America.
This makes sure that they don’t meet with United States Navy ships that surrounded the Caribbean Sea.
Later, Khrushchev refuses to remove the long-range missiles from Cuba, blaming Kennedy and accuses him of putting the world at a nuclear risk.
President Kennedy making little to no progress with Khrushchev, Kennedy commands flights over Cuba to be double as often, and orders pilots to begin night shifts to monitor the Soviet missiles.
Concerned that the USSR might not dismantle the deadly close Missiles from Cuba, Ex-Comm begins to plan to invade Cuba and take control over and dismantle the Soviet missiles.
Now October 27th Kennedy decides to not invade the Cuban territory, later that day Khrushchev speaks out to say that he will remove the deadly missiles from Cuban territory, if President Kennedy agrees to not invading.
Thirteen days after October 15th Khrushchev has agreed to remove every missile under Soviet name in Cuba.
Khrushchev speaks out on a radio station that the Soviet missiles will be dismantled and removed from Cuba, Cuba will not be invaded, and the crisis will come to an end.
The world escaped nuclear war in October 1962 mostly because of the cautious nature of Kennedy and Khrushchev.
A year later a telephone hotline was set up to sign a nuclear test ban between the two leaders.
You might be wondering how this whole catastrophe affected the locals, well after the crisis United States and Cuban relations where irreparably damaged.
As well, relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union were on a shaky ground for some time after Khrushchev’s removal of the missiles.
The affect it had on everyone was the two weeks of anxiety that a nuclear war could break out at any time.
If it wasn’t to President Kennedy’s calm and cautious behavior the war could have ended very differently.
