Some 3,400 unique records relevant to the crisis, totalling approximately 17,500 pages, are reproduced in the microfiche.
Much of the documentation focuses on United States decisionmaking during what Robert Kennedy called the “Thirteen Days” of the missile crisisfrom McGeorge Bundy’s October 16, 1962 briefing of President Kennedy on the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba to Nikita Khrushchev’s October 28 decision to withdraw the weapons.
The numerous intelligence reports, diplomatic cables, political analyses, military situation reports, and meeting minutes included in the set portray both the deliberative process and the execution of critical decisions made by the Kennedy administration during the crisis.
First, a focus on the missile crisis itself was necessary in order to guarantee the intellectual coherence of the set.
Second, the volume of documentation available on the Bay of Pigs and Berlin made it difficult to identify a usable number of key documents that could be extracted for inclusion in this collection.
Contrary to many published accounts of the Cuban missile crisis, the dispute did not immediately end with the Soviet decision on October 28 to remove the missiles from Cuba.
For three more weeks, tensions between the United States, Cuba, and the Soviet Union ran high over several unresolved issues.
The documents in the collection trace negotiations held in November 1962 over verification of the missile withdrawal, the United States non-invasion”guarantee,” and the question of Soviet IL-28 bombers and troops remaining on the island.
To provide intellectual coherence to the collection, documents in the set also cover the effect of the crisis on overall United States policy toward Cuba during the remainder of the Kennedy administration.
You may use it as a guide or sample for writing your own paper, but remember to cite it correctly.
Hi, my name is Amy 👋 In case you can't find a relevant example, our professional writers are ready to help you write a unique paper.
Just talk to our smart assistant Amy and she'll connect you with the best match.
