These advantages often relate to greater and Canadian politics. insight into the intelligence process itself.
Among the different models on offer, three prominent Introduction ones include the cyclical model, the target-centric model, and the T multi-layered model, as presented in the first section of this article. he overall complexity of the intelligence profession Each model is based upon a slightly different understanding of poses serious conceptual challenges for practitiothe intelligence process, and each carries different strengths and ners and scholars alike.
For one, the exact nature of weaknesses as a result. the relationship between policymakers, analysts, and collectors can be difficult to articulate.
Moreover, The remainder of this article aims to test the usefulness of the highly interactive order of decisions, actions, and events these three models by evaluating them against the Cuban Missile cannot be easily captured in ‘linear’ descriptions.
This crisis demonstrates many of the conceptual challenges time, decisions, actions, and events can take place simultaneconfronting intelligence practitioners and scholars, making it an ously, or even in reverse logical order.
In has actually occurred. turn, the fourth section situates the three intelligence models within this history to critically evaluate their respective merits.
The final In light of these challenges, a number of intelligence models section serves as a short conclusion, restating the article’s main have been created to help grasp this complexity.
None of the modfindings, and returning to the overall complexity of the intelligence els claims to completely or faithfully represent the intelligence profession.
Requirements, at the centre of the intelligence process, pushing other needs considerations to the periphery.
Planning, The target-centric approach has more promise for direction complex problems and issues than the traditional cycle view.
Though depicted as a cycle, the traditional process is in practice linear and sequential, 5.
Analysis, whereas the target-centric approach is collaborative production 3.
Its nonlinear analytic process allows for participation by all stakeholders, so real insights into a problem can come from any knowl4.
Involving customers increases the likelihood that the resulting intelligence will be used.
The Cyclical Model them to) the value of an analytical approach to complex problems.
Intelligence Models in Theory These are only some of the purported strengths of the targetA s mentioned, the intelligence profession is very complex, centric model, but they speak directly to the perceived faults of the involving multiple actors and roles.
Ultimately, it is Clark’s view that the target-centric critical actors involved in the intelligence process include model creates greater appreciation for the intelligence process policymakers, analysts, and collectors.
The different roles as a whole, including the distinct contributions of policymakers, performed by these actors generally reflect their different nameanalysts, and collectors.
In this respect, policymakers set the overall objectives appearance when compared to the traditional cyclical model. of the intelligence process and guide its workflows.
Like the targetinterpreted by analysts, culminating in an intelligence ‘product’ centric model, this model aims to address some of the perceived destined for consumption by policymakers.
Instead, it attempts to make provision for ers, analysts, and collectors.
Admittedly, such a pattern is not greater discretion and contingency within the intelligence process, ideal, failing to properly account for the inherently unequal noting decisions, actions and events can move in almost any direcstatuses between these three types of actors, and overstating tion, while maintaining the same basic conceptual categories and the autonomy of each actor within the overall intelligence proworkflows as the other two models.
From Secrets to Policy Americans, but it drew little initial concern from the United States Processing and Requirements Collection Exploitation Analysis Dissemination Consumption intelligence community.
One notable exception to this general truth was Central Intelligence Director John McCone, who interpreted Feedback the presence of SAMs as part of a defensive system for offensive nuclear weapons.
A Special National Processing and Intelligence Estimate was issued on Requirements Collection Exploitation Analysis Dissemination Consumption 19 September 1962, which reflected the mainstream opinion.
The Multi-Layered Model lack of imagination when it came to the Soviet’s intentions.
Their weapons to Cuba, but this decision had no direct connection to the applicability to real-world intelligence situations, however, is SAMs.
This history is based mainly upon the writings of Raymond L Garthoff, who worked in the United States Department ate under the assumption that such weapons had been delivered.
Moreover, they never became aware of the presence of tactical nuclear weapons until the late-1980s, when the new Soviet state of State as a special assistant for Soviet bloc affairs during the policy of glasnost allowed for greater openness, including the Crisis.
The history also draws upon the writings of several release of previously secret government records. other authors to provide greater perspective.
Significantly, the majorof human reports with respect to the presence of Soviet longity of these reports failed to properly describe the missiles, and range missiles (which would have been necessary to deliver the they were provided before the actual delivery of missiles to Cuba nuclear warheads) in Cuba from Cuban refugees, but many of would have occurred.
Having said this, the Americans received two accurate reports towards the end of September, and they decided to investigate the matter further through the use of U-2 reconnaissance aircraft.
A desire to avoid offending the Soviets and poor weather conditions combined to delay the flights for two weeks.
However, on 14 October 1962, the Americans finally confirmed the construction of longrange missile sites in Cuba through the use of aerial photographs.
They kept this knowledge secret for one week before announcing it publically to the world, then catching the Soviets off guard.
T h e G r a n g e r C o l l e c t i o n , N YC, I m a g e 0 0 76 7 7 1 Kennedy issued two public warnings aimed at the Soviets on 4 September 1962 and 13 September 1962 respectively.
Nonetheless, the Soviet leadership did not heed the warnings, and they continued with the transportation of offensive weapons to Cuba and the construction of offensive weapons delivery systems in Cuba.
Two subsequent Special National Intelligence Estimates were issued on 19 October 1962 and 20 October 1962, after the discovery of offensive weapons delivery systems in Cuba.
These estimates did not vary greatly in detail, considering possible Soviet intentions and potential American responses.
The two estimates ascribed an offensive purpose behind the Soviet’s actions, and this led to a more aggressive stance from the Americans.
The National Security Council was also created at this time; its Executive Committee being led by the president.
The NSC and ExComm were meant to pool © B e tt m a n n / C O R B I S , I m a g e U 12 6 3 6 3 0 2 resources across the United States intelligence community, and it is generally regarded as having succeeded in this respect at first.
The Soviets did not anticipate a naval blockade by the Americans—they assumed that the Americans would simply accept the missiles as part of the ‘game,’ and that the existing presence of the missiles would force the Americans to accept their continuing presence.
EST). first, was aggressive in tone, and it demanded the withdrawal of The Soviet leadership, in particular, Premier Nikita Khrushchev, American missiles from Turkey.
In preparing their reply to the first considered ‘running’ the blockade, but ultimately decided against letter, the Americans were surprised by the sudden change of tone, such a response. and they decided to ignore the second letter.
The The origin of the letters is often attributed to an unauthorized two main sides opened lines backchannel communication between Soviet embassy counselor of communication between each other, but the Americans also Aleksandr Fomin and ABC News correspondent John Scali.
The Soviets were was instructed to make contact with the Americans by Soviet aware of these mobilizations through satelAmbassador Anatoly Dobrynin, who was not lite imaginary, and the Cubans became aware informed of the Soviet plan to place missiles of the American’s contingency plans through in Cuba until after it became common public human intelligence.
The positive response expressed Soviets and the Cubans took the American National Intelligence by Scali is read by many to have pushed the contingency plans to represent their actual Estimates were issued Soviets for further concessions.
However, plans, and it is commonly argued that this Fomin’s encounter would not have reached led, in part, to the sudden willingness on on 19 October 1962 and Moscow in time for Khrushchev’s first letter, Khrushchev’s part to negotiate a settlement 20 October 1962, after the meaning the Soviets were already prepared on 28 October 1962.
Although this general discovery of offensive to offer serious concessions.
In response account of the conclusion to the Crisis is to the second letter, Scali met once again accurate, it glosses over several important weapons delivery systems with Fomin.
This time, he was instructed events that took place between 22 October in Cuba.” to offer a firmer message for the Soviets.
Likewise, it is this message that many now believe led downplays some of the lingering issues that the Soviets and the Cubans to believe the were not resolved until much later.
The fact that Soviet SAMs shot down a U-2 reconnaissance Among these other events were two letters sent by Khrushchev aircraft around the same time only added to the sense of alarm on 26 October 1962 and 27 October 1962, as well as a series of felt by all sides. authorized and unauthorized backchannel communications.
The first letter sent by Khrushchev was conciliatory in tone, and it laid The idea of trading missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba, out many of the concessions that would form the final settlement. however, actually originated through parallel backchannel communiIn contrast, the second letter, which was sent mere hours after the cations between Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Ambassador © B e tt m a n n / C O R B I S , I m a g e U 13 5 4 19 4 A Soviet attack submarine near Cuba during the missile crisis, 1 November 1962.
This may have led to greater confidence in the Soviet-Cuban camp, but subsequent reports reiterated the expectation of an immediate attack.
Such a sudden change in intelligence could have pushed the Soviets closer towards settlement, even if the Cubans read it as cause for a pre-emptive attack.
As partial payment for their co-operation, the Cubans demanded that a small show of Soviet force remain in Cuba.
This force The Soviet freighter Anosov leaving Cuba, 6 November 1962. was meant to act as a ‘tripwire’ in the event of any future American attack, and it went directly against the agreed upon settlement.
In fact, a small Soviet combat brigade of 2500 men remained in Cuba until their discovery in the summer of 1979, which caused a mini-crisis.
Moreover, the Soviets tried to exploit the difference between ‘offensive’ and ‘defensive’ weapons, but the Americans were generally effective in denying this difference.
Other members of ExComm, apart or actions, such as the secret backchannel communications from the President, were not aware of these talks.
For this reason, between Attorney General Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin, any exchange of missiles was generally understood to be part of into their workflows.
Khrushchev may have misunderstood this cerns the generally-stated relationship between policymakers, point, but the other major players were aware of it.
For example, collectors may communicate ligence actors at the beginning of the crisis, towards the end, with analysts to get a better sense of their needs.
This point can be policymakers such as President Kennedy and Attorney General directly related to the American surveillance of Soviet missile sites Kennedy assumed sole ownership of the issue.
Here, collectors were actively photothey began to actively perform the roles of analysts and collecgraphing the pace of construction, providing analysts a better sense tors themselves, problematizing the conceptual categorization of of the actual threat posed by the missiles, based upon feedback. separate intelligence activities based upon separate intelligence Finally, the cyclical model succeeds in recognizing hierarchy within actors.
In this sense, the true nature of hierarchical power is not the intelligence process, but it arranges policymakers, analysts, properly captured by any of the models.
Their general focus and collectors in a way that overstates their independence.
As upon interactions between policymakers, analysts, and collecdemonstrated, policymakers enjoy the unique capacity to bypass tors obscures the fact that the degree to analysts and collectors, or to unilaterally which this relationship is truly interactive assume their roles. depends upon policymakers.
First, alongside model fails to incorporate outside events or autonomy over the other the cyclical model, the target-centric model actions, presenting itself as a closed process. actors involved in the fails to incorporate outside events or actions, This is problematic for the reasons already and it overstates the reciprocal nature of intelligence process.” addressed.
The same model also suggests the intelligence process, albeit in greater an overly linear process in that instructions excess.
A cursory glance at the model would proceed unidirectionally from policymaksuggest a nearly equal, symbiotic relationers to analysts and collectors.
Such a depiction ignores the reality ship between policymakers, analysts, and collectors, but actual of interaction between these three actor types.
Second, the targetto impose clear meanings upon highly fluid and oftentimes centric model presupposes that a clear intelligence target already ambiguous workflows.
This was not the case with respect to the Cuban Missile of presenting a linear account of the intelligence process and of Crisis.
The American government scrambled to build such a target downplaying the full effect of hierarchy within this process; the after it became known that the Soviets were building long-range target-centric model is guilty of both these faults, in addition missile sites in Cuba.
Thus, the importance of long-term, forward to overemphasizing the availability of advanced knowledge; thinking and investment implied by the target-centric model may and the multi-layered model is guilty of being overly complex. reflect an expectation that is set too high for actual practice.
On the Nonetheless, given the overall complexity of the intelligence other hand, the target-centric model allows for greater interaction profession, this ‘fault’ of the multi-layered model is actually among policymakers, analysts, and collectors than the cyclical the model’s key strength, in that it provides a truer sense of model, which serves as its greatest strength. the intelligence world.
Therefore, although it is far from an ideal heuristic, the multi-layered model appears to be the best In comparison to the other two intelligence models, the conceptualization of the intelligence process available to pracmulti-layered model represents a highly complex account of the titioners and scholars. intelligence process.
While this might seem like a fault, it actually serves to positively distinguish the model.
The multi-layered model, for instance, allows for interaction between policymakers, analysts, and collectors in myriad NOTES ways, injecting a critical sense of discretion and contingency into the intelligence process.
Taken together, the the secrets of the world would still be secrets to me.
Lowenthal, 69. in part by the fact that the intelligence process itself demonstrates 7.
Obviously, an analyst can perform the role of a collector and vice versa, but the target-centric model, and the multi-layered model.
In pursuneither can perform the role of a policymaker without first being given the authority of a policymaker.
This point relates to the leading position of ing this aim, it drew upon the real-world example of the Cuban policymakers in the overall intelligence process.
To some extent, all the models encountered expanded discussion on the true relationship between these three actor types in difficulty incorporating outside events or actions into the intelthe intelligence profession. ligence process.
