This “smoking gun” reconnaissance photo of San Cristobal, Cuba , revealed the presence of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles.
It was obtained by a high-ﬂying U-2 spyplane such as the one at far right.
A low-ﬂying Air Force RF-101 or Navy RF-8 snapped the close-up at right of anti-aircraft artillery and radars being erected near the missile sites.
Airpower and the Cuban Missi The Russians hoped to have their missiles in operation before the Americans discovered them.
United States aerial surveillance in July reported an exceptional number of Soviet ships moving toward the island. simply upgrades from the older MiGs the Cubans already possessed.
In an Aug. memo to President Kennedy, he guessed that They rode high in the water, suggestRussia was about to introduce ballistic ing military cargo—such as missiles, missiles into Cuba.
CIA U-2 spyplanes overﬂew Cuba Keating —whose sources were twice a month.
On Aug., they found probably Cuban exiles in Florida—said SA-2 surface-to-air missile sites at eight there was evidence of Soviet “rocket different locations.
That was of interest installations” in Cuba and urged KenBy John T Correll but of no great concern.
E Capehart , joined in the call The U-2s also found MiG-21s, confor action. ﬁrming the earlier sighting reports.
To make matters worse for Khrushchev, the Soviet missiles were of inferior quality.
Khrushchev had added to the perception of a missile gap by his loud and untruthful boasting that the USSR was turning out missiles “like sausages” and his claims of long-range missile capabilities he was nowhere close to having.
The United States Air Force had deployed Thor and Jupiter intermediate-range missiles to Europe as a direct counter to Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs.
The U-2 had been operational in Turkey since Cuba mission had been passed from the CIA to the Air Force.
Kennedy didn’t want April 1962. another Gary Powers-like ﬂap if a CIA airplane went down.
Fidel Castro agreed readily to accept the Soviet missiles in his country.
The ﬁrst ﬂight was by to do anything about them,” he said “Operation Mongoose,” a scheme to Maj.
Richard S Heyser on Oct.. in Khrushchev Remembers, published undercut the Castro regime, was still When CIA analysts on the next day in 1970. running. pored over Heyser’s reconnaissance He was reacting, superﬁcially at Castro welcomed the installation of ﬁlm, they found SS-4 medium-range least, to the Jupiter intermediate-range the Russian missiles as an opportunity ballistic missiles.
Senior Administraballistic missiles the United States to stick it to the Yanquis. tion ofﬁcials were told that night.
More A survey team, led by Marshal Sergei President was notiﬁed early on the important, though, Khrushchev wanted Biryuzov, chief of the Soviet Rocket morning of Oct.. to compensate for Russia’s strategic Forces, visited Cuba prior to the deThe Cuban missile crisis had begun. disadvantage in long-range missiles. ployments.
Upon his return, Biryuzov By the time the public was informed one “In addition to protecting Cuba,” he assured Khrushchev that the missiles week later, the U-2s had also discovered acknowledged in his memoirs, “our would be concealed and camouﬂaged an SS-5 intermediate-range ballistic missiles would have equalized what by the palm trees.
Khrushchev believed missile site and Il-28 bombers. the West likes to call ‘the balance of him.
IRBMs siles and one nuclear a naval “quarantine” and said any misbased in Cuba could reach United States targets warhead for each launcher.
There would sile ﬁred from Cuba would be treated as easily—and faster—as ICBMs from also be four combat regiments, 24 SA-2 as a Soviet attack on America. launch sites in the Soviet Union. batteries, 42 MiG-21 interceptors, and On Oct., a Russian SAM crew shot Missiles had recently taken center 42 Il-28 bombers. down a U-2, killing the pilot, Air Force stage in the Cold War.
The White of Kennedy’s issues in the 1960 elecBlack Sea in the middle of July.
The ﬁrst House decided not to retaliate. tion was an alleged “missile gap,” with MRBMs arrived at the Cuban port of On Oct., the Russians bowed to the Russians ahead.
There was indeed Mariel aboard Poltava on Sept.. overwhelming United States strategic power and a missile gap, but it was in favor of the “Soon, hell will break loose,” Khrushagreed to withdraw their missiles.
By the time of the Cuban missile crisis, they probably had several dozen, The U-2 Khrushchev’s Gambit although some estimates went as high The state of the art in aerial photo As Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev as 75.
On Aug., a SAC U-2 on a mission under the direction of the equally At the end of each wing of the U-2 unrelated to Cuba overﬂew Sakhalin fabled Clarence L “Kelly” Johnson. was a “pogo,” an outrigger with a wheel Island in the Far East by mistake.
The The prime customer was the CIA, but on it, to keep the wingtips from dragSoviets protested and the United States apolothe Air Force was also offered a share ging on takeoff.
On Sept., a Taiwanese U-2 was of the program. ground, the pogos dropped away.
The lost, probably to a SAM, over western At ﬁrst, according to a declassiﬁed wingtips had skids for landing.
LeMay, commander in chief of Strategic USAF Takes the Flights Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Air Command, said that “if he wanted The U-2 cameras carried 5,000 feet National Security Advisor McGeorge high-altitude photographs, he would of ﬁlm.
So—just as the missile shipments The Air Force bought some U-2s Thus the ﬁlm was divided into two were approaching port in Cuba—the anyway.
They were assigned to SAC’s strips, each nine inches wide, feeding U-2 missions stopped.
There were no 4080th Bomb Wing at Laughlin Air from opposite directions.
It would be overﬂights from Sept. to Oct., Force Base, near Del Rio, Tex.
The recombined in the laboratory to produce although the CIA was allowed to ﬂy aircraft began arriving in June 1957. images 18 inches square. peripheral runs, taking pictures from Mostly, the Air Force U-2 pilots ﬂew Each U-2 mission took about 4,000 slant range, 15 miles offshore. missions around the Soviet periphery pictures.
The U-2’s free run of crossing Soviet aircraft photographed large crates on The U-2 was built to go high and far. territory came to an end on May 1, 1960, the deck of the Soviet ship Kasimov, on The wingspan was 80 feet, almost twice when CIA pilot Francis Gary Powers, its way to Cuba.
The size and shape of the length of the body of the aircraft, ﬂying out of Pakistan, was shot down the crates indicated that they contained which was not quite 50 feet.
It ﬂew at over Sverdlovsk by a Russian SA-2 Il-28 light bombers, which was later 72,500 feet, more than 13 miles high.
To get range, altitude, and endurThere was great political uproar, On Oct., the Administration transance, the Skunk Works had traded off both in the United States and abroad. ferred responsibility for U-2 overﬂights everything else.
The U-2 was not very President Eisenhower, who had detailed of Cuba to the Air Force.
Unlike conventional aircraft, whose main wing spar passes through the fuselage to give the wings continuity and strength, the U-2 had two separate wing panels, which were attached to the fuselage sides with tension bolts.
At the minimum speeds was a scant six knots center is a launch control building, surrounded by service roads, missile erectors, ,” a Washington Post reand camouﬂage netting.
AIR FORCE Magazine / August 2005 81 There is also some indication that derson ﬂew the ﬁrst Air Force mission Com,” an executive committee of the the Department of Defense and the over Cuba, the one that found the misNational Security Council, was formed Air Force pressed hard to get the siles, or that he and Heyser both ﬂew to work the crisis. mission.
That was a public relations On Oct., the U-2s found an happened. maneuver instigated by the Pentagon SS-5 IRBM site (the first of three to According to the CIA history, “The after Anderson was shot down.
The range of the SS-5 acting DCI [director of central intelfact is, Heyser ﬂew the ﬁrst mission was 2,531 miles, double that of the ligence], Lt.
It could reach any point in the United States Army, reacted strongly to the Air the backup.
United States except for the Pacific Force takeover of a major CIA operaHeyser took off from California in Northwest.
At one point, he remarked, ‘I think the middle of the night on a schedule under construction, no SS-5s reached it’s a hell of a way to run a railroad.
San Julian installed enough missiles already to dewant to consider a transfer of the reairﬁeld was off to his left.
At nized that Cuba was within its rights best models of the U-2, which the CIA the debrieﬁng, Heyser described the as a sovereign nation in permitting an had and the Air Force didn’t. mission as “a milk run.” ally to install nuclear missiles.
Kennedy In 1962, the most experienced pilots The ﬁlm was delivered to the CIA’s understood, however, that a nuclear at Laughlin were Heyser, of ApalachiNational Photographic Interpretation missile threat 90 miles off the Florida cola, Fla., and Anderson, of Greenville, Center.
They went to Edwards AFB, Calif., components of SS-4 missile batteries at for familiarization in the U-2Cs and to San Cristobal and Il-28 bombers at San Showdown bring back two of them, which the Air Julian.
That evening, Administration ofﬁcials President Kennedy spoke to the nation The U-2C could ﬂy 5,000 feet higher were tracked down and notiﬁed. on televison.
On his orders, the sile launched from Cuba against any Finding Missile Sites Air Force U-2s began ﬂying as many nation in the Western Hemisphere as It is sometimes reported that Anas six missions a day over Cuba.
AP photo by Marty Lederhandler He also announced a naval “quarantine” of Cuba, avoiding the term “blockade,” which is an act of war.
For the ﬁrst time in history, Strategic Air Command went to DEFCON 2, one step short of general war.
Up to a third of the B-52s were on airborne alert, and the rest of the ﬂeet was ready to take off in 15 minutes.
The North American Air Defense Command moved ﬁghter-interceptors and Hawk and Nike Hercules anti-aircraft battalions to the southeastern United States.
While the U-2s continued to work at high altitude, other Air Force and Navy aircraft flew photo missions over Cuba at lower altitudes.
The Air Castro knew the missiles might provoke a United States invasion of his country, but he Force RF-101 used six cameras that was anxious to be a player on the world stage.
Khrushchev believed the miscould photograph the missile sites siles could be installed and hidden before the United States knew what was happening. from treetop level.
That was so, but the United States also made a concession, which was not announced.
The Jupiters were obsolete, President Kennedy and his brother Robert, the attorney general, confer and the mission they were performduring the 1962 crisis.
Kennedy recognized the courageous efforts of the reconing was taken over by Polaris nuclear naissance pilots and crews for helping resolve the crisis. submarines.
Photoreconnaissance on Nov. conThere was some talk of a “surgical open ﬁre, and the Cubans shot down an ﬁrmed that the MRBM sites had been strike” to take the missiles out, but with American U-2 reconnaissance plane,” bulldozed.
Ships began taking missiles the capabilities and bombing accuracies he said in his memoirs. and other equipment back to the Soviet of the day, that was not to be.
SAC went back to its Force told the President that it would a U-2 were shot down, the SAM site normal alert posture on Nov., and take hundreds of sorties to be sure of would be attacked and destroyed.
Acthe naval quarantine ended. getting 90 percent of the missiles. cordingly, the Air Force prepared an Khrushchev was removed from powThat was a no go.
The reasons were mostly Meanwhile, Castro—who had been Kennedy would not allow it. domestic, but the Cuban missile ﬁasco steadily ignored by both the Russians A week after the shootdown, the Cuhad cost him support. and the Americans—was growing imbans turned over Anderson’s body to a Years later, it was revealed that, in patient.
Kennedy addition to the missiles, there had been own scattered around the island, and personally ordered the Air Force to award 40,000 Soviet troops in Cuba, many he ordered the Cuban gunners to shoot posthumously to Anderson the Air Force more than the United States had estimated.
The Soviet Cross—the ﬁrst ever presented. were also about 20 nuclear warheads in ambassador tried to persuade Castro to Cuba, although none of them had been cancel his order, but he refused.
That was the situation on the mornOn Oct., the same day Anderson On Nov., at Homestead AFB, Fla., ing of Oct., when Anderson took was shot down, the Air Force put its Kennedy presented the Presidential off from McCoy Air Force Base in a ﬁrst 10 Minuteman I missiles on alert at Unit Citation to the 4080th Strategic U-2.
It was another Wing and the 363rd Tactical Reconnaisline of Cuba at 9:15m., ﬂew south, reminder to Khrushchev that he was sance Wing.
He also visited and thanked over Guantanamo Bay, and then back years away from achieving strategic Navy ﬂiers at Key West, Fla. northward.
The SAM site at Banes, on parity with the United States, and he “I may say, gentlemen, that you take the northeastern coast, picked him up knew it. excellent pictures and I have seen a about 10m.
Issa Pliyev, could not be found at that remove our missiles and bombers on “The 4080th contributed as much critical moment.
The SAM battery the condition that the President give to the security of the United States as fired three rockets, two of which hit us his assurance that there would be any unit in our history and any group Anderson’s U-2 and knocked it out no invasion of Cuba.” of men in our history.” ■ of the sky.
There were mild reprimands from Moscow and orders not to shoot down John T Correll was editor in chief of Air Force Magazine for 18 years and is now a any more U-2s.
His most recent article, “How the Air Force Got the ICBM,” apit, of course.
