The increased stabilization of the Cuban economy and society has led to many internal changes in the country, however, and these have largely been to the benefit of Cuba and indeed of much of the world.
As current research and statistics show, Cuba has not only managed to achieve a modicum of stability under Castro's communist regime, but it has actually achieved levels of success envied by many prosperous capitalist nations.
Many think that Cuba is on the cusp of greatness while others warn of coming doom.
It can be difficult envisioning the true Cuba from an Americanized point-of-view.
Many Americans cannot understand a socialist framework where everyone is treated equal because America is the land of unique opportunity and individualism.
It can be said that in order to examine and predict Cuba's future without Castro, one must first look at Cuba's past and present.
By looking at the Revolution of 1959 and what Cuba's holds for its people today, this paper will explore many ""what if"" scenarios.
It is simple to conclude that a Cuba without Castro influences the status of the power authority directly.
It seems that Cuba's political health has a direct relationship with the state… Works Cited Chomsky, Aviva., Barry Carr, and Pamela Maria Smorkaloff, ed.
The sugar-cane farmers and rum producers, the tobacco growers and the fishermen all had seen their quality of living decrease sharply under atista as the men who owned the markets they supplied paid less and less and sold for more and more.
Ultimately, atista could not possibly be viewed as the friend of the people he purported to be and the nation of peasants shifted radically to the left.
Cuba was pushed to the left by a dictator who could… Bibliography Farber, Samuel.
Yet what might seem irrational to one country may seem perfectly logical to another country that has different goals, values, and traditions.
The failures apparent in the onset of orld ar II and during the course of the war led indirectly to the creation of the CIA in 1947.
During orld ar II, Colonel illiam J Donovan headed the Office of Strategic Services , and in 1941 Donovan submitted to the president a plan outlining the need for a government-wide organization that would pool and coordinate existing intelligence.
Roosevelt followed this recommendation and created a Coordinator of Information as part of the Executive Office of the President.
Fidel Castro's regime has been marked by relatively low levels of repression and a sense of solidarity with other protest movements.
The total estimated 2004 fertility rate of Cuba was1.66 children born per woman.
The population of Cuba was 11,308,764 Officially, there is an equal and egalitarian distribution of income amongst all members of the population, depending upon the standard of living in the community.
The 2004 per capita income was $381.76, in a nation… Works Cited Chinese Cubans"" Nation Master.
First of all, a guarantee of the airstrike being effective was highly unlikely.
At the time, the pinpoint weaponry employed by the present day United States was not available, and in fact such weaponry had not even been invented yet.
The Soviet Union, of course, knew that such a course of direction would not be effective and therefore the deterrence factor on this particular option was rather low.
The reason for this bias towards the blockade included the fact that an invasion was a risky prospect, and at best, put far more lives at risk than a blockade would.
Cubans are found of music and sport, and the national fondness for baseball underlines the still-close cultural connection between Cuba and the United States, despite Castro's best efforts to sever it. the persistence of Santeria and other indigenous religious traditions likewise underlines the impossibility of entirely erasing religion from the national consciousness.
Specifically, it will select one required discussion thread and summarize the selected thread.
To summarize is to break down the content of a subject and sum up its ultimate meaning and importance.
WE CAME ALL THE WAY FROM CUBA ""The Spouse"" is the story of two estranged people who run into each other, which brings up many old memories from their relationship a relationship that never really meant anything.
This is illegal, but it is done all the time, and these two people represent just why it is done.
Raul needed an American wife to make him legal in this country, and Lupe needed money.
The amusing thing about this is that he really took the marriage seriously, while Lupe simply wants it behind her.
Cuba has always been a region of American interests in the Caribbean Sea and its 45-year resistance against capitalism impresses everyone, even person hostile to Cuban regime.
Cuban influence on worlds politics during the Cold War and nowadays is important and worth paying attention to.
Many years have past, Communism had a great success but it died after Soviet Union collapsed.
An Empire of Liberty in an Age of National Liberation Princeton Univ Pr; 5.
The chapter entitled, Through the Looking Glass, dealt mainly with how the political debate on Cuba has encroached in the arena of American pop culture.
The chapter opens with Michael Moore's attempt to present another of his acerbic documentary about the United States health care system, a 15-minute segment of which was devoted to portraying the Cuban health care system.
Moore's exploit to Cuba have earned him the ire of the United States State Department, which led him to ""exile"" his film to nearby Canada to protect it from being seized by the Bush administration in light of its current policy of isolation with regard to Cuba.
Yet, regardless of the seeming loyalty of the Cubans towards the Spaniards the fact remains that the majority of the people were not satisfied with the rule.
The people realized that they needed to be free but were not in a situation to take advantage of the fact, they were simply biding their time for freedom.
The various rebellions over the years had taken its toll on the Cubans and none were in a hurry to create a situation that would adversely affect the land and the people.
There was a certain instability in the social classes as by 1884 the 'sugar nobility' was changing.
It is one of the numerous syncretic religions created by Africans brought to the Caribbean islands as slaves.
It was developed out of need for the African slaves in order to carry on practicing their native religion in the New World.
As in all nations where the African slaves were taken, Cuban slave masters dampened and sometimes banned the practice of their native religions.
The slaves in Cuba were required to follow the practices of the Catholic Church, which went against the beliefs of their native religions.
Noticing the similarities between their native religion and Catholicism, and in order to please their slave-masters and accomplish their own religious needs, they fashioned a secret religion.
Fidel Castro became involved in political activism and became a widely renowned orator and was labeled a political agitator.
His group attempted a coup d'etat against the rule of atista however they failed and were imprisoned.
Guatemala, the Congo, and the Cubans Instruments of Statecraft: United States Guerilla Warfare, Counterinsurgency and Counterrorism, 1940-1990.
Due to the fact that the population of Cuba has been largely impoverished rice and beans have been a major part of most Cuban meals.
An interesting development in the history of Cuban cuisine has been the difference between the diets of Cubans living in the easterly regions of the island and those in the west living in and around Havana.
In the east the cuisine is more heavily influenced by the Spanish and African cultures while the cuisine the west in and around Havana is far more continental due to the presence of outside influences from and around other European cultures.
Again, Cuba's proximity to the… Bibliography Aviva Chomsky, Barry Carr, Pamela Smarkaloff.
The guide said that a uban would go to the doctor -a visit free of charge -who would write a prescription for aspirin.
Behind the counter five well-dressed uban women waited to serve, but the shelves were empty.
This is the paradox of uban healthcare -it is readily available, but if somebody really does need medicine, such as in the case above, to get better, this may not be readily available.
Cuba has been a hub of unconventional warfare traditionally and historically specifically, in the mountains of Oriente Province.
The peasants have a history of campaigns such as Maceo and Membises, a heritage which they cherish.
And even after the evolution of the newly developed guerrilla model in the 1950s, it could not be applied without alterations in the epublic of Cuba.
The United States assumed occupancy over Cuba after defeating the Spanish at the end of the 1898 Spanish-American War.
Cuba became an independent country in 1902, although the United States continued to delegate power and control over Cuba's affairs through the Piatt Amendment.
Supervised elections began in 1909, but in 1952 dictator Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar was elected which changed the political climate of the country.
Batista soon proved to be a true enemy of the Cuban people with many corrupt policies and unfair political maneuvers.
Castro's rise to power could not be considered friendly or in the best interest of peaceful relations between Cuba and the United States.
Tension and confrontation are the definitions used to describe the relations between the United States and Cuba over the last forty years Due to Cuba's establishment of very close ties with the Soviet Union and the part Cuba played in fueling the Cold War frictions between the United States and Cuba have been of a long-running nature.
While President Clinton was in office the policy with Cuba was one that promoted the 'peaceful transition' of Cuba to a stable and democratic government and held respect for human rights.
Economic Eye on Cuba United States Cuba Trade and Economic Council, Inc.
Conclusion The trade relationship between Cuba and the United States continues to be strained, despite efforts for improvements.
Although a world in which trade is not restricted between nations, and the earth becomes a kind of ""united economic entity,"" ruled by the equalizing nature of the market is a pleasant image, many believe that such a ""pie in the sky"" view of globalization is horribly wrong -idealistic, unlikely, and even dangerous.
Indeed, whereas political leaders of ""first world"" nations are quick to tout the benefits of a globalizing world, others, like writer Joseph Stiglitz, believe that ""integration with the global economy works just fine when sovereign countries define the terms.
Unfortunately, this is exactly the position in which so called ""third world"" countries find themselves.
In the 20th century American society, numerous events had led to the creation of the American image, where the country played a significant role in influencing and affecting decisions in domestic and international politics.
In America, the President plays the essential role of analyzing and deciding on solutions that will involve the country and society in participating on crucial events and situations, domestically or internationally.
The United States shows in its history the vital role of the President as the decision-maker and leader of a society stricken with socio-political conflict and civil strife domestically and internationally.
In 1914, Woodrow Wilson, as America's 28th president faced the crucial decision in involving the United States In the First World War, and breaking the country's strict Neutrality Program.
The year is 1962; the main players are Kennedy and his team of advisors, including his brother Robert Kennedy, his close confidante Kennth O’Donnell and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
Kennedy’s team is not only facing pressure from the Soviets but also from the Joint Chiefs, who represent the war hawks, eager to strike first and ask questions later.
My sister and I had flown in to Cuba for a Quinceanara, which is the 15th birthday party for a young woman of Latina descent.
We were very excited because the girl whose party it was a close friend of both my sister and I as well as of our extended family in Cuba.
She wore purple polka dotted dress with a lace frock that flared at the bottom.
Her hair was pinned up in a bun and, at 14 years of age at the time, I thought she looked like it could have been her rite of passage/coming to womanhood birthday party instead of my friend's.
Developing a sense of cultural awareness represents a type of knowledge that can be useful in mitigating sources of conflict.
In the military cultural factors have been a critical, yet mostly unexamined, aspect of missions conducted in Africa and the Middle East since the end of the first Gulf ar in 1991 and cultural factors played an important, but usually unacknowledged, role in shaping the scope of the United States' humanitarian intervention in Somalia during the 1990s.
However, there has been a growing awareness that cultural awareness is a critical success factor that needs to be further developed because it can serves as a critical success factor in dealing with other nations.
A Primer for United States Armed Forces Deploying to Arab and Middle Eastern Countries.
This book covers in depth the major global emergencies during the Kennedy Presidency, including Berlin, Cuba, and Vietnam.
Since Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 before he had the chance to prove and continue his foreign policy, these are valid questions about an administration left hanging.
Throughout the book Freedman continually returns to this thesis as he examines each… References Freedman, Lawrence.
By helping to build up the Cuban infrastructure, further economic trade could be encouraged.
This could also help both the United States And Cuba exploit its other natural resources by providing the necessary framework for extraction and export of its huge nickel and sugar stockpiles. ith the coming economic recovery, the world will certainly need raw materials like nickel and steel as well as sugar to fuel the building and population boom that will more than likely follow a recovery.
There lacked consistency of purpose which ultimately affected the economy of each land and resulted in lack of a dedicated leader all could approve of.
The Cuban and Bolivian revolutions also had in common many primary figures of authority that, despite their wrongs or rights, were charismatic enough to capture the support of a great number of people.
The Cuban military, much like the revolutionaries in Bolivia, were for the most part ineffective.
The country's leader prior to the ascendancy of Fidel Castro, Fulgencio Batista, had cleverly manipulated the assistance of a number of external forces, primarily that of the United States, to assist the country in achieving a degree of economic gain and modernity the likes of which were comparable to, if not surpassing, those of other parts of the world.
Each has a different story to tell about labor, free and slave, politics, race and freedom yet underlying each of these themes is a current that is not only consistent but largely underdeveloped.
This theme is agricultural and its changing labor and production practices.
This work will analyze and compare the treatment of agriculture as a theme associated with each local.
Each nation demonstrates the story of profiteering through agriculture in varied ways, and the rejection of it.
Race, Sex, Science, and United States Impeialism in Pueto Rico, Biggs shows how ace, class, gende, and powe ae inteelated and inteconnected.
Pueto Rican cultue has been sexualized, and the sexualization of Pueto Rico has been lagely o exclusively the pojection of white Anglo-Saxon Potestant values placed upon a dake-skinned, Catholic populace.
The esult has been the conceptualization of an exotic otheness, coupled with a simultaneous fea.
Pueto Ricans have been citicized as developing a cultue of povety in the United States, and Pueto Rican families ae blamed.
Regading the theme of gende and sexuality and how it is elated to citizenship and immigation, Biggs shows that white Ameicans have pojected the cultue of povety on Pueto Rico by blaming Pueto Ricans, athe than acknowledging the sociological oots of the poblem that can be taced to… references to the Cold War.
The strengths of this article in relation to the theme is that it is about global apartheid, linked thematically to other analyses thereof.
Moreover, this article has a strong sense of time and place, which is important for a reliable and valid historiography.
The weakness of the article is that it is not inclusive of gender issues.
The ideal of 'pulling yourself up by your own bootstraps' that is so popular in America is also manifested in the American attitude towards health.
Americans believe in the ability of personal willpower to conquer illnesses such as obesity, and manifest a belief in complete self-transformation through diets and exercise.
Americans also view the ability to obtain healthcare at all as a personal choice.
Moreover, to encourage Cubans to evade United States military and police forces in order to gain access to United States political asylum only encourages human trafficking and other dangerous practices.
Instead of deporting Cubans or forcing them to seek asylum in a third country, which may have more restrictive definitions of what it considers a refugee, the United States should grant asylum to Cubans fleeing political persecution.
The embargo still stands and is thoroughly imposed, there are no diplomatic relations and no direct flights between the two countries.
There are no signs so far that the United States is willing to warm up to Cuba and allow it to come out of its isolation.
In other words, there are really no elements to help us determine that the isolators would be willing to allow the isolated to be released.
Drawing again on the parallel, we should point out that this was the same in Philoctetes's case, at least for most of the play.
The reason he is able to come out of his isolation is not necessarily because the isolators have realized they have made a mistake or because they are… Bibliography 1.
It has been more than forty years now since Fidel Castro and his communist insurgents captured control of the Island of Cuba.
Originally supported by the American government, Castro quickly lost United States backing once the communistic nature of his government became clear.
The evolution did its work, and thousands upon thousands of Cubans were deprived of their property, property that was taken over by the Cuban State, and in accordance with Marxist tenets, ""redistributed"" among the workers.
Many settled in the United States, especially in and around Miami, where they quickly came to constitute a powerful bloc with strong influence over American policy toward their homeland.
There has yet to be a clear resolution to the controversy, but the expression of symbolic free speech on the part of Beyonce and Jay-Z has deepened the discourse about the purpose and effectiveness of the Cuba embargo.
The celebrity visit has caused new dialogue about Cuban-American relations and the meaning behind the ongoing travel ban Many Americans do not give much thought to the travel ban; but Cuban-Americans take the ban personally.
Now that the Cold War is over, it does not seem to make much sense to have an embargo.
Beyonce and Jay-Z's Cuba jaunt sparks uproar as United States politicians accuse Obama of breaking tourism embargo.
Money came to have little meaning in the legal economy but not by design as, according to Marxism, it was supposed to do in a utopian communist society.
There simply was little to buy through officially sanctioned channels, and the government provided most social needs gratis or for minimum fees.
Under the circumstances, material as well as moral incentives became ineffective in the legal economy.
The burdens of sheer survival and transport difficulties also led people to miss work with increased regularity, above all women on whom the burdens fell most.
Not only did Cuba nationalize property held by United States interests during the revolution, but also Cuba became an ally to Russia during the Cold ar; which was critical to the Soviet strategy since Cuba is in close proximity to the United States Both actions consequently undermined the stated values of the American free-market system in regards to America's corporate holdings in the country.
This tension has furthermore been manifested by blatantly vocal opposition on both sides of the dispute.
In this paper such ongoing tension will be illustrated by one of the most timely and extreme examples of hostility in foreign relations as well as propose an avenue for future trade arrangements.
He was Argentinean by birth but was later awarded with an honorary Cuban citizenship in recognition of his contribution towards the armed struggle in the Cuban revolution.
He became a champion of the class struggle against capitalism on an international level.
He joined Fidel Castro in 1955 in overthrowing the Cuban government of atista.
Subsequently, he became an important figure in Cuban diplomacy and a vocal critic of the United States and the Soviet Union.
Later on he helped revolutionary groups… Bibliography Anderson, Jon, L 2010.
This led to his being given a writing job at the Biblioteca Nacional Jose Marti in 1963.
In 1965 at 22 he his first novel Celestino antes del alba which won the First Mention Award at the Cirilo Villaverde National Competition.
It was originally published in 1967 by the UNEAC and had a limited run of 2000 copies.
He left the Biblioteca Nacional in 1968 and became an editor for the Cuban… Works Cited Arenas, Reinaldo.
Constantly bustling, full of many cultures and ethnicities, although Cuban-Americans predominate.
The aesthetic is very functional, since the area is mainly dominated by recent immigrants coming from underdeveloped countries to the United States.
The characters are very new to the United States and are unfamiliar with its social expectations.
Hispanic-Americans Gender: As with most relationship-driven sitcoms, more female than male.
From the entire world, women have maintained their place due to the new customs that have arisen over the years.
They have been able to go vote and work, which puts them as equals with men For example, South Korea; there is a female president instead of a make.
Therefore, women have overcome the stereotypes that society has created from sixty years ago.
No matter what country or culture women are in, it has been proven during the last two decades they are no longer inferior when it comes to being equals with men.
In other words, regardless of what society throws at women, they become stronger and more powerful every day.
In Mexico, Mexicans place a high value on family and traditional values. lthough women make up an increasingly… Along with India, South Korea has build up support for women so that they can be equal.
The Korean Women's Development Institute or KWDI was established in 1983 to promote women's social participation and welfare by carrying out research and studies on women, by providing education and training for women, and by assisting women's activities.
A law passed by the Korean National Assembly in 1982 mandates the KWDI to assist government in popularizing gender consciousness, as well as in promoting gender equality in policy formulation and implementation.
KWDI has three anchor programs, namely; the Research Center, the Lifelong Education Center, and the Women's Information Center.
The Research Center carries out basic research and policy studies to promote gender consciousness in various fields of society and life as well as to formulate and implement policies that supports gender equality.
The Lifelong Education Center provides gender consciousness education, women's leadership training, women's capacity development, and training of international experts.
It also hosts international activities, and acts as a comprehensive assistance center for women's non-formal education.
Last but not the least, the Women's Information Center produces and distributes information about the research and projects of the KWDI, as well as information about women's issues and concerns.
Therefore, women in South Korea have become very strong and determined without the help with men which only means they are growing more powerful every day.
In that case, women in most societies were denied some of the legal and political rights accorded to men.
Although women in much of the world have gained significant legal rights, many people believe that women still do not have complete political, economic, and social equality with men.
In South Korea, through AWORC, the KWDI hopes to share its resource and library holdings to women outside of South Korea, and to make resource and information generated by women's organizations and institutes accessible to the communities it serves.
Throughout each countrywomen are becoming more self-made and the only people that they rely on themselves.
They happen and our lives take different turns and take different roads.
We deal with these issues as they come and try our best to cope with them the way we know how.
These events involve me leaving my country of birth and also when I moved to the United States.
The first event of my life that I consider significant was when I had to leave my native country of Cuba and move to the country of Spain.
The reasoning behind this was based on my father's political problems and personal views that were not in line with the country of Cuba's ideals and political views.
Healthcare is my duty, and I shall see to it that I ""freely give"" of my energy to heal the sick and communicate the word of God via my work.
In a Christian light, healthcare is not as controversial as it is made out to be in the American media.
Rather, the issue of healthcare parallels the three Christian norms of love, justice and peacemaking.
To love others is to put into practice Jesus' advice to love our neighbors as ourselves.
No matter what a patient's background or physical condition, that individual has the right to receive the best care possible.
Finally, the research also showed that unlike the reports of other iconographic figures from the 1960s, Guevara's death was confirmed by empirical observation but his popular identity continues to be developed through the use of famous photographic images and his legacy continues to be reinforced by people in search of heroes today. ibliography arbas, Samantha.
Eventually, a better job opportunity came to me in the form of a state job in the Department of Youth and Family Services, so I decided to leave the school system.
Between working there and at Families Matter, New Jersey, I learned quite a bit.
I would spend hours with parents who did not have the skills to help themselves and children who were in crisis.
This result is ironic since the embargo was enacted ostensibly to free the Cuban people from an oppressive regime.
Many people view the Cuban embargo as a complete failure, as it has not accomplished its goals, and arguably has done nothing else than to bolster Castro's position and thrust the Cuban population into a deeper state of poverty.
Despite this, the United States has yet to lift the embargo, due largely to strong opposition from key political leaders. eferences Griswold, Daniel.
My health promotion strategy program will center around a Cuban-American family called the Garcias whose primary health issues center on hypertension, and the need for greater information about the importance of establishing a healthy lifestyle.
This includes the importance of screening, exercise, establishing healthy habits, and monitoring one's lifestyle.
Several members of the family indicate stress and hypertension whilst the grandmother also has cardiac disease and osteoarthritis, but is resilient to receiving information on how to alleviate her symptoms.
In a similar way, Angelo, an addicted smoker, refuses to stop smoking and to deal with his chronic cough and mild chest pain, stating that, as man of the family, he has to continue working his overwhelming hours.
It was spawned by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the ensuing lack of suppot given to Cuba by the Soviet Bloc.
It was aggavated by the continued economic sanctions against Cuba pepetated by the United States.
In 1973 she was part of a New Jersey Turnpike shootout where she was wounded along with a trooper.
Three charges were dismissed, and she was acquitted on the other three charges.
Then she was convicted in 1977 on eight felony counts including first-degree murder for the New Jersey Turnpike… References Christol, Helene.
This thesis says ""continental expansion...was the driving, dynamic factor of American progress.
It was an odd moment to being saying such things, and a prophetic one, for America has, perhaps unbeknownst to him, just run out of frontier to conquer.
Of course, ""overseas"" was already conquered, had its own government, and its own citizens.
Cuban sugar producers were more and more at the mercy of the United States refiners"" This economic unity no doubt helped provoke America's eventual conquest.
In the meantime, revolutionary spirit continued undimmed by the end of the Ten Years' War, building its foundation of support and respect among the people.
This was a true revolution of the people now, and its prospects for success seemed to grow daily under the leadership of Jose Mart', a middle class poet, journalist, philosopher, and dreamer.
In 1895, following a Spain-induced loss of trade with America, and further evidence of Spanish despotism, the revolution began.
The revolution seemed successful at first; then Spain sent the best of its worst men.
General Valeriano Weyler, with his reinforcements, began a war of deprivation, forcing peasants into concentration camps where lack of food, sanitation, and water killed thousands upon thousands of them.
Introduction to Screenplay Writing, Mark Troy, Writers.Net Screenwriting 102: Advanced Screenplay Writing, Mark Troy, Writers.Net WORK EXPERIENCE 2006 SILVER HILL HOSPITAL New Canaan, CT to present Residential Counselor/Psychiatric Technician 2009-present Responsible for ensuring efficient, quality functioning for adolescent unit in 28-day Transitional Living Program.
Cover house operations in the absence of the Senior Residential counselor.
Carry out admission and discharge process for residents, while ensuring transitional living experience fosters growth and independence in residents.
