David A Welch THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS REVISITED T-M^he Cuban missile crisis has assume significance.
Dean Rusk called it ""the the world has ever seen,"" the only ti superpowers came ""eyeball to eyeball called it the ""Gettysburg of the Cold W inger, Jr., it was ""the finest hour"" of the a moment of maximum nuclear peril tr trophe.
Many people believe that the mi 1962 represents the closest point that t nuclear war.
Since the Cuban missile crisis remains the only nuclear crisis we have experienced, it remains the great laboratory in which to study the art of crisis management.
This disagreement was brought into sharp focus at a recent meeting of scholars and former members of the Executive Committee of the Na tional Security Council , the group convened by President John F Kennedy to advise him on the matter of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Blight and Welch are currently working on a book on the Cuban missile crisis.
The authors wish to express their thanks to the Carnegie Corporation and the Alfred P Sloan Foundation.
But we should also be wary of drawing generalizations that ignore important ways in which the world has changed, that cannot be supported by evidence from a single crisis, and that are insensitive to the fact that diplomatic or strategic successes can rarely be repeated in quite the same way.
The German leadership in 1914 had expected a repeat of Russia's backdown in the Bosnian crisis of 1909.
Instead, they found themselves em broiled in the costliest war mankind had yet seen.
Retain civilian control and beware of the limited outlook of the military.
This list reflects a large measure of the common wisdom of classical diplomacy, and the successful resolution of the crisis is prima facie evidence of its validity.
But the history of the missile crisis has not given the hawks a chance to vindicate their view that more forceful action would have led to at least as desirable an outcome.
Perhaps the United States did hold all the cards and could have acted more forcefully, even with impunity.
The latter sort of list might have had some validity if the nuclear balance, rather than the quarantine or world opinion, had been primarily responsible for the resolution of the crisis.
No one can resolve the controversy over the importance of the nuclear balance in 1962.
History is an imperfect laboratory, and there were too many causes of the outcome of the missile crisis for any single factor to be definitive.
But in the explana tion of the dispute between hawks and doves lies a series of important lessons for future policymakers and future crisis managers.
When we ask why hawks and doves have held such different views of the event and have drawn such different conclusions from it, we can identify clearly several key factors which heavily influenced its conduct and outcome.
At the ti crisis, ExComm members assigned different weigh risk and tended to favor a particular course of acti ingly.
Almost from the outset the array of options members of the ExComm fell into three main catego hawkish in the missile crisis meant supporting an early action, either an air strike on the missile bases or a of the island or both.
Dovish views implied wishing any use of military force, even a naval quaranti willingness to resolve the crisis by ""trading"" Americ missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
In shorthand, therefore, hawks were inv doves were traders; ""owls"" were persuaders.
The fact that Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles were ""soft"" and required con siderable time to prepare for launch made them extremely vulnerable to an American first strike, and seemed to shorten the Soviet fuse.
Therefore crisis stability and the importance of assuring command and control were sources of concern to the owlish group.
I was so sure we had 'em over a barrel, I never worried much about the final outcome, but what things might happen in between.
Now some of the civilians do recall worries about the time of that second Saturday; worries that really run to two or three steps up the ladder of escalation.
It's the nature of some people if they can't have a legitimate worry, they create them.
If he was irrational, I still expected his colleagues to look after him.
What is remarkable about Taylor's analysis is how wedded it is to the classical ""rational actor"" model of decision-making.
If all partic ipants could be counted on to act rationally and there were no accidents or mistakes, Taylor would probably have been correct about the low level of risk.
Several members of the ExComm, including Taylor, Dean Acheson, Douglas Dillon, John McCone and Paul Nitze, be lieved from the start of the crisis that military action against the Soviet bases in Cuba carried little risk of retaliation.
The United States held all the cards; the only question in their minds was how great was the fall that the Soviets were bound to take.
Some still hold this view, and they have been joined over the past quarter-century by like-minded scholars and publicists who argue that with a tougher response Kennedy could have removed Castro as well as the missiles.
Many in this hawkish group believe at the same time that the crisis holds no significant lessons for today.
In their view, the reason why the Soviets capitulated, agreeing to withdraw the missiles from Cuba, and the main reason the Soviets would not have retaliated militarily even if the missiles had been removed by an air strike and an invasion of the island, was the overwhelming American superiority at the strategic nuclear level.
As strategic superiority is believed to have been funda mental to the outcome of the crisis, and as it has long since been lost, the missile crisis is thought to be no more relevant to present concerns than, say, the Peloponnesian Wars.
All were deeply concerned to avoid setting a precedent whereby the Soviets believed they might deceive the United States and then escape unpunished when caught in the lie.
Others seem to have been concerned more with what they regarded as the quite real and substantial military significance of the Soviet SS-4s and SS-5s being in stalled in Cuba.
The correct interpretation of the significance of the missiles, according to the hawks, was that whereas previously the Soviets in a preemptive strike could have expected to destroy only a tiny fraction of the United States strategic forces, they could with the addition of the Cuban missiles plan to destroy perhaps as much as 40 percent of the Strategic Air Command bomber force.
Finally, the hawks were very concerned about the risks involved in what they regarded as the foot-dragging aspects of a quar antine.
The missiles were discovered before they became op erational and ought to be destroyed before they were made ready to fire.
For all these reasons, in addition to their belief that American conventional and stra tegic superiority would nullify any Soviet response, the hawks favored an immediate air strike aimed at taking out the Soviet missile sites in Cuba.
President Kennedy and most of his inner circle seem to have had a more expansive view of the risks involved.
But more than that, they seem to have felt a fear of inadvertent nuclear war that was not shared by Taylor and the other hawks.
It would have been perfectly natural for the hawks not to feel this apprehension if they did not take the risks of inad vertence seriously.
But it is also interesting to note that those who felt the fear of inadvertent nuclear war most keenly approached the crisis not merely as advisers offering their judgments and opinions, but as people who felt that they shared the president's responsibility to get the missiles out of Cuba without humiliation or catastrophe.
This sense of responsibility, the resulting heightened sensitivity to the risks of inadvertence, and the associated fear seem to have reinforced each other and to have had a powerful cautionary effect on the ExComm's choices of action throughout the crisis.
Together, these consid erations go a long way toward explaining the way in which the crisis was eventually resolved.
With pressure building, the president sent his brother Robert to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin with what the Soviets seem to have interpreted as the final American offer to resolve the crisis peacefully.
General Taylor arrived with news that an American U-2 had been shot down over Cuba.
Meeting with the president, in cluding Robert Kennedy, Sorensen, Rusk, McNamara, Bundy and Llewellyn Thompson.
According to Robert Kennedy, ""At first, there was almost unanimous agree ment that we had to attack early the next morning with bombers and fighters and destroy the SAM sites.
Robert Kennedy told Dobrynin that the United States would pledge publicly not to invade Cuba if the Soviets would pledge publicly to begin withdrawing the missiles immediately.
He also said privately that United States mis siles were going to come out of Turkey, in any event.
He took to the airwaves to accept it immediately after receiving the offer.
There remains a great deal of disagreement among the former members of the ExComm on whether Robert Kennedy ""traded"" the missiles in Turkey, on whether he had given the Soviets an ultimatum and on what the president's next move would have been had the Soviets rejected his terms.
McNamara resists the idea that Robert Ken nedy actually threatened the Soviets with an air strike and an invasion; Dillon, Nitze and Taylor have all expressed confi dence in interviews that President Kennedy would have or dered the air strike and invasion within 48 hours of the deadline his brother had imposed on the Soviets; McNamara and Bundy are both convinced that the president would have continued American efforts at persuading the Soviets by ""cranking up the quarantine,"" adding more to the list of prohibited items and perhaps also by intensifying search procedures.
Dean Rusk provided new information to the Hawk's Cay conference indicating that the president had not yet abandoned the option of a public trade of American missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Mr Cordier was to put that statement in the hands of U Thant only after a further signal from us.
That step was never taken and the statement I furnished to Mr Cordier has never seen the light of day.
So far as I know, President Kennedy, Andrew Cordier and I were the only ones who knew of this particular step.
As McGeorge Bundy pointed out to the meeting at Hawk's Cay, this step does not necessarily mean that a policy of trading missiles would have resulted.
We will never know for certain what President Kennedy would have done had Khrushchev not responded favorably to his last proposal.
But the fact that he laid the groundwork for a public trade indicates the degree to which he was concerned about the possible unintended consequences of extending the crisis, or of an imminent air strike and invasion.
It is striking how little the hawks were concerned with these risks, and it is important to note that each group's exposure to the other's views led to polarization and discord rather than convergence and consensus.
As the owlish option of the quarantine began to look like a failure, and as the hawkish and dovish options began to look like the only viable alternatives, debate in the ExComm became bitter, tempers flared and positions hard ened.
But the owls were ultimately vindicated, and the risks of the hawkish and dovish options were successfully avoided.
The trade was made, though privately, and the invasion, though threatened, never occurred.
It is important to recognize that the strategy adopted by the 9 When we suggest that the trade was made ""privately,"" we recognize that this is a figure of speech describing an action which was of no use to Soviet public diplomacy.
But in conveying to the Soviets the information that the Jupiters in Turkey were scheduled for removal, the Administration's intention seems largely to have been to help Khrushchev justify the settlement to his opposition in the Politburo and the military.
The prevailing opinion in the ExComm was that there were dangerous risks in relative inaction and also in direct and decisive military action.
The dovish position, exemplified first by Adlai Steven son, held that military action was just too risky because of the danger of provoking a superpower war, perhaps even a nuclear holocaust.
Hawks, as we have illustrated, saw dangers, political and military, only in the continued presence of the missiles in Cuba.
The naval quarantine represented an owlish attempt to reconcile the partial truths contained in the options favored by hawks and doves.
If one assumes that there were indeed risks in both action and inaction, in decisiveness and caution, then the resolution of the crisis must be seen as a masterpiece of owlish diplomacy.
Because this approach recognizes a wide variety of risks; because it provides a safety net right up until the end; and because it is our judgment that, if forced, the president would have chosen to run the political risk of a trade rather than the risk of an inadvertent nuclear war.
In short, we believe that President Kennedy had decided he was not going to initiate war over the missiles in Cuba, but that he would do his utmost to get them removed with the least political cost.
IV Before, during and at the conclusion of the missile crisis, American leadership was perplexed by the question of S intentions.
The professed confusion added measurably to fearfulness as the crisis wore on.
Of all the ExComm memb none in the president's inner circle had predicted the em ment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Once the quara line was in place on October 24, most of the members inner circle expected a dramatic Soviet countermane probably around Berlin.
Some, like Dean Rusk, reacted to the first letter with fear that Khrushchev had ""lost his cool,"" and thus might begin to think irrationally and act impulsively in ways that would deepen the crisis.
Others, like George Ball, recall reacting to the second letter with dismay because they feared Khrushchev might no longer be in charge and that the Soviet military or hardliners in the Politburo had assumed command.
Finally, when the ExComm broke up on the evening of October 27, few of those who knew of Robert Kennedy's message to Dobrynin expected that the Soviets would agree to the American offer.
Yet not only did the Soviets agree to the American terms, they did so immediately, enthusiastically and without reservation.
From the discovery of the missiles to the agreement securing their removal, President Kennedy and his closest advisers found the Soviets almost entirely inscrutable.
Understanding one's adversary is crucial to managing a conflict, as every stage of the Cuban missile crisis illustrates.
President Kennedy's public warnings to the Soviets not to deploy offensive weapons in Cuba virtually committed the two countries to a showdown once such missiles were discovered.
Let me say here that the line between offensive and defensive weapons was drawn in September, and it was not drawn in a way which was intended to leave the Soviets any ambiguity to play with.
I say that believing very strongly that that would have been an act of prudence, not weakness.
But I am suggesting that one reason the line was drawn at zero was because we simply thought the Soviets weren't going to deploy any there anyway.
Of course, Kennedy's warnings were too late; the Soviet decision to deploy had been made months before, and the relevant machinery had been set in gear.
It is, of course, difficult to say whether such an uncharacteristically risky ven ture could have been easily foreseen; but it is striking nonethe less that few outside the intelligence community and none in President Kennedy's inner circle seem to have given any serious thought as to why the Soviets might deploy until after the missiles had been discovered.
Perhaps the most important dimension of knowing one's enemy is knowing his view of a crisis and what is at stake, for this largely determines which strategies are appropriate and effective, and which are not.
If the adversary sees it as a zero sum game for which he is willing to take great risks to avoid a loss, then the interaction needs to be handled differently than would be the case if he saw it as a predicament stumbled into by mistake or through stupidity, from which both sides must extricate themselves through cooperative action, avoiding either's humiliation.
In these two cases, the same strategies would elicit very different responses and would carry with them very different risks.
To make matters even more prob lematic, the ""adversary"" may be a contentious group whose internal balance shifts over the course of the crisis.
The quarantine option, and the owlish approach to the Cuban missile crisis in general, was successful largely because it provided the flexibility that enabled the Administration to ""learn"" about its adversary as the crisis progressed.
McGeorge Bundy recalls that as the missile crisis wore on, President Kennedy expressed increasing curiosity about Khrushchev, and about the ways this man's personality might interact with the Soviet system and with the deep crisis they both were in to produce various Soviet actions.
Other experts consulted directly or indirectly included, inter alia, Foy Kohler, Ray Cline, Raymond Garthoff and Averell Harriman.
Perhaps in no other two-week period has any American administration learned so much about the Soviet Union and its leaders as Kennedy's did during the Cuban missile crisis.
It is difficult to discover precisely what Thompson did or said to warrant the apparently unanimous verdict that his contribution was heroic.
He was certainly not a member of the president's inner circle; he seems to have spoken relatively infrequently at ExComm meetings; and former ExComm mem bers whom we have questioned about Thompson's role have few concrete recollections of anything in particular he said or did during the crisis.
It seems clear that whatever Thompson's role may actually have been, the consistent portrayal of him as an almost infallible index of the ""Russian soul"" must be related in some considerable degree to the feeling among most of the other ExComm members that, in this most tense and dangerous confrontation, they themselves knew next to nothing that would allow them to comprehend and predict Soviet actions accurately.
And now, with the crisis long since having been resolved successfully, they give Thompson a large share of the credit.
What seems indisputable is that all through the crisis Presi dent Kennedy and his closest associates found themselves al most continuously mystified by the Soviets, so much so that in retrospect the single member of the group who claimed famil iarity with the Soviet Union is given credit for being the hero, the absolutely indispensible man during the crisis.
Some degree of mystery about the Soviet side is likely to be a feature of any superpower crisis.
Might the and deterred the subsequent expansion Kennedy is reported to have believed at t of fighting between United States and Soviet for out of three and fifty-fifty.
The Soviets should have been ampl more could have been accomplished b barring unforeseen complications.
Some of the participants at Hawk's Cay that the chances of a war that could e exchange were more like one in fifty.
Likewise, since the proof is prim we find little reason to fault the cour President Kennedy and his advisers.
Whatever one's view of the past, the next crisis is not likely to be as ""easy"" as the Cuban missile crisis.
At the nuclear level, we no longer have superiority (whatever difference that may have made) and there is little prospect that the Soviets will allow us to regain it.
Our international political standing and ur ability to win the backing of the United Nations, the Organization of American States and NATO have diminished.
After Vietnam and Watergate there seems slight prospect of preserving secrecy for a week of careful consideration of the options, as Kennedy was able to do.
Moreover, the system of nuclear deterrence has become much more complex.
In some ways the weapons are better protected than they were in 1962, but the numbers have grown and so has the complexity of command and control systems.
Finally, the Soviet Union is changing, but we will never be sure what that means in a crisis.
Given these considerations, Robert Kennedy's list of lessons looks even more perceptive than it appeared at the time.
Perhaps the first lesson of an updated list would be the importance of avoiding superpower nuclear crises.
Attempts to replay the Cuban missile crisis could lead to fatal mistakes.
A corollary is the importance of developing measures and channels of com munication that help to avert crises.
In short, the most impor tant lesson of the missile crisis a quarter-century later may be to be wary of reading from it simple lessons on crisis manage ment.
The second lesson concerns the importance of the views of the top leaders who are elected and appointed.
Each member of the ExComm brought to the Cuban missile crisis a coherent world view which determined his perceptions of the risks and of Soviet intentions.
While the episode illustrates the extent to which some decision-makers are able to learn new information quickly, it equally clearly illustrates the importance and the dangers of rigidly precon ceived world views and the effect they can have on the pro cessing of new information.
Deterrence is not a game played by two players seated at a chess or poker table.
It is played by small groups of people embedded in enormous complex orga nizations whose outlines they barely discern and whose detailed operations they scarcely control.
Robert McNamara was acutely aware of the need for civilian control and the need to manage the details so that the wrong signals were not communicated in the crisis.
But he could not prevent a U-2 from overflying Soviet territory at the height of the crisis, and he was not aware until 25 years later that his orders to alert our forces were transmitted in the clear (where the Soviets could easily read them) rather than in code, as per standard procedure.
In my opinion, this law ought to be inscribed above all the doorways in the White House and the Pentagon, and it is the overwhelming lesson of the Cuban missile crisis.
It is critical for high level officials to prepare themselves to deal with crises ahead of time.
Our country places in high office lawyers, politicians, academics and businessmen who have no experience with nu clear systems, yet they are expected to handle a nuclear crisis if one occurs.
The briefings on nuclear operations that top officials receive from the professional military at the beginning of an administration's term have been described as analogous to being given a drink from a firehose.
We need to find ways through briefings and simulations to ensure that top officials have a better grasp of the complexity of the nuclear systems they direct before a crisis occurs.
Finally, in a world where the leaders of the two superpowers discussed the possibility of ridding the world of nuclear weap ons at a summit conference, if only in sketchy and confused terms, the Cuban missile crisis may hold some lessons on the limits of current debates about nuclear deterrence.
On the one hand, the Cuban missile crisis shows that a little nuclear deter rence went a long way.
At least for the group of American leaders at that time, superiority did not remove the prudence that was engendered by even a low probability of a few Soviet warheads exploding over our cities.
Perhaps Soviet leaders might have reacted differently had positions been reversed; but it seems clear that nuclear deter rence had a good deal to do with the fact that Khrushchev did not respond with a Berlin blockade or pressure on Turkey, as some of the participants expected.
The specter of nuclear catastrophe lurking at the end of a chain of events had a powerful cautionary effect on both sides.
It fostered a caution that, as George Ball noted, would not have been present to the same degree if only conventional forces had been involved.
As long as that political competition persists, the horror of nuclear weapons will have the ironic effect of producing both fear and caution.
The Cuban missile crisis would appear to have had the desirable effect of reinforcing these responses, and the result has been, in the past 25 years, that we have weathered arms races, third-party wars at various global flash points, and a renewal of cold-war rhetoric without a super power confrontation of comparable magnitude or intensity.
But we cannot rely on fear and caution exclusively; the next superpower crisis will almost certainly be accidental and unex pected.
We will have to learn to manage the U.S.-Soviet com petition to reduce the risks we have thus far dodged.
But it will also involve learning to manage crises more effectively while we strive to improve the relationship over the long run.
In the meantime, we will be drawn back repeatedly to the Cuban missile crisis and the effort to understand the lessons it can teach us.
Though the world of 1962 is becoming increasingly remote, some of its lessons seem timeless.
