Note the Navy Unit Commendation decal on the nose cone and the forward-firing camera bay door opened to remove film.
Although short, the evolving chain of events threatened the Cold War doomsday we all feared.
All this military hardware Washington intelligence community that the was dismantled, crated and shipped half-way Navy’s Light Photographic Squadron 62 (VFP– around the world, while 43,000 Russian soldiers 62)—colloquially known as Fightin’ Photo—had and technicians constructed missile sites in the the best capabilities.
Based at NAS Cecil Field, hot, humid tropics of Cuba—an impressive Florida, and flying the supersonic RF–8A Photo engineering achievement—with the hopes of Crusader, VFP–62 had developed a new forwardpresenting a fait accompli to President John F firing photographic capability using advanced Kennedy.
Additionally, the squadron had been Fortunately, United States intelligence agencies were training for this type of mission for months. watching with Lockheed U–2, high-altitude The Chief of Naval Operations issued orders photographic reconnaissance planes—not to VFP–62’s commanding officer, Commander unknown to the Soviets who had shot down a CIA William B Ecker, to get his squadron prepared U–2, piloted by Gary Powers, in May 1960.
Flying with a readiness of up to 16 RF–8As, and to at over 70,000 feet, the spy plane was a marvel of prepare mission plans, which would originate Surveillance discovered another MRBM site and an SS–5 IRBM site being constructed in central Cuba.
Now, 90 million American lives were endangered. technology, but at the same time was vulnerable from NAS Key West and return to the Fleet Air to SAMs and adversely affected by cloud cover.
Photographic Laboratory at NAS Jacksonville, On 14 October, a U–2 flew a short mission over Florida.
There film would be processed and western Cuba and one day later photo interpreters then couriered to Washington PIs.
The classified pouring over the U–2 imagery discovered operation was codenamed Blue Moon. three SS–4 MRBM sites under construction west Commander Ecker’s first urgent problem was of Havana (the SS–4 had a range of 1,200 miles to find more aircraft and aviators (he didn’t have and carried a two to three megaton nuclear enough of either), as his squadron was tasked to warhead—capable of hitting Washington, D.C.). provide three-plane detachments to all Atlantic President Kennedy was informed on 16 October, carrier air groups.
He requisitioned NADC’s and convened the Executive Committee of the RF–8A that National Security Council to develop Marine Corps Major John Glenn (later astronaut strategies to deal with the new threat.
Additionally, four RF–8As and five pilots In following days, U–2 surveillance discovered from the Marine Composite Reconnaissance another MRBM site and an SS–5 IRBM (with a squadron VMCJ–2 based at Cherry Point, North range of 2,400 miles) site being constructed in Carolina, formed an augmentation detachment central Cuba.
At the Pentagon, old strike and with the new forward-firing cameras and the invasion operational plans were dusted off and pilots merged into VFP–62’s operations.
A key component of those plans and enlisted ground crew were sent to Key West was tactical photo reconnaissance. to await further orders.
President Kennedy made The intelligence community and the Joint a television address on 22 October, presented Chiefs of Staff recognized a need for higherthe missile threat to the nation and world and 20 Foundation • Fall 2011 4 Tom Satterlee collection 2 1 3 The RF–8A’s array of cameras is clearly visible in this photo.
Starting from the nose are the forwardfiring Camera Bay 1 , the starboard oblique camera windows for Bays 2 and 4 (port side Bays 2 and 3 oblique windows not visible), the port Bay 2 and aft-most Bay 3 vertical camera windows and finally, the starboard Bay 4 vertical window.
Bay 2 is a trimetrogon horizon-to-horizon station, while Bays 3 and 4 have rotatable camera mounts allowing the pilot to set the degree of obliquity. his intention to form a naval quarantine (a erectors, support vehicles with fuel tanks, nuclear toned-down euphemism for blockade) around warhead bunkers and even soldiers scrambling Cuba.
Military forces worldwide were placed at from the low-flying Navy jets to man their antiDEFCON 3.
On 23 October, Fightin’ Photo was aircraft guns were obvious to everyone. ordered to fly three two-plane sorties over Castro’s The Voodoos were allowed to fly on 24 Cuba at near supersonic speeds and tree-top level.
October, but failed miserably; Air Force Now, the U–2s and the RF–8As would team to cameras and training were inadequate and provide the hard intelligence necessary to gage produced no useful imagery.
Air Force Chief of the wiggle room for JFK to work out a diplomatic Staff General Curtis LeMay groveled to obtain resolution to the crisis—the U–2s covering wide Navy cameras for his planes.
Days later, the Air swaths of Cuba and the Crusaders investigating Force improved its low-level capabilities and the suspicious areas to provide the clarity that eventually flew alternating missions with the even laymen could discern.
The rules of missions on 25 October, first as wingmen engagement required fighter protection to and later as flight leaders.
The Crusader Commander Tad Riley—both had flown during pilots flew the 90 miles over the Caribbean, low the first missions—en route to the IRBM site at enough to pick up salt spray, avoiding Cuban Remedios in central Cuba.
Once feet dry, they kept their the target, Coffee saw an interesting military speed up to 0.96 Mach to make their dash to complex, impetuously yanked hard on the stick, points of interest, where they popped up to 1,500 broke formation, and just as he leveled the feet to take their pictures and then ran like hell wings, turned on all of his cameras.
Foundation • Fall 2011 21 A recon photo of the San Cristobal missile site, revealing five SS–4 MRBMS, missile ready tent and support vehicles.
Dino Brugioni collection Just before going feet wet, they flew over a Secretary McNamara began to recognize small coastal village, and Riley said with a note of the provocative psychological impact of the triumph, “Let’s let ’em know we’re here—burner low-flying jets.
WHU WHUMP . . . as we pulled up the noses air strike . . . camouflaging the possibility of a later of our Crusaders to climb out over the Straits low-level attack, emphasizing our concern with of Florida.
In reviewing the film at NAS Crusaders were now tasked to project United States power Jacksonville, the village chickens were flapping and will, and explicitly threaten the possibility all over the place—one guy was literally diving of hostile action to come—at the time and place head first out the window of his hut.” the United States decided.
During the following days, Fortunately for Lieutenant Coffee, his the Crusaders encountered more anti-aircraft unauthorized break from his approved flight fire from the Cuban gunners.
Mission after mission, the fast jets Rocket Over Ground) missiles, capable of were long gone before the Cuban gunners could carrying a nuclear warhead, were poised to meet inflict damage. an American invasion force and destroy the Crusader pilots never passed up an Guantanamo Naval Base.
Instead of a reprimand, opportunity to show-off the capabilities of their Coffee received a commendation letter from hot fighter—the first carrier jet to exceed 1,000 the Commandant of the Marine Corps, with mph.
They, as well as the enlisted sailors who kept the praise, “. . . the most important and timely it flying, loved it with a passion.
Tributes such as information for the amphibious forces, which “it was the Harley Davidson of airplanes,” “the has ever been acquired in the history of this MiG Master” and “flying at the speed of heat,” famous Navy-Marine fighting team.” commonly describe a communal respect.
LTJG Terry Hallcom, LT Thomas Cook, LTJG John Hewitt Jr., LTJG Bernard Kortge, CDR William Ecker, LT Edmund Feeks and LT Arthur Day.
LTJG Robert Chase, LT Bruce Wilhelmy, LCDR Tad Riley and LCDR James Kauflin.
Peter Mersky collection Foundation • Fall 2011 23 and VMCJ–2 pilots happily accepted their new behind.
Regularly, the RF–8As buzzed the MiG air In the early 1960s, those of us who were lucky bases, flying down the main runway—flaunting enough to witness a high-speed Crusader flyby their ability to do so.
Russian pilot Lieutenant from a carrier’s flight deck know how difficult Colonel Nikolay Pakhomov, in a memoir, it was to see its approach from a distance.
The our base daily on a regular basis . . . increased high-positioned knife-edged wings were nearly speed . . . and left off leaving a black-smoky loop invisible from the front and when you finally saw Reviewing the 23 October 1962 (first mission over Cuba) photos at Fleet Air Photographic Laboratory NAS Jacksonville.
Peter Mersky collection 24 Foundation • Fall 2011 it, you couldn’t help being mesmerized.
The mind goose bumps, evoking the pride we had in this had nothing to compare it to—the long, sleek most beautiful of man-made machines and the profile, with its prominent shark-like vertical aviators who flew them.
The hapless Cuban antitail, streaking momentarily abeam the ship, aircraft gunners could be forgiven for missing outracing the roar of its Pratt and Whitney J–57 their target. engine gulping thousands of pounds of air each As the 13 days of the Cuban crisis ticked off, minute.
Then, the aircraft’s ear-shattering sonic photographic intelligence painted a grim picture boom followed by an abrupt, steep vertical climb, for the president.
The SAM, MRBM and IRBM standing on the afterburner’s translucent fiery sites were becoming operational at an alarming plume while performing a perfect eight-point rate and the opportunity to attack them was roll.
President Kennedy feared that an air with supersonic shock waves glowing above air strike would not get all of the missiles and he the wings.
Time the memory of it is still vivid, always producing and options were running out.
The skies over their targets were becoming more dangerous for the recon pilots, and it was becoming common to see the white popcorn puffs of AAA in their rear mirrors.
President Kennedy saw the potential for gaining new intelligence, but also recognized the possibility that exploding flares could be mistaken for an attack and might escalate the crisis into general war.
The president did agree to apply further pressure by increasing the frequency of low-level incursions over Cuba from twice a day to once every two hours.
While the president didn’t approve night photo runs over the missile sites, Lieutenant Jim Curry did fly two night photo runs from USS Enterprise over Guantanamo’s boundary fence.
The base commander wanted to check out suspicious noises on the other side of the fence.
As often happens, word did not get passed to the base Marines and when the Crusader made its pass with booming flares lighting the night sky, they thought they were under artillery attack and ran for their defensive positions.
Curry’s photos showed groups of isolated Cuban soldiers on the other side of the fence, leaning on shovels and looking up at the streaking Crusader.
On 27 October, the crisis was drawing to a climax with both Khrushchev and Kennedy trying to arrive at a peaceful resolution.
ExComm had to respond to a Soviet offer to dismantle the missile sites and withdraw their offensive weapons, but required the United States to remove the quarantine and promise not to Foundation • Fall 2011 25 invade Cuba.
In addition, the United States secretly any on-the-ground inspection teams.
He had a hinted that it would concede to removing its particular aversion to the low-level flights and obsolete nuclear-tipped Jupiter missiles from the effects they were having on his military’s Turkey in the future. morale.
To the Cubans, the U–2 overflights were While these peace offers were being invisible but the Crusaders and Voodoos were a formulated, the RF–8As were conducting personal affront to Cuban sovereignty.
Unable to dawn-to-dusk surveillance—all but two faced restrain his frustration any more, he ordered his fierce anti-aircraft fire over the targets.
Crusaders escaped damage, but a U–2 pilot At the same time, the need for photo wasn’t so fortunate.
Air Force Major Rudolph intelligence was greater than ever; there was Anderson was flying over Banes, Cuba, when a need to account for all of the weapons a Russian colonel in charge of a SAM site being removed.
McNamara still saw value disobeyed Khrushchev’s orders and fired a in the harassing effects of the recon jets, barrage of SA–2s, bringing the spy plane down keeping pressure on the Soviets to honor their and killing the pilot.
The president resisted commitments and demonstrate to the American his adviser’s recommendations to retaliate public that the United States was taking aggressive action against the SAM site and sent Khrushchev what with the Cubans.
Should Commander Tad Riley and his Marine wingman it fail, an air attack was planned for the 29th Captain Fred Carolan were bounced by two to be followed by an invasion.
Carolan detected them in time and Khrushchev agreed on the 28th to dismantle the two used evasive tactics, ducked and escaped and withdraw his offensive weapons. at speeds up to Mach 1.2.
The encounter was The agreement to resolve the crisis peacefully over in a few minutes.
When informed of this, by the two superpowers did not involve Fidel President Kennedy forwarded a protest to the Castro; his concerns amounted to nothing.
The Soviet ambassador at the United Nations and suggested relentless intrusion of his air space brought that any future challenge to recon planes would him to a new level of belligerence—refusing be met with an armed response.
President Kennedy personally presented the Navy Unit Commendation to VFP–62.
Twelve VFP–62 and four VMCJ–2 aviators received the Distinguished Flying Cross.
USN 26 Foundation • Fall 2011 Mr Ken Jack enlisted in the Navy in July 1959 after graduating from New Kensington High School near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, determined to be a Navy photographer.
He graduated from the Navy’s Photographic School at NAS Pensacola, first in his class.
In April 1960 he headed to his first duty station, VFP–62 at Cecil Field, Florida to work with the sophisticated camera systems in the RF–8A Crusader.
After a short Mediterranean cruise, he was sent to photographic-electronics school to learn how to repair the state-of-the-art electronics controlling the camera systems.
Each where Photo Chief Frank Wolle and Commander Robert chicken represents a completed low-level mission Koch were resolving the camera’s numerous problems.
The camera was schedover Cuba, symbolizing the dead hopes of the uled for carrier testing aboard USS Forrestal communist power.
Jack was promoted to a photomate secBy the end of November, it was clear that ond class and assigned the position of lead photomate with Forrestal’s VFP–62 detachment.
The KA–45 camthe low-level photo planes were getting under era was tested for the rough carrier environment and for the Russians’ skins.
In a meeting with President the first time, night photography, using the carrier and its Kennedy, Mr Anastas I Mikoyan, first deputy escorts as targets.
Just in time, the KA–45 was ready for of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, the October photo missions over Cuba. complained that “low-altitude overflights are When his enlistment ended, Jack obtained a blatant hooliganism.
During that time, he received a VFP–62 and VMCJ–2 received the Navy Unit Master’s degree in mathematics education and postCommendation, with President Kennedy graduate credits in Computer Science from the Unipersonally presenting the award at Key West. versity of Pittsburgh.
He joined Westinghouse ElecTwelve VFP–62 pilots and four VMCJ–2 pilots tric Corporation as a Computer Software Engineer received the Distinguished Flying Cross.
In a in 1980 designing and developing computer code for letter to Commander Ecker, the president wrote, nuclear reactor safety monitoring systems.
Hunters, which will coincide with the 50th anniversaFightin’ Photo was disestablished in January ry of the crisis in 2012.
In October 2010 Mr Jack was 1968, always to be remembered for helping a interviewed for the PBS documentary on the 100th grateful President Kennedy avert nuclear war.
