The doctrine covers a broad range of measures for military deception, from camouflage to denial and deception.
Deceptive measures include concealment, imitation with decoys and dummies, manoeuvres intended to deceive, denial, and disinformation.
Sources 5 Further reading 6 External links Development of the doctrine The Russian doctrine of military deception has evolved with time, and it encompasses a number of meanings.
An early military meaning was camouflage, soon extended to battlefield masking using smoke and other methods of screening.
From there it came to have the broader meaning of military deception, widening to include denial and deception.
Historical antecedents In the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380, Dmitry Donskoy's Muscovite army defeated a much larger Mongol army using surprise.
Early in Russia's history, in the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380, Prince Dmitry Donskoy defeated the armies of the Mongol Golden Horde using a surprise attack from a regiment hidden in forest.
Before World War II The Russian Army had a deception school, active in 1904, disbanded in 1929.
Meanwhile, military deception was developed as a military doctrine in the 1920s.
The 1929 Field Regulations of the Red Army stated that ""surprise has a stunning effect on the enemy.
Concealment was to be attained by confusing the enemy with movements, camouflage and use of terrain, speed, use of night and fog, and secrecy.
The 1935 Instructions on Deep Battle and then the 1936 Field Regulations place increasing stress on battlefield deception.
The Instructions define the methods of achieving surprise as air superiority; making forces mobile and manoeuvrable; concealing concentration of forces; keeping fire preparations secret; misleading the enemy; screening with smoke and technical deception; and using the cover of darkness.
It asserts that it contributes to achieving surprise, preserving combat readiness and the survivability of objectives. 1978 concept The 1978 Soviet Military Encyclopedia defines deception similarly, placing additional stress on strategic levels, and explicitly including political, economic and diplomatic measures besides the military ones.
It largely repeats the 1944 Encyclopedia's concept, but adds that .mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}Strategic maskirovka is carried out at national and theater levels to mislead the enemy as to political and military capabilities, intentions and timing of actions.
In these spheres, as war is but an extension of politics, it includes political, economic and diplomatic measures as well as military.
Indeed, Michael Handel reminds readers, in the preface to the military analyst David Glantz's book, of Sun Tzu's claim in The Art of War that all warfare is based on deception; Handel suggests that deception is a normal and indeed necessary part of warfare.
The goal of military deception is however surprise, vnezapnost, so the two are naturally studied together.However, the military analyst William Connor cautioned that in the Soviet sense, the doctrine covered much more than camouflage and deception.
By the time of Operation Bagration in 1944, Connor argues, the Russian doctrine of military deception already included all these aspects.
The meaning evolved in Soviet practice and doctrine to include strategic, political, and diplomatic objectives, in other words operating at all levels.This differs from Western doctrines on deception, and from information warfare doctrines, by its emphasis on pragmatic aspects.
In 2015, Julian Lindley-French described strategic maskirovka as ""a new level of ambition"" established by Moscow to unbalance the West both politically and militarily.
Soviet military deception at different operational levels of war as theorized by the American defence researcher Charles Smith In military intelligence, the Russian doctrine roughly corresponds to Western notions of denial and deception.
The International Dictionary of Intelligence from 1990 defined it as the Russian military intelligence term for deception.Robert Pringle's 2006 Historical Dictionary of Russian and Soviet Intelligence defined it as strategic deception.
Scott Gerwehr's The Art of Darkness summarized it as deception and operational security.
In his comprehensive study, Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War, Glantz summarized the Russian doctrine as involving both active and passive deception and surprise.
And since they thought of war as just an extension of politics by other means, deception could and should be used and constantly considered in politics before a war began, if it was to work effectively.The American defence researcher Charles Smith identified different dimensions of Russian military deception.
He divided it into multiple types – optical, thermal, radar, radio, sound/silence; multiple environments – aquatic, space, atmosphere – each involving active or passive measures; and organizational aspects – mobility, level, and organization.
The levels are the conventional military ones, strategic, operational, and tactical, while organization refers to the military branch concerned.
Measures employed in Russian military deception Measure Russian name Western equivalent Techniques Example Concealment сокрытие Camouflage Awnings, smoke screens, nets, radio silence Building tanks in an automobile plant Imitation имитация Mimicry decoys, military dummies Dummy tanks with radar reflectors; decoy bridges created by a line of floating radar reflectors Simulation симуляция Simulation Decoys, etc.
Dummy artillery battery complete with noise and smoke Disinformation дезинформация Disinformation False letters; untrue information to journalists; inaccurate maps; false orders; orders with false dates Demonstrative manoeuvres демонстративные маневры Feints False trails Attacks away from the main thrust; pontoon bridges away from attack routes In practice Georgy Zhukov was a leading proponent of Soviet military deception.
The deceptions included apparent requests for material for bunkers, the broadcasting of the noise of pile-drivers and wide distribution of a pamphlet What the Soviet Soldier Must Know in Defence.
In his memoirs Zhukov described them as such, noting that they were worked out at army group or ""operational-tactical"" level.
First Rzhev–Sychyovka Offensive Operation The first offensive to have its own deception operation was in Zhukov's part of the attack on the Rzhev-Vyazma salient to the west of Moscow in July and August, 1942.
The offensive was conducted by Ivan Konev's Kalinin Front on the north, and Zhukov's Western Front with 31st Army and 20th Army on the south.
The radios communicated false traffic between the simulated armies and Front headquarters.The real tanks and other vehicles made tracks like those of troop columns.
When the Luftwaffe attacked, the deception units returned fire and lit bottles of fuel to simulate fires.
The deception had the immediate effect of increasing Luftwaffe air strikes against the railhead and false concentration area, while the two railheads actually in use were not attacked, and the Wehrmacht moved three Panzer divisions and one motorized infantry division of XL Panzer Corps to the Yukhnov area.
Meanwhile, the real troop concentration to the north was conducted at night and in thick forests.Zhukov's attack began on 4 August, and the 20th and 31st Armies advanced 40 kilometres in two days.
The Russians claimed that surprise had been achieved; this is confirmed by the fact that German intelligence failed to notice Zhukov's concentration of 20th and 31st Armies on Rzhev.
Other small offensives on the same front had poorly planned and executed deception measures, but these were largely unsuccessful.
The successful deception for the attack on Rzhev showed that military deception could be effective, but that only certain Red Army commanders applied it correctly.
Battle of Stalingrad Successful deception: Field Marshal Friedrich Paulus , with his chief of staff Arthur Schmidt surrender the encircled German 6th Army at the end of the Battle of Stalingrad.
Military deception based on secrecy was critical in hiding Soviet preparations for the decisive Operation Uranus encirclement in the Battle of Stalingrad.
In the historian Paul Adair's view, the successful November 1942 Soviet counter-attack at Stalingrad was the first instance of Stavka's newly discovered confidence in large-scale deception.
This was two months before the German 6th Army capitulated.Hitler's own self-deception played into this, as he was unwilling to believe that the Red Army had sufficient reserves of armour and men.
Further, the many ineffective Red Army attacks to the north of Stalingrad had unintentionally given the impression that it was unable to launch any substantial attack, let alone a rapid army-scale pincer movement.
Careful attention was paid to security, with greatly reduced radio traffic.
Troop movements were successfully concealed by moving the armies up only at night, and camouflaging them by day on the open, treeless steppes.Strategic deception included increasing military activity far away, near Moscow.
At the sites of the planned attack, elaborate disinformation was fed to the enemy.
Civilians within 25 kilometres of the front were evacuated, and trenches were dug around the villages for Luftwaffe reconnaissance to see.
Conversely, along the uninvolved Voronezh Front, bridging equipment and boats were prepared to suggest an offensive there.
The five real bridges that were built for the attack were masked by the construction of seventeen false bridges over the River Don.
The German intelligence view on 18 November 1942, showing 6 to 8 Soviet armies near Stalingrad.
The actual Soviet dispositions on 18 November 1942 , showing 10 Soviet armies.
Overall, Stavka succeeded in moving a million men, 1000 tanks, 14,000 guns and 1400 aircraft into position without alerting their enemy.Despite the correct appreciation by German air reconnaissance of a major build-up of forces on the River Don, the commander of the 6th Army, Friedrich Paulus took no action.
He was caught completely by surprise, failing either to prepare his armour as a mobile reserve with fuel and ammunition, or to move it on the day of the attack.
This was a deception for a defensive battle, as Hitler was planning to attack the Kursk salient in a pincer movement.
Soviet defences were quickly built up using deception techniques to conceal the flow of men and equipment.This was accompanied by a whole suite of deception measures including feint attacks, false troop and logistics concentrations, radio deception, false airfields and false rumours.
In mid-June 1943 German army high command had estimated 1500 Soviet tanks in the Kursk salient, against the true figure of over 5100, and underestimated Soviet troop strength by a million.
The German intelligence view of the Belgorod front, on the south of the Kursk salient, 2 August 1943 The actual Red Army dispositions on the Belgorod front, showing concentrated forces ahead of the 4th Panzer Army, 2 August 1943 The result was that the Germans attacked Russian forces far stronger than those they were expecting.
The commander of the Soviet 1st Tank Army, Mikhail Katukov, remarked that the enemy ""did not suspect that our well-camouflaged tanks were waiting for him.
Katukov's tanks were concealed in defensive emplacements prepared before the battle, with only their turrets above ground level.
We did not .. detect even one minefield or anti-tank area until .. the first tank was blown up by a mine or the first Russian anti-tank guns opened fire.
Operation Bagration, 1944 Operation Bagration spanned about 1000 kilometres from Estonia in the north to Romania in the south.
The encirclements of three components of the German Army Group Centre at Minsk, Vitebsk and near Bobruisk are shown by dashed red lines in the middle of the area.
The 1944 Operation Bagration in Belarus applied the strategic aims and objectives on a grand scale, to deceive the Germans about the scale and objectives of the offensive.
In particular, the Stavka needed to be certain that the Germans believed the main Soviet attack would be in the south.
The Soviet plan successfully kept the German reserves doing nothing south of the Pripyat marshes until the battle to the north in Belorussia had already been decided.
Stavka succeeded in concealing the size and position of very large movements of supplies, as well as of forces including seven armies, eleven aviation corps and over 200,000 troop replacements.
As for the strategic offensive itself, its location, strength and timing were effectively concealed.
The German high command and Adolf Hitler grossly underestimated the threat to Army Group Centre, confidently redeploying a third of its artillery, half its tank destroyers and 88% of its tanks to the Southern front where OKH expected the Soviet attack.
The Soviets succeeded in distorting OKH's intelligence picture, given that German intelligence had to rely mainly on radio intercept, aerial photography and agents left behind in the territory they had once held.
Stavka deceived OKH by playing to their three sources of information; Stavka systematically denied the Germans real intelligence on Red Army forces as they concentrated for the attack, and revealed other real and simulated forces in other places.
Hitler's own reckless optimism and determination to hold on to captured territory at all costs encouraged him to believe the picture suggested by the Russians.
Meanwhile, his advisors believed the Soviet Union was running out of men and materiel, with much less industrial production than it in fact had.
Thus they underestimated the forces ranged against them, a belief encouraged by continued deception operations.
Pirnie points out that it did not have to succeed in every aspect to be successful.
In Belarus, the German armies involved had a good idea of the locations and approximate timing of Operation Bagration, but the higher levels, Army Group Centre and OKH failed to appreciate how strong the attacks would be, or the intention to encircle the Army Group.
The soldiers involved in Anadyr were provided with winter clothing and informed they would be going to the east of the Soviet Union.
On board ship, intelligence officers allowed the 40,000 soldiers involved on deck only during the hours of darkness.
The force, including missiles, reached Cuba before United States intelligence became aware of it.Anadyr was planned from the start with elaborate denial and deception, ranging from the soldiers' ski boots and fleece-lined parkas to the name of the operation, a river and town in the chilly far east.
Hansen's analysis ends with a recognition of the Soviet advantage in deception in 1962.
In Hansen's view, the fact that the Killian Report did not even mention adversarial denial and deception was an indication that American intelligence had not begun to study foreign D&D; it did not do so for another 20 years.
Hansen considered it likely that with a properly-prepared ""deception-aware analytic corps"", America could have seen through Khrushchev's plan long before Maj.
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia The Soviet Union made substantial use of deception while preparing for their military intervention of Czechoslovakia in 1968.
When the Kremlin had failed to reverse the Czechoslovak leader Alexander Dubček's liberal reforms with threats, it decided to use force, masked by deception.
The measures taken included transferring fuel and ammunition out of Czechoslovakia on a supposed logistics exercise; and confining most of their soldiers to barracks across the northern Warsaw Pact area.
The men cleared customs and travelled to the Soviet Embassy in the centre of Prague.
There they picked up weapons and returned to the airport, taking over the main buildings.
They at once allowed further aircraft to land uniformed Spetsnaz and airborne troops, who took over key buildings across Prague before dawn.
Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and War in Donbas The 2014 annexation of Crimea was described in the West as maskirovka.
The area was swiftly occupied by so-called little green men, armed men in military trucks who came at night, with no insignia, so that even pro-Russian activists did not understand what was happening.
They were later revealed as Russian special forces, but at the time Vladimir Putin denied this.Time magazine reported in April 2014 that the troops in eastern Ukraine described themselves as Cossacks, whereas analysts in Ukraine and the West considered at least some of them to be Russian special forces.
The subsequent war in the Donbass region of Ukraine has also been described as a Russian maskirovka campaign.
As with Crimea, the conflict began when armed 'rebel' forces without military insignia began seizing government infrastructure.
Unlike the action in Crimea, there were no Russian military bases to deploy soldiers from.
Support for Russia amongst the local population was not as high, and Donbass was larger and less isolated than the peninsula.
Russia sent ""humanitarian"" convoys to Donbass; the first, of military trucks painted white, attracted much media attention, and was described as ""a wonderful example of maskirovka"" by a United States Air Force General.
Regular Russian troops were captured by Ukraine numerous times, making denial of their involvement increasingly implausible.
Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on Information Warfare and Security.
Moro M90 Six-Color Desert Pattern United States ""M81"" Woodland Australian Disruptive Pattern TAZ 83 M84 wz.
Puma Camouflage Daguet Desert Night Camouflage Tropentarn Desert Camouflage Pattern Camouflage Europe Centrale Soldier 2000 wz.
