Although officials 25 years ago denied there was any such arrangement, it has long been known that such a secret deal was struck as part of the solution to the crisis.
The four hours of conversations at key White House meetings on Oct. 27, 1962, released yesterday by the John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library, bring vividly to light how strongly Kennedy pushed the idea of the trade.
When his top aides argued about the difficulty in getting approval of Turkey and other NATO allies for removal of the American-made Jupiter missiles, Kennedy replied that he faced a situation where “because we wouldn't take the missiles out of Turkey, then maybe we’ll have to invade or make a massive strike on Cuba, which may lose Berlin.
In a subsequent evening meeting in the Oval Office, which was not recorded, Kennedy, at Secretary of State Dean Rusk's suggestion, structured the secret proposal to remove the missiles from Turkey after the Soviets took theirs out of Cuba, but agreed not to link the two actions publicly.
The released transcript also shows how Kennedy's advisers had to talk the president out of responding positively to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's first public proposal — made that morning — that Soviet nuclear missiles be removed from Cuba only if Washington did the same with its equivalent arms in Turkey.
Paul H Nitze, who participated then as assistant secretary of defense and currently is President Reagan's special adviser on arms control, told Kennedy in 1962 that he should publicly only discuss an earlier Khrushchev proposal that called for removal of the Soviet weapons in return for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy's national security adviser, agreed with Nitze that the president could deal with the purely Cuban solution that had been the subject of a Khrushchev note the night before.
Throughout the subsequent discussions that day, while most aides pushed for a delay before agreeing to discuss the Jupiter missiles with the Soviets, Kennedy kept returning to the subject.
McCone also said part of the message should be that “I’d trade these Turkish things [the United States missiles] out right now.
Ironically, after the crisis, Adlai E Stevenson, then United States ambassador to the United Nations, was identified in a controversial magazine article based on interviews with senior Kennedy administration officials as a “superdove” because he wanted to trade removal of United States missiles in Turkey for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Rusk, who drafted the exchange proposal that was carried out, was the man who at the time described the Soviets as blinking in what he termed an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation.
Rusk revealed earlier this year that in fact Kennedy had secretly ordered him to propose through an intermediary to U Thant, then set' retary-general of the United Nations, that if Thant publicly proTub Washington Post posed a removal of the missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba, the United States would accept the offer.
But that plan was not implemented because Khrushchev agreed to withdraw his missiles from Cuba in return for a secret United States assurance to dismantle the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The transcript also shows that the participants talked of employing only conventional forces and never discussed in these sessions the use of nuclear weapons by either the Soviet Union or the United States.
A new book on the crisis by Raymond L Gartoff, a State Department official at the time and now a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, will report that although key officials at the time believed nuclear warheads were present in Cuba, new information indicates that the Soviet ship carrying warheads was headed toward the island but never even approached the United States naval blockade.
The transcript also shows that the participants did not have completely accurate information on the military situation, despite the presence of McNamara and Gen.
The secret tape recorder was , turned on and off by someone at the meetings, and thus some conversations were not recorded, according to an official who was present and has reviewed the tape.
