The speech was carefully crafted, copies were shown to only a few trusted advisors for comment, and Kennedy's ace speechwriter Ted Sorensen worked on it day and night to meet the president's schedule.
JFK's Quest for Peace"" which just came out, the economist Jeffrey Sachs considers this to be Kennedy's most important speech, and I tend to agree.JFK's dedication to peacemaking shines through in his words.
The piece contains one of the most memorable paragraphs that I have seen in any presidential speech.
In words that are now famous, Kennedy appealed to our basic connection on this planet as the most powerful argument for worldwide peace:""So let us not be blind to our differences, but let us also direct attention to our common interests and the means by which those differences can be resolved.
For instance a little known submarine officer Vasili Arkhipov refused to launch his submarine's nuclear torpedo even as American planes were dropping dummy depth charges around the submarine.
His Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev understood this too, cautioning JFK to not tighten the ""knot of war"" which would eventually have to be catastrophically severed.
Kennedy's pessimistic prediction that in 1975 ten or twenty countries would have nuclear weapons has not come true.
In fact the PTBT was followed in 1968 by the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which for all its flaws has served as a deterrent to the formation of new nuclear states.
In addition there are several success stories of countries like South Africa, Sweden, Libya, Brazil and the former Soviet Republics giving up nuclear weapons after wisely realizing that they would be better off without them.Yet there are troubling signs that Kennedy's dream is still very much a dream.
Countries like Israel and India which did not sign the NPT have acquired nuclear arsenals.
North Korea is baring its nuclear teeth and Iran seems to be meandering even if not resolutely marching toward acquiring a bomb.
In addition loose nuclear material, non-state actors and unstable regimes like Pakistan pose an ever-present challenge that threatens to spiral out of control; the possibility of ""accident, or miscalculation, or madness"" is very much still with us.There are also little signs that the United States is going to unilaterally disassemble its nuclear arsenal in spite of having the most sophisticated and powerful conventional weapons in the world, ones which can hit almost any target anywhere with massive destruction.
The United States did unilaterally disarm its biological weapons arsenal in the 70s, but nuclear weapons still seem to inspire myths and illusions that cannot be easily dispelled.
Thousands of weapons are still deployment-ready, years after the Cold War has ended.
It goes without saying that this kind of spending is unconscionable, especially when it takes valuable resources away from pressing problems like healthcare and education.
Eisenhower who warned us about the military-industrial complex lamented exactly this glut of misguided priorities in his own ""Chance for Peace"" speech in 1953:""Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed.
It is two electric power plants, each serving a town of 60,000 population.
It is of course inconceivable to imagine a conservative politician saying this today, but more tragically it is disconcerting to find exactly the same problems that Eisenhower and Kennedy pointed out in the 50s and 60s looming over our future.As Sachs discusses in his new book, in a greater sense too Kennedy's vision is facing serious challenges.
Sachs believes that sustainable development has replaced nuclear weapons as the cardinal problem facing us today and until now the signs for sustainable development have not been very promising.
The usual policy toward such countries is akin to the policy of a doctor who instead of preventing a disease waits until it turns into a full-blown infection, and then delivers medication that almost kills the patient without getting rid of the cause.
Sadly for both parties in this country, drones are a much bigger priority than dams.
This has to change.We are still struggling with the goal laid out by John Kennedy in his Peace Speech, but Kennedy also realistically realized that reaching the goal would be a gradual and piecemeal process.
He made it even clearer in his inaugural speech:""There is no single, simple key to this peace; no grand or magic formula to be adopted by one or two powers.
Nor will it be finished in the first 1,000 days, nor in the life of this administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet.
The views expressed are those of the author and are not necessarily those of Scientific American.
ABOUT THE AUTHORAshutosh Jogalekar is a chemist interested in the history, philosophy and sociology of science.
He is fascinated by the logic of scientific discovery and by the interaction of science with public sentiments and policy.
He blogs at The Curious Wavefunction and can be reached at curiouswavefunction@gmail.com.
May 2022Joanna ThompsonEnergyRechargeable Molten Salt Battery Freezes Energy in Place for Long-Term StorageAnna BlausteinAdvertisement NewsletterGet smart.
Chemistry and diversityBy Ashutosh Jogalekar on June 20, 20131Support Science JournalismDiscover world-changing science.
Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.
Create your free account or Sign in to continue.Create AccountSee Subscription OptionsContinue reading with a Scientific American subscription.Subscribe NowYou may cancel at any time.Sign in.
