For the next six days the president and his advisers secretly deliberated about the American response.
The new threat not only upset the nuclear balance but also placed nuclear missiles capable of destroying most United States cities on the territory of a new enemy, Premier Fidel Castro.
As the Kennedy administration strove to keep this alarming news secret, it nevertheless shared it with the new acting secretary general of the United Nations, a quiet unassuming Burmese diplomat named U Thant.
Speciﬁcally, on Saturday, October 20, 1962, Admiral John McCain, military adviser at the United States Mission to the United Nations, informed Thant’s military adviser, Major General Indar Jit Rikhye, about the missiles.
General Rikhye went to the Pentagon for a secret brieﬁng and received an album of United States photos of the menacing missiles,4 which he showed to Thant.
Two days later, on Monday, October 22, Rikhye informed Thant that Kennedy would be making an important television broadcast that evening concerning the missiles.
Thant conferred with the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson,5 and a few hours later watched Kennedy make one of the most momentous presidential speeches of the century.
The president announced a “naval quarantine” of Cuba, pushing the world closer to nuclear war than ever before.
In the deepening crisis, the United Nations, and speciﬁcally Secretary General Thant, was to play a signiﬁcant role in de-escalating and then resolving the nuclear standoff 1.
U Thant was appointed acting secretary general of the United Nations on November 3, 1961, after the death of Dag Hammarskjöld.
He was appointed secretary general on November 30, 1962, shortly after the Cuban missile crisis, retroactive to the time he assumed ofﬁce in 1961.
Hence, his retroactive title, secretary general, is used throughout this article.
Indar Jit Rikhye, “Critical Elements in Determining the Suitability of Conﬂict Settlement Efforts by the United Nations Secretary General,” in Timing the De-escalation of International Conﬂicts, ed.
Rikhye, “Critical Elements in Determining the Suitability of Conﬂict Settlement Efforts by the United Nations Secretary General,” 74.
Thant sent appeals and messages, relayed proposals, offered reassurances, advanced the “noninvasion for missiles” formula that formed the basis of the ﬁnal agreement, shuttled to Cuba to mollify Castro, and helped secure a veriﬁcation arrangement.
During the crisis, the Kennedy administration came to rely heavily upon the UN secretary general.
In fact, the United Nations and its secretary general enjoyed enormous public prominence during the crisis and for a brief period afterwards.
Headlines in American and Russian newspapers hailed Thant for his part in de-escalating the crisis.
It was only after the crisis, as its history was being written, that the United Nations was edged out.
The view that Kennedy’s threat of force alone had compelled the Soviets to back down was vigorously advanced.
The popular belief became that, when the superpowers went eyeball to eyeball, “the other guy blinked,”7 as Secretary of State Dean Rusk had put it.
This famous quotation was used repeatedly by traditionalists to characterize the conﬂict as an unequivocal American victory.
Revisionists, on the other hand, have contended Kennedy needlessly risked war for domestic political gain.
The added poignancy and signiﬁcance of Thant’s action is that he corresponded directly with the heads of the superpowers and helped them pull back from the brink during the world’s most dramatic nuclear showdown.
New sources have allowed some factual adjustments to our understanding of the Cuban missile crisis, including Thant’s efforts.
Most of these have been based upon the release of the transcripts of the deliberations of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, known as ExComm,11 which was composed of Kennedy’s principal advisers during the crisis.
Soviet sources also became available, as did the testimonies of the actual participants in the crisis.
However, no studies to date have been devoted to the role Thant played.
This article describes Thant’s intervention and analyzes his contributions.
It highlights Thant’s efforts to de-escalate the crisis, help resolve it, and then implement the settlement.
It reveals how Kennedy utilized Thant’s assistance to affect the Soviet position and actively sought his involvement at critical junctures.
It compiles and summarizes, for the ﬁrst time, the signiﬁcant discussions about Thant in the American ExComm.
This study uses ExComm and Soviet materials, oral histories, other primary and secondary sources, and previously unknown documentation found by the authors in UN archives regarding highly secret directions given to Thant by the U.S., requesting him to take speciﬁc actions.
Thant took a humble attitude regarding his role, but the lack of credit was decried by his associates, including Sir Brian Urquhart and Major General Indar Jit Rikhye.
See Brian Urquhart, A Life in Peace and War , 193; and Rikhye, “Critical Elements in Determining the Suitability of Conﬂict Settlement Efforts by the United Nations Secretary General,” 80.
It’s quite obvious that what they think they can do is try to get Berlin.
To ensure the Soviets did not learn that the United States knew about the missiles, the president even kept an appointment with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko on October 17.
Gromyko asserted that the only assistance the Soviet Union was providing to Cuba was for agriculture, plus a small amount of “defensive” arms.
Kennedy reiterated his earlier statements that serious consequences would arise if the Soviet Union placed missiles or offensive weapons in Cuba, but Gromyko assured him this would never be done.
The “hawks” advocated an immediate air assault and invasion of Cuba while the “doves” called for negotiations and concessions.
Gradually, the compromise position of a “naval quarantine” became Kennedy’s preferred option.
It involved force but still allowed negotiation and a Soviet missile withdrawal without hostilities.
The word quarantine was used because a naval blockade was, in international legal terminology, an act of war that required a declaration of war.
During that week of secret deliberations, many of the Americans expected the United Nations to play a role in the crisis, though not necessarily its secretary general.
They conﬁned the United Nations to, ﬁrstly, a forum in which the United States would win the battle of world opinion and, secondly, an agency that would provide reliable observers to verify a possible Soviet missile withdrawal.
On numerous occasions during that ﬁrst week, the United Nations was discussed in ExComm.
As early as October 20, Kennedy stated that at the United Nations, the United States should identify the Soviet missile buildup in Cuba as “subterranean” in nature.
Two days later, on October 22, Secretary of State Dean Rusk said the United States should get UN teams to inspect all 13.
Kennedy thought the United States should initially frighten the UN representatives with the prospect of all kinds of actions and then, when a resolution was proposed for the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, Turkey, and Italy, the United States could consider supporting it.
He thought American action at the United Nations should be aimed at removing the missile threat while the objective in the OAS should be to persuade other Latin American countries to act with the United States.
When Ambassador Stevenson read from a list of problems he foresaw in the United Nations, Secretary Rusk reiterated his view that the United States aim should be a standstill of missile development in Cuba inspected by UN observers and then negotiation of other issues.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy stated the United States should take the offensive rather than defensive at the United Nations, especially since the Soviet leaders had lied about the strategic missile deployment in Cuba.
Because the ExComm envisaged some roles for the United Nations in the crisis, Kennedy gave Secretary General Thant advance warning about the Soviet missiles in Cuba two days before the president’s address to the nation and the world.
What the president and his advisers did not anticipate, however, was how signiﬁcant a role Thant would play.
Not even Adlai Stevenson, a friend of Thant, anticipated the extent of Thant’s intervention and mediation.
As the crisis evolved, the new secretary general made appeals to the parties, offered proposals, transmitted messages, visited Cuba, and performed other intermediary functions that served a vital role in resolving the conﬂict. u thant’s g am bl e At a critical moment—when the nuclear powers seemed set on a collision course—the Secretary General’s intervention led to the diversion of the Soviet ships headed for Cuba and interception by our Navy.
This was the indispensable ﬁrst step in the peaceful resolution of the Cuban crisis. —Adlai Stevenson, Statement to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, March 13, 1963 18.
A confrontation between Soviet ships en route to Cuba and the American navy was imminent.
Many people feared an escalation to general war, perhaps by the Soviet seizure of West Berlin, and even a nuclear exchange.
It was in the midst of this widespread international terror that almost half the UN members, mostly the nonaligned countries, implored Secretary General U Thant to assume the role of an intermediary.
Adlai Stevenson later called this intervention an essential “ﬁrst step” in resolving the crisis.
Thant sent his ﬁrst message to the two leaders on October 24, which happened to be UN Day, in the afternoon, only a few hours after the quarantine had taken effect.
It contained an urgent appeal for a moratorium of two to three weeks involving both the voluntary suspension of all arms shipments to Cuba and the quarantine measures, especially the searching of ships bound for Cuba.
Thant read his message at the Security Council meeting on the night of October 24 and, importantly, suggested that if the United States pledged not to invade, the offensive armaments might be withdrawn.
This was a critical proposal, but it was ignored at the time by the participants.
After the meeting, the Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations, Valery Zorin, privately censured Thant for not 25.
Also see U Thant’s comments on his message in U Thant, View from the UN , 163.
At that televised Council meeting, Thant informed the Council of his identical messages to President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev.
In the Security Council, Thant suggested a Soviet missile withdrawal in exchange for a United States nonaggression guarantee. forcefully criticizing the United States blockade of a sovereign state.
Much to Zorin’s embarrassment, Khrushchev’s response to Thant’s message was overwhelmingly positive.
At about 3:30m. on October 25, the secretary general received the Soviet leader’s cable.
I have received your message and have carefully studied the proposal it contains.
I understand your concern over the situation which has arisen in the Caribbean, for the Soviet Government too regards it as highly dangerous and as requiring immediate intervention by the 30.
I wish to inform you that I agree to your proposal, which is in the interest of peace.
Khrushchev’s positive response to Thant’s message helped him save face as he ordered most Soviet ships heading to Cuba to turn back.
These ships would soon enter the interception zone, which could lead to their capture or destruction, and to war.
As this drama was unfolding, American ofﬁcials also initially reacted negatively to Thant’s message.
The American feeling was publicly guarded and privately almost hostile.
At 2:30m. on October 24, Thant had told Adlai Stevenson that he was going to send identical messages to Khrushchev and Kennedy at 6m. calling for a voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba and the lifting of the quarantine.
Stevenson expressed disappointment that these communiqués would not include any mention of the missiles or their construction sites in Cuba and asked Thant to postpone sending the messages for twenty-four hours.
The secretary general refused but did agree to meet Stevenson again at 5m., which he did, this time with Charles Yost, a member of the United States mission to the United Nations.
At that meeting Thant advised them that the telegrams had already been sent.
Ambassador Stevenson responded by asking Thant to include in the speech he was going to make to the Security Council that night a reference to the need to stop military construction in Cuba.
Thant agreed to do so, though he refused to say anything about the missiles already in place.
The president immediately told Rusk to get back to Stevenson on it,36 in other words to press Thant to delay his message.
Clearly the president and his advisers were apprehensive about Thant’s message for the same reasons Stevenson had been.
Similarly, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, in a telephone conversation with Kennedy at 7m. that evening, condemned Thant’s message.
Subsequent to his telephone conversation with the British prime minister on the evening of October 24, Kennedy received his second correspondence from Khrushchev since the beginning of the crisis.
In that cable, sent before Khrushchev had responded to Thant’s appeal, the premier accused Kennedy of issuing an ultimatum that the United States would itself never accept and of pushing mankind toward nuclear war.
We will then be forced on our part to take the measures . . . to protect our rights.
Though many ships had turned back, this was little consolation to the United States.
A Soviet tanker called the Bucharest was rapidly approaching the interception zone, and the president was under pressure to board it.
At about 10:30m. that night , Kennedy spoke by phone to Under Secretary of State George Ball regarding Khrushchev’s stated intention to defy the quarantine.
Regarding the ships that Khrushchev had already turned back, the president stated, “he is stopping the ones he doesn’t want us to have” .43 The president had little time to decide how to deal with the Soviet ships still heading toward Cuba.
To let them pass would indicate that the United States lacked the resolve to enforce the quarantine.
Turning to Thant’s message, Under Secretary Ball said that the president’s previous instructions to reply to it immediately had Ambassador Stevenson in 38.
Less than an hour after his ﬁrst conversation with Ball at 10:30m., Kennedy called Ball again with a new idea.
In fact, the president had just received Khrushchev’s extremely hostile communiqué threatening deﬁance of the quarantine.
But Kennedy was aware from U.S. intelligence that Khrushchev had ordered back many ships48 and undoubtedly now realized that a second message from Thant might help Khrushchev save face.
There was extensive discussion in ExComm that day, October 24, about the many Soviet ships that had turned around.
Also, in a telephone conversation with Prime Minister Macmillan, President Kennedy said, “some of these ships, the ones we’re particularly interested in, have turned around.
Stevenson immediately called the secretary general, getting him out of bed.
In that discussion Thant agreed to issue a direct appeal to the Soviets in the morning.
The contents of that message—what the United States wanted—were handed to Thant by Stevenson on the morning of October 25 in the form of a single typed page.
It listed the points that Rusk wanted Stevenson to have Thant send to Khrushchev as Thant’s own proposal.
An expression of concern that Soviet ships might be under instructions to challenge the quarantine and consequently create a confrontation at sea between Soviet ships and Western Hemisphere ships which could lead to an escalation of violence.
An expression of concern that such a confrontation would destroy the possibility of the talks such as you have suggested as a prelude to a political settlement.
An expression of hope that Soviet ships will be held out of the interception area for a limited time in order to permit discussions of the modalities of an agreement.
An expression of your conﬁdence, on the basis of Soviet ships not proceeding to Cuba, that the United States will avoid a direct confrontation with 50.
Ironically, the United States asked Thant to send a second message before it had even responded to his ﬁrst one.
The president’s response to Thant’s ﬁrst message emphasized that the crisis was created by the secret introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba and that the answer lay in their removal.
The president then referred to Thant’s suggestions made in the Security Council to promote preliminary talks and satisfactory arrangements and assured the secretary general that Ambassador Stevenson was ready to discuss these arrangements with him and that the United States desired a peaceful solution of the matter.
It contained almost word for word what Stevenson had requested in writing earlier that day.
Thant asked Khrushchev to instruct Soviet vessels en route to Cuba to stay away from the interception area for a limited time.
Thant simultaneously asked Kennedy, in a separate though similar message, to instruct United States vessels to do everything possible to avoid direct confrontation with Soviet ships.
By asking Thant to convey his second appeal to the Soviets as his own proposal, Kennedy clearly understood the importance of giving his opponent an honorable way out.
To now accept a proposal directly from his adversary to withdraw all his remaining ships would have been viewed as a complete retreat.
But to accept a proposal from the UN secretary general to “temporarily” hold back his ships as an act of 55.
President Kennedy’s reply to U Thant is reprinted in Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 185.
Assistant Secretary of State Harlan Cleveland later claimed that the United States not only provided wording for Thant’s second message to Khrushchev, but also the message to Kennedy.
When Kennedy suggested this tactic to Ball, he was transcending very strongly felt American and British apprehensions about Thant’s ﬁrst message.
Kennedy, during the most desperate moments of the crisis when others were girding for confrontation, realized he could use a mediator to get his opponent to gracefully disengage without appearing to surrender or display weakness.
As in other mediated conﬂicts, compromises proposed by the mediator often originate with one of the protagonists, but when presented as the mediator’s idea they appear more palatable.
By his actions on the night of October 24, Kennedy facilitated the transformation of the conﬂict from a bilateral to a mediated one.
The Americans could not anticipate that Khrushchev would accept both Thant’s messages, and ExComm deliberated on October 25 about possible responses to the Cuba-bound ships and their cargo.
One of the things that tempered Kennedy at this juncture was his knowledge that Thant was working for conﬂict resolution.
One is that one of these ships, the selected ships which Khrushchev continues to have come towards Cuba.
On the other hand we have U Thant, and we don’t want to sink a ship . . . right in the middle of when U Thant is supposedly arranging for the Russians to stay out.
I think tomorrow night we will know a lot better about this matter of the UN’s actions and Khrushchev’s attitude about continuing his shipping.
He was determined to avoid action at sea until he knew whether Thant’s second message would convince Khrushchev to hold back his ships.
On the morning of October 26, Thant received Khrushchev’s acceptance of his second proposal.
The stand-still at sea permitted a period of communication between the parties that ﬁnally focused on the issues of Cuban security and missiles.
Tension over the situation at sea did not dissipate totally, but the leaders’ attention was no longer ﬁxed on a naval confrontation.
Negotiations on the core issues soon began and would lead to resolution of the crisis a mere two days later.
Throughout the conﬂict both the United States and the Soviet Union weighed their actions with careful consideration of their impact on international opinion.
The proceedings were televised live and watched by many worldwide, including Kennedy in the White House.
Thant also inﬂuenced the superpower game in the Security Council at the climactic moment.
The Security Council meeting of October 25 was one of the most famous UN meetings ever held.
Before it began at 4m., President Kennedy spoke on the phone with Ambassador Stevenson outside the Security Council chambers 67.
Thant is seated third from the left at the horseshoe table with hand to chin. . to insist that his speech be of moderate tone.
He emphatically demanded that Soviet Ambassador Zorin declare to the world if the Soviet Union had missiles in Cuba or not.
Consequently, he to some degree has assumed the role of a mediator and we consider that he will be able to cope with his responsible mission, provided, of course, that each party drawn into this controversy displays good will. —Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 27, 1962 From October 26 to 28, negotiations intensiﬁed.
In Moscow, October 26 was the day that Khrushchev dictated his long letter to Kennedy outlining a peaceful settlement.
In Washington, the October 26 ExComm morning meeting focused on ideas of how to proceed now that the situation at sea seemed stable.
The United States precondition to these negotiations was a freeze on the construction at the missile sites in Cuba so that they remained inoperable.
The Americans were not aware that some of the nuclear weapons were already operable.
To head the United States delegation , Kennedy appointed John McCloy, a former assistant secretary of war in World War II and a former World Bank president.
ExComm was exhausted after eleven grueling days of crisis, and though an agreement was suddenly reached on October 28, it could not be predicted even 75.
U Thant sent a cable to Castro on October 26 stating he had received encouraging responses to his appeal to the United States and Soviet Union for negotiations, and urging that construction of the missile installations in Cuba be suspended during these negotiations.
Castro replied with a cable the next day inviting U Thant to visit Cuba.
John J McCloy and United States Ambassador Adlai E Stevenson; U Thant; Soviet deputy Foreign Minister Vasily Kuznetsov , and Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin (Photo date: November 20, 1962; UN Photo/MH). hours beforehand.
Indeed the ExComm discussions for October 26 and 27 indicate a dearth of faith that the Soviets would halt construction on their Cuban missile sites.
All United States calls that they do so, even temporarily, had been futile.
For many ExComm participants, the only hope for a cessation of missile activity lay in negotiations involving Thant’s good ofﬁces.
Numerous excerpts from the ExComm discussions at this time clearly indicate how much Thant’s efforts were providing hope to the United States side.
When discussion on the morning of October 26 turned to the question of whether the United States should prohibit POL from entering Cuba, thus tightening the quarantine and escalating the crisis, Secretary Rusk wanted to wait in order to give Thant more time.
Stevenson outlined the United States preconditions to such negotiations at the morning ExComm meeting of October 26.
Now, this is going to be very difﬁcult to achieve, because the other side is going to be very resistant to UN inspectors coming into Cuba . . . this will involve a considerable effort on the part of the Secretary General, even if the Soviets and the Cubans accept it.
At an intelligence brieﬁng later that afternoon, it was concluded that the Medium Range Ballistic Missiles in Cuba were becoming fully operational and readied for imminent use.
Apparently, the ExComm did not know that some missiles were already operational.
Late in the afternoon of October 26, Ambassador Stevenson met with Thant in the secretary general’s thirty-eighth ﬂoor UN ofﬁce.
If the Soviets agreed to no further arms shipments to Cuba, no further work on the missile sites, and rendered the existing missile sites inoperable in forty-eight hours, then there could be two or three weeks for negotiations.
Stevenson and Thant discussed possible arrangements for veriﬁcation, but Thant did not think the Soviets or Cubans would accept the United States demands, 82.
Nevertheless, Thant emphasized that a deal could be reached by trading an American guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba for the dismantling and removal of all Cuba’s missile sites and offensive weapons.
If this is true, then we have not only a case of Kennedy using the mediator to present proposals to his opponent to render them more palatable, but also of Khrushchev making the same use of the mediator.
It would indicate that Khrushchev, wanting a way out of the crisis that would protect Cuba, utilized Thant to test the viability of a proposal.
Whatever the Soviet involvement, Thant saw that this idea offered a quick and simple solution to the crisis and tenaciously pressed it.
After advancing it to Stevenson, he even telephoned Secretary of State Rusk directly to press the idea with him.
This time he described it as trading a veriﬁed standstill that met all United States conditions only for American agreement not to attack Cuba during the two or three weeks of negotiation on a ﬁnal settlement.
This formula, ﬁrst made public by Thant two days earlier in his Security Council speech,92 and now being vigorously advanced by him as a potential solution, would soon become the backbone of the settlement.
Another development convinced Kennedy that Khrushchev might accept such an agreement.
On October 26, Alexander Fomin, a KGB operative whose real name was Alexandre Feklisov, met with John Scali, an ABC journalist with State Department contacts.
Scali reported to Rusk that the Soviets were interested in removing all offensive weapons in Cuba for an American pledge not to invade it,93 which was basically what Thant had proposed to both Stevenson and Rusk.
Rusk told the president, who at 6:30 pm that evening mentioned the possibility to British Prime Minister Macmillan.
This part of President Dorticos’s speech is quoted in Thant, View from the UN, 464.
Two days later, on October 28, Thant did in fact announce a trip to Cuba.
Khrushchev also restated that he accepted U Thant’s earlier proposals regarding the nonshipment of armaments to Cuba during a period of negotiations.
Khrushchev’s message, backed by Fomin’s remarks to Scali and Thant’s conﬁdence and persistence in presenting this suggestion not only to Stevenson but also by phone to Rusk, enabled the ExComm participants to retire that night with cautious optimism.
It began for ExComm with concern about a ship under Soviet charter, the Grozny, which was approaching the quarantine line.
President Kennedy decided to deal with the Grozny by asking Thant to convey a message to the Soviets telling them exactly where the quarantine line was being drawn.
Then came news that shattered the optimism created by Khrushchev’s proposal of the night before.
Reuters was now broadcasting that Moscow had announced it would withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba if the United States withdrew its rockets from Turkey.
This shocked ExComm, since Khrushchev’s proposal of the night before had made no 94.
The passage in which the prime minister suggests U Thant might go to Cuba and makes the comparison to Hammarskjöld is on page 481.
Certainly part of the dilemma concerning the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey was that the Turks would not acquiesce.
He said, “In the ﬁrst place, we last year tried to get the missiles out of there because they’re not militarily useful, number one.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff made a formal recommendation to the president that he order a massive air strike against Cuba on October 28 or 29 and prepare to invade.
Also, a U-2 was missing, and other American pilots reported being shot at over Cuba.8 These developments increased the confusion in ExComm.
President Kennedy’s immediate response was to prepare a message to Thant asking if he could get assurances from the Soviet Union that work on the missile sites had ceased.
He wanted this message, which was sent to Stevenson for transmission to Thant that day, to state that discussion about 101.
Llewellyn Thompson mused that Khrushchev had written the earlier cable of October 26 himself and sent it without clearance.
He stated, “We don’t want the Soviet Union or the United Nations to be able to say that the United States rejected it,”112 and “this trade has appeal.
It was decided to accept the proposal outlined in Khrushchev’s earlier cable of October 26, which called only for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba in exchange for a Soviet withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba, with no reference to Turkey.
This approach ignored Khrushchev’s most recent cable of October 27, which added the removal of the United States missiles in Turkey to the bargain.
Discussion on this matter was interrupted by the terrible news that an American U-2 had been shot down over Cuba and its pilot killed.
There was considerable support for knocking out a Soviet SAM site, but Kennedy did not give the order, and a decision was postponed to that evening.
Robert Kennedy and Sorensen left the meeting and wrote the ﬁnal version of the letter to Khrushchev, which the president approved.
The president’s brother, Robert, was to personally deliver the letter to Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin that evening.
What happened at that meeting between Robert Kennedy and Dobrynin remains a romanticized part of the crisis.
It is now known that Robert did offer, on behalf of the president, to remove the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey, though with the provision that this be kept an absolute secret from all parties.9 111.
Stevenson’s rejection of the missile trade now is of interest because at the beginning of the crisis he proposed it.
Ted Sorensen, who edited Robert Kennedy’s book Thirteen Days after his assassination, admitted years later in 1989 that he had twisted the truth.
He said Robert Kennedy’s “diary was very explicit that this was part of the deal; but at that time it was still a secret even on the American side, except for the six of us who had been present at that meeting.
Clearly news of much heightened United States military readiness was a factor in Khrushchev’s thinking.
On October 26, he learned that the Pentagon had moved United States forces from DEFCON 5, peacetime status, to DEFCON 2, just one away from war, and that United States hospitals had been ordered to prepare to receive casualties.
He sent instructions to accept Thant’s proposal to avoid a confrontation at the quarantine line and dictated his long letter to Kennedy proposing a peaceful solution based on a United States noninvasion pledge for a withdrawal of Soviet missiles.
Oddly, on the next day, October 27, Khrushchev came to believe that he could get more out of the United States and changed his proposal to include the Turkish missiles in the deal.
But then, on October 28, he again became deeply concerned about an American invasion.
An American U-2 had been shot down over Cuba, and Castro was reporting that an invasion was almost inevitable.
Dobrynin’s ominous description of his discussion with Robert Kennedy reinforced Khrushchev’s decision, as did the assurance that the United States missiles would be withdrawn from Turkey.7 It is evident that both Khrushchev and Kennedy were affected by their perceptions of their opponent’s resolve.
Yet the parties employed Thant as a mediator to convey proposals to their opponent as his own, to save face, and to provide support.
This ﬁnally proves that the U.S. side did explicitly agree to remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey as part of the deal, even if it was with the insistence that it be kept a secret from all parties and remain a personal undertaking by Kennedy to Khrushchev.
He was to give the message to Thant after a signal from Rusk, notably in the event of a Soviet rejection of a covert trade of missiles.
The message requested Thant to propose the missile trade at the United Nations.
This would have made it much easier for Kennedy to publicly accept trading the Turkish missiles, for it would have been seen as part of a UN proposed agreement backed by world opinion, which also would have made it more difﬁcult for Khrushchev to reject.
This indicates not only how far Kennedy was prepared to go to avoid war, but also how creatively he intended to use the mediator to propose a solution at the United Nations and achieve a peaceful outcome.
On October 28, Washington received the news of Khrushchev’s acceptance of the United States proposal.
They recommended an air strike the next day followed by an invasion unless there was “irrefutable evidence” that dismantling had begun.9 On the same day, October 28, Thant announced he would go to Havana to try to secure Castro’s consent in the establishment of a UN mission to verify the dismantling of the missile sites.
On October 26, he sent a cable urging Castro to suspend work on the missile facilities while negotiations were under way.
Castro replied on October 27, stating that Cuba was prepared to accept these compromises only if the United 128.
Castro invited Thant to visit Cuba for direct discussions, which Thant quickly accepted.1 The U.S.-Soviet understanding of October 28 angered Castro.
The UN inspection and veriﬁcation principles adopted by the superpowers now required implementation in Cuba.
Castro’s consent and cooperation were necessary but in his rage he now demanded ﬁve measures.
Thant’s ﬁrst meeting with Castro in Havana on October 30 was discouraging.
Thant made a strong plea for UN supervision of the dismantling of the missile sites, as agreed to by Khrushchev, stressing the United States pledge to lift the blockade and not take military action against Cuba.
Castro reiterated his vitriolic accusations against the United States and refused to accept any UN supervision, dismissing it as an unacceptable invasion of sovereignty.
Good news awaited Thant upon returning to the villa where he was staying.
The Soviet ambassador to Cuba brought the Soviet general in charge of the missile installations to explain the signiﬁcant dismantling efforts under way.
The Soviets invited Thant to visit a missile site, but Thant declined, on Rikhye’s advice, saying that the verbal reassurances were sufﬁcient.5 The next morning, Thant met Castro again, this time accompanied only by his interpreter.
Castro was still bitter and told the secretary general that he was going to broadcast his account of the crisis.
At Thant’s urging, Castro promised to delete from his speech the parts criticizing Khrushchev for agreeing to UN inspection of the missile sites.
Castro would not, however, agree to allow Thant to leave behind one or two UN aides for direct liaison between the Cuban government and the secretary general.
United States pilot who had been shot down on October 27.136 General Rikhye later passed the pilot’s remains to United States authorities.
Ambassador Valerian Zorin, Vasily Kuznetsov ; John McCloy ; Anastas Mikoyan ; U Thant; and Ambassador Adlai Stevenson.
Rikhye . behalf of the United States, led Cleveland to conclude, “how extremely useful to American foreign policy the UN could be if we were skillful about it.”138 postagre e m e n t n e g o t iat io n s Following Khrushchev’s acceptance of Kennedy’s proposal, the two principal issues left to be resolved were how to verify the agreed Soviet missile withdrawal and what to do about the Soviet IL-28 bomber aircraft still in Cuba.
The United States regarded them as “offensive” and wanted them removed, while the Soviets insisted they had been a gift to Cuba that Castro refused to return.
Also the October 28 informal agreement between the leaders still needed to be codiﬁed in a more ofﬁcial fashion.
In the two months that followed there were many meetings, some of them facilitated by Thant.
Though little is known about them, they initially took place in Secretariat conference rooms with Thant shuttling back and forth between the two negotiating teams or hosting the teams in his thirty-eighth ﬂoor conference room.
Moreover, to the Soviets, UN inspectors were certainly preferable to American ones, as is evident from the enormous pressure applied on Castro by Moscow to accept UN teams on its territory.
Thant originated the idea of using ICRC (International Committee of the Red Cross) personnel to inspect Soviet ships at sea.
Though it did not transpire, both superpowers initially agreed to it, which removed the immediate impasse regarding how to verify the missile pullout without UN inspectors.
Another possibility considered was using observers from Central American countries.
Thant’s efforts in this regard kept the negotiations alive by providing reassurance that veriﬁcation would take place.
Veriﬁcation was ﬁnally accomplished at sea by United States ships and planes, which came near Soviet vessels as the canvas covers over the missiles were removed to allow them to be counted.
These bilateral veriﬁcation measures were worked out at the UN-sponsored talks, where the Soviets also shared information about their ship departures.
After extensive negotiations, on November 19, Castro ﬁnally told Thant that he would agree to the removal of the IL-28 bombers.
The next day Kennedy announced Khrushchev’s decision to remove the IL-28 bombers and ordered the quarantine lifted.
In an effort to formalize the agreement between the leaders, the “UN negotiations” produced a Soviet-Cuban draft protocol and an American draft declaration on “the settlement of the Missile Crisis,” as well as several draft joint statements, but these were never ﬁnalized or signed, despite pressure from Khrushchev.
General Rikhye stated this in an interview with the authors on October 15, 2006.
Also, U Thant’s military attaché, General Rikhye, has conﬁrmed, in an interview on October 15, 2006, with the authors, that U Thant did originate this idea.
U Thant was unanimously elected to an extended term as secretary-general on November 30.
The story of the Cuban missile crisis, including the multifarious activities of the secretary general and ExComm reactions to his initiatives, shows that Thant had a signiﬁcant impact on both parties.
He inﬂuenced their thinking, negotiating positions, stance towards the use of force, and proclivity to accept a proposal, including the noninvasion deal that he pressed for both publicly and privately.
When Thant took his ﬁrst bold initiative in this crisis, it was at the bequest of the smaller, newer, and neutral members of the United Nations, organized in making their appeal to him by the representative of Cyprus, a small and troubled country.
Ironically, both the United States and the USSR initially resisted Thant’s ﬁrst appeal.
Nobody foresaw that it would help effect a Soviet retreat on the high seas.
In the aftermath of this crisis, many attributed Kennedy’s success to his resolve and strength.
We can see that of equal importance was his rare recognition of the need to provide his opponent with an honorable alternative and of the utility of a skilled intermediary in presenting one.
The explicit instructions handed to Thant by Stevenson on October 25 detailed exactly what the Americans wanted Thant to send to Khrushchev as his own proposal, or speciﬁcally how they wanted Thant to play a classic third-party role.
This act, initiated by Kennedy, transformed the crisis by making Thant its mediator.
An interesting lesson that emerges from this conﬂict is how a mediator’s offer to assist may be initially rejected by one or both of the parties but then renunciation of an invasion of Cuba.
The Cuban missile crisis clearly indicates that initial rejections of the mediator should not be construed as ﬁnal, for they can indeed be reversed when calmer minds prevail.
The enormous signiﬁcance of Thant’s messages echoes in Stevenson’s words that “the Secretary General’s intervention led to the diversion of the Soviet ships headed for Cuba and interception by our Navy.
Kennedy’s own words at ExComm indicate that he exercised restraint because he chose to wait for Khrushchev’s response to Thant’s second appeal rather than take military action.
This restraint continued afterwards when, on numerous occasions, Kennedy decided not to escalate the conﬂict because he retained hope in Thant’s efforts.
Frequent reference to Thant during the ExComm discussions, especially by Kennedy and Secretary Rusk, indicate the extent to which Thant’s efforts dissuaded the United States from escalating the conﬂict.
For example, the United States did not add POL to the quarantined items or use ﬂares for night surveillance because of hopes, especially voiced by Rusk, that Thant’s efforts might secure Soviet cooperation.
When the Grozny was approaching the demarcation line, Kennedy, rather than ordering the boarding of this ship, instead asked Thant to convey the exact location of the demarcation line to the Soviets.
When Kennedy received Khrushchev’s new demand for the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey, his immediate response was to ask Thant to get assurances from the Soviets that work on the missile sites in Cuba had ceased.
Thant single-mindedly advanced the noninvasion proposal that became the centerpiece of the ﬁnal settlement.
Possibly he did this at Khrushshev’s request, which would indicate that Khrushchev used Thant as a means to indirectly introduce an initiative, as did Kennedy.
In any case, the leaders both recognized that agreeing to a proposal from a mediator would be more acceptable than backing down to an opponent.
Whatever the Soviet role may have been in the Thant proposal, the secretary general certainly gave the noninvasion pledge salience in the negotiating process.
He did so by publicly proposing it early (in the October 24 Security Council meeting), then by expressing his conﬁdence to Stevenson that it would be acceptable to the Soviets as a trade for the Cuban missiles, and then by personally telephoning Secretary Rusk, an exceptional move, to press for the proposal.
Adlai Stevenson, Hearings before the Subcommittee on International Organization Affairs, Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 88th Congress, 1st Session, March 13, 1963, 7.
The signiﬁcance of all this lies in the fact that when Thant presented the “noninvasion for missiles” trade, the Americans were still pressing for prolonged negotiations of several weeks preceded by a freeze of Cuban missile activity.
The Americans simply could not foresee a much faster way out of the crisis than arduous negotiations with the missiles frozen in place.
The Thant formula saw the missile sites dismantled in mere days, and Thant was on hand in Cuba to get ﬁrst-hand reports of the progress.
As early as October 26, when pressure was mounting because the Americans believed the missile sites were approaching operational readiness, Rusk, Kennedy, and even the British prime minister were thinking of the possibility of Thant leading a mission to Cuba well before Castro invited him.
They had come to appreciate the mediator’s enormous utility, and their strategy involved him extensively.
Mediated conﬂicts are of many types and involve varying degrees of mediator activity.
But a mediator may also play a less formalized role that does not control all communications but that nevertheless effects signiﬁcant change in the negotiations.
He facilitated face-saving and de-escalation, transmitted messages, fostered conﬁdence, made proposals, and affected the negotiations profoundly.
When Pravda ﬁrst began to signal on October 26 the Soviet readiness to make a deal, it quoted the full text of Thant’s letter to Khrushchev on the front page along with Khrushchev’s reply.9 Certainly military power and a resolve to use it played a role in this conﬂict.
But so did the inﬂuence of a highly respected mediator who assisted the parties in pulling back from the brink.
The faith of the parties in U Thant is evident in their discussions, their requests to him, and his many successful initiatives.
To view the Cuban missile crisis simply as a victory of United States military might is a false and incomplete interpretation of the conﬂict.
This is not only because of the signiﬁcant effect that Thant had upon the protagonists, but also because Kennedy gave his opponent an honorable way out, and skillfully used a mediator to do so despite advice to the contrary.
His victory lay in exercising restraint, even to the point of refusing to give orders to ﬁre upon Soviet antiaircraft installations that had shot down an American plane and in making concessions based in part on the mediator’s suggestions.
One of the great ironies is that at the outset of this crisis, many ofﬁcials condemned Thant’s ﬁrst message and tried to prevent him from mediating the conﬂict.
The article is entitled “Reason Must Triumph,”Pravda, October 26, 1962, 1.
