His work has been published by the Washington Post, Toronto Star, Christian Science Monitor, The Nation, The Progressive, National Catholic Reporter, In These Times, and Covert Action Quarterly.
He was Washington bureau chief of the Guardian newsweekly from 1985 to 1992.
Jack Colhoun, “Aggressive United States Moves Against Cuba Loomed Large in Khrushchev’s Decision to Deploy Missiles to Cuba” In Moscow, Chairman Nikita Khrushchev received fragmentary intelligence reports on Operation Mongoose.
The KGB was also picking up intelligence about large-scale United States military exercises rehearsing an invasion of Cuba.
In Washington, the Navy Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic issued planning directives for United States operational plans for an invasion of Cuba in a February 14, 1962 telegram.
The Pentagon estimated that it would take ten days of heavy combat and 18,500 United States casualties to drive the Cuban revolution from power with an occupation of the island to follow.
In spring 1962, the United States conducted military exercises to test the readiness of its Cuba OPLANs with a series of military maneuvers in the Atlantic Ocean from North Carolina to the Caribbean Sea.
In April 1962, Chairman Nikita Khrushchev was in Bulgaria on a state visit.
He worried that the United States was preparing to invade Cuba, and was preoccupied with defending the Cuban revolution.
The idea of deploying Soviet missiles to Cuba came to Khrushchev as he strolled along the Black Sea in Varna, Bulgaria with Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky.
Malinovsky pointed to Turkey across the Black Sea, noting the United States Jupiter missile base there.
Intermediate-range Jupiter missiles could reach targets in the Ukraine and southern Russia within a matter of minutes.
Khrushchev asked why the Soviet Union did not have the right to deploy missiles to Cuba as the United States did in Turkey.
He was convinced that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba would deter a United States invasion of Cuba.
He pointed out that the installation of missiles in Cuba would also augment the Soviet Union’s strategic nuclear force.
He elaborated, “According to our intelligence we are lagging almost fifteen years behind the Americans in warheads.
The Kremlin was acutely aware of the margin of United States superiority over the Soviet Union in strategic nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev discussed his plan to deploy Soviet missiles to Cuba with only a handful of Soviet leaders.
Khrushchev consulted Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko about his missile deployment plan.
Instead, he sought the counsel of Anastas Mikoyan, a veteran member of the Presidium and his closest associate.
This risk lay in the fact that in wanting to save Cuba, we could be drawn into a very terrible and unprecedented nuclear missile war.
On May 24, 1962, the Presidium met to consider Khrushchev’s missile deployment idea.
KGB officer Alexandr Alexiev was summoned back to Moscow from his post in Cuba.
When Khrushchev informed him that he would return to Cuba as the new Soviet ambassador, Alexiev was puzzled, because he was not a diplomat.
Alexiev said he thought Castro would reject the missiles because they would compromise the independence of the Cuban revolution.
The success of Khrushchev’s exercise in Soviet missile power was predicated on presenting President Kennedy with a fait accompli.
The Soviet “hedgehogs” would be installed in Cuba while Washington was preoccupied with the November 1962 congressional elections.
Khrushchev would tell Kennedy about the Soviet missile deployment after the elections, when the missiles would be fully operational.
Khrushchev that Kennedy would not launch United States military strikes against the missile sites, because he could not be sure of taking out all of the missiles.
He reasoned that Kennedy would grudgingly accept the missiles in Cuba as an alternative to nuclear war with the Soviet Union.
In June, Alexiev returned to Cuba with a delegation from the Soviet Union, including Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, head of the Strategic Rocket Forces, and Politburo member Sharaf Rashidov.
When the delegation met with Fidel Castro, the Soviets discussed the international situation and the possibility of a United States invasion of Cuba.
Marshal Biryuzov asked Castro what he thought would deter United States military intervention.
The Soviet delegation insisted that only Soviet missile power could prevent United States intervention.
The Soviets said the missiles would also enhance the power of the USSR and the Socialist bloc of nations.
But he wanted to consult with his closest colleagues before making a decision about the missiles.
The next day Alexiev met again with Castro, who was joined by Che Guevara, President Osvaldo Dorticos, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, and Blas Roca.
The idea that Soviet missiles in Cuba would make the Socialist bloc stronger appealed to the Cuban revolutionaries.
It also tempered their concern that the missiles would compromise the independence of the revolution.
