This blog will show several of these incidents through the eyes of John F Kennedy.
Interesting Pages Thirteen Days In October 5 notes April 8, 2014It is insane that two men, sitting on opposite sides of the world, should be able to decide to bring an end to civilization.
Some including President Kennedy interpreted Khrushchev’s challenge as a prelude to a planned Soviet takeover of West Berlin.
At the same time, an ExComm memorandum noted that the presence of these missiles on Cuba did not significantly upset the pre-existing balance of power.
In an interview conducted 25 years later, Robert McNamara stated that United States demands that the missiles be removed were politically, not militarily, motivated.
The crisis and diplomatic stalemate continued over the following weeks.
President Kennedy writes a letter to the widow of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr., offering condolences, and informing her that President Kennedy is awarding him the Distinguished Service Medal, posthumously.At a tense meeting of the Executive Committee, President Kennedy resists pressure for immediate military action against the SAM sites.
At several points in the discussion, Kennedy insists that removal of the American missiles in Turkey will have to be part of an overall negotiated settlement.
The Committee ultimately decides to ignore the Saturday letter from Moscow and respond favorably to the more conciliatory Friday message.
Air Force troop carrier squadrons are ordered to active duty in case an invasion is required.Later that night, Robert Kennedy meets secretly with Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
In an additional secret understanding, the United States agrees to eventually remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.Pictured, a working copy of JFK’s letter to Major Anderson’s wife, on the event of him being shot down over Cuba.
Click on the article to read in full; 2) Published in the Guardian on 3 September 1962.
Click on the article to read in full; 3) Published in the Guardian on 22 October 1962.
The rebels were easily put down by a well-armed Cuban army that had strong links with the Soviet Union.Knowing that the Soviets were eager to prop up fellow communist regimes, the United States remained watchful of the Kremlin’s relationship with Castro.
As the world held its breath, the Soviet ships edged ever closer to their destination only to receive instructions from Moscow to turn back, so averting a confrontation with the US.Days later, the deadly game of nuclear brinkmanship between the two nations ended, Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message that Soviet missiles would be taken back.
