The views expressed are entirely the author’s own and not that of the S Rajaratnam School of International Studies.
Known earlier as the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies when it was established in July 1996, RSIS’ mission is to be a leading research and graduate teaching institution in strategic and international affairs in the Asia Pacific.
GRADUATE EDUCATION IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS RSIS offers a challenging graduate education in international affairs, taught by an international faculty of leading thinkers and practitioners.
The Master of Science degree programmes in Strategic Studies, International Relations and International Political Economy are distinguished by their focus on the Asia Pacific, the professional practice of international affairs, and the cultivation of academic depth.
Thus far, students from more than 50 countries have successfully completed one of these programmes.
A small but select Ph.D. programme caters to advanced students who are supervised by faculty members with matching interests.
The focus of research is on issues relating to the security and stability of the Asia Pacific region and their implications for Singapore and other countries in the region.
The school has four professorships that bring distinguished scholars and practitioners to teach and to conduct research at the school.
They are the S Rajaratnam Professorship in Strategic Studies, the Ngee Ann Kongsi Professorship in International Relations, the NTUC Professorship in International Economic Relations and the Bakrie Professorship in Southeast Asia Policy.
INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION Collaboration with other professional schools of international affairs to form a global network of excellence is a RSIS priority.
The paper argues that in an increasingly complex and interdependent world driven by forces of globalization strategic intelligence may not be able to provide policy makers the foresight of crisis and its possible outcomes.
Instead, strategic intelligence can perhaps help the policy maker to make sense of an increasingly chaotic, uncertain and unpredictable situation and grasp the complexity of a spectrum of possible outcomes.
He joined the School after serving at its forerunner, the old Department of Strategic Studies at the SAFTI Military Institute.
He was seconded for several years to the Oral History Department and concurrently, the old National Museum, which he lead through a major reorganization.
He has published on subjects from the archaeology of 14th century Singapore to policy analysis for regional security crisis management. ii ROLE OF INTELLIGENCE IN INTERNATIONAL CRISIS MANAGEMENT “There cannot be a crisis next week.
Henry Kissinger1 The Cuban missile crisis has, and continues to be the locus case of successful crisis management2 and of the role of United States intelligence in shaping the crisis.
The evaluations of United States intelligence performance in the crisis have usually focused on the failure to estimate the Soviet intent to deploy strategic missiles on Cuba.
Declassified records now enable us to assess the support United States intelligence provided to their policy makers during the crisis by monitoring the levels of Soviet buildup on Cuba and globally while also attempting to estimate Soviet reactions to possible United States options against their missiles deployed on Cuba.
Declassified records also enable us to follow United States intelligence monitoring of the Soviet removal of their missiles from Cuba.
In contrast, the opening up of the Soviet archives shows that Soviet intelligence were cut out of the Soviet decision making leading to the deployment of missiles on Cuba and during the crisis had no information on United States options and response to this deployment of missiles on Cuba.
The Cuban missile crisis confirms our conventional thinking of an international crisis as an unexpected and surprising turn of events that threatens the survival of the nation-state.
Editor M Leventhal invited a number of leading historians to either write an aphorism about history or to select a quote about history or its writing, and to provide a commentary on their choice of quotations.
Longman/Addison-Wesley, 1999, 2nd edn) remains the benchmark study, with this second edition reiterating the Rational Actor Model of decision making argued for in the first edition of the text published some twenty-five years earlier.
Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 indicates that the CIA did consider this prospect, but ruled it out.
Strategic intelligence is, in our current understanding of international crises, expected to provide the policy maker the information which anticipates what the adversary is planning and so enable the policy maker to take appropriate pre-emptive action to avoid war.
Crisis management is about maintaining control over events to avoid war, 6 and intelligence is expected to provide policy makers the foreknowledge of events taking an unexpected turn leading to a crisis.
For Kennedy the crisis over Soviet deployment of missiles arose on 14 October when U-2 aerial photographs confirmed the construction of missiles sites on Cuba and undermined the Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62.
Westview Press, 1991) and earlier, Phil Williams, Crisis management; Confrontation and diplomacy in the nuclear age make this point about crisis management being about maintaining control over events to avoid war. 2 to be Soviet national interests and clear United States warnings of its interests.
But for Khrushchev the outbreak of a crisis was over whether the United States will discover the deployment of Soviet missiles before they had completed it and so present the US with a fait accompli.
Apparently Khrushchev thought Kennedy would do nothing because the United States was already vulnerable to Soviet intercontinental missiles, and Soviet missiles in Cuba were therefore not a new or escalating threat.
Further, Khrushchev may have assessed that the Soviet Union could withstand any diplomatic pressure from the young United States President.
The first step of political crisis management is understanding what sense the adversaries are making of their rapidly changing environment, and based on that understanding of the adversary’s intentions and actions we then decide upon our response to the evolving crisis.
This understanding, especially the resolve of the other side in holding on to their intention, is a key to our formulation of a negotiation strategy for the settlement of the crisis.
The crux of successful crisis management is to be aware that the degree of coercion we are prepared to exert on the adversary, often in response to our own domestic and bureaucratic pressures, feeds back into the crisis and our response then becomes the basis of the next phase of the crisis when the adversary has to decide what to do next.
But more important was how those al-Qaeda visions fed into United States visions of their place and role in the world as was being defined by a group of neo-conservative policy-makers who saw al-Qaeda’s actions as an evil against which the United States must engage in a Manichean struggle.
Simons, eds., The limits of coercive diplomacy acknowledge that successful crisis management is about recognizing the limits and need to moderate coercive diplomacy.
The traditional expectations of intelligence in the management of a political crisis are firstly, to apprise the policy maker of the impending breakdown of normalcy and the possible outbreak of a crisis or worse, surprise attack.
Second, intelligence is expected to provide the policy maker during the crisis with a constant flow of estimates and assessments of the other side’s intentions and response to the changing environment.
Third, these estimates and assessments are expected to provide the policy maker with an advantage in negotiating a settlement of the crisis or prosecution of a war.
The track record of intelligence in fulfilling these expectations in a crisis has been dismal.
All the crises which escalated and erupted into war from before the Japanese invasion of Pearl Harbor that precipitate World War II in the Pacific, to the ongoing war in Iraq have been attributed to intelligence failures of one kind or another.
Ex-CIA analyst Michael Scheuer writing anonymously in the first edition of his Imperial Hubris; Why the West is losing the war on terror makes the same critique of the US, that its sense of imperial hubris will be its downfall in its war on al-Qaeda.
Unfortunately, lack of awareness of more instances of successful de-escalation of a crisis12 to which strategic intelligence may have contributed, has focused attention on the catastrophes of failure of crisis management.
The consequent post-mortems and studies have blamed intelligence for failure to provide their policy makers the foresight and understanding to avoid war in a crisis.
The first category of failures is the inability of intelligence to see through the fog of deception created by the adversary in the build-up to a crisis.
Central to penetrating the fog of deception is uncovering the adversary’s actions to cover and conceal his movements to launch a surprise attack.
The Soviets successfully covered and concealed much of their shipment of their missiles to Cuba from the CIA until14 October, when they were about to complete it.
Barton Whaley13 pioneered the study of stratagems employed by adversaries in a crisis to deceive and surprise their adversary for a strategic advantage.
Whaley’s 1969 study of the signals and warnings of the German invasion of Russia in 1941 are significant for how the Allied intelligence services drew very different interpretations from these warnings.
The lesson that intelligence services have drawn is that Deception and Denial of information by the adversary of their intentions and actions are a major obstacle they are up against in their efforts to provide better assessments and estimates to their policy makers.
It is 12 Michael Handel has distinguished military surprise as an integral part of military planning from diplomatic surprise Surprise in military planning is to gain a strategic advantage over the adversary who must be then deceived and deprived of knowledge of moves against him.
In contrast, diplomatic surprise is about moves and signals to the adversary of planned changes in foreign policy which may surprise the other.
The 1971 US-Chinese rapprochement is an instance of a major diplomatic surprise de-escalating US-China tensions.
The second category of explanations for intelligence failures are the cognitive biases driving intelligence analysis.
As CIA veteran Richards J Heuer, Jr16 has advised his staff, there are biases in the evaluation of evidence; biases in perception of cause and effect; biases in estimating probabilities and finally hindsight biases in evaluating the quality and value of intelligence products.
Studies by a generation of scholars from Roberta Wohlstetter in her 1962 classic study of Pearl Harbor,17 to Richard Betts, 18 Robert Jervis19and a generation of post-Yom Kippur Israeli scholars lead by Michael I Handel 20 and including Zvi Lanir 21 and more recently Ariel Levite 22 and Ephraim Kam23 have all lamented the inevitability of strategic surprise in a crisis which could lead to a surprise attack.
The third category of reasons for intelligence failures to forecast crisis and surprise attacks are attributed to the management and organization of the intelligence services.
This has been the finding of most Commissions of Inquiry from the 39 Volumes Congressional Hearings into Pearl Harbor to the Agranat Commission on failures in Israeli intelligence leading to Israel being surprised in 1973.
Handel’s insights into surprise and intelligence failure are examined and further developed in Richard K Betts and T Mahnkam, eds., Paradoxes of strategic intelligence.
I thank Zvi Lanir, who served in the Israeli Defence Force intelligence, for discussing his work with me in the late 1980’s.
The challenge in reforming the intelligence services is the delicate checking of overcentralisation and balance with decentralization and pluralism.
Finally, failure of intelligence to warn their policy makers of an impending crisis may be rooted in their relations to their policy maker.
The mainstream expectation of the intelligence analyst is that he is to provide an objective and accurate picture of ‘what is out there” to his policy maker.
He is not necessarily a part of the policy process to ensure that his estimates and assessments are not biased and politicized.
But separated from the policy process, the intelligence analyst, unaware of policy needs and tensions, risks producing estimates and assessments which are irrelevant to policy needs.
The challenge, as more than one intelligence analyst has recognized, is how to be close to the policy maker without being caught in the policy process, to produce politicized products which rationalize and justify policy goals rather than objectively advising on the possible responses these policy goals might evoke from the adversary.
It assumes that the policy maker is in some control of his environment and assured of being able to decide his future in an orderly, stable and predictable world.
The quote attributed to Kissinger at the start of this essay typifies this attitude towards our world.
Within this ordered world of policy making, an international crisis is precipitated by an actor seeking to challenge and change the established order to his favour.
The intelligence analyst is expected to provide the policy maker the warning for action to deter the actor from destabilizing the status quo.
This, from the perspective of Washington and its allies, is the issue of North Korea’s and Iran’s persistence in developing its nuclear capabilities.
The challenge for intelligence is how to build a more effective early warning system to anticipate and manage crisis29.
The challenge for policy makers is to recognize that the actor challenging the international order has crossed the Rubicon (or the safety valves of the industrial plant is about to blow) and a crisis is in progress, and contingency plans to contain the damage and limit the crisis must be launched.
Harvard Business School, 1999) which indicates how thinking on crisis management has evolved from 1994 to 1999 in eight classic articles.
Planning for the inevitable (Backinprint.com.Edition; Cincinnati, Ohio: Authors Guild, 2002) while Ian I Mitroff, & others, The essential guide to managing corporate crises provides a more analytical approach outlining various qualitative techniques for crisis management. 8 escalation of a crisis in large part depends upon how the policy maker makes sense of, and grasp the crises as it unfolds.
Neither can intelligence anticipate the nature and extent of “blowback” which will follow that naval confrontation or detention of a fishing vessel.
Today we continue to argue about the alternative explanations and narratives of what happened and the appropriateness of the responses to terminate these crises.
Such Incidents at Sea escalating into political crises are likely to continue as the South China Sea and the East China Sea become increasingly contested.
The unintended consequences of an Incident-at-Sea between competing Naval vessels or detention of fishing vessels are “wild cards” that are unpredictable and indicative of a complex and chaotic world.
The instinctive reaction of the skipper to being pursued by a Coast Guard vessel cannot be anticipated and may trigger a series of events which culminates in a diplomatic crisis which was totally unpredictable.
The policy maker today will not have the time which Kennedy and his advisers had in 1962 to reflect on their proposed responses to Khrushchev.
Information technology today has created a new matrix of real-time information flows enabling an unprecedented number of not only participants in a crises, but also observers to witness what is happening.
The crisis maybe compounded by dormant or new stakeholders in the policy process emerging to assert a claim to the crisis for their own agendas.
Non-governmental and other political movements or groups may try to push policy makers towards their special interest.
The recent incidents-at-sea in the South China Sea involved not only Naval vessels of the conflicting parties, but also their Coast Guards and other maritime agencies with rather different agendas for how to deal with the crisis.
Strategic intelligence will probably be unable to help the policy maker link cause and effect in such crises because they are impossible to determine in the turbulence of the crisis.
This linking of cause and effect maybe apparent only in hindsight, after the crisis and as such makes it difficult, if not impossible, for the policy maker to decide how to intervene in the unfolding course of events to alter the effect.
Donald Rumsfeld’s now infamous 2 February 2002 statement on the absence of evidence linking Saddam Hussein with the supply of weapons of mass destruction to terrorist groups, that “ there are known knowns; there are things we know we know.
We also know there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are some things we do not know.
REVISING THE ROLE OF INTELLIGENCE IN INTERNATIONAL CRISIS MANAGEMENT Dave Snowdon, consultant and researcher in the field of knowledge management explains that in contrast to the realm of known-knowns where the leader has the time to collect and categorise data to make sense of the situation and then respond accordingly, in the world of unknown-unknown the “leader’s immediate job is not to discover patterns but to stanch the bleeding.
Studies of how corporate chiefs react to crises shows that they act to bring events and structures into existence which they hope will contain, if not terminate the crisis.
This decision of whether to escalate or de-escalate the crisis or go for a stand-off is shaped by a range of cognitive biases attempting to instinctively make sense of the chaos of a crisis.
Our minds, as Daniel Kahneman has demonstrated, are wired to think fast and slow.
Fast thinking enables us to balance on a bicycle without falling, multiply 2x2 or orient to the source of a sudden sound and detect hostility in a voice.
It is this system of fast thinking that usually drives our reactions to the world around us, and in this case, respond to a crisis.
The slower, more deliberative and logical system of our mind is only activated when fast thinking confronts a problem it has no immediate response to, like multiplying 17x24.
The role of intelligence must be to support the slow thinking reflective system of the policy maker’s mind.
Arguably, intelligence support for the fast thinking system of the policy maker’s mind has been its nemesis when it provides the policy maker desired evidence, for example of the presence of WMD in Iraq.
Intelligence should then feed the slow thinking system of the policy-maker’s mind to break the instinctive fast thinking system’s move to action because that action will 37 David J Snowden & Mary E Boone, “A leader’s framework for decision making,” Harvard Business Review , pg.
Penguin/Allen Lane, 2011) sums up his work with his late colleague Amos Tversjy on decision-making and uncertainty, for which he received the Nobel Prize in economics in 2002. 12 feed into the crisis and may escalate it.
Rather, it is a dynamic decision problem requiring the policy maker to make sequential risky choices in a rapidly evolving and complex environment.
The policy maker has to make sense of the feedback and consequences of his choice and decide how to respond to the next round of the crisis.
Further, the policy maker can try to anticipate, but cannot control how a decision he makes now will impact on his options later in the unfolding crisis.
The sequential risky choices made by adversaries in a crisis create an uncertain and unpredictable environment not under their control.
The challenge for intelligence is to advise policy makers on the adversary’s capacity for risk, sensitize the policy maker to the possible consequences of his risky choices and open up his mindset to divergent outcomes of the crisis.
Rather there are multiple possible outcomes as competing parties in the crisis manoeuver and act out their scenarios to contain the crisis.
Dave Snowden has pointed out that in a complex and chaotic world there is not one future we are working towards.
Rather, there are multiple futures we could work towards which we need to probe, make sense of and then respond to.
The start point of policy is not necessarily the past leading into the known present and then work towards the knowable future.
Rather the more useful start point may be the multiple futures which a crisis could lead to and probe for whether there are patterns among them which can then be worked back to our present.
Understanding China’s position on its claims to the South China Sea will involve identifying the various Chinese agencies who have emerged or are emerging as interested parties claiming a stake in the issue and trying to make sense of their different claims and core interests in the South China Sea.
Making sense of the strategic ambivalence and ambiguity of the ten members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on their positions and claims of some to the South China Sea is even more complex.
See J Gleick, Chaos on the “butterfly effect” 41 See the International Crisis Group, Asia Report no.3, 23 April 2012, “Stirring up the South China Sea ” on trying to make sense of Chinese policies and positions on the South China Sea.
The issue maybe more complex than poor or lack of coordination between China’s different state agencies claiming an interest in the South China Sea, as this report suggests, but a more complex issue of each of these agencies having a different justification and narrative for their stake in the South China Sea. 13 operandi of simplifying and reducing the “number of dots” it has to connect to form a pattern to increasing the number of dots and the possible patterns they could form.
Traditional data processing, as Max Boisot and Bill McKelvey 42 have argued is hierarchic, in which the mountains of data is processed upwards through the layers of a pyramid of “experts” into a single agreed assessment.
In the intelligence world this is the Intelligence Estimate, SNIE 85-3-62 issued by the CIA assessing it to be unlikely the Soviets would deploy missiles on Cuba.
But in the emergent complexity leading to a chaos world of crisis management, this pyramid has to be inverted in a search for multiple and divergent patterns.
Predictive warning may then be more a process of socializing the policy maker into understanding and accepting that there are multiple futures, the “dots” of which need to be connected into various patterns that could form probable futures or scenarios which the analyst and policy maker then needs to keep in view as they work out of their present into their preferred future.
Connecting these multiple futures will be dependent upon the intelligence analyst’s awareness and empathy for the different narratives that justifies the initiation and continuation or termination of a crisis.
For example, Singapore’s reaction to any crisis it has or may be involved in is the narrative of its survival against the odds to economic take-off to global city status and how any financial or political crisis challenges its aspirations to global city status.
For ASEAN, their narrative of the conflicting claims to the islands, reefs and waters of the South China Sea is about managing conflict in the region the “ASEAN Way” and the 40-year successful track record of what some ASEAN’s critics have described as equivocation.
The challenge for the intelligence analyst is to discern how these foundation narratives are being appropriated, adapted and asserted by different parties in an emerging crisis for different agendas.
Such a change amounts to a paradigm shift in intelligence practice from attempting to predict the outcome of a crisis to only supporting the policy maker respond to a crisis.
CONCLUSION This essay has argued for a paradigm shift in our understanding of international crises44 and the role of strategic intelligence in the termination of these crises on three grounds.
The first is the dismal record of intelligence in providing their policy makers with sufficient warning time of the onset of a crisis.
This essay has reviewed the variety of explanations and justifications for the failure of intelligence to warn of a crisis which escalates into a surprise attack.
Second, and more problematic, is that intelligence is expected to provide early warning of a crisis within a policy framework that assumes an orderly, controllable and predictable world populated by Rational Actors working to maximize their gains.
It is a view of human society and its nature embedded in an Enlightenment vision of the world of men and theorized in the work of at least two if not three generations of 20th century social and behavioural scientists who believed that the understanding of human society can be modelled after the physical and natural sciences.
But this view of our physical and natural world as an orderly and predictable reality verifiable by scientific investigations and codified in theories was undermined by new experiments and theorizing about our physical world from the beginning of the 20th century.
In Thomas Khun’s felicitous phrase, it was a paradigm shift from the Newtonian view of the physical world to a more uncertain, complex and chaotic world of sub-atomic particles of quantum physics.
Behavioural economics challenges the rationality of homo economicus and the Rational Actor assumed in political science.
The conundrum for intelligence is how to convince themselves and their policy-makers that the rationality they assume they bring to managing a crisis may be misleading them into believing that they have more control over the course of events than is often the case in the uncertainty and unpredictability of a crisis.
Third is how post-Cold War Globalization is drawing us closer and making us more interdependent in a tightly networked and complex world.
Information technology is dragging us from our current www. world to a new www. world of more complex flows of information and knowledge that is changing our world and how we relate to each other, to governments and to markets.
Unforeseen events, this essay has argued, can reverberate through our tightly networked world with catastrophic consequences, escalating minor events or issues into a crisis.
An overload of fragmentary and contradictory information enabled by exponential development of information technology contributes to the confusion of the crisis, challenging the power and effectiveness of governments to be more transparent, responsive and accountable for its actions.
A new approach to intelligence support for policy makers caught in a crisis is needed.
Vietnam-China Relations Since The End of The Cold War Ang Cheng Guan 2.
Assessing the Buildup to the 1999-2000 General Elections Joseph Liow Chin Yong 6.
Reading Discontinuity in Late-Modern Diplomatic Practice Tan See Seng 9.
The Case of Regime Maintenance and Foreign Policy Terence Lee Chek Liang 11.
Framework for Autonomy in Southeast Asia’s Plural Societies Miriam Coronel Ferrer 14.
Asian Developing Countries and the Next Round of WTO Negotiations Barry Desker 19.
The Role of the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation Forum Ian Taylor 20.
The Effect Of Social Division On InterKorean and Cross-Strait Relations Chien-peng Chung 25.
The Domestics Politics – Domestic Capital Nexus Helen E S Nesadurai 32.
Islam and Society in Southeast Asia after September 11 Barry Desker 34.
Not Yet All Aboard…But Already All At Sea Over Container Security Initiative Irvin Lim 36.
A UK Perspective on Defence Equipment Acquisition David Kirkpatrick 42.
Structural Shifts, State-Of-Play And Prospects For The Doha Round Razeen Sally 44.
China and Southeast Asia In The Emerging Asian Order Amitav Acharya 45.
The War On Terror And The Future of Indonesian Democracy Tatik S Hafidz 47.
Sovereignty and The Politics of Identity in International Relations Adrian Kuah 49.
The Correlates of Nationalism in Beijing Public Opinion Alastair Iain Johnston 51.
Negotiating the US-China Relationship and Regional Security Evelyn Goh 52.
American Unilaterism, Foreign Economic Policy and the ‘Securitisation’ of Globalisation Richard Higgott 53.
Naval Force Protection-Projection, Coast Guarding, Customs Border Security & Multilateral Cooperation in Rolling Back the Global Waves of Terror from the Sea Irvin Lim 54.
An Ethical and Legal Critique of the Bush Doctrine and Anticipatory Use of Force In Defence of the State Malcolm Brailey 56.
Weighing in on Force Transformation & Speed Kills Post-Operation Iraqi Freedom Irvin Lim 59.
Buffering, Binding, Bonding and Beleaguering in the Real World Chong Ja Ian 61.
Outlook on the Indonesian Parliamentary Election 2004 Irman G Lanti 62.
UAVs/UCAVS – Missions, Challenges, and Strategic Implications for Small and Medium Powers Manjeet Singh Pardesi 67.
The Shifting Of Maritime Power And The Implications For Maritime Security In East Asia Joshua Ho 69.
The Regional Security Implications of Resource Development On The Lancang Jiang Evelyn Goh 70.
Threats, Opportunity, And Charting The Course Forward John Bradford 76.
Deducing India’s Grand Strategy of Regional Hegemony from Historical and Conceptual Perspectives Manjeet Singh Pardesi 77.
A Comparative Study of Attempts to Broker Peace with MNLF and GAM S P Harish 78.
Multilateralism, Sovereignty and Normative Change in World Politics Amitav Acharya 79.
The State and Religious Institutions in Muslim Societies Riaz Hassan 80.
Civil-Military Relationship and Reform in the Defence Industry Arthur S Ding 83.
Bilateral Trade Negotiations and Bargaining Strategies Deborah Elms 84.
Autobiography, Politics and Ideology in Sayyid Qutb’s Reading of the Qur’an Umej Bhatia 87.
Sowing The Seeds For Revisioning International Society Helen E S Nesadurai 96.
Securitization Of Illegal Migration of Bangladeshis To India Josy Joseph 101.
Environmental Management and Conflict in Southeast Asia – Land Reclamation and its Political Impact Kog Yue-Choong 102.
The case of marginalized stateless minorities in the ThaiBurma Borderlands Mika Toyota 103.
The LTTE’s Online Network and its Implications for Regional Security Shyam Tekwani 105.
Inchon and Stalin In The “Trigger Vs Justification” Debate Tan Kwoh Jack 106.
ASEAN Cooperation against the Illicit Trafficking and Abuse of Drugs Ralf Emmers 107.
TEMPORAL DOMINANCE Military Transformation and the Time Dimension of Strategy Edwin Seah 110.
UNCLOS and its Limitations as the Foundation for a Regional Maritime Security Regime Sam Bateman 112.
Freedom and Control Networks in Military Environments Paul T Mitchell 113.
Rewriting Indonesian History The Future in Indonesia’s Past Kwa Chong Guan 114.
Muslim Political Discourse in Late 19 th and Early 20th century India Iqbal Singh Sevea 116.
Some Thoughts on the Nature of Iran’s Ambitions in the Middle East Christoph Marcinkowski 125.
Chinese Military Modernization and the Rearming of Southeast Asia Richard A Bitzinger 127.
The De-escalation of the Spratly Dispute in Sino-Southeast Asian Relations Ralf Emmers 130.
War, Peace or Neutrality:An Overview of Islamic Polity’s Basis of Inter-State Relations Muhammad Haniff Hassan 131.
The AMM and the Transition from Conflict to Peace in Aceh, 2005–2006 Kirsten E Schulze 132.
Revolutionary War and Counterinsurgency in Southeast Asia Ong Wei Chong 137.
Contextualizing Political Islam for Minority Muslims Muhammad Haniff bin Hassan 139.
Modernity and Its Discontents at the Pondok Pesantren al-Mukmin of Ngruki, Surakarta Farish A Noor 140.
Implications of and for the Modern / Post-modern Navies of the Asia Pacific Geoffrey Till 141.
Islamic Militancy, Sharia, and Democratic Consolidation in Post-Suharto Indonesia Noorhaidi Hasan 144.
The Indian Ocean and The Maritime Balance of Power in Historical Perspective Emrys Chew 145.
United States Primacy, Eurasia’s New Strategic Landscape,and the Emerging Asian Order Alexander L Vuving 148.
The Asian Financial Crisis and ASEAN’s Concept of Security Yongwook RYU 149.
Implications for the United States and Singapore Richard A Bitzinger 151.
The Islamic Opposition in Malaysia:New Trajectories and Directions Mohamed Fauz Abdul Hamid 152.
The Modernization and Reform of Islamic Higher Education in Indonesia Farish A Noor 153.
Outlook for Malaysia’s 12th General Elections Mohamed Nawab Mohamed Osman, Shahirah Mahmood and Joseph Chinyong Liow 154.
Sovereignty In ASEAN and The Problem of Maritime Cooperation in the South China Sea JN Mak 157.
Military Organizational Behaviour and Civil-Military Relations in Indonesia Evan A Laksmana 162.
Emerging Sub-regional Integration between China and ASEAN Gu Xiaosong and Li Mingjiang 169.
Hizbut Tahrir Indonesia’s Mobilization Strategy and Its Impact in Indonesia Mohamed Nawab Mohamed Osman 172.
Integrated Islamic School and a New Trend in Formal Education Institution in Indonesia Noorhaidi Hasan 173.
The Spread of the Tablighi Jama’at Across Western, Central and Eastern Java and the role of the Indian Muslim Diaspora Farish A Noor 176.
Significance of Abu Dujana and Zarkasih’s Verdict Nurfarahislinda Binte Mohamed Ismail, V Arianti and Jennifer Yang Hui 177.
How ASEAN’s Meta-Regime Undermines Economic and Environmental Cooperation Vinod K Aggarwal and Jonathan T Chow 178.
The Capacities of Coast Guards to deal with Maritime Challenges in Southeast Asia Prabhakaran Paleri 179.
Livelihood Strategies Amongst Indigenous Peoples in the Central Cardamom Protected Forest, Cambodia Long Sarou 181.
Reintegration of the Cambodian illegal migrants from Vietnam and Thailand Neth Naro 182.
United States and Singaporean Approaches to Strategic Planning Justin Zorn 187.
Climate Change and Conflict in the Southern Philippines J Jackson Ewing 188.
The Arrival and Spread of the Tablighi Jama’at In West Papua , Indonesia Farish A Noor 192.
China’s Role in dealing with North Korea’s Nuclear Quandary Chung Chong Wook 193.
The Role of the Five Power Defence Arrangements in the Southeast Asian Security Architecture Ralf Emmers 196.
Agrarian Influence and the Creation of United States Securities Regulations Richard W Carney 197.
Military and intelligencegathering activities, Marine Scientific Research and hydrographic surveys in an EEZ Yang Fang 199.
Regional Institutions in East Asia and the Dynamic of Unstated Goals Deepak Nair 200.
The 1915 Indian Sepoy Mutiny in Singapore as a case study of the impact of profiling of religious and ethnic minorities.
Consequences for East Asian Regionalism Ralf Emmers and John Ravenhill 209.
The Function of Globalization Bhubhindar Singh and Philip Shetler-Jones 210.
India’s Emerging Land Warfare Doctrines and Capabilities Colonel Harinder Singh 211.
A Trigger for a View into the Insightful Complex of Conceptual and Historical Links Giora Eliraz 215.
The Function of Political Values and State Capacity Christopher Roberts 218.
Muslim intellectualism and the conservative turn in post-Suharto Indonesia Martin Van Bruinessen 223.
Institutional Preconditions for Long-Range Planning in CrossCountry Perspective Justin Zorn 224.
China’s Search for a Multilateral World and Its Implications for SinoUnited States Relations Li Mingjiang 226.
Major Strategic Gaps for the Next Stage of Reform Leonard C Sebastian and Iisgindarsah 228.
A Perception Survey of Opinion Leaders Pradumna Bickram Rana, Wai-Mun Chia & Yothin Jinjarak 229.
Comparative Protest Spaces in Asia and the Middle East Teresita Cruz-del Rosario and James M Dorsey 231.
A Cursory Survey of the Social Studies and History textbooks of Indonesia, from Primary to Secondary Level.
Theoretical Implications for Changes of Third-World Security Oriented Institution Kei Koga 235.
An Ethnic-Cultural Solidarity Movement in a Globalising Indonesia Farish A Noor 243.
