Blight and Lang provide a list of six points that they argue will help the reader get into the minds of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro.
These points are that Armageddon is possible, is possible even if leaders are rational, can become highly probable in a crisis, will likely occur inadvertently, and remains virtually inevitable; as a result, nuclear weapons should be abolished.
The book is centered on 43 letters and other communications among the three leaders that the authors use to describe events that occurred during those tense thirteen days in 1962.
The book is organized like a play with chapters denoting the cast of characters, a prelude, acts 1 through 4, and a postscript.
The chapters also provide comic strip illustrations presenting scenes of the key actors.
The act chapters consist of the actual letters of the leaders during the crisis with the authors providing context that elaborates on events.
One is tempted to recommend this elegantly written, intense book for all users.
Blight’s major argument—that fear played an instrumental role in the eventual outcome of that crisis—is a central thesis.
More than that, however, the book is an attempt to go inside the minds of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the other participants in that game of near-death.
Using the tools of his discipline Blight tracks the mind-sets of the decision-makers through the crisis, concentrating on the adaptive role that fear played in their decisions, especially during the fateful last 48 hous of the crisis.
In the course of his analysis Blight takes issue with both the rational and irrational actor schools of analysis, arguing that neither approach is particularly useful in explaining what happened during those fateful days in 1962, nor will these schools be particularly useful in dealing with future world crises.
The argument is provocative, the writing superb, and the lesson important.
At the time, global nuclear war seemed a possibility when the United States discovered the construction of Soviet missile bases in Cuba and publicly demanded that the USSR withdraw immediately.
Roberts highlights the events that led up to the crisis, details of the standoff, and the shortand long-term implications of standing at the brink of nuclear war.
Including newly found material from the Soviet archives, this volume offers perspectives from the US, the Soviet Union, Cuba, and these countries’ allies.
It features an introductory essay, more than 70 alphabetically arranged entries, a large bibliography, and a chronology.
An excellent set of primary source documents enhances the book, including JFK’s “Report to the American People on the Soviet Arms Buildup in Cuba,” exchanges between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, and letters between Khrushchev and Fidel Castro.
This is a concise, easy-to-read reference for high-school and public libraries and beginning undergraduates.
Khrushchev acted aggressively defensive, alarmed by United States moves against Castro’s Cuba and by growing United States nuclear strength.
Kennedy believed that he had to prove himself to his older, wily Soviet opponent.
Although each leader misjudged the other, the two were equally determined to avoid nuclear war.
Khrushchev chose not to threaten West Berlin, and Kennedy was prepared to sacrifice the United States missiles in Turkey.
Although the author draws on his own reporting, his account is based on the published work of others.
Frankel questions whether the world was on the “brink” of nuclear war in October 1962.
Scholars might challenge Frankel’s judgment that Kennedy and Khrushchev maintained command and control during the missile crisis.
Contents are organized into sections; the chapters of the first describe the standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union, define the Cold War, and place the event in historical context.
Other chapters describe the US’s adversarial relationship with Cuba and document the reaction by President Kennedy and senior staff following discovery of missiles in Cuba.
Chapter 4 provides a blow-by-blow account of the blockade by the US, with a gripping narrative about the crisis and the behind-the-scenes diplomacy to avoid war.
The next chapters address lessons learned and the eventual end—and legacy—of the Cold War.
Section two includes narrative biographies of leading figures involved, with sources.
A collection of key speeches, diplomatic cables, and personal letters appear in the third section.
Each section is introduced with a brief explanation of the document and how it relates to the crisis.
Front matter describes how to use the book and offers research topics for students to consider.
Back matter offers a glossary of people, places, and terms, a chronology of events, a list of further monographic, journal, and online readings and photo credits.
With the help of professional court reporters, May and Zelikow have prepared the first complete transcripts.
To establish the context, the editors have also penned an introduction and conclusion and included transcripts of unrecorded meetings, key letters and speeches, and the president’s conversations with Prime Minister Macmillan.
The transcripts demonstrate that Kennedy positioned himself between advisors, like Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson, who called for peaceful negotiations, and those, like the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who recommended a military assault on Cuba.
Throughout the crisis, Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara seemed relatively precise, clear, and focused.
Other presidential advisors rambled and drifted, especially on October 27, the height of the crisis.
The editors have celebrated Kennedy’s management of the crisis, downplaying decisions Kennedy took on Cuba and nuclear missiles that helped precipitate the confrontation.
Reviewed in CHOICE February 2000 Many questions remain to be answered about the behavior of the US’s closest ally during the most dangerous moment of the Cold War.
Scott has searched recently declassified British official records on all these questions, but he has uncovered few surprises.
Reviewed in CHOICE March 2004 This book certainly ranks among the most significant works yet written on one of the most precarious moments in all human history.
Top administration advisers debated how to respond to the placement of Soviet missiles 90 miles from United States shores.
President Kennedy himself is shown to be a consistently moderating figure, ever seeking such options to nuclear confrontation as a swap involving NATO missiles in Turkey.
Robert F Kennedy, contrary to claims made in his memoir Thirteen Days , was confrontational throughout the crisis.
Reviewed in CHOICE June 1996 White has crafted the materials of a Cold War doomsday confrontation into a historiographical tour d’horizon.
Focusing on the perspectives, motives, and maneuvers of John and Robert Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, Adlai Stevenson, Dean Acheson, and Kenneth Keating, White’s crystalline, structured, evocative narratives are this generation’s definitive account of the famous crisis over Russian nuclear rockets in Cuba.
White argues that an excitable American Cold War rhetoric and the wages of Cold War domestic politics prompted an anxious and harassed Khrushchev to perilous counteraction, to silence his own Maoist and militarist McCarthyites.
The Kennedys, determinedly anti-Castro and myopically antiliberal, ignored genuinely irenic Soviet and Cuban overtures of 1961-61, boosted the atomic arms race, and noisily plotted the overthrow of Castro’s bombastic Cuban communism.
Once these were discovered by United States photoreconnaissance, it took the Kennedys a week to think their way through the politically useful but diplomatically vacuous Cold War propaganda that had cluttered their minds until then.
It was an impressive achievement, sadly not replicated by their immediate successors in the White House.
Recommended to anyone who wishes to learn how the political world actually works.
J Mahoney, Spokane Community College Related Posts Ukraine8 reviews on the conflict between Russian and Ukraine.
