Russell and the Cuban missile crisis by Al Seckel THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS lasted only thirteen days, from 15 October to 28 October 1962.
For thirteen days the world was brought closer to the edge of a nuclear war than it had ever been before.
Then, within forty-eight hours of Russell's telegrams, the Tass news agency began broadcasting an important reply to Russell from Chairman Khrushchev, an event that brought Russell nearer to the centre of the scene, causing the press, TV and radio correspondents to rush to interview the ""nonagenarian intellectual in carpet slippers in his cottage in North Wales"", and find out why the head of a powerful state used a ninety-year-old philosopher in this power game.
The tein, 4 Kennedy, 5 and Larson, 6 either ignore Russell's involvement comCubans have every right to the government that they wish and if it is a pletely or merely mention him in passing.
Typical is Robert Kennedy's communist government it in no way justifies American intervention.
If the account in Thirteen Days; he just reprints Russell's telegram to Kennedy United States invades Cuba it may provoke a dangerous warlike action from and Kennedy's well-publicized rebuke.
If Russia supplies arms and troops to Cuba the danger of general misconception that Russell had no real importance in the affair unwise and warlike action by the Americans will be increased with the immiand that Khrushchev only reversed course because America flexed her nent risk of world war.
Russell himself thought his actions were significant enough to government of the United States not to invade Cuba and by the Soviet Union publish an account of them in his book Unarmed Victory.
Precipate action by either may provoke attempted here is an examination of the actual effect Russell's telegrams worldwide disaster. had on the peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis and a determination of Russell's proper role in the events.
This prescient statement was ignored by the press and by both the United The progress of events deserves a brief synopsis.
Statements continued to flow from Plas Cuba's Batista government in 1958 by Fidel Castro, and its supersession Penrhyn, but these too were ignored.
On 18 October Russell addressed a by a regime which leaned ideologically on communism and economically telegram to U Thant expressing his grave concern at the seriousness of on the Soviet Union, lead to threats of invasion by American-based the international situation; he also requested an opportunity to address exiles, supported in greater or lesser degree, overtly or covertly, bys. the General Assembly.
Russell believed that time for a reasonable solution was attack by Florida-based exiles on the Bay of Pigs, a disastrous failure running out.
A year later American spyplanes identified the, construction of nuclear missile bases on the In paralyzed terror the world looked on as, hour by hour, the distance between island, and evidence showed these were being established and serviced American and Russian ships grew less.
With little hope of success, I decided that I must telegraph to within close range of nuclear-tipped missiles.
Late on 22 October, KenKennedy and Khrushchev beseeching them to let the human race continue to nedy declared a blockade of Cuba, aware that Russian supply ships were exist.
I had had reason, already, to think that Khrushchev might not be approaching the island.
It was at this time that Russell stepped openly offended by my approach to him. onto the international stage.
Russell, however, had been aware of the tension building some weeks Following Kennedy's midnight announcement on October 23rd that earlier.
Soviet Union and asserted that the blockade was not going to be observed.
The Soviet Union would instruct its vessels bound for Cuba not I received a call from Averill Harriman.
Speaking with unusual urgency, he to obey the orders of American naval forces.
The world ... the indications that afternoon that the nearest Soviet ships were slowing appeared to be in its darkest hour.
Then, the hook ... we must give him an out ... if we can do this shrewdly we can suddenly some light began to appear.
Khrushchev publicly responded to downgrade the tough group in the Soviet Union which persuaded him to do all Russell's cable in a long letter published by Tass on 24 October.
I should like to assure you that the swapped for American bases in Turkey.
Russell implied in Unarmed Soviet government will not take any reckless decisions, will not permit itself to Victory that Khrushchev accepted his suggestion.
The question of war. and peace is so vital that we should consider a top-level It seems to me that an initiative of another kind from you could electrify the meeting in order to discuss all the problems which have arisen, to do everyworld and make these and future talks far more likely to lead to the result that thing to remove the danger of unleashing a thermonuclear war.
Could you make a unilateral gesture ... and then request the rocket nuclear weapons are not put into play it is still possible to avert war.
The abandonment of the Warsaw Pact, for example, When aggression is unleashed by the Americans such a meeting will already could be the basis for a request that the Americans make a similar gesture in become impossible and useless.
As Herbert DinnersThis cable caused more problems than it solved, for that morning, tein has pointed out, ""What is striking about the letter is what it failed to unknown to Russell, Alexsander Fomin, a counsellor at the Soviet say.
Gone was the commitment to defend Cuba, gone also was the Embassy, suggested that if the United States would remove its missiles in statement that Cuba had the right to whatever weapons she needed for Florida under United Nations inspection, Chairman Khrushchev would propose her self-defense.
Not even an indirect commitment to go to Cuba's never to introduce such offensive weapons into Cuba again.
Washington thought that Khrushchev's letter to and were no more burglars than are the American forces in Britain and Kennedy along with the Fomin proposal promised some hope for a Western Europe.
But in view of the repeated American threats of invasion of settlement.
But on the morning of the 27th prospects suddenly darCuba, the Americans were at least contemplating ""burglary."" kened.
The Soviet Union now said it would remove its bases not couch my telegram of October 23rd to President Kennedy more from Cuba and offer a non-aggression pledge to Turkey if thes. would gently.
Itsdirectness made it unlikely to cut much ice, I agree.""14 remove its missiles from Turkey, and offer a non-aggression pledge to On October 28th, after having had very little positive effect on KenCuba.
Before the 27th, Khrushchev had only mentioned the swapping of Florida bases for Cuban missile bases.
It seems to me, therefore, that you ought to dismantle Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy, echoing Russell's words, seems to show Soviet installations in Cuba under the guarantee of inspection by UNO, dethat Khrushchev's use of this proposal must have arisen from his corresmanding only, in return, that when UNO gives the necessary guarantee, the pondence with Russell.
Kennedy, however, found the idea totally unacAmerican blockade of Cuba should be lifted.
I think it should be made evident ceptable and the swap was promptly rejected. to world public opinion that this action is only taken in response to a kind of Meanwhile Russell received a well-publicized reply from President blackmail which is neither sane nor morally justifiable.
I have not made it public, and I shall not do so unless it meets with your approval.
We are currently discussing the matter in the a sacrifice which you may find excessive and intolerable.
I think your attention might well be directed to the burglars rather In Unarmed Victory Russell states what happened next.
Russell lets the reader draw the conclusion that the crisis ended only after his cable to It is true that I had not expressed concern for the introduction of ""secret Soviet Khrushchev on the 28th.
Victory, so aptly puts it, ""The overwhelming impression created is that upon hearing of them, for thes. has heretofore had no powerful enemies the end of the crisis followed Russell's cable as effect follows cause ...."" 15 upon its borders.
Russia already possessed the power to blot out thes. if she wished statesmen involved.
An approach from a philosopher, a man with no power, no axe to Nobody could accuse the Cubans of being burglars, since they have not left. their own island.
At the same time, of course, we humanity to the dangers of nuclear warfare.
Not only did Russell do so, but he was In 1957 Russell published an open letter to Khrushchev and openly critical of the United States on points to which Khrushchev Eisenhower asking them to forget past differences and to confer on wanted desperately to direct world attention.
Khrushchev immediately responded; Eisenhower bring world attention to these points, he could step out of the situation waited two months and then had his Secretary of State, John Foster gracefully, without losing face.
Khrushchev then published a rebuttal of Dulsuading U Thant to be publicly critical of the United States, because of les's arguments.
Russell closed the debate with another open letter Thant's official position.
Russell, however, in his letters of the 23 r d, chiding them fortheir inability to forget past differences and focus on the 26th, and especially the 28th (in which he wrote, ""I think it should be real problems facing humanity.
This debate, which occurred in the pages made evident to world opinion""), was giving Khrushchev that important of the New Statesman 18, did not materially further the cause of peace, but way out.
Khrushchev saw this potential in Russell's cables and addressed it does show that at an early date Khrushchev was open to an approach for his vital letter to Russell knowing the added attention it would receive. peace by Bertrand Russell.
This is the reason why Kennedy issued his We welcome all forces which stand on positions of peace.
Kennedy would never expressed gratitude to Mr Bertrand Russell, too, who manifests alarm and have responded to Russell had Russell not been achieving world-wide concern for the fate of the world, and I readily responded to the Appeal of the attention for his views after Khrushchev's public reply.
IY Thus Russell acted as an intermediary in the crisis, allowing Khrushchev an out he otherwise might not have had.
It would be difficult U Thant, in his View from the United Nations, also attributes to determine what would have happened had Russell not intervened.
There appears to be ample evidence that I am writing at some length on Bertrand Russell's activities regarding the crisis Russell's involvement in the Cuban missile crisis was more important because I felt at the time, and still feel, that Khrushchev's positive reply to my than Clark or other commentators have granted.
For future biographers of Russell and historians of the missile crisis to ignore his undoubted 16 Russell interviewed in BBC film, ""The Life and Times of Bertrand Russell"" (London, influence would be a serious mistake in the accurate evaluation ofevents.
