THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS SOURCE NOTES This chronology describes key events relating to the Cuban text indicate either editorial clarifications or sections excised missile crisis.
It begins in 1959 and describes the evolution by government declassification reviewers. ofrelations between the United States, the Soviet Union, and Each entry is followed by a c~tation for its sources.
Additional entries in the often with references to specific sections or pages.
Fidel Castro assumes power in his trip, Mikoyan negotiates economic and trade Cuba, the culmination of the six-year revolution that agreements that help Fidel Castro wean C4ba away toppled the government of General Fulgencio from economic dependence on the United States.
Turkey and the United States sign May 7, 1960:The Soviet Union and Cuba establish an agreem~nt for the deployment of fifteen nucleardiplomatic relations. tipped Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The United States suspends the Cuban launch site. sugar quota, effectively cutting off So percent of Cuban exports to the United States.
Soviet First Deputy Prime day, the Soviet Union agrees to buy sugar previously Minister Anastas Mikoyan visits Cuba and attends the destined for the United States market.
John F Kennedy is inaugurated as ments on the island. the thirty-fifth president of the United States.
The United States imposes an embefore the scheduled landing of a force of U.S.bargo on trade with Cuba. trained Cuban exiles.
The first large Soviet Blo~ arms airstrikes on Cuban airfields is canceled.
With United States direction, training, and weapons such as antiaircraft batteries.
Soviet Bloc support, a group of about fourteen hundred Cuban personnel also begin to be employed as military inemigres attempt an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of structors, advisers, and technicians.
Cuba and the Soviet Union issue the beachhead, and without additional supplies of ama joint communique in which Cuba openly aligns itself munition, the invaders are quickly crushed by Cuban with the domestic and foreign policies of the Soviet ground forces.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev nal uprisings. tells a gathering at the Cuban embassy in Moscow: ""Alarming news is coming from Cuba at present, news April19, 1961: Inamemoforthepresident,Attorney that the most aggressive American monopolists are General Robert Kennedy warns, ""if we don't want preparing a direct attack on Cuba.
What is more, they Russia to set up missile bases in Cuba, we had better are trying to present the case as though rocket bases of decide now what we are willing to do to stop it."" the Soviet Union are being set up or are already estabRobert Kennedy identifies three possible courses of lished in Cuba.
The United States to be reconsidered)""; placing a strict blockade turns over the handling of its affairs to the Swiss emaround Cuba; or calling on the Organization of bassy, and the Cuban government refers its affairs to American States to prohibit the shipment to the embassy of Czechoslovakia.
In continuing correspondence with stitutes a real menace"" to Latin American nations, TayPresident Kennedy after the Bay ofPigs invasion, Prelor calls for the creation of a new program of action mier Khrushchev assures Kennedy that the Soviet against Cuba, possibly employing the full range of politUnion ""does not seek any advantages or privileges in ical, military, economic, and psychological tactics.
While at a Central Treaty OrganiGermans to the West, and Nikita Khrushchev allows zation meeting in Ankara, Turkey, Secrehis ""deadlines"" on resolving the Berlin question to tary of State Dean Rusk privately raises the possibility pass without further incident. of withdrawing the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey with Turkish Foreign Minister Salim Sarper.
An interagency report on Soviet objects to Rusk's suggestion, pointing out that the nuclear capabilities, National Intelligence Estimate Turkish Parliament has just approved appropriations 11-8/1-61, is disseminated within the governfor the missiles and that it would be embarrassing for ment.
The NIE and later intelligence reports show for the Turkish government to inform Parliament that the the first time that the Soviet ICBM program is far beJupiters now are to be withdrawn.
Only some ten to twenWashington, D.C., Rusk briefs President Kennedy on ty-five Soviet ICBMs on launchers are believed to his discussion with Sarper, and Kennedy accepts the exist, with no major increase in Soviet ICBM strength idea of some delay in removing the Jupiters.
In a major speech cleared by Rusk, Bundy, and President Kennedy, Deputy Secretary of June 3-4, 1961: President Kennedy meets with PreDefense Roswell Gilpatric publicly deflates the ""mismier Khrushchev in Vienna.
On the second day of the sile gap"" hypothesis-the theo:ry that the United summit, Khrushchev delivers an ultimatum on the staStates is dangerously behind the Soviet Union in its tus of Berlin, a continuing source of tension between nuclear capabilities.
Khrushchev threatens to ""norHot Springs, Virginia, that the United States actually malize"" the situation in Berlin (~d consequently cut possessed a substantially larger nuclear arsenal than Allied access to West Berlin) ifthe city's status is notrethe Soviet Union.
Thirty-two planning tasks, ranging from sabomajor new covert action program aimed at overthrowtage actions to intelligence activities, are assigned to ing the Cuban government.
The program is denamed OPERATION MONGOOSE, will be directed by signed to develop a ""strongly motivated political action counterinsurgency specialist Edward G Lansdale movement"" within Cuba capable of generating a revolt under the guidance of Attorney General Robert eventually leading to the downfall of the Castro govKennedy.
Lansdale envisioned that the United States Group Augmented , is created with the sole would provide overt support in the final stages of an uppurpose of overseeing Mongoose.
William K Harvey is put in January 19, 1962: A meeting of the SGA is held in charge of Task Force W, the CIA unit for OPERATION Robert Kennedy's office.
No time, money, sand Cubans, a private navy of speedboats, and an aneffort-or manpower is to be spared.
McManus attributes the phrase ""top Cuban ships engaged in Cuban trade), such as contapriorityin the United States government-no time, money ... to minating shipments of sugar from Cuba and tamperbe spared"" to Attorney General Kennedy.
The New Year's Day parade in Cuba conference on October 30, the foreign ministers from provides United States intelligence sources with the first relithe twenty-one American republics vote to exclude able intelligence on the extent of Soviet Bloc arms deCuba ""from participation in the inter-American sysliveries to Cuba.
The measure is approved fourteen-to-one, with Cuban Revolutionary Air Force are estimated to insix abstentions.
Another resolution is also adopted clude around sixty Soviet-built jet fighters, primarily prohibiting OAS members from selling arms to Cuba MiG-15 andMiG-17 aircraft with a limited number of and setting measures for collective defense against somewhat more advanced MiG-19 planes.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff establishes a ""first priority basis"" for the completion of all January 18, 1962: Edward Lansdale outlines ""The contingency plans for military action against Cuba.
Soviet basic plan includes political, psychological, military, sources have identified three reasons that might have sabotage, and intelligence operations as well as pro~ led Khrushchev to pursue the idea seriously.
At a meeting of the SGA, the scale Upon returning to Moscow, Khrushchev discusses of Lansdale's ""Cuba Project"" is sharply reduced, and the idea with First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Lansdale is directed to develop a detailed plan for an Mikoyan.
Although Mikoyan is opposed, Khrushchev intelligence-gathering program only.
On March 1, the asks a group of his closest advisers, including Frol KoSGA confirms that the immediate objective of the zlov, Commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces program would be intelligence collection and that all Sergei Biryuzov, Foreign Minister Andrei other actions would be inconspicuous and consistent Gromyko, and Marshal Malinovsky to evaluate the with the United States overt policy ofisolating Castro and neuidea.
The group proposes that a mission be sent to tralizing Cuban influence in the hemisphere.
In Taylor, they note that the United States would attempt early May, Khrushchev informs the newly designated to ""make maximum use of indigenous resources"" in ambassador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseyev, of the trying to overthrow Fidel Castro but recognize that plan.
United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey become poses a force of twenty-four medium-range ballistic operational.
Soviet officials also decide that a large contingent of Soviet combat forces should be THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS sent to Cuba.
The proposed Soviet contingent includes tro informs the visiting Soviet officials that Cuba will four elite combat regiments, twenty-four advanced accept the deployment of nuclear weapons.
Since the SA-2 surface-to-air missile batteries, forty-two crisis, Castro and other Cuban sources have suggested MiG-21 interceptors, forty-two IL-28 bombers, twelve that this decision was made not only because the misKomar-class missile boats, and coastal defense cruise siles would serve to deter a United States invasion but also bemissiles. cause the Cuban government wished to shift the ""correlation of forces"" in favor of socialism.
A multiservice military exercise deHavana felt indebted to the Soviet Union for its supsigned to test contingency planning for Cuba begins. port of the Cuban revolution.
Raul Castro and a high-level Cuban miliCaribbean lmown as Jupiter Springs is planned for tary delegation arrive in Moscow, where they are met sometime in the spring or summer.
Soviet and Cuban at the airport by Marshal Rodion Malinovsky and sources have suggested that the series of United States military Anastas Mikoyan.
Nikita Khrushchev subsequently exercises conducted in the region throughout the year meets with Raul Castro on July 3 and 8.
During these are perceived as additional evidence of United States intendiscussions, detailed arrangements are made for the tions to invade Cuba. (operation rrwngoose, 4-10 missile deployment.
SharifRashidov, an alternate member of diction of the Soviet military command.
Raul Castro the Soviet Presidium, arrives in Cuba with a delegaspends a total of two weeks consulting with Soviet offition, ostensibly on a ten-day mission to study irrigation cials before returning to Cuba on July 17.
Shortly before the departure of the delegation, begin moving out of the Black Sea for Cuba with false Premier Khrushchev informs all Presidium members declarations of their destinations and reporting tonthat the Soviet Union plans to deploy nuclear missiles nages well below their capacities.
Aerial reconnaisin Cuba and that Bhyuzov and Alekseyev will broach sance of the ships in the following months showing the idea with the Cuban government. them ""riding high in the water"" would confirm that On the evening of its arrival, the Soviet delegation the vessels carried unusually light cargo, typically a meets with Fidel Castro and his brother Raul, the sign that military equipment is being transported.
Raul Castro leaves Moscow after two tent of deploying nuclear missiles on Cuban soil.
Casweeks of secret talks with Nikita Khrushchev and tro responds by calling the idea ""interesting,"" but tells other high-ranking Soviet officials on the scheduled the group that he will need to consult with his coldeployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Upon his return to Cuba, RaUl Guevara, Osvaldo Dorticos and Bias Roca, Fidel CasCastro tells a gathering that neither internal uprisings -t,, A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS nor exile landings are a threat, only a United States invasion, Cuba.
On the ninth anniversary of the 26th of Cuba in the event ofaggression) July Movement, Fidel Castro states that ""mercenaries"" no longer pose a threat to Cuba: President August 17, 1962: On the basis of additional informaKennedy had already ""made up his mind"" to invade tion, CIA Director John McCone states at a high-level Cuba, he asserts, but Cuba has acquired new arms to meeting that circumstantial evidence suggests that beat back such a direct attack.
United States intelligence receive several reports guing that the buildup is purely defensive.
After late August, numbers of 11/30/62) such reports increase, as do reported sightings of MiG-21s and IL-28s.
After examining CIA reports on the can be overthrown without direct United States military intermovement of cargo ships from the Black and Baltic vention.
Taylor reports that the SGA recommends a seas to Cuba, CIA Director John McCone dictates a more aggressive OPERATION MONGOOSE program. memorandum for th~ president expressing the belief Kennedy authorizes the development of aggressive that Soviet MRBMs are destined for Cuba.
McCone's plans aimed at ousting Castro, but specifies that no memorandum is sent over the objections of subordiovert United States military involvement should be made part nates concerned that McCone has no hard evidence of those plans . to back up his suspicions.
Kennedy directs that several additional also positively identifies coastal defense cruise missile actions and studies to be undertaken ""in light of the installations for the first time.
A Chronology July-November 1962, be taken to remove United States Jupiter nuclear missiles from 61I8/63, 7) Turkey.
President Kennedy is informed that August 26, 1962: Che Guevara, Cuba's Minister oflnthe August 29 U-2 mission has confirmed the presdustries, and Emilio Aragones Navarro, a close associence of SAM batteries in Cuba. ate of Fidel Castro, arrive in the Soviet Union.
Keating urges President Cuban agreement governing the deployment of misKennedy to take action and proposes that the OAS siles in Cuba.
Although Guevara urges Khrushchev to send an investigative team to Cuba.
Although Keatannounce the missile deployment publicly, the Soviet ing's sources of information remain unclear, it appears premier declines to do so.
The agreement is never that he simply made firm declarations based on rusigned by Khrushchev, possibly to preclude the mors and reports that United States intelligence officials conCuban government from leaking it.
Soviet troops belong""There is no evidence of any organized combat force ing to four elite armored brigades are believed to have in Cuba from any Soviet Bloc country; of military begun arriving in Cuba at this time.
Troops belonging bases provided to Russia; of a violation of the 1934 to the combat groups continue to embark through the treaty relating to Guantanamo; of the presence of ofsecond week of October.
Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin asSeptember 3, 1962: At President Kennedy's request; sures United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai senior State Department official Walt Rostow submits Stevenson that ""only defensive weapons are being his assessment of the Soviet military buildup.
The United States Tactical Air Command mends that current OPERATION MONGOOSE activiestablishes a working group to begin developties be intensified but also suggests studying the possiing plans for a coordinated air attack against Cuba to bility of having independent anti-Castro groups oust be launched well before an airborne assault and amCastro with minimal United States assistance. military W W Rostow's Merrwrandum to the President, Asplanners have, until then, made no provision for such sessing Soviet Military Aid to Cuba, g/3f62) an operation.
Following a discussion between President Kennedy, Dean Rusk, and Robert McNaSeptember 11, 1962: TASS releases an authorized Somara, during which they review evidence that SAM viet government statement condemning United States oversites and possibly a submarine base are under conseas bases and denying any intention of introducing struction in Cuba, Attomey General Robert Kennedy offensive weapons into Cuba.
The president reiterates that statement revealing that SAMs and substantially more new movements of Soviet technical and military permilitary personnel than previously estimated have sonnel to Cuba do not constitute a serious threat and been detected in Cuba.
The United States Intelligence with respect to the Situation in Cuba, 10/3f62; CR, Board approves a report on the Soviet arms 1/31163) buildup in Cuba.
In a speech to the United Nations General intelligence indicates the ongoing deployment of nuAssembly, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko clear missiles to Cuba.
Gromyko further warns drinking in Havana, had boasted, 'We will fight to the that any United States attack on Cuba or on Cuba-bound shipdeath and perhaps we can win because we have everyping would mean war.
The concept is apthat ""the establishment on Cuban soil of Soviet nuproved and October 20, is set as the date when all clear striking forces which could be used against the preparations needed to implement such an attack United States would be incompatible with Soviet policy as we should be completed.
Navy air reconnaissance aircraft ted the positioning of bloc offensive weapons on observing Cuba-bound ships photograph ten large Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors. shipping crates on the decks of the Soviet vessel KasiAn attack against the Guantanamo_Naval Base mov.
Mter studying the size and configuration of the or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban crates, photoanalysts determine that the containers territorial air space or waters. hold Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft.
The IL-28s A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the are over twelve years old and have been removed alleaders of which request assistance .... most entirely from the Soviet Air Force in 1960.
AlCuban armed assistance to subversion in other though technically capable of carrying nuclear payparts of the Western Hemisphere. loads, the aircraft have never been given a nuclear deA decision by the President that the affairs in livery role.
A Chronology July-November 1962, tinuing United States national security.
Defense Intelligence Agency analysts inminutes of the meeting, Robert Kennedy states; that form the group that some intelligence points to the the president was ""concerned about progress on the possibility that MRBMs have been positioned in Pinar MONGOOSE program"" and believed that ""more prioridel Rio Province.
The attorney general also expresses the presiCommand , is directed by McNamara dent's ""concern over developing situation,"" and ""to be prepared to irtstituteblockade against Cuba."" urges that ""massive activity'' be undertaken within the The commanders-in-chief of the United States Navy and the MONGOOSE framework.
The group agrees that plans United States Air Force under the Atlantic Command are also for the mining of Cuban harbors and for capturing directed to preposition military equipment and Cuban forces for interrogation should be considered. weapons needed to execute the airstrike plan.
As a result of his meeting with the 1, CINCLANT orders military units to increase their JCS the previous day, Robert McNamara sends a readiness posture to execute Oplan 312, the airstrike memo to the JCS outlining six circumstances in which on Cuba.
Cuban President Dortic6s, addressidentifies all but one of the remaining twenty-four ing the United Nations General Assembly, calls upon the United SAM sites in Cuba.
Other photographs of San Julian Nations to condemn the United States trade embargo against airfield show that IL-28 light bombers are being unCuba.
The NPIC phones CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence speech is interrupted four times by anti-Castro Ray Cline to inform him of the discovery.
Osvaldo Dor-路at NPIC have tried to contact CIA Director McCone tic6s, President of the Republic of Cuba, 10/8/62; but are unable to reach him en route to Los Angeles.
Cline asks that he be called again beLarge Chester Bowles has a long conversation with tween 8:oo and 10:00 P.M. to be informed of the reSoviet Ambassador Dobrynin.
Key Kennedy adminisbrynin that the United States ""had some evidence"" intration officials are tracked down in Washington and dicating that Soviet nuclear missiles were in Cuba. briefed about the discovery of the missiles.
National Dobrynin, who had not been told of the missile deSecurity Advisor McGeorge Bundy, who is given the . ployment by the Kremlin, repeatedly denies that the news by Ray Cline, decides to wait until morning to Soviet Union harbored any intention of placing such alert President Kennedy.
A U-2 aircraft flies the Missiles in Cuba until the Morning of October 16, over western Cuba from south to north.
The SGA orders the acceleration of after authority for the flights is transferred from the covert activities against Cuba.
Quick readout teams at leged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, the National Photographic Interpretation Center Hlzo/75, 147) in Washington analyze photos taken by A major United States military exercise named PHIBRIRichard Heyser's U-2 mission.
The first meeting of Navy personnel and four thousand Marines in an amthe ExComm convenes.
Photographic evidence is phibious assault on Puerto Rico's Vieques Island and presented to the group, including pictures of missile the overthrow of its imaginary tyrant, ""Ortsac""sites under construction with canvas-covered missile ""Castro"" spelled backwards.
The missiles are initially identified by photoimpending crisis, Phibriglex-62 is used primarily as analysts as nuclear-tipped SS-3s by their length; by cover for troop and equipment deployments aimed at evening, the MRBMs are correctly identified as increasing military readiness for a strike on Cuba. longer range SS-4 missiles.
No nuclear warheads are (CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis, reported seen in the area.
McGeorge Bundy inand certainty of the evidence, Soviet military capabiliforms President Kennedy that ""hard photographic evties in Cuba and what additional United States surveillance idence"" has been obtained showing Soviet MRBMs in might be required.
Kennedy immediately calls an 11:45 A.M. and six U-2 reconnaissance missions are flown during meeting and dictates the names of the fourteen or so the day.
In the freewheeling discussion, participants advisers he wants present.
This is the group that becover a number of different options for dealing with comes known as the ""ExComm""-the Executive the Cuban situation.
The principle options discussed Committee of the National Security Council.
Kennedy hensive series of attacks and invasion; or a blockalso telephones John McCloy, a Republican lawyer ade of Cuba.
Preliminary discussions lean toward takwho acted as a private adviser to the president.
President Kennedy ~onfers for half an hour with Charles Bohlen, the forOctober 16, 1962-ajtemoon: McNamara, Deputy mer United States ambassador to the Soviet Union who has just Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, and the JCS been appointed ambassador to France.
Bohlen later hold a luncheon meeting to begin preparing the milirecalls that at this early stage in the crisis, ""there tary for any actions that might be ordered.
Bohlen participates in the first Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin, Deputy Under ExComm meeting later that morning but leaves for Secretary of State U Alexis Johnson, and State DeFrance on the following day.
Excerpts on the 1962, 11/2/62, 1; Taylor, 269) Cuban Crisis, s/21/64) The USIB meets to examine U-2 photographs and to coordinate intelligence on the crisis.
Once again, Khrushchev insists that all Soviet pare an immediate evaluation of the Soviet missile activity in Cuba was defensive and sharply criticizes sites.
The GMAIC concludes that the missiles are United States bases in Turkey and Italy.
It Discussion of U-2, Cuban Fishing Port, Nuclear Test also concludes that the missile installations thus far Ban and United States Elections) In Two Sections, 10l16/62; identified do not appear to be operational.
Warning that United States officials could not under the MONGOOSE program.
After the intelligence report Dean Acheson and John McCone attend discussions is presented, Robert McNamara outlines three broad for the first time, though President Kennedy and Vice options for action.
By this time, Robert communications with Fidel Castro and Premier McNamara has become. the strongest proponent of Khrushchev; the second is ""part political, part millthe blockade option.
MeN amara reports that a ""surgibuy,"" involving a blockade of weapons and open surcal"" airstrike option is militarily impractical in the veillance; the third is ""military"" involving an attack on view of the JCS and that any military action would Cuba and the missile sites.
The ExComm members have to include attacks on all military installations in debate, but do not resolve, which option should be Cuba, eventually leading to an invasion.
Premier Khrushchev receives United States primarily by Dean Acheson, argue that a blockade Ambassador to the Soviet Union Foy Kohler for a would have no effect on the missiles already in Cuba. three-hour conversation on a variety of subjects.
Khrushchev reassures Kohler that the Cuban fishing blockade would shift the confrontation from Cuba to port that the Soviet Union has recently agreed to help the Soviet Union and that Soviet counteractions, inbuild will remain entirely nonmilitary.
Acheson again voices his opinion that the Kennedy that the arms being sent to Cuba are intendsurgical airstrike is the best United States option.
Bolshakov had not however, is in the minority in dismissing the Pearl been told by Khrushchev that the Soviet Union is acHarbor analogy.
By the time Bolshakov's message reaches George Ball find it persuasive.
In some cases, as with President Kennedy, he has been fully briefed on the Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, the moral Soviet missile deployment.
The GMAIC estimates that the President Kennedy meet at the White House.
IRB M sites would not become operational before DeGromyko states that Premier Khrushchev plans to cember but that sixteen and possibly as many as thirtyvisit the United Nations following the United States elections two MRBMs would be operational in about a week. in November and that he believes a meeting with No SS-5 missiles actually reach Cuba at any time, alKennedy at that time would be useful.
After Kennedy though this is not completely confirmed by United States offiagrees to meet the Soviet Premier, Gromyko turns the cials during the crisis.
The JCS, attending part wise, the Soviet Government would never had beof the meeting, recommends that President Kennedy come involved in rendering such assistance."" order an airs trike on the missiles and other key Cuban Kennedy has decided not to discuss United States awareness of military installations.
So, without taking excepsponds by asking whether a surprise air attack would tion to Gromyko's claim, Kennedy responds by readbe a morally acceptable course of action.
Kennedy then meets with Robert place in Dean Rusk's conference room at the State Lovett, a former government official brought in to Department.
Lovett warns that an airstrike tend the talks, confers privately with Dean Rusk and would appear to be an excessive first step.
During the day, that a路blockade is a better alternative, although he exKennedy also meets privately with Dean Acheson for presses a preference for blocking the movement of all THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS materials into Cuba except for food and medicine, possible contingencies.
Meeting at the White separate working groups are exchanged and critiqued.
House, the ExComm presents its recommendations In the course of this process, airstrike proponents to President Kennedy.
By this time, most members of begin to shift their support to the blockade option. the committee support the blockade option.
As the The airstrike speech is abandoned, and Theodore meeting progresses however, individual opinions Sorensen agrees to try to put together a speech for begin to shift and the consensus behind the blockade President Kennedy on the blockade.
Kennedy directs the group to continue pletes the speech at 3:oo A.M. the following day. its deliberations.
The legality of a blockade is also exPaul Nitze meet to develop a specific timetable for amined independently at the State Department by carrying out all of the diplomatic and military actions Leonard C Meeker, the deputy legal adviser.
All timing revolves around the ""P Hour""-the Evaluation"" intelligence reports is disseminated.
The time when President Kennedy would address the naevaluation, the product of collaboration between the tion to inform Americans of the crisis.
Responding to questions MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched within about an article by Paul Scott and Robert Allen dealeighteen hours.
At the State DepartReports that emergency military measures are being ment, Nicholas Katzenbach and Leonard Meeker implemented are also denied.
Separate Khrushchev or Fidel Castro is unlikely to halt the ongroups are td develop the blockade and airstrike opgoing deployment of missiles to Cuba.
On the other tions, drafting speeches for each plan and outlining hand, a total blockade of Cuba, the SNIE projects, A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS would ""almost certainly'' lead to ""strong direct presand military actions, is reviewed and approved. sures"" elsewhere by the Soviet government.
Any form Kennedy's address to the nation is set for October 22, of direct military action against Cuba would result in at 7:00P.M. an even greater chance of Soviet military retaliation.
He proposes that the quarpossibility that the Soviets, under great pressure toreantine be accompanied by a United States proposal for a settlespond, would again miscalculate and respond in a way ment involving the withdrawal of United States missiles from which, through a series of actions and reactions, could Turkey and the evacuation of Guanhinamo.
ExComm meetings the meeting adjourns at 5:10 P.M., President Kennedy continue at the State Department.
Final planning for tells Theodore Sorensen that he is canceling the rethe implementation of a naval blockade is completed, mainder of his midterm election campaign trip. and Theodore Sorensen's draft speech for President Kennedy instructs Sorensen to redraft the quarantine Kennedy is amended and approved.
As MeN amara speech, although he notes that he would not make a leaves the conference room, he reportedly phones the final decision on whether to opt for the quarantine or Pentagon and orders four tactical squadrons to be an airstrike until he has consulted one last time with readied for a possible airstrike on Cuba.
He a partial briefing on the Cuban situation but is renotes that the airstrike plan as presented is not a ""surquested to hold the story in the interests of national gical"" strike but a massive military commitment that security. could involve heavy casualties on all sides.
The intelligence community preon Cuba, one member of the JCS reportedly suggests pares another SNIE reviewing the possible consethe use of nuclear weapons, saying that the Soviet quences of certain courses of action that the United Union would use its nuclear weapons in an attack.
It is estimated that sixonly course of action compatible with American printeen launchers for SS-4 MRBMs are operational and ciples.
The scenario for the full quarantine operation, that these operational missiles could be fired within covering diplomatic initiatives, public statements, eight hours of a decision to launch.
The president convenes a SNIE includes: twenty-two IL-~8 jet light formal meeting of the National Security Council.
Adbombers; thirty-nine MiG-21 jet fighters; sixtymiral George Anderson briefs the gathering on the two less advanced jet fighters; twenty-four 24 SA-2 quarantine plans and procedures that he has drawn up missile sites; three cruise missile sites for coastal earlier in the day.
Anderson explains that each ship apdefense; and twelve Komar-class cruise missile paproaching the quarantine line will be signaled to stop trol boats.
If the ship does not reof Certain United States Courses ofAction on Cuba, w/zo/62) spond, a shot will be fired across the bow.
If there is still A nuclear warhead storage bunker -is identified at no response, a shot will be fired into the rudder to cripone of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time.
President Kennedy expresses concern intelligence proves unable to establish definitively that such an action might unintentionally destroy the whether warheads are actually in Cuba at any time, boat, but Anderson reassures the president that it is however, and the ExComm believes it prudent simply possible to cripple a ship without sinking it.
Soviet sources have recently concludes the meeting by observing that the United suggested that twenty of a planned deployment of States might be subjected to threats in the following days forty nuclear warheads reached the islands but that but that ""the biggest danger lay in taking no action."" none of the warheads were ever actually ""mated"" to Midway through the ExComm session, Kennedy the missiles.
Mter a does not think Stevenson is right for the job and recbrief discussion, Kennedy gives final approval to the ommends that Stevenson be assisted by John McCloy. quarantine plan.
Around this time, White House Kennedy agrees, and Lovett arranges to have McCloy Press Secretary Pierre Salinger is informed of the criflown from Germany to the United States.
Despite White House precautions, President Kennedy and other top officials to discuss several newspapers have by this time pieced together the air attack concept.
Pierre Salinger notifies eliminate the missiles in Cuba, TAC believes that adPresident Kennedy in four separate calls during the day ditional strikes are required on, at a minimum, Soviet that security is crumbling.
To keep the story from SAM sites and MiG airfields, and that altogether sevbreaking, Kennedy phones Max Frankel at the New eral hundred bombing sorties would be required.
SAC initiates a masForeign Minister and ChiefofState on the Situation in sive alert ofits B-52 nuclear bomber force, guaranteeCuba upon Receipt ofthe ""Go"" Signal, 10/z 1/62) ing that one-eighth of the force is airborne at any given time.
Dean Acheson briefs new bomber taking off each time another bomber Charles de Gaulle and delivers President Kennedy's lands.
The alert is directed to take place quietly and letter on the Cuban situation.
Acheson is not able to gradually and to be in full effect by October 23.
At about the same time, United States Ambas(Chronology of]CS Decisions Concerning the Cuban sador to Great Britain David Bruce briefs Priine MinCrisis, 12lz1/62) ister Harold Macmillan and Lord Home, the British foreign minister.
The JCS notify the State copy of Kennedy's speech and briefs MacMillan withDepartment that United States military forces worldwide out it.
He Lauris N orstad has been ordered to try to persuade hastens to assure Bruce that he will assist and support NATO forces to assume a comparable alert posture the United States in any way possible.
During the day, 112; Briefing of British Prime Minister Harold Norstad confers with Harold MacMillan, who strongMacMillan on the Cuban Situation, 10/z2/62; Cooper) ly argues against ""mobilizing"" European forces.
The ExComm meets with President Kennedy for a Aware that an alert might weaken European support brief discussion.
The president directs that personal for the United States-and having received a personal messages be sent to commanders of Jupiters missiles message from President Kennedy stressing the need in Italy and Turkey instructing them to destroy or rento keep the alliance together-Norstad decides not to 路 der inoperable the Jupiters if any attempt is made to put European forces on higher alert status.
During ment 29, Cable from Joint Chiefs of StaffAnnouncing the meeting, State Department Legal Advisor Abram DEFCON 3 Military Alert, 10122162; Text of Message Chayes successfully suggests changing the legal justito Lauris Norstad on the Impact of the Cuban Crisis fication for the blockade presented in Kennedy's on NATO, 10122162; MacMillan,p.go) speech.
The president reviews fense in case of armed attack, Chayes suggests citing the crisis in a formal meeting of the National Security the right of the OAS to take collective measures to Council.
In addition, Kennedy tatives from the Office of Emergency Planning for the accepts Leonard Meeker's suggestion that the limited first time, Kennedy formally establishes the Exnature of the ""blockade"" be stressed by calling it a Comm.
Seventeen congressionPresident Kennedy phones MacMillan late that al leaders from both parties assemble at the White evening.
During the crisis, the two leaders remain in House for a briefing by President Kennedy, Secretary close contact, speaking with each other over the teleof State Rusk and an intelligence officer.
President Kennedy adthe Soviet Union to remove the missiles from Cuba dresses the nation in a televised seventeen-minute and that an airstrike or invasion should be employed speech.
Secretary of State Rusk tine on all offensive military equipment"" is being put meets with Anatoly Dobrynin.
Kennedy further warns the Soviet governsile deployment ""a gross error,"" Rusk hands the Soviet ment that the United States will ""regard any nuclear ambassador an advance copy of President Kennedy's missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the speech.
During the receives a letter addressed to President Kennedy president's speech, twenty-two interceptor aircraft go from British Prime Minister Macmillan.
MacMillan airborne in the event the Cuban government reacted warns that Premier Khrushchev, in reaction to the militarily.
S.tate Edwin Martin conducts a further closed-door A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS briefing for Latin American ambassadors at the State gardless of the classification to which they may Department.
At around 8:oo P.M., Secretary Rusk belong, are intended solely for defensive purposspeaks to a meeting of all other ambassadors in Washes in order to secure Republic of Cuba ington.
United October 23, 1962-10:00 A.M.: At a meeting of the States Air Force in Europe 1945-1979, n128/8o, P路 ExComm, President Kennedy approves plans for 61; Garthoff 1, 6o) signing an official quarantine proclamation.
In anticiSoviet Colonel Oleg Penkovsky is arrested in the pation of a possible reaction to the blockade from the Soviet Union.
From April1g61 to the end of August Soviet government, Kennedy directs John McCone to 1962, Penkovsky has been a spy for British and U.S. prepare an analysis of the effects of a comparable intelligence services, providing them with material on blockade on Berlin.
The ExComm then examines the Soviet military capabilities, including important techquestion of how the United States will respond if aUnical information on Soviet MRBM and ICBM pro2 aircraft is shot down.
Penkovsky had been given a few telephonic ""evidence of hostile Cuban action"" has been estabcoded signals for use in emergency situations, includlished, the ExComm decides that the SAM site reing one to be used if he is about to be arrested and one sponsible for the downing will be attacked and deto be used in case of imminent war.
Continued harassment of U-2 flights, it is was about to be arrested, Penkovsky apparently chose to use the signal for an imminent Soviet attack.
At a special meeting of a letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President the United Nations Security Council, Adlai Stevenson issues a Kennedy.
Zorin submits a draft resoluWhite House, the president signs Proclamation 3504, tion demanding an end to United States naval activity near formally establishing the quarantine.
CINCLANT is Cuba and calling for negotiations to end the crisis. directed to enforce the blockade beginning at 10:00 the following morning.
Fidel Castro announces a combat alarm, placing the Cuban armed forces on October 23, 1962-8:35 P.M.: Fidel Castro tells the their highest alert.
Cuban armed forces subsequently Cuban public in a ninety-minute television speech reach a size of 27o,ooo men, following a massive mothat Cuba will never disarm while the United States bilization effort.
The group makes slight rement by Castro Rejecting the Possibility of Inspection visions to the proclamation and approves a new mesand Noting That Cuba Has Taken Measures To Repel a sage to Premier Khrushchev.
At a Soviet embassy reto Cuba, although the contents of these messages are ception in Washington, D.C., Lieutenant General not lmown.
In addition, John McCone states that Vladimir A Dubovik appears to suggest that the capSoviet submarines have unexpectedly been found tains of the Soviet ships heading for Cuba are under moving into the Caribbean.
Ambassador Dobrynin, Kennedy, the president ordered the navy to give ""the arriving late at the reception, declines to refute highest priority to tracking the submarines and to put Dobovik's comments, saying, ""he is a military man, I into effect the greatest possible safety measures to am not.
A Chronology July-November 1962, 6f18/63, October 23, 1962-6:51 P.M.: A new message from so; Abel, 134) President Kennedy is transmitted to Premier KhruAt a debriefing for State Department officials, shchev via the United States embassy in Moscow.
Kennedy, Edwin Martin emphasizes to U Alexis Johnson the stressing that it is important that both sides ""show pruimportance of preventing exile groups from creating dence and do nothing to allow events to make the an incident in Cuba during the crisis.
Martin suggests situation more difficult to control than it already is,"" that Johnson raise the issue of halting covert activities asks the Soviet Premier to direct Soviet ships to obwith CIA Director of Plans Richard Helms as well as serve the quarantine zone.
The issue of ending OPERATION Kennedy's Letter to Premier Krushchev, 10l23f62) MONGOOSE activities and checking the action ofindependent Cuban emigre groups does not, however, appear to have been seriously discussed in the ExA CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS Comm.
Low-level reconnaissance flights down until October 30, too late to prevent a sabotage over Cuba begin for the first time, supplementing mission against Cuba from being carried out by CIA high-altitude U-2 photoreconnaissance.
Alexis Johnson sAgendafor the Morning ExComm level missions between October 23 and November Meeting, 10l24/6z) 15.
The Soviet Union responds to the low-altitude flights by employing camouflage where possible.
A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, 52) October 23, 1962-10:15 P.M.: Robert Kennedy reGallup poll survey taken on October 23 shows that lates his conversation with Dobrynin to President 84 percent of the United States public who know about the Kennedy and British Ambassador David OrmsbyCuban situation favor the blockade while only 4 perGore, who is meeting with the president.
Ambassador Ormsby-Gore information as of 6:oo A.M. states that communist rethen reportedly expressed concern that the naval action to the United States quarantine against Cuba has ""not quarantine line reportedly has been set at eight hungone beyond the highly critical but noncommittal dred miles from Cuba.
Ormsby-Gore recommends statement"" issued by the Soviet government on Octodrawing the interception line closer to the island in ber 23.
Official world reaction is reported to be generorder to give the Soviet government more time to anaally favorable, particularly in Latin America.
President Kennedy agrees and lance of Cuba indicates continued rapid progress in calls Secretary of Defense McNamara to shorten the completion of IRBM and MRBM missile sites.
It is unclear whether the new offensive missile sites have been discovered, but eight-hundred-mile line is ever actually planned; dinuclear storage buildings are being assembled with aries from the quarantine commander, Admiral Algreat speed.
Robert McNamara tells the group that course and are returning to the Soviet Union.
Only Soviet ships approaching the quarantine line show no the. tanker Bucharest continues toward the quaranindications of stopping and that two Soviet ships, the tine line.
William Knox, a United States that antisubmarine tactics, including the use of small businessman, has a 3 1/4-hour interview with Preexplosives, has been ordered to prevent the Soviet submier Khrushchev at Khrushchev's request. marine from interfering with the blockade.
Khrushchev states that it is now too late for the United According to Robert Kennedy, the president asks, States to take over Cuba, and that he will eventually ""Isn't there some way we can avoid our first exchange give orders to sink a United States vessel enforcing the blockwith a Russian submarine-almost anything but ade if Soviet ships are stopped.
The cable states that while the comparison antine of Cuba officially goes into effect.
The ExComm meets to quested to assess the political consequences of the reconsider the situation in Cuba.
According to Robert moval of the Jupiters in a variety of different circumKennedy's memoirs on the crisis, the meeting ""seemed stances.
Khrushchev warns that the Soviet Union ments on the Possible Dismantling ofJupiter Missiles, views the blockade as ""an act of aggression"" and that, 10124/62) as a consequence, he will not instruct Soviet ships bound for Cuba to observe the quarantine.
Thomas Powers, the quest of more than forty nonaligned states, calls for commander-in-chief of SAC, believed, as he later the voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba wrote, that while discreet preparations had been aptogether with the voluntary suspension of the naval propriate before, it was now ""important for [the Soviquarantine for between two and three weeks.
Consequently, PowThant's October 24 Letter to Kennedy Calling for a ers decides on his own authority to transmit uncoded Temporary Suspension ofthe Quarantine and ofArms messages to SAC commanders noting that SAC plans Shipments to Cuba, 10/24/62) are well prepared and that the alert process was going smoothly.
TASS releases an exdefense preparations during a possible military enchange of telegrams between British philosopher and gagement with Cuba.
The first outlines civil defense passivist Bertrand Russell and Nikita Khrushchev.
In measures which could be taken in the vicinity of tarhis first public statement since the onset of the crisis, gets close to Cuba under attack with conventional Khrushchev warns in his telegram that if the United weapons, while the second suggests measures which States carries out its program of ""pirate action,"" the could be taken in response to possible nuclear attack.
A message from PresiKennedy to discuss how to end the conflict and ""redent Kennedy for Premier Khrushchev is transmitted move the threat of the unleashing of a thermonuclear to the United States embassy in Moscow.
The State Department ances"" that no missiles bases would be established in receives a letter for President Kennedy from Premier Cuba.
At 10:52 P.M., the message is read to ment of missiles in Cuba ""required the responses I Kennedy.
The aircraft carrier 24 Proposal to Temporarily Suspend the Quarantine USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail and atand Further Arms Shipments to Cuba, 10/zs/62; Mestempt to intercept the Soviet tanker Bucharest.
At the prompting of the October 25, ~962-morning: A syndicated column by United States, U Thant sends a second message to the influential journalist Walter Lippman proposes a Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy asking ""face-saving"" agreement whereby the United States them to avoid direct confrontations between Soviet would agree to remove Jupiters from Turkey in return and United States ships while the quarantine remains in effect. for a Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba.
Many U Thant asks that Soviet ships keep out of the quaranin the United States and the Soviet Union mistakenly tine zone for a limited time and that the United States interpret the proposal as a trial balloon floated by the instruct its vessels ""to do everything possible to avoid a Kennedy administration.
During the morning October 25, 1962-5:00 P.M.: Dean Rusk reports on ExComm meeting; President Kennedy authorizes the the political situation during an ExComm meeting.
At development of a program to drop propaganda the close of the meeting, CIA Director McCone indileaflets over Cuba.
Although leaflets are produced cates that some of the missiles deployed in Cuba are and approved by the ExComm, the program, later now operational.
S. dent Kennedy avoids responding directly to U Thant's quarantine forces, Admiral Alfred Ward, orders the proposal that Soviet arms shipments to Cuba and the USS Kennedy to proceed toward a Lebanese United States quarantine be suspended for several weeks.
During the day, the freighter cerned that acceptance of the proposal would allow has been selected by President Kennedy as the first Soviet military personnel to continue work on the misship to be boarded by quarantine forces.
The USS siles already in Cuba, Kennedy writes only that he apKennedy informs the Marucla that night by radio that preciated the ""spirit"" of U Thant's message, adding the ship will be boarded the following morning. that Adlai Stevenson is prepared to begin preliminary negotiations regarding the crisis.
Khrushchev receives a cable from United States Ambassador to NATO notes that, like U Thant, he considered the Cuban criThomas Finletter relaying Ankara's position on the A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS possible withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey. to apply further pressure by increasing the frequency Finletter reports that the Turkish representative to of low-level flights over Cuba from twice per day to NATO has made it clear that his government sets once every two hours.
The ExComm also decides not ""great store"" by the Jupiters, and that Turkey regards to undertake any emergency civil defense programs at the missiles ""as a symbol of the alliance's determinathis time, although preliminary measures have been tion to use atomic weapons"" against either a Soviet initiated.
John Scali, State Dethe Cuban Crisis 14 October-24 November 1962, ca. partment correspondent for ABC News, lunches with 1/63, 27; Chronology of]CS Decisions Concerning Aleksandr Fomin at the Occidental Restaurant in the Cuban Crisis, 12121/62) Washington at Fomin's urgent request.
A CIA sabotage team, dispatched officially the Soviet embassy public affairs counselor, to Cuba to destroy facilities at the Matahambre copis known to be the KGB's Washington station chief. per mine in Cuba , is Noting that ""war seems about to break out,"" he asks prevented from executing the sabotage attack by Scali to contact his ""high-level friends"" in the State Cuban authorities.
Department to ascertain whether the United States would be interested in a possible solution to the crisis.
The CIA memorandum According to Scali's notes, Fomin's proposal runs reporting information as of 6:oo A.M. notes that conalong the following lines: "" bases would be disstruction of IRBM and MRBM bases in Cuba is promantled under nited ations supervision and ceeding without interruption.
President Kennedy directly to the State Department to report on the tells the ExComm that he believes the quarantine by meeting to Roger Hilsman.
The State Department October 26, 1962---6:45 P.M.: John Scali tells Dean receives a cable from United States Ambassador to Turkey RayRusk and Roger Hilsman of Aleksandr Fomin's promond Hare warning that Turkish officials will ""deeply posal . resent"" any Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.
Hare exUnited States officials assume that Fomin's message has been presses his opinion that the most satisfactory resoluinitiated by the Kremlin and interpret Khrushchev's tion to the crisis would avoid the Jupiter issue altonewly arrived letter in light of Fomin's offer that the gether, but he suggests that if the missiles have to be Soviet Union remove its missiles under United Nations inspecremoved it should be done gradually.
Ambassador to Aleksandr Fomin, John Scali recites a message given Brazil A Lincoln Gordon is requested to ask the to him by Dean Rusk.
The message that Pinto is to give to Caswith U Thant and with each other.
The State Department ABC News,"" 81I3f64) begins receiving a message from the United States embassy in Moscow containing a new, private letter from Premier October 26, 1962-10:00 P.M.: The ExComm reconKhrushchev.
The message arrives in four sections, venes in an extraordinary session to consider Premier with the final portion arriving at g:oo P.M., some Khrushchev's letter.
Further textual analysis of the lettwelve hours after the text has been delivered to the ter is ordered, and two Soviet specialists, Helmut SonUnited States embassy.
You will declare that the United Comm members, Robert Kennedy and Anatoly DoStates will not invade Cuba with its troops and will not brynin meet at the Soviet embassy, one of a series of . support any other forces which might intend to invade secret meetings the two held during the crisis.
The attorney general reportedly leaves the room to phone the president.
A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS When he returns, he tells Dobrynin, ""the president Cuba are identified.
Military planners consequently said that we are ready to consider the question of revise air attack targeting and plans.
The airstrike plan Turkey, to examine favorably the question of Turkey."" now includes three massive strikes per day until Dobrynin reports the conversation to the Kremlin.
Some 1,190 bombrn, 158) ing sorties are planned for the first day of operations.
Khrushchev's statement may refer memorandum containing information compiled as of to a cable from Fidel Castro that was transmitted on 6:ooA.M. reports that three of the four MRBM sites at the evening of October 26.
S. invasion San Crist6bal and the two sites at Sagua la Grande apis imminent, Castro reportedly composes the mespear to be fully operational.
The mobilization of sage-dictating in Spanish to Soviet Ambassador AlekCuban military forces is reported to be continuing at a seyev, who translates the letter into Russian-while high rate, but the CIA advises that Cuban forces respending the night in a bomb shelter in the Soviet emmain under orders not to engage in hostilities unless bassy in Havana.
Information as of o6oo 27 October and as an attempt to get Khrushchev to launch the mis1962, 10127162) siles in Cuba against the United States.
Radio Moscow begins Khrushchev recalls Castro warning that ""an American broadcasting a message from Premier Khrushchev.
At the Havana Conbases in Turkey in return for the removal of the Soviet ference in January 1992, Castro states that his letter missiles in Cuba.
While the broadcast is undeiWay, the was mistranslated; that he was suggesting that if Cuba original copy of Khrushchev's last letter to President was invaded, the Soviet Union would need to defend itKennedy is delivered to the United States embassy in Moscow. self from attack by using nuclear weapons.
A Chronology July-November 1962,6/18/63;Allyn,p.7) October 27, 1962-10:00 A.M.: The ExComm meets in the Situation Room at the White House.
Fidel Castro orders Cuban antiairusual intelligence briefing by John McCone, the mincraft forces to open fire on all United States aircraft Hying over utes of the meeting record that the island.
When mended that we be prepared to board the Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev asks Castro to Grozny, which is now out about six-hundred recind his order, he apparently is rebuffed.
Under Secretary Ball pointed out that with Sergo Mikoyan on Soviet Views on the Missile the Soviets' did not know the extent of our quarCrisis, 101l3f87; Szulc, 647; Allyn, 161) antine zone.
The President agreed that we As a result of the increased frequency of low-level should ask U Thant to tell the Russians in New reconnaissance missions, additional military targets in THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS York where we are drawing the quarantine line. the U -2, which eventually manages to fly out of Soviet The Russians would then be in a position to deterritory with no shots being fired.
Alaskan Air Comcide whether to tum back their tanker or allow mand records suggest that the United States fighter planes are her to enter the quarantine zone sometime later armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles. today.
According to one account, when Secretary of Defense McNamara hears that a U-2 was in Soviet airDuring the meeting, Premier Khrushchev's second space, ""he turned absolutely white, and yelled hysterimessage begins to be received.
Your naissance plane is shot down over Cuba and its pilot, representatives will make a declaration to the efMajor Rudolf Anderson, killed.
The ExComm, when informed of sons entrusted by the United Nations Security the downing, assumes that the attack had been orCouncil could inspect on the spot the fulfillment dered by the Kremlin and speculates that the move is of the pledges made .... designed to escalate the crisis.
In fact, as Soviet and Cuban officials have only recently revealed, the attack The new letter sets the stage for a protracted ExComm discussion, which continues throughout the is the result of a decision made by local Soviet comday, about how to respond, with the president stating manders.
Although a Soviet major general, Igor I. that to go to war with the Soviet Union instead of acStatsenko, claims responsibility for the decision in cepting a trade would be ""an insupportable position."" 1987, other Soviet sources have suggested that Lt.
The pilot radios for assistance and a United States bers assemble in George Ball's conference room to F-102 fighter aircraft in Alaska scrambles and heads consider possible options in light of the deteriorating toward the Bering Sea.
F8U-1P low-level rethe October 26 letter (which did not mention the connaissance planes take off for afternoon missions Jupiters) gradually begins to emerge.
Two of the six planes are forced to abort Kennedy, initially hesitant to accept the idea because their mission due to mechanical problems.
As the rehe does not believe Khrushchev would accept such a maining planes fly over San Crist6bal and Sagua Ia deal, finally agrees when Soviet specialist Llewellyn Grande, Cuban troops open fire with antiaircraft guns Thompson argues that Khrushchev might.
One of the United States aircraft is hit by a Sorensen and Robert Kennedy leave the meeting to 37mm antiaircraft shell but manages to return to its compose the proposed response.
The ExComm is called After the ExComm meeting breaks up, a smaller back to the White House.
President Kennedy orders group composed of President Kennedy, McNamara, the immediate dispatch of a message to U Thant askRobert Kennedy, Bundy, Rusk, Llewellyn Thompson, ing urgently whether he would ascertain if the Soviet and Theodore Sorensen meet in the Oval Office.
The government is willing to stop work on the bases while group agrees that the second letter to Khrushchev negotiations continue to find a solution to the crisis.
In should be reinforced with an oral message passed the middle of the meeting, Maxwell Taylor brings in a through Ambassador Dobrynin.
They further agree late report confirming that the missing U-2 had been that Dob:rynin should be informed that if the Soviet shot down over Cuba, probably by a SAM site.
Presimissiles are not withdrawn, there will be military acdent Kennedy, however, decides not to retaliate but tion against Cuba.
If they are removed, however, the agrees that if any more surveillance planes are fired on United States will be willing to give a noninvasion over Cuba, the SAM sites would be attacked. pledge.
Concern is so acute that throughout the day, continually favors trading away the assurance not be leaked to the public or to NATO the missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba as that not even other ExComm members are told of the Khrushchev has offered-possibly because he secretadditional assurances regarding the Jupiters.
MeNamara argues that the Negotiations To Remove Jupiters Prior to the Crisis, Jupiters in Turkey should be removed, but only as a 2f2s/87; Bundy, 433) prelude to an invasion of Cuba; Maxwell Taylor forwards the JCS recommendation simply to initiate the October 27, 1962-4:15 P.M.: At Dean Rusk's request, airstrike and invasion plans; and the State Department ABC News correspondent John Scali and Soviet emdrafts a letter flatly rejecting the SoViet proposal. bassy official Fomin meet once again.
He states that Premier Khrushchev's Kennedy's account ofthe meeting in several ways.
Acnew message had been drafted before his report on the cording to Dob:rynin, Kennedy did not in fact threaten favorable United States reaction to the October 26 proposal military action against the missiles sites if the Soviet had arrived.
Furious at Fomin's response, Scali shouts government did not remove the missiles.
Fomin says that he and Ambassador Dostruck brynin are expecting a reply from Khrushchev at any Mter the meeting with Dobrynin, the attorney genmoment and urges Scali to report to United States officials that eral returns to the White House.
Scali replies that he does not Kennedy's direction, McNamara instructs Secretary think anyone will believe Fomin's assurances but that of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert to order to active he will convey the message in any case.
The two part duty twenty-four Air Force Reserve units totaling ways, and Scali immediately types out a memo on the 14,200 personnel.
President Kennedy's remove those bases, we would remove them .... letter to Premier Khrushchev drafted earlier in the He asked me what offer the United States was day is transmitted to Moscow.
He As I read your letter, the key elements of your raised the question of our removing the missiles proposals-which seem generally acceptable as I from Turkey.
We, on our siles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of part, would agree-upon the establishment of time.
We had the quarantine measures now in effect and to only a few more hours-we needed an answer give assurances against the invasion of Cuba. immediately from the Soviet Union.
I said we The letter is also released directly to the press to avoid must have it the next day.
The statement is a proposal to be made Salinger, 272) by U Thant calling for the removal ofboth the Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Castro also extends an invitation to U 2/2s/87; Schlesinger, 520) Thant to visit Cuba.
U Thant accepts the invitation on October 28 and travels to Havana on October 30.
Fidel Castro meets with (Transmittal ofMessage from Fidel Castro Welcoming Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev for lengthy discussions U Thanfs Visit and Responding to U Thanfs Request in the Soviet embassy in Havana.
U Thant informs Adlai messages sent back and forth between Moscow and Stevenson that Soviet representative Zorin has reWashington during the crisis.
Instructions are sent October 27, 1962-g:oo P.M.: The ExComm again reto Ambassador Finletter to review the deepening criviews various options for the following day, including sis with the NATO allies.
As the meeting comes to a close, may find it necessary within a ve:ry short time in its inRobert MeN amara turns to Robert Kennedy.
Construction of one nuclear gressive Economic Blockade against Cuba, 10/zs/62) bunker reportedly has been completed but none are believed to be in operation.
October 27, 1962--evening: Unknown to other memInformation as ofo6oo 28 October 1962, 10/28/62) bers of the ExComm, President Kennedy and Dean Rusk prepare a contingency plan to facilitate a public October 28, 1962-g:oo A.M.: A new message from Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.
At Kennedy's instrucNikita Khrushchev, which effectively terminates the tion, Rusk phones Andrew Cordier, a former United Nations unmissile crisis, is broadcast on Radio Moscow.
In a separate Secretary of Defense MeN amara reports that the Soletter to Khrushchev, written almost immediately after viet ship Grozny is standing still and that no other Sothe broadcast, Kennedy states, ""I consider my letter to viet Bloc ships will be entering the quarantine zone you of October twenty-seventh and your reply of today during the day.
President Kennedy directs that no air as firm undertakings on the part of both our governreconnaissance missions be flown during the day, and ments which should be promptly carried out."" that no action be taken against any Soviet Bloc ships Although there is a sense of relief and exultation with regard to the unresolved question of the IL-28 among most of the ExComm members after word of bombers in Cuba.
Kennedy agrees that the United Khrushchev's decision is received, several members of States should consider the IL-28s ""offensive the JCS are less enthusiastic.
Admiral George Anderweapons"" and press for their removal, but he also sugson reportedly complains, ""we have been had,"" while gests that the United States should not ""get hung up"" General Curtis LeMay suggests that the United States on this issue.
Fidel Castro deIn Havana, Fidel Castro, who was not consulted or clares that the United States assurance of nonaggression informed of the decision beforehand, reportedly goes against Cuba is unsatisfactory unless it includes addiinto a rage upon hearing of the Soviet move, cursing tional measures.
After meeting with high military leadUnited States against Cuba; a halt to all attacks on ers during the morning, Castro apparently goes to San Cuba carried out from the United States military bases on the Antonio Air Force Base himself in order to shoot down island of Puerto Rico; the cessation of aerial and naval a United States low-altitude aircraft.
However, United States planes do reconnaissance flights in Cuban airspace and waters; not pass over the base.
A Chronology October 28, 1962-4:07 P.M.: The JCS asks CINJuly-November 1962,6/18/63, 78) CLANT to reevaluate Oplan 316, the invasion plan of As a result of an order from Robert MeN amara to Cuba, and determine what modifications should be begin the process of removing Jupiter missiles from made to the plan in light of the most recent intelliTurkey, an interdepartmental task force convenes gence estimates on military equipment in Cuba.
CINunder Defense Department General Counsel John CLANT is specifically directed to consider whether McNaughton.
John Scali meets with October 29, 1962-zo:oo A.M.: At the morning ExSoviet embassy official Fomin for the fourth time durComm meeting, President Kennedy orders that U.S. ing the crisis.
Fomin tells Scali, ""I am under instrucNavy ships maintain their quarantine stations.
The information you provided level reconnaissance flights are directed to resume, Chairman Khrushchev was most helpful to him in but no U-2 missions are authorized.
U Thant briefs Adlai Khrushchev's decision to accept the United States proposal for Stevenson, John McCloy, and Charles Yost on his ending the crisis. meeting with Vasily Kuznetsov earlier in the day.
U The Soviet embassy in Havana receives a lengthy Thant tries to convince the Americans that the quartelegram from the Kremlin explaining the decision to antine should now be suspended, but McCloy and withdraw the missiles.
Any other move, the message Stevenson disagree, linking the end of the quarantine argues, would have meant ""global conflagration and to the actual removal of offensive weapons from consequently the destruction of the Cuban revoluCuba.
The cable also stresses that ""the Soviet governcould be suspended for the duration of U Thant's visit ment under no circumstances would refuse to fulfill to Cuba, scheduled to begin on October 30.
United States negotiators ground forces engaged in operations against Cuba note that the quarantine proclamation explicitly inwould also be armed with tactical nuclear weapons. cluded bomber aircraft, and they point to President CINCLANT assures the JCS that the nuclear Kennedy's letter of October 22, which objected to the weapons would be employed only if Cuban or Soviet ""long-range missile bases"" as well as ""other offensive forces initiated the use of nuclear weapons.
Shortly after his arrival Items of Significant Interest Period J00701-J10700 in Havana, U Thant and his aides meet with Fidel CasOctober 1962, 10/31/62; CINCLANT Historical Actro, Cuban President Osvaldo Dortic6s and Foreign count of Cuban Crisis, 4f2gl63, 95; The Air Force Minister Raul Roa.
U Thant presents several verificaResponse to the Cuban Crisis 14 October-24 Novemtion proposals to ensure that the dismantling of the ber 1962, ca.
Castro rejects each of mer out a formal agreement with the United States on these proposals, saying they are ""intended to humilithe settlement of the missile crisis.
Premier Khrushchev sends PresiThe attorney general makes no immediate response dent Kennedy a sixteen-page message covering the but takes the letter with him to consider the proposal. missile crisis, the naval quarantine, a nuclear test-ban When he meets Dobrynin the following day, Kennedy treaty, and the Berlin question.
The Kremlin leader rejects the idea of a written agreement involving the requests that the United States lift the quarantine imJupiter missiles. mediately, as well as the economic blockade of Cuba.
Following the ExComm's discussion of the IL-28 He also suggests that the United States withdraw from question on October 28, State Department analyst its base in Guantanamo, Cuba.
Khrushchev also attempts to gamer an writes, however, that the United States can not ""reaagreement on Berlin that would exclude German sonably insist"" on the withdrawal of MiG aircraft, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, because ""the next criSAMs, or nonmissile ground force weapons.
October JI, Ig6z-Io:oo A.M.: The ExComm reviews Read letter-Studied it over night.
No quid pro the lack of progress in the talks between U Thant and quo as I told you.
You asked me about missile bases in sance missions to resume the next day unless signifiTurkey.
I told you we would be out of themcant progress is made in the discussions.
I4, 10/31/62) your letter-Reconsider it & if you feel it is necU Thant meets with Fidel Castro, Dortic6s, and essary to write letters then we will also write one Roa for the second time during his stay in Cuba.
U the basis ofthe Kennedy-Khrushchev exchange ofletThant is unable to obtain Castro's approval for any ters.
Gromyko also suggests that some type of formal form of inspection of the Soviet missile withdrawal. agreement should ""codify"" obligations on both sides.
Adlai Stevenson remessage to Attorney General Robert Kennedy to verports to Washington that he has received preliminary ify that the mission is in order.
Kennedy, angered to reports from U Thant and Indar Jit Rikhye on their learn that CIA missions are continuing, chastises Harvisit to Cuba.
The United Nations officials report that relations vey and asks CIA Director.
McCone to terminate the between Cuba and the Soviet Union are, in Rikhye's operations.
However, though they have not had ""definitive"" discussions three of ten scheduled six-man sabotage teams have about the IL-28 bombers, ""the Russians repeated ... already been dispatched to Cuba.
Fidel Castro reports on Department Cable on Secretary General U Thant's his meetings with U Thant in a speech carried by Meetings with Castro, 1ll1/62; Report by Rikhye on Cuban radio and television.
Castro also discusses the Impressions from United Nations Visit to Cuba, differences that had arisen between the Soviet Union 1ll1/62) and Cuba over the resolution of the missile crisis.
Castro and no immediate retaliatory measures will be carried out Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev meet during if any U:S. aircraft are shot down.
Construction at the IRBM sites aprects United States negotiators to stress the importance of obpears to have stopped, and the installations are partaining verification, which he describes as ""essential"" tially dismantled.
With regard to the that work is continuing on IL-28s at San Julian airfield Soviet bombers stationed in Cuba, the negotiators are but that it is unclear whether the bombers are being told to try to ""elicit a clear confirmation that the ILassembled or dismantled.
At a meeting of the Kuznetsov, 1ll1/62) ExComm, Kennedy confirms that the United States will press for the removal of the IL-28 bombers curNovember I, I962-7:3o P.M.: Anastas Mikoyan rently stationed in Cuba.
Stevenson has been intained but only by hailing all vessels entering the quarstructed to provide Mikoyan with a list of weapons antine zone.
He reconfirms orders to United States Navy vesthat the United States considers ""offensive"" and exsels not to board Soviet Bloc ships.
However, the talks are immediately inter2) bomber aircraft; rupted by the news that Mikoyan's wife in the Soviet 3) bombs, air-to-surface rockets, and guided Union has died unexpectedly.
Mikoyan later decides missiles; to have his son Sergo, who was accompanying him, re4) warheads for any of the above weapons; turn to Moscow while he remains in Cuba.
The nineteenth meetincluding Komar-class motor torpedo boa:ts. ing of the ExComm focuses on inspection questions (List of Weapons Deemed Offensive by the United and the issue of the IL-28 bombers.
In a brief televised adit considers the IL-28s to be offensive weapons to be dress, President Kennedy informs the nation that the withdrawn from Cuba, but he agrees that the public United States government has concluded ""on the basis of yesannouncement of this position should be delayed terday's aerial photographs ... that the Soviet missile until the next day.
The want to meet Mikoyan but is persuaded to do so by future of the SAM sites is unclear.
President Kennedy replies to PreKhrushchev l,p. soo) mier Khrushchev's letter of October 30 addressing the issue of inspection and verification before the November 3, 1962--g:oo A.M.: Anastas Mikoy,an naval quarantine can be lifted.
Kennedy cites ""ve:ry seholds his first formal meeting with Fidel Castro at rious problems"" if Fidel Castro cannot be convinced Castro's apartment in Havana.
States has defined"" offensive weapons"" that the Soviet (Kennedy-Khrushchev Messages Exchanged on the Union is to remove from Cuba, that is, as including the Cuban Crisis, nl:y'6z) IL~28s and Komar-class missile boats.
John McCloy lunches with Soviet saying that the Soviet Union views them as ""a wish to negotiators at his Stamford, Connecticut, home.
In The process of removing the equipment is completed return, the Soviet government wants the quarantine on November (Department of Defense Press Conlifted and a formal protocol of United States guarantees, inference ofRobert McNamara, 2fz8/63, M-1) cluding a pledge that the United States will not invade President Kennedy hands Secretary of Defense Cuba or induce other Latin American countries to atMeN amara a short memorandum expressing his contempt an-invasion.
Warning that using too few troops could result Fidel Castro and suggests United Nations observation in the in the United States becoming ""bogged down,"" United States as well as in Cuba.
A Chronology divisions and, if necessary, building additional diviJuly-November 1962, 6l18/63, 8g) sions.
The dispatches a brief memo to Robert MeN amara warnJCS meet on November"" 7 with CINCLANT to rectify ing that ""the Russians may try again.
This time they the problem. may prepare themselves for action on the sea in the Robert Kennedy continues to exert pressure on the Cuban area.
Further pressure toreAdmiral Anderson later advises MeN amara that the move the bombers is brought to bear by U Thant, Soviet Union could base naval forces in Cuba in severwho, at the request of the United States, raises the al ways, but he believes that United States intelligence would issue with Vasily Kuznetsov.
Anderson the bomber question is ""a new issue"" and not ""covrepeats his earlier recommendation that submarines ered"" in the Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding. operating out of, or supported from, Cuban bases (Meeting with Soviet Representatives on On-Site and should be declared offensive weapons and placed on ICRC Inspection, 11/s/62; Garthoff 1, 110) the list of prohibited materials.
S. reconnaissance sible Establishment of a Soviet Submarine Base in aircraft and Cuban-based MiG fighters occurs.
In a three-page letter to President gests that more attempts to intercept reconnaissance Kennedy, Premier Khrushchev writes that he is ""seriaircraft would be made in the future.
Robert McNaously worried"" about the way in which the United mara, with the concurrence of the JCS, proposes that A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS the public not be informed of the incident, but that a commitment might be issued once the Soviet Union diplomatic protest be made to the Soviet Union.
Both remove the IL-28 bombers and the United States receives ""ashighand low-altitude reconnaissance flights continsurances that there will be no reintroduction of strateue as scheduled the following day.
The president Stevenson, Secretary of State Rusk advises, ""our priraises the issue of the four reinforced Soviet troop regmary purpose is to get the MRBMs and IL-28 iments in Cuba for the first time.
The United States eventually drops its portance to the personal assurances you have given demands for the removal ofKomar-class missile boats that submarine bases will not be established in Cuba."" in order to focus on the IL-28 bombers.
Various other ideas are offered, including no evidence of any split within the ruling elite at a tightening the quarantine, initiating new covert action Kremlin reception held during the evening, and he against Castro, and launching air attacks on the IL-28 states that Premier Khrushchev has privately discouraircraft.
THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS The Defense Department announces that ""all ceed in the negotiations.
President Kennedy decides known"" MRBM and IRBM Soviet bases in Cuba have not to lower SAC alert levels at the time, with Robert been dismantled, and that a ""substantial"" number of MeN amara noting that such a decision could send the missiles have been loaded aboard Soviet ships or are wrong ""signals"" to the Soviet Union.
Premier Khrushchev sends Preswhich five ambassadors to Cuba from Asian, Mrican, ident Kennedy a message confirming the removal of European, and Latin American countries would verithe missiles.
The letter adopts a friendly tone, comfy the withdra~al of the missiles.
The last of the ships removing SoNovember 12, 1962-night: President Kennedy inviet MRBM missiles from Cuba leave the island.
Six structs his brother Robert to inform Soviet Ambasvessels, the Bratsk, Dvinogorsk, I Polzunov, Labinsk, sador Dobrynin that Khrushchev's ""word"" on the ILM Anosov,and Volgoles, have left Mariel since No28s will ""suffice"" and the United States will not insist on an imvember 5, and two ships, the F Kurchatov and the L mediate withdrawal of the bomber planes.
Johnson, include a proposed sequence of actions de12/62; NYT, ullo/62) signed to end the deadlock.
At President desired outcome, the group suggests tightening the Kennedy's prompting, the group discusses various blockade, arranging for other countries in Latin ways in which the United States might strike a deal America and elsewhere to apply diplomatic pressure with the Soviet Union over the bomber issue.
The on Fidel Castro, and using intense low-altitude reconpossibility of offering further noninvasion assurances, naissance as. a form of psychological warfare.
Premier Khrushchev sends anKennedy's Letter to Premier Krushchev, 11hs/62; other message to President Kennedy on the IL-28 Status of the Negotiations on Removal of IL-288, issue.
The largest amphibiUnited States is ""not carrying out its commitments"" to ous landing since World War II begins as part of an exend overflights and quarantine, nor has it agreed to ercise at Onslow Beach, North Carolina.
President Kennedy discusses the Cuban situation (CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis, with Harold MacMillan over the telephone.
For example, we might say the President Kennedy to report on the readiness status whole deal is off and withdraw our no invasion pledge of forces that would be involved in any military action and harass them generally."" against Cuba.
Noting that the United States has already inreadiness can be maintained for about thirty days.
Cuban fighter aircraft are detected to POL if no progress practicing low-level flight tactics in the Havana area. is made.
John McCloy and Adlai StevenKhrushchev to back down again in some ways might son have a long meeting with Vasily Kuznetsov and Vabe more difficult than it was during the missile crisis. lerian Zorin to try to force the dispute over the IL-28s Similar messages for Latin American heads of state to a head.
McCloy repeatedly warns Kuznetsov that are also sent during the evening.
States must have a pledge that the bombers will be rethe IL-28 Situation, nllg/62) moved by that time.
The Cuban government apparentComm session, President Kennedy authorizes highly had been persuaded to allow the bombers to be relevel reconnaissance flights but again suspends lowmoved by the signing of a new Cuban-Soviet agreelevel sorties.
Ig/62; Schlesinger, 526) lower state of alert for United States forces at his press conference.
Letters from PresiPremier Khrushchev formally agrees to remove the dent Kennedy to Charles de Gaulle, Konrad AdeIL-28s from Cuba in a fourteen-page letter to Presinauer, and Harold Macmillal} are transmitted by the dent Kennedy.
I informed you that the IL-28 j:he quarantine to include POL and the possibility of planes are twelve years old and by their combat charan air attack against Cuba in response to attacks on . acteristics they at present cannot be classified as ofUnited States reconnaissance planes.
On our side, formal assursion, 11/2o/62) ances against invasion of Cuba.
Mter discussing Preissue by having the United States and Soviet Union issue paralmier Khrushchev's letter agreeing to remove the ILlel declarations before the United Nations Security Council.
Nonetheless, he states, ""If all offenKhrushchev,11l21l62) sive weapons are removed from Cuba and kept out of The president officially lifts the naval quarantine of the hemisphere in the future ... and if Cuba is not used Cuba, and measures .are taken promptly by the U.S. for the export of aggressive Communist purposes, Navy to return to a normal readiness posture.
The JCS orders SAC multaneously, the Soviet Union and other Warsaw to return to its normal airborne alert status, effective Pact nations announce the cancellation of the special immediately.
During the day, SAC forces lower their military preparedness measures that had been put alert status from 0 EFCON 2, and other United States military into effect on October 23.
Premier Khrushchev sends a November 21, 1962-g:49 P.M.: In a cable to Adlai five-page letter to Kennedy regarding the Soviet 路 Stevenson and John McCloy, Dean Rusk summarizes leader's views on Cuba and opinions on Fidel Castro. the status of crisis following the IL-28 agreement: THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Cuban leaders, he observes, are ""young, expansive have taken the missiles out.
But I want to tell you people-Spaniards in a word, to use it far from the pesomething, Mr McCloy.
ExComm members discuss future policy toward Cuba at a working meetNovember 29, 1962-10:00 A.M.: The ExComm ing held without President Kennedy.
The group remeets with President Kennedy to discuss intelligence views United States planning for future overflights of Cuba, apand diplomatic reports on Cuba, United States declaratory polparently agreeing that continued aerial reconnaisicy on the IL-28 issue, the future of OPERATION sance is necessary to verify the re~oval of the IL-28s MONGOOSE and ""post mortems of Oct.-28."" and to ensure offensive weapons are not reintroduced Kennedy directs the State Department to prepare a into Cuba.
In a three-hour meet""diplomatic measures be taken"" to assure that the ing with President Kennedy and Secretary of State United States does not find itself in the position of Rusk, Anastas Mikoyan repeatedly presses for a clarihaving to attack Soviet-controlled bases in Cuba. fication and a confirmation.of a United States guarantee not to (Warning That the United States May Soon Face the invade Cuba.
However, Kennedy ment on on-site verification even though all the misdoes state that if the Soviet Union abides by the exsiles and planes have already been removed from change of correspondence, the United States will as Cuba.
Ifpublic presumes this with Soviet negotiators at the Waldorf Suite in New objective is on-site verification, more and more York City.
Earlier, in one of the final sessions between importance will be attached to such inspection as the United States and Soviet negotiators, Vasily Kuznetsov met negotiation continues.
In a television and radio interthan to have succeeded. view, President Kennedy offers some of his thoughts on the crisis.
Khrushchev sends a nine-page Wednesday in the first twenty-four letter to Kennedy on the situation in both Cuba and hours, I don't think we would have chosen as prudentBerlin.
He characterizes the Soviet atSoviet Union have come to the final stage of the tempt to install missiles in Cuba as ""an effort to mateCuban affair.
He writes, ""with the elimination of the Cuban At a press conference, President Kennedy tells recrisis we relieved mankind of the direct menace of porters that, in the best judgment of the United combat use oflethal nuclear weapons that impended States, all strategic mis~iles and IL-28 bombers have over the world.
Continued negotiations subsequently lead mier Khrushch.ev in response to"" Khrushchev's Deto.路the eventual signing of a limited test-ban treaty cember 11 message.
Bundy later notes that the ""gradual dewere to do the kind of things which would from our velopment of some form of accommodation with Caspoint ofview justify invasion,"" Rusk stresses, the Unittro"" became a standard item in lists of policy alternaed States would not consider any non-invasion assurtives considered by the Kennedy administration. ance binding.
The Soviet Union makes a final atKennedy administration also contemplates Pentagon tempt to obtain a firm United States noninvasion pledge during proposals for military action against Castro, as well as a meeting between Vasily Kuznetsov and President a wide range of economic and covert programs to Kennedy just prior to Kuznetsov's departure for weaken the Castro government.
The president declines to extend any further tion Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, n/zo/75, assurances.
In a lengthy televised speech, Fidel January 7, I963: The United States and the Soviet Castro declares, ""for us, the Caribbean crisis has not Union agree to terminate United Nations consideration of the been resolved.
Regarding a United States non-invasion guarantee, Stevenson and Vasily Kuznetsov note that while the Castro says, ""we don't believe in Kennedy's words.
At its first meeting in over a month end of negotiations at the United Nations.
Carlos and during subsequent sessions, the ExComm conLechuga, the Cuban ambassador to the United Nasiders various long-range plans to pressure Fidel Castions, sends a letter to U Thant two hours prior to the tro.
The United States wants Castro removed from delivery of the U.S.-Soviet letter.
Lechuga objects to power but it recognizes that if this proves impossible, the settlement, insisting that Cuba cannot regard any then it wants him to be independent of the Soviet agreement ending crisis negotiations as ""effective"" Union.
Policy papers suggest that the ultimate objecunless it meets the ""five points"" Castro had articulated tive is replacement of the government by ""one fully on October 28, 1962.
Dean Rusk, testifying at a closed replaced by a different oversight organization, the hearing before the Senate foreign relations commitSpecial Group, chaired by McGeorge Bundy.
The though Mongoose is abolished, the CIA arm, Task United States ""never made an unadorned commitForce W, continues to exist as the Special Affairs Staff, ment not to invade Cuba in the first place,"" Rusk delocated at the CIA's Miami station.
In any case, Rusk adds that ""a crucial element"" the head of Task Force W, is replaced by Desmond in 'the Kennedy-Khrushchev understandings-onFitzGerald as head of the Special Mfairs Staff.
Covert site inspection and assurances against the reintroducoperations against Fidel Castro continue during 1963 tion of strategic weapons into Cuba-was not fulfilled under FitzGerald.
In addition to continuing attempts by the Cuban and Soviet governments.
The anti-Castro group L-66 attacks disrupting the Cq.ban government and economy. and sinks the Soviet ship Baku as it loads Cuban sugar (Cuba, operation rrwngoose, 1/z8/63; Alleged Assassiat the harbor of Caibarien, Cuba.
At Premier Khrushchev's direcously protested by the Soviet Union and Cuba.
On April1, before the Jupiters terest Period 20D70I-2I0700 February 1963, are withdrawn, the first Polaris submarine is deployed 2121/63) in the Mediterranean Sea.
Fidel Castro and a large enKrushchev reportedly deal with domestic affairs-his tourage begin a five-week, fourteen-city visit to the handling of the Cuban crisis may have contributed inSoviet Union.
Castro negotiates renewed pledges of directly to his loss of support among the other highSoviet aid in the event of a United States attack as well as level Soviet officials. changes in Soviet-Cuban sugar agreements.
Apparently prompted by Cuban fears the Soviet Union and the United States as a result of of an invasion by the United States, Soviet Charge Yuli _the missile cpsis.
Castro later reveals that it is only at M Vorontsov meets with National Security Advisor this time that he learned that the withdrawal of nuHenry Kissinger some eight years after the Cuban clear missiles from Turkey had been part of the agreemissile crisis in an attempt to reconfirm the Kennedyment settling the crisis.
On August 7, Kissinger meets with President Kennedy approves a new sabotage program Vorontsov, and both give their word that the underagainst Cuba.
In an attempt to defuse increasing ers, n/zo/75) diplomatic tensions over the Cienfiegos ""submarine port,"" Anatoly Dobrynin meets with Henry Kissinger.
A memorandum of understanding beThe Soviet ambassador hands Kissinger a note reaftween the United States and the Soviet Union estabfirming the Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding; it lishing a ""hot line"" between Washington and Moscow states that ""in the Cuban question, the Soviet governis signed.
Castro for the withdrawal of Soviet strategic missiles The note lists five specific actions that the U.S.路govand a large number of Soviet forces (see entry for Noernment would consider violations of the 1962 agreevember2, 1962). ment.
Dobrynin also states that the Soviet Union will tion, President Reagan states that his administration is from August onward make diplomatic exchanges a actively reviewing the Kennedy-Khrushchev underpart of the U.S.-Soviet understanding on Cuba.
Carter told Project at the Center for Science and International reporters that the Soviet government has given him Affairs hosts a major conference on the Cuban Missile assurances that no shipments of arms to Cuba had or Crisis in Hawks Cay, Florida.
After reviewing the deployment of orge Bundy, Theodore Sorensen, and Arthur Soviet MiG-23 aircraft to Cuba, the State DepartSchlesinger, Jr., as well as the most prominent crisis THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS scholars, among them Graham T Allison, Ernest May, dent Kennedy to overthrow the Castro government.
Joseph Nye, Richard Neustadt, and Thomas The documents, declassified for the first time as a result Schelling.
The National Security Archive provides the of a FOIA lawsuit filed against the State Department, -documents for the conference, from which emerges a offer a better understanding of events leading up to the number of significant revelations-most notably that missile crisis.
N. proposal on trading measures and psychological operations, were intended ~ssiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba if negotito result in a popular uprising against Castro, the sucations broke down between the superpowers.
Process ofwhich would ""require decisive military intervenceedings from the conference, as well as those from a tion"" by the United States.
The National Security Archive files twenSoviet missiles were then deployed for defensive reaty-seven Freedom of Information Act requests for sons.
The third in a seFOIAs are filed in the name of Professor Philip ries organized by James G Blight, the conference Brenner, a Cuba specialist and board member of the brings together the U.S., Soviet, and Cuban sides of Archive. the missile crisis for the first time.
A second conference on the GOOSE documents, significant new facts about the Cuban missile crisis, organized by James G Blight, crisis are disclosed: takes place in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Khrushchev's former speechwriter and adviser; Sergo The real figure was over forty thousand.
Mikoyan, son of former First Deputy Premier Anastas 路The Cubans expected the United States to inMikoyan; and Georgi Shaknazarov, a personal aide to vade and predicted up to eight hundred thouGeneral Secretary Ghorbachev.
The information prosand casualties. vided by the Soviet participants fills a major gap in the 路 At least twenty nuclear warheads were actually in one-sided history of the crisis; the conference results Cuba but were never mounted on the rockets, in compelling new analysis of the critical question of according to General Dmitry Volkogonov, this is why Premier Khrushchev decided to deploy the misthe first confirmation that the Soviets had mansiles in Cuba. aged to deploy warheads as well as missiles before the blockade was implemented.
S.-Soviet settlement of the leases substantive documentation on OPERATION missile crisis, according to Theodore Sorensen, MONGOOSE, the covert program authorized by Presiwho edited Robert Kennedy's memoir of the criA CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS sis, Thirteen Days.
Attended all four sile crisis, ""Cuba between the Superpowers,"" is held days by Fidel Castro, the last surviving world leader on the island of Antigua.
S.-Cuban and Soviparalleled accounts of his personal role in the events, et-Cuban dynflmic and Cuba's role in the crisis. as well as that of Cuba as a nation.
Pursuant to a FOIA lawsuit filed by weapons in Cuba, and that the local Soviet commanthe National Security Archive, the Department of der had the authority to fire those weapons without State releases the remaining correspondence befurther direction from the Kremlin in the event of a tween Kennedy and Khrushchev.
