Indeed, on the fever chart of these forty-five years, the Cuban confrontation gives off the highest reading, signaling a nearterminal breakdown.
Conventional interpretations and reconstructions of the crisis that followed the discovery of Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Pinar del Rio Province, the region of Cuba closest to the United States, tell us that the shooting down of another U-2, Major Rudolf Anderson's, presented the moment of utmost peril.
But perhaps the most serious threats, as Robert L O ' Connell makes clear in this chapter, may have lurked under the water, in the form of Soviet submarines armed with tactical nuclear torpedoes.
Their commanders were prepared to use them on the spot, and there would be no waiting on Moscow 's word just as the Soviet general who ordered the firing of the SA-2 surfaceto-air missile at Anderson's plane did so on his own initiative.
OF AMERICAN HISTORY October 30, local Soviet commanders also had the authority to fire tactical nuclear weapons, without prior approval.
President John F Kennedy may have been ready to risk not going to war, and so, as the crisis deepened, was the man who had initiated it, Khrushchev.
But as O'Connell points out, other factors might have led the two antagonists over the brink.
History is too often determined not by its obvious movers and shakers but by its loose cannons.
On Black Saturday, the former secretary of state, Dean Acheson, who was one of Kennedy's advisers, advocated a strike against the missiles.
Archivist of the United States ""I know what they are required to do in the light of their history and their Room 1200 posture around the world.
Cheyenne Mountain 80903-2000 ""I believe that under the NATO treaty, with which I was associated, we would be required to respond by knocking out a missile base inside the Soviet Union,"" Acheson went on.
ROBERT L O ' CONNELL is a former member of the United States Delegation On this day, the fortieth anniversary of the commencement of the to the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
A History of War, Weapons, and Aggression; The Ride of tion the narrative summary of the findings of the Danforth Commisthe Second Horsemen: The Birth and Death of War; Sacred Vessels: The sion.
As you know this document has remained classified since its Cult of the Battleship and the Rise of the United States Navy; Soul of the Sword; and completion in 1972, and is only now being released as the result of a a novel, Fast Eddie, based on the life of Edward Vernon Rickenbacker. long judicial process, culminating in a ruling by the United States Supreme O'Connell lives in Charlottesville, Virginia.
However, our accomplishsources—comments made by principals to subordinates and foreign ments pale before those of the Danforth Commission—the historians, diplomats, a limited amount of message traffic, and data gleaned from members of the military, archaeologists, cryptanalysts, climatologists, patterns of nuclear release authority, launch procedures, and subsequent physicists, physicians, and the host of other specialists—who worked weapons effects.
Despite these impediments, we believe that the passage continuously for three years to reconstruct the events of October 27–8, of time, unprecedented access to those sources that do exist, along with 1962 and their aftermath.
In doing so they overcame enormous gaps .. . the talent and dedication of our professional staff, has allowed for a reahiatuses literally burned in the fabric of the evidence, pursuing clues at sonably accurate profile of this tragic war and its aftermath.
We owe them a prohistorical research will undoubtedly alter the facade, but the underlying found debt of gratitude.
Together they produced a document that I frame of events should continue to stand. believe will explain to the American people how and why history took such a tragic turn, and help remove the remaining veil of guilt and susCausation picion that continues to hang over our beloved nation.
The understanding of Nikita S Khrushchev 's motives for deploying nuclear forces to Cuba has undergone a fundamental shift.
At the time of I remain, respectfully, the missile crisis it was understood by the United States and its allies as Newton Leroy Gingrich, Ph.D. an offensive move aimed at threatening the American people and laying the foundation for the eventual Soviet dominance of the Western Hemisphere.
In large part, the USSR was viewed as an aggressive power intent SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS on world hegemony, disdainful of United States political will, and recklessly determined to gain a fundamental psychological advantage over its chief Introduction adversary.
However, subsequent revelations, particularly those of the Far more than any of the other momentous occurrences of the twenChinese and Indians, point to this as a basic misinterpretation. tieth century, the events surrounding the Two Days' War remain The weight of evidence now indicates that Khrushchev's motives, shrouded in uncertainty.
It was the charter of the Danforth Commisthough profoundly misguided, were defensive and centered on two sepsion, directed by the president and confirmed by a Joint Resolution of arate sets of concerns.
First, reporting indicates that the Soviet leaderCongress, to gather and analyze all available evidence with the aim of ship prized the Cuban revolution as the first example of a people clarifying the causes of the war, its course, and the subsequent response willingly embracing communism and were apparently determined to on the part of the world community.
In this we have only partially sucprotect it from what was perceived as an almost inevitable invasion on ceeded.
The near-simultaneous demise of virtually all the key decision the part of the United States (a conclusion made all the more plausible makers on both sides left gaps in the record that simply could not be by two very large amphibious maneuvers held in the spring and fall overcome.
While United States Intelligence bly a dozen or more SS-5 IRBMs with significantly longer ranges.
From a matter of course, also brought along approximately one hundred Soviet perspective, this must have been a highly attractive though risky nuclear weapons for their Frogs, cruise missiles, and IL-28s, and, fatally, option.
In one quick move they would have not only moved decisively one nuclear torpedo for each of the submarines.
Compounding matters, to protect the Cuban revolution but also significantly redressed the Soviet nuclear release authority was profoundly faulted.
Control by strategic imbalance by more than doubling the number of their ballisticMoscow of the SS-4 warheads was likely provided through KGB elemissile—mounted nuclear warheads capable of reaching the United ments in Cuba, a procedure, though it ultimately failed, that was at least States. l Of course, the Soviet leader and his colleagues must have realcredible.
Unfortunately, no parallel regulation was extended to the tacized that the introduction of these missiles into Cuba would be intertical weapons, which might be activated by the commander on the ground or at sea by his own authority.
More than any other single factor ' The central attraction of all ballistic missiles was their speed, which at this time rendered them invulit was the failure of these procedures that brought about the terrible nerable to interception once successfully launched. consequences of the Two Days' War.
The key members of this group Yet, the evidence indicates that it would hardly be fair to characterize were Vice President Lyndon B Johnson; the president's brother and the group's behavior as reckless.
So far as is known, the general outlook attorney general, Robert Kennedy; the secretary of state, Dean Rusk; of the participants became increasingly less aggressive as the crisis tranUndersecretary of State George Ball; Llwellyn Thompson, recently United States spired.
It is known that these policy Douglas Dillon; National Security Assistant McGeorge Bundy; Theodore choices were thoroughly debated, and the one perceived the least danSorensen, the president's speechwriter and factotum; former secretary of gerous of the three, the ""quarantine,"" was chosen.
Tragically, the entire keystone of his plan to halt and reverse the offensive buildup. membership, with the exception of Bohlen and Stevenson, would be The next several days seemed to point toward a peaceful resolution of dead within two weeks.
An intensive alone that our knowledge of this body's deliberations and even its exisUnited States diplomatic campaign brought our European allies and the Organitence rests.
Unfortunately, the reporting of each was circumscribed by zation of American States solidly behind the Kennedy administration's time and circumstances.
Then, at a meeting of the UN Security Council on October 25, viewed by the Danforth Commission staff, but he had attended only one Ambassador Stevenson publicly confronted doubters around the world meeting before leaving to assume his duties in Paris and therefore was and, in particular, the Soviet delegation with photographic evidence of familiar with only the opening circumstances.
Subsequently published as A Man of Peace in a Nest of Hawks (New the Two Days' War.
Shortly after, it was reported The Two Days' War that the twenty Soviet ships closest to the blocking force had either Saturday, October 27, 1962, began inauspiciously and ended far stopped or reversed their course.
But the vision of peace proved to be gathering data on nuclear testing near the North Pole had strayed into a mirage.
Far more serious was the news On October 26, the White House announced, on the basis of U-2 that around noon a Soviet SAM battery had shot down a U-2 on a overflights, that rather than signs of dismantlement ""the development reconnaissance mission over Cuba, killing its pilot, Major Rudolf of ballistic missile sites continues at a rapid pace, ... apparently Anderson.
Why this was done and exactly who was responsible has directed at achieving a full operational capability as soon as possible."" 3 never been resolved.
But it was plainly part of a pattern of local Soviet Yet, it is also apparent that intense diplomatic efforts were being made commanders taking matters into their hands. through official and unofficial channels to head off a confrontation.
On At 1343 hours, two destroyers of Task Force 136, Blandy and the same day as the White House announcement, Khrushchev had Domado, picked up on their sonars a Soviet submarine approximately written a public letter to Kennedy offering to withdraw the missiles twelve miles south of the island of Andros, moving in the general direcfrom Cuba in exchange for an American removal of the Jupiter IRBMs tion of the aircraft carrier Randolph.
We know from Captain Lev from Turkey, along with a formal pledge not to invade the island.
When the B-130 moved to within 12,000 yards of the Ranmunication the same day.
Whatever the intent, eliminate the missiles from the island for a simple promise not to the B-130 surfaced shortly thereafter.
Whether the proposals would have allowed the United States and Soviet engulfed the Randolph and within minutes formed a characteristic leadership to steer away from impending catastrophe remains today a mushroom cloud.
Since Randolph was conventionally powered, it was matter of speculation, since the miscalculations of subordinates and disclear that the explosion was a result of hostile action.
It was learned from Captain s White House statement on continuation of missile buildup in Cuba, October 26, 1962. s 4 Op. cit., ""My Memories of October's Path to Apocalypse,"" 372.
OF AMERICAN HISTORY Dubivko that Soviet submarine commanders off Cuba had the authority to employ nuclear torpedoes if their hulls were breached.
Whether this was the case with the B-130 will never be known, since it was immediately sunk by the combined fire of the two United States destroyers.
Again, one or several local Soviet commanders (extensive research of Red Army command-and-control patterns points to either General Issa Pliyev or General Igor Statsenko as the key initiator 7 ) chose on his own authority to employ nuclear weapons.
As the first United States F-100 and F-101B fighter bombers swept in from the north, a barrage of four Soviet nuclear-armed Frogs was fired at Guantanamo, obliterating the base and wiping out the Second Marine Division.
This was shortly followed by the launch of two nuclear-tipped cruise missiles in the general direction of the Marine ships offshore, which, though they each missed by over a mile, set off explosions that nearly swamped several ships.
Once again, Soviet procedures for nuclear release proved There ensued a lull of approximately twenty-five minutes, durtragically inadequate.
During the lull, Soviet personnel not only maning which time General Thomas Powers, head c f the Strategic Air aged to prepare the two rockets for launch but also obtained their assoCommand , struggled to learn what had happened in Washingciated nuclear warheads, mated them to the missiles, and completed the ton, and if in fact the National Command Authority was defunct.
At arming procedures.52, after being assured that-a nuclear blast had gone off directly On or about 1610, the first missile was launched.
It impacted about above the District of Columbia and having failed to reestablish contact eight minutes later in a field in rural northern Kentucky, forty-two miles with any elements of the NCA, Powers, on his own authority, sent short of Cincinnati, but its warhead malfunctioned and did not produce out orders to SAC elements around the world to initiate the SIOP. a nuclear event.
Unfortunately, this was not the case with the second Twenty-two minutes later, the general was put in touch telephonically SS-4, which was fired approximately eight minutes after the first and with John W McCormack.
The speaker of the House of Representadetonated at 1625 hours and 31 seconds, approximately 2,000 feet tives, at home for the weekend in the Boston area, had been located and above the Lincoln Memorial.
Strategically, this unsanctioned act of preemption may have decapitus of communications between the leadership in Moscow and their tated the United States government and military, but it sealed the doom of the forces in Cuba remained very much in doubt.
Had President Kennedy and his key advisers remained alive and made aware of Captain Shumkov's actions, since his submarine was in control, it is likely that they would have responded in a measured and sunk so quickly.
It is also open to question whether they were promptly judicious manner.
Now, instead, the entire Single Integrated Operainformed of tactical nuclear weapons use in Cuba.
Even the nature of tions Plan would be executed against the Soviet Union without the attack on Washington may have remained obscure to them, since regard for the consequences. their own embassy and its communications gear was completely deThe SIOP had evolved gradually and in relative obscurity during the stroyed in the blast.
At any rate they had very little time left. 1950s and early sixties, driven almost exclusively by targeting policy.
As Within minutes of the Powers order, thirty-five of the forty-two prenew United States nuclear weapons and delivery systems were deployed, Soviet fueled Atlases and Titans along with fourteen Jupiters and Thors had targets were found for them, until they numbered literally in the been successfully launched.
When the Kennedy administration assumed power, Defense of the IRBMs, each armed with a four-megaton W-49 warhead, began Secretary Robert McNamara expressed something close to horror at impacting in and around Moscow, Leningrad, and several specifically its implications.
On June 16, 1962, during a speech, McNamara first military targets, paralyzing the national command-and-control system publicly articulated the need for a ""damage limitation"" strategy.
Thomas Powers, December 11, 1962, before the House Armed Services Committee, 27 the full-blown SIOP remained in place, a terrible instrument of St.
After releasing their two AGM-28 already been won, but the punishment had just begun.
Russian heartland in and Titan ICBMs, also armed with W-49 warheads, began hitting a fruitless search of viable remaining targets for their Mk-41 and B-53 broad range of civilian and military targets.
To their credit, numerous crews returned home with sixty-three more ICBMs and seventy Thors and Jupiters arrived and their weapons bays full, but in all too many instances thermonuclear detonated over their targets.
United States Navy's ballistic missile submarine fleet launched their Polaris A-1s Next in order of appearance were the manned bombers of the Strateand A-2s against Soviet targets along the littoral.
Many malfuncgic Air Command, an eighth of which had been kept airborne in rotattioned-the USS Patrick Henry was lost with all hands due to an exploing cycles to avoid preemption and shorten the time and distance to sion of a missile prior to ejection—but over fifty detonated at or near their targets.
Approximately half an hour after the initiation of the their targets, obliterating coastal assets along the Baltic and Barents SIOP, a flight of B-47E Stratojets, each armed with multiple nineseas, the Black Sea, and in the Pacific.
Meanwhile, an armada of B-47s megaton Mk-53 gravity bombs, crossed over into Cuban airspace and and tactical-attack aircraft went after Soviet ground force concentralaid down a radioactive path of destruction.
In Nor were the PVO Strany elements charged with protecting the skies response, the USSR managed to deliver precisely two more glancing but over the Soviet Union any more successful in thwarting the SAC still nuclear blows to the continental United States.
Yet, they were sufbombers that began arriving about 2. hours after the ICBMs in the ficient to ensure another measure of gratuitous retribution. form of sixty-three supersonic B-58 Hustlers.
Their command-andAt approximately 2200 hours a 611AV-class Soviet ballistic missile control already shattered and their SAMs designed for much slower tarsubmarine surfaced fifty-five miles west of Virginia gets, Soviet air defense troops were virtually helpless in the face of the Mach 2 Hustlers, flying at 70,000 feet and carrying either a single Mk-53 or up to five single-megaton B-43s.
Both overshot the mark—one While the costs of the Two Days' War are common knowledge, they detonated in open country north of Fort Pickett, the other hitting Susbear repeating in light of the blame assigned to the United States and sex, Virginia.
The submarine's captain probably received word of hosthe resulting consequences. tilities and was carrying out an assigned mission, but this remains The first to suffer were the Japanese, who for the,second time in just uncertain since the boat was sunk within minutes after the missiles were seventeen years were victimized by severe nuclear effects, when prevailfired.
Together, both blasts killed less than 6,000 people, but they led ing southwesterly winds delivered a cloud of very heavy radiation United States military authorities to conclude the USSR was still dangerous. directly from the Vladivostok area.
Of all the excesses committed by United States forces during the of smoke from urban and forest firestorms, spread a cloud that, within a two days, this was its most inexcusable, and one that would have dire month, girdled the entire Northern Hemisphere, particularly the areas consequences for the postconflict environment.
By January 1, 1963, sunlight had for this wanton act of mega-arson, it is that it marked the final act of the been reduced in this band by up to 50 percent, resulting in by far the terrible drama.
All United States Intelligence sources pointed to the complete coldest winter ever recorded.
There had been no signs of resistance for widespread public fear that the condition was permanent and even premany hours and precious little signs of life.
At last the generals sheathed dictions by respected scientists that a new Ice Age was inevitable.
The Two Days' War was over; now it was necessary nately, these fears were dispelled when the dust settled during the next to come to terms with its consequences. year, though at the cost of greatly increased radiation levels.
In the end, however, the most serious consequences of nuclear twilight was the virAftermath tual absence of spring in the Northern Hemisphere and the resultant For those who survived, the initial response was largely one of relief drop in food production, setting off severe famines in India and China that the conflict was over so quickly and that it had not spread worldand very serious food shortages across Europe and North America. wide.
The United States had lost over a quarter-million people but was By the late summer the return from Russia of Chinese and European basically intact, and the magnitude of the damage suffered by the USSR reconnaissance parties confirmed what had become increasingly apparand its allies was understood by only a very few.
Death and expediency—choosing a path aimed at satisfying a hort-term domestic destruction in the USSR was far worse, akin to Cuba's.
Most notable was the administration's scarcely would succumb to starvation and the effects of radiation during the folconcealed contempt for the global disarmament movement and its lowing year, leaving the population only a little more than a tenth of refusal to participate in the 1966 Geneva Convention for the Abolition what it had been.
It was during the fall of 1963 that the term Second of Nuclear Armaments, a decision that left the United States in a Holocaust was first applied to the conflict, and the United States began minority of one.
This status was confirmed by Nixon's decisions to to be viewed increasingly as malefactor, not victim, by people around rebuild the war-depleted nuclear stockpile, continue the deployment of the globe.
The trend would only gain momentum until the United solid-fuele&Minuteman ICBMs, and prioritize the development of a States was virtually ostracized from the world community. ballistic missile defense.
While these moves were plainly aimed at reasDuring the early stages, Americans were thoroughly preoccupied suring the American public, which undeniably had been the target of a with their own misfortune.
The seat of national government and many recent nuclear attack, they galvanized worldwide opinion.
Anti-American of its functions had been shattered, and reestablishing order and coherdemonstrations of unprecedented size became virtually a daily occurence in the face of a collapsing food supply proved a Herculean task. rence; NATO collapsed in early 1967 when the entire European memElsewhere, Americans may have been seen as callous and self-absorbed, bership withdrew, and a movement to expel the United States swept but in their own eyes they were struggling for survival as a nation. the UN General Assembly later that year.
Once again attempting to To his everlasting credit, President McCormack rose to the emerplay on domestic outrage, Nixon, in a nationally televised address on gency, discharging his duties with a wisdom and dignity that earned him January 23, 1968, renounced membership and ordered all UN functions the nearly universal sobriquet Grandfather John.
McCarthy's victory, by an unprecedented 76 percent of the ity against the United States, pitted two veterans of the Cold War, Senpopular vote, made it clear that the American people believed that ator Henry M Jackson and ex–vice president Richard M Nixon, Nixon had taken the wrong turn and that isolation amounted to against each other.
While neither candidate was inclined to concede national exile. any measure of war guilt, it was Nixon who seized the initiative and ultiNow, on the eve of the 1972 elections, President McCarthy's record mately the election with his famous ""nothing to be ashamed of"" speech. remains a mixed one.
The United States has reestablished diplomatic Although the passage of time may partially rehabilitate the image relations with twenty-four states and also assumed an ""observational"" of the Nixon administration, at present little has emerged that is status in the UN, offering to take up full membership if and when those positive.
In essence, Nixon and his advisers were guided by political resolutions dealing with war guilt and reparations are dropped.
OF AMERICAN HISTORY American scientific community, with massive support from the U.S. government, has assumed a leading role in the global nuclear decontamination effort.
American agriculture is once again producing bountiful harvests, which are being systematically distributed to what are now ROBERT DALLEK termed the Victim States.
United States international trade is once again growing, and we are now participating in the deliberations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
JFK LIVES Nonetheless, President McCarthy 's record is less positive on the core issue of nuclear disarmament.
Unilateral reductions of the American strategic arsenal and offers to enter negotiations aimed at an eventual ""zero option"" have plainly fallen on deaf ears, especially among the signatories to the Geneva Convention.
Among state parties there is no option but the treaty itself and the immediate renunciation and disarmament it entails.
This position is unquestionably founded on a continuing belief that the United States was primarily responsible for the Probably no question in recent history is more poignant than what would have outbreak and consequences of the Two Days' War. happened if John F Kennedy had not chosen to visit Dallas on November 22, After viewing the evidence in the greatest possible detail, it is the 1963.
Barely more than a year had passed since his most memorable success, opinion of the Danforth Commission staff that this is far from the case. the resolution of the missile crisis.
It is true, however, for reasons havreforms, especially in civil rights, are probably a given.
It must be admitted that we did, in this process, comKennedy was the youthful symbol of youthful age.
Rarely in history has the mit something close to genocide, and that the use of the term ""The Secdeath of one individual so tainted the future.
Yet, the Beatles and Woodstock, the miniskirt, women's liberation, Twiggy, the the only way to ensure its end is to ensure the elimination of the means by Twist, the Prague Spring, and Swinging London.
Would we have been spared the Abolition of Nuclear Armaments at the earliest possible date.
