Conversely, the Cienfuegos submarine base dilemma of 1970—despite having graver potential consequences—was never framed as a crisis, was out of the public eye, and was equally successful at repealing a Soviet threat.
We offer a Force Dilemma model that suggests the president’s problem definition process should produce crisis classifications sparingly, considering and employing less confrontational instruments of power, without prematurely sending unnecessary signals to adversaries, contemporaries, and the public.
Fast-forward to 1970, a repeat of this scenario, potentially more dangerous than the first, never reached the level of brinksmanship in 1962.
Two conflicts, two potentially disastrous results, two paths to solution, both culminate in the United States’ victories over the Soviets’ use of Cuba in a game of nuclear warfare.
The authors thank Scott Wolford and three anonymous readers for their insightful comments.
Previous versions of this paper were presented at the 2010 Southern Political Science Association Annual Meeting in New Orleans, Louisiana, and the 2009 American Political Science Association Annual Meeting in Toronto, ON, Canada.
The noncrisis in Cienfuegos has been studied so little that Siniver recommends two journal articles and six books—three of the books are memoirs by the then Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, Kissinger, and Nixon, two of the books are about Kissinger, and one is on the Nixon White House—none of them are specifically about Cienfuegos.
Neorealism argues that international relations can be explained by the structures of the international system, forcing states to act in specific ways, particularly when it comes to the use of power— limiting and constraining state’s choices —and has been the established theory to understand the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union.
We suggest that it is the latter approach where the Cienfuegos case has its foundation, although we do not explicitly adopt a constructivist framework here.
An examination of Cienfuegos suggests that a president’s problem definition process should produce crisis signals sparingly.
This distinction allows for the consideration of additional courses of action, many of which employ less confrontational instruments of power.
This paper examines the extant literature on the president’s rhetorical leadership and the nature and myriad definitions of crises.
We provide a parsimonious, but effective presidential Force Dilemma model, with force as a catalyst, for determining when signal choice might be important for labeling a potential conflict.
We suggest that labeling a potential conflict as a crisis leaves little room for solutions other than force.
Tulis argues that the general theory of presidential rhetorical leadership is concerned with institutional practice, political authority, influence, and the exercise of presidential power.
Bachrach and Baratz and Cohen suggest that not mentioning politically relevant content has important implications as well.
This is certainly true when the issue is foreign policy—generally understood as certain by the members of Congress and specifically decided by the Supreme Court, when they ruled that the president is the “sole organ” of the nation’s foreign policy.
What the president says formally, and informally, and how that message is interpreted by the media, the public, political actors, and so forth, help to shape our theory.
Defining A Crisis Lebow and Haney provide several definitions of crises in the academic literature and concede that there is little consensus on the exact definition.
Crises can be important situations, violent situations, turning points, situations characterized by different levels of threat, time to respond, and surprise.
The latter tends to examine methods of communication, while the former attempts to address and expand theoretical issues related to the concept of presidential power.
Fearon says that troop deployments and public threats make crises public events, locking leaders into positions from which they cannot back down.
While there is little consensus on an exact definition, there is agreement that crises consist of some threat, and the time to deal with the threat is finite.
The explosive nature of high stakes , limited time, and surprise are all catalysts prone to move decision makers to the high end of a notional response rheostat.
The expectation that crises legitimately warrant increased levels of response serves as a self-priming pump, ratcheting up reaction prospects regardless of the veritable threat posed.
In each of these, only through the declaration of a crisis was the military response initially received as legitimate by the United States population.
Most of the existing literature assumes that a crisis exists, but Cienfuegos does not fit neatly into the literature and, as we shall see, neither does the Force Dilemma model that we present later.
However, “private tactics and quiet maneuvers is common practice” , despite existing literature that quiet diplomacy is ineffective.
Lebow argues that once leaders are committed to brinksmanship, they become insensitive, in varying degrees, to information that challenges the prospect of its success, often devising elaborate personal and institutional defenses to avoid having to come to terms with this information.
Fearon’s work suggests that once the president has signaled a crisis and is thus committed to brinksmanship, there is a political cost to backing down.
If the president—or the target—does not back down, they will stay locked in their position and will be unable to back down, due to political consequences at home.
These “audience costs” ultimately signal credible threats to a target, risking a hardening of position where both sides prefer a fight, rather than negotiation of a settlement.
To threaten the United States and strengthen relations with Cuba, Khrushchev wanted to turn Cuba into a missile base.
When you combine this literature with the handful of scholastic writing regarding Cienfuegos and Haney’s challenge to “…understand the politics of problem definition”, ultimately deciding first and foremost if a problem exists at all, we thus employ a parsimonious, but effective problem definition model, with force as a catalyst, for determining when signal choice might be important for labeling a potential conflict.
The definition of Crisis fits the Ury and Smoke categories of high stakes, little time, high uncertainty, and a narrowing of options.
Near-crisis can be defined as a relaxation of one or all of these categories, while Non-Crisis cannot be defined by high stakes, little time, high uncertainty, or a narrowing of options.
In Column II, Force Expectation is the public attitude toward the use of force in a crisis; Column III is the Force Tolerance/Legitimacy component—the favorability that domestic political actors assign to a crisis—members of Congress, bureaucratic actors, and interest groups.
Force Expectation and Force Toleration outcomes are directly proportional to the problem label choices Crisis, Near-Crisis, and NonCrisis.
As a result of this critical selection, leaders may find their options extremely limited and held to the mercy of Fearon’s audience costs—though not in the same context that Fearon used those costs.
Columns IV and V are Leadership Perception with Force and Leadership Perception without Force, given the problem definition labeling.
For example, failing to use military force in a decided Crisis will likely be perceived as weak and irresponsible.
Conversely, using force for a Near or Non-Crisis might be viewed as an overreaction or premaForce Dilemma Model Surprise Threat Problem Label Force Force Leadership Leadership Urgency Expectation Toleration / Perception Perception Legitimacy With Force Without Force High Crisis High High Positive Negative action) Use of Force Threshold Near-Crisis Low Low Negative (PrePositive mature action) Non-Crisis Low Low Negative Positive (Unnecessary to act) Low FIG 1.
As a result, presidents may be best served initially defining a problem at the low end of the problem label scale, which allows for greater response options, while reserving the decision to escalate higher if warranted.
Using the Force Dilemma Model, Kennedy’s actions from the beginning signal that the threat and urgency of the situation is high, that there will be an expectation of force, and that any action on the part of the United States that does not use force will be seen as a weak and tepid response from the Commander-In-Chief.
These signals prompted schools to implement bombing drills at school, while families built bomb shelters in their back yard.
The cumulative effect put into motion a showdown that could escalate into a large-scale, nuclear conflict.
Five days later, on October 27, 1962, President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev agreed in principal that the United States would not invade Cuba if the Soviet Union would remove its weapons from Cuba.
According to a memo that Kissinger would request eight years later on the interpretation of the agreement, “…the “understanding” we have with the Soviets…is an implicit one, which was never formally buttoned down.
Testing The Waters…Literally In the fall of 1970, the Soviet Union made a bold move that was certain to provoke the United States officials, although surprisingly, it went largely unnoticed publicly.
The significance of such a base in this region dwarfs the concerns of land-based missiles in Cuba less than a decade earlier.
Simply stated, the clandestine operations of submarines, unlike that of land-based missile systems, make their exact whereabouts, capabilities , and intensions principally unknown.
This inquiry surprised Kissinger and appears more of a challenge than a serious search for understanding since the agreement, although somewhat incomplete, left no room for any other understanding except that of the United States’ position permitting no offensive weapons in Cuba.
It was only after doubts had been raised, that the United States intelligence indicated signs of a rapidly growing submarine base in Cienfuegos.
Bad Timing for a Nuclear War The Cienfuegos situation was not happening in a vacuum.
President Nixon was seven years removed from the last nuclear showdown with the Soviets, the era of Soviet détente had not yet blossomed, and the spread of communism was on the move in Vietnam.
The Soviet’s backing of Syria in an invasion of Jordan was a continuing threat to the peace of that region.
Additionally, pro-Marxist activity was gaining steam in Latin America with Chile successfully electing a socialist government.
Despite these factors serving to weaken the President’s normally strong resolve in such matters, Nixon was able to temper the highly diverse, emotional, and clearly conflicting advice from his staff, keeping his options at the low end of the Force Dilemma Model.
Bill Rogers, Nixon’s Secretary of State, thought the entire matter ill timed for the upcoming November elections and recommended a delaying tactic.
Nixon’s response was a mixture of both political preservation and unfeigned responsibility.
To be sure, political motivations included concerns of his failing popularity and upcoming elections, sensing that the country would not well receive an emerging conflict while currently failing in another.
Perhaps a greater and more legitimate impetus was his keen appreciation of just how serious a threat he was facing.
While Communist expansionism was heretofore accomplished indirectly, such as through a third party, this challenge meant meeting the enemy face-toface, and, like in 1962, nuclear weapons were the central issue.
This would alert the Soviets to the United States’ knowledge of their efforts, but the information would be void of detail and appear nonthreatening in tone.
The White House would not confirm the press reports nor would the issue be raised in any external meetings or conferences.
Third, open dialogue between Kissinger and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Secretary Kissinger would ensure the Soviets understood the “way out” offered by the United States.
The aforementioned strategy almost collapsed, when a Pentagon briefer inadvertently provided a highly detailed account of the Cienfuegos base development to include all background information to the press.
Impassive, Nixon held his ground, keeping the matter in his purview while proceeding to execute his planned schedule which included traveling to Europe.
This approach was crucial to keep the Soviet “way out” alive since a Soviet change of course in Cienfuegos would be a clear humiliation if it appeared they backed down again under increasing United States’ pressure.
As a result, all options were still in play, and Kissinger resumed talks with his Soviet counterparts focusing on the United States’ understanding of the 1962 Kennedy– Khrushchev agreement, potential for a showdown if the Cuba base plans continued, and fragility of a future Moscow summit should this not be resolved diplomatically.
Kissinger disarmed the press with a “wait and see” approach, and persistent press inquiries were consistently met with “No comment” stonewalling , while keeping Nixon above the fray of the mounting commotion and allowing diplomacy to work its course.
Adequately convinced of the unacceptable political cost to pursue an operational submarine base in Cienfuegos, the Soviets backed down.
This outcome was unquestionably the result of effective diplomacy, most specifically the creation and sale of a face-saving escape, made possible by the Nixon administration’s success in keeping the issue on the low end of a problem definition scale.
It was also Nixon’s refusal to ratchet up the rhetoric, allowing the complementary use of diplomacy to work in a noncrisis atmosphere, keeping force expectations low, working less in the public arena, and spending more time behind the scenes, working through the proper channels to prevent catastrophic consequences.
Second, President Kennedy also has a little-known, but effective noncrisis success that has received scant attention from scholars.
Reeves argues that President Kennedy was practically a cocontractor on the Wall’s construction with Khrushchev, an agreement that might have gotten Kennedy impeached had it been widely known in 1961.
This agreement, however, gradually reduced the threat of nuclear war until the Wall fell in 1989.
If there were to be a nuclear war in those years…it was going to be in Europe, and it was going to begin in Berlin.
It would have happened if the Soviets had made good their threats to take Berlin.
The people of East Germany and other communist countries, at the rate of two thousand a day by the middle of 1961, were using Berlin to escape to the West…the doctors, engineers, writers, lawyers, the young people.
Our problem was that our allies, the British and French, had only fifteen thousand soldiers in West Berlin and they were surrounded by dozens of divisions of the Red Army.
If we intended to keep Berlin, or keep Germany, or perhaps even keep all of Europe, we had to use nuclear weapons.
When realized the Khrushchev’s real problem was only refugees on the run, the two politicians…were able to work things out.
After the Wall went up on Communist territory on August 13, 1961, JFK did not appear in public for three days.
And, from the day the Berlin Wall went up until the day it went down, the chance of nuclear war in the world declined every day.
Two explanations could be that the Berlin Wall is already gone, and while it holds historical value, the strategic value is limited.
Kennedy kept his options at the low end of the crisis spectrum, recognizing that while Berlin was a potentially dangerous spot that may require future military action, the building of a wall on their territory did not rise to that level of commitment.
Bachrach and Baratz argue that “nondecisions” that never enter the political arena, can be as important to the policy process as those that are transparent.
This nondecision allowed Kennedy to avoid conflict, while also limiting exposure of these issues to the public.
Despite these observations of successful quiet, diplomatic actions, it would be a mistake to interpret these conclusions as an appeal against the use of force, or that noncrisis and near-crisis definitions are less serious than crisis situations.
Put another way, presidents must be careful in the realm of problem labeling since courses of action are likely to be set long before decision makers truly appreciate the nature of the problem at hand.
Without question, the murder of over three thousand innocents demanded justice, and reducing the likelihood of future attacks rightly became a necessary imperative.
That is, until Bill Clinton signaled that he and the al Qaeda organization was a danger to the United States.
Cienfuegos was a much deadlier scenario than 1962, when spy planes could easily account for missiles.
Not only did Nixon and Kissinger successfully defeat the Soviets, they did so without having to fire a shot—or even seriously threatening to move the problem to the high-end crisis spectrum of the Force Dilemma model.
A widespread myth is the notion that the Chinese symbol for crisis represents a combination of danger and opportunity.
Most accurately translated, it simply means a dangerous moment in time.
Despite this clear misinterpretation, the idea that crises consist of both risk and possibility has appealed to many strategists.
Conceivably, this attraction implies that the reduction in threat is achieved through the difficult process of choosing the right strategy among what are likely many dead ends.
The emerging American way of war appears to unwisely downplay serious consideration for which strategy might be needed for success, perhaps overconfident in its current hegemonic station.
In the aftermath of 9/11, the United States might have prematurely evoked the crisis label in an attempt to satisfy an outraged populace and legitimize a far-reaching military strategy.
A clearer strategic selection was tragically ignored in favor of “shock and awe”, ultimately resulting in several missed opportunities.
For years, neorealism has influenced the literature—focusing on identifiable, measurable explanations of systems and structures, instead of a constructivist approach, which may be less straightforward, but potentially richer in explanation, with its focus on the social practice and interaction between state actors.
We suggest that the Cienfuegos case is best understood through this constructivist lens and deserves more attention.
However, we do make the case that the Cienfuegos case deserves more study and consideration than it has received to this point, and we disagree with most scholars that 1962 was more dangerous than 1970.
Public Opinion, Presidential Rhetoric and the Domestic Politics of Audience Costs in United States Foreign Policy Crises.
FEARON, JAMES D Domestic Political Audiences and the Escalation of International Disputes.
Theory and Evidence of Presidential Management of Foreign Policy Decision-Making.
