Above all, this event was so huge that it could have gave birth to another World War.
This was a 13 day confrontation between USA and USSR that took place in 1962.
Mainly, it was about the Soviet’s deployment of ballistic missiles in Cuba.
This confrontation between USA and USSR took place on October 28, 1962.
It took almost 13 days to resolve the conflict between the two nations.
During those days Nikita Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviet Union.
This competition between the two super powers led to the placement of missiles.
Operations by the US US was a big threat when USSR have been planning to place their missiles in Cuba.
World’s response for the crisis Being a member of the NATO, United States was supported by Italy and Turkey.
For this reason, these nations also gave them the opportunity to place their missiles on their nation.
On the other hand, the Soviet union only had the support of Cuba and some small communist nations.
Kennedy’s epic speech Then president John F Kennedy gave an epic speech to his nation in the wake of the crisis.
He gave the order to quarantine all kinds of military equipment that they were shipping to Cuba.
Some approved of his actions, while some clearly disapproved of his actions.
Khrushchev’s important telegram to Kennedy The leader of the Soviet Union sent a telegram to Kennedy.
This was a warning for the United States intervention in the matters of Cuba.
Above all, he stated that any intervention in their privacy can also lead to war.
The Response by Kennedy to the telegram Kennedy also responded to the telegram in strict order.
He stated that their nation will take strict action if any offensive missile is deployed in the nation of Cuba.
Above all, it only had one purpose, that was to solve the problem without any military action.
Officials from both the side took many discussions to resolve the conflicts between them.
The Result of the conflict After various discussions Soviet Union had to promise for the removal of their missiles from Cuba.
Furthermore, USSR also promised that they would never invade Cuba without provocation.
Otherwise, we all know it could have led to full scale war between the two nations.
We provide you with the latest breaking news and videos straight from the entertainment industry.FOLLOW US © SuttaNews India 2021.
