THE CUBAN MISSILE Fifty years ago, the United States and the Soviet Union WATCH THE VÍDEO came dangerously close to nuclear war www.scholastic .com/js K F or President John F a ticking bomb.
On the morning of Tuesday, Photos from CIA spy planes Instead, the President decided October 16, 1962, his national showed Soviet technicians building to establish a naval blockade security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, missile bases in Cuba, only 90 around Cuba.
Any missile WORDS TO KNOW nuclear missiles that could kill launched from Cuba would be • biockade [n): a barrier of war80 million Americans. regarded as a Soviet attack, subject ships or troops used to isolate Kennedy immediately assembled to United States retaliation. an enemy his top advisers.
Suddenly, total war days, as word came of more Soviet was a frightening possibility.
This Communist nation made up of But such an attack could kill long conflict between the United States and Russia and neighboring republics thousands of innocent Cubans, the Soviet Union lasted from the 1 2 JUNIOR SCHOLASTIC/OCTOBER 1,2012 A United States warship American comes close to students confronting a / ""duciiand Soviet ship. cover."" missiles in Cuba.
Meanwhile, the Soviet ships exchange for Kennedy's promise not to invade Cuba.
JFK also secretly agreed to remove some United States missiles in Turkey, near the Soviet border. in a massive buildup of their steamed toward Cuba.
Wednesday, October 24, a group of Missile Crisis is considered the most The result was a daily fear of them approached the blockade line dangerous episode of the Cold War. catastrophe for Americans and where United States Navy vessels waited.
Fidel Castro has retired (his students to ""duck and cover"" under men held their breath.
Many historians credit President Fidel Castro seized power there At nearly the last moment, Kennedy with keeping the United States and {see Key Dates], he declared Cuba the Soviet ships slowed, stopped, Soviet Union from war.
As relations with America ""We're eyeball to eyeball, and I hour in the White House,"" his went downhill, the United States tried think the other fellow just blinked,"" biographer Robert Dallek wrote.
For followed before Khrushchev catastrophe."" —Bryan Browr\ Khrushchev, they were a chance to defend an ally and to look tough to the Americans.
