Robert S McNamara Secretary of Defense, 1961-1968 Secretary of Defense, 1961-1968.
McNamara brings in a new civilian team to apply his more centralized, quantitative approach.
Under McNamaras guidance, his administration develops the policy of Flexible Response.
The United States would develop the capacity to meet Communist encroachments with an appropriate level of force.
Initial development of counterforce strategy for United States nuclear forces.
Soviets could overwhelm ABM systems by building more missiles/warheads.
Such systems very expensive Such systems very expensive Soviets might interpret such programs as a sign United States thought it could survive nuclear war.
If United States targeted Soviet military targets after U.S.S.R. had launched a first strike, the number of such targets was exceedingly high.
The about of damage would invariably kill millions of Soviet civilians.
Developing such an ability would appear as if the United States was building a first strike capability.
Bolsters stability by emphasizing survivability of United States nuclear arsenal and capacity to retaliation.
By developing conventional forces, United States would be better able to deter or fight conflicts without escalation to nuclear war.
Of the increased funds devoted to defense, 80% goes to developing conventional forces.
Directs other agencies to enhance counterinsurgency capabilities: CIA CIA United States Agency for International Development United States Agency for International Development United States Information Agency United States Information Agency."", ""width"": ""800"" } 18 Flexible Response and NATO United States pushes to develop alliances conventional capability United States pushes to develop alliances conventional capability DoD analyses determine actual Soviet threat to Western Europe only 46 divisions, much lower than New Look estimates.
DoD analyses determine actual Soviet threat to Western Europe only 46 divisions, much lower than New Look estimates.
Flexible response gave the impression that the United States was backing away from a commitment to use nuclear weapons in Europes defense.
Nikita Khrushchev states U.S.S.R. will support wars of national liberation and support socialist governments in the Third World.."", ""width"": ""800"" } 22 Bay of Pigs April 1961: CIA arranges a landing of anti-Castro exiles, in anticipation of provoking an uprising against the Cuban regime.
CIA arranges a landing of anti-Castro exiles, in anticipation of provoking an uprising against the Cuban regime.
United States 8 th Army pushes North Korean and Chinese forces back up the peninsula.
Objectives Understand how two sides faced off in Europe during the Cold War.
Kennedy’s Foreign Policy Terms and People John F Kennedy – a Democratic senator who was elected President in 1960 Richard M Nixon – former Republican.
Period of conflict, tension and competition between the United States and the Soviet Union and their respective allies from the mid-1940s.
Emergence of Superpowers United States and USSR emerged from WWII as superpowers United States and USSR emerged from WWII as superpowers Ideological differences.
The United States led the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in democratic Western Europe.
