However, several months later, the United States did remove the Jupiters from Turkey, as well.
The administration averted the crisis, and the Soviets and Americans did remove their missiles.
The Soviets admitted they planned to use the missiles against the U.S., and installed them because they were afraid that Kennedy planned to invade Cuba.
Before the crisis, there had been talk in the Kennedy administration of invading Cuba, assassinating Fidel Castro, and other actions against Cuba and its Communist leadership, and there was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion that made Cuba very wary of the United States So, in a way, the Kennedy administration helped bring on the missile crisis, but how the administration handled it was much more important.
For approximately fifty years the two counties faced off, each trying to achieve dominance over the other.
Both nations were in possession of nuclear weapons and for a time, the end of the world was literally at the hands of a select group of political leaders.
For years, people lived with the imposing specter of nuclear annihilations.
Families built bomb shelters beneath their houses and children were taught how to hopefully survive a nuclear attack whether they were at home or at school.
Decades of living in a hyper paranoid state where every day was potentially the last were ultimately rewarded by the end of the Cold ar without a single shot ever having been fired.
The American side perceived that avoiding the missiles is considered to be the only probable alternative.
The fall out of the incident according to aymond L Garthoff was that the Soviet Union was miffed and would never attempt another arms race, especially in Cuba.
Only in 1970 did the public become aware of the tacit understanding between both sides.
There was no public statement from the United States never to invade Cuba.
The risks of a direct confrontation during the cold war was enormous and the consequences unthinkable.
The Cuban missile crisis was one event that brought out the threat and drove home the necessity of keeping off show downs to both sides.
Soviet ships had not yet tried to run the United States naval blockade, but the missiles were still on Cuban soil.
The situation could either be resolved soon, or events could get out of hand and people would die.
That afternoon, a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane had been shot down by mistake.
A local Soviet commander violated those orders on October 27 when he downed Major Rudolph's Anderson's U-2 with a surface-to-air missile.
The crisis or what most people refer to as a crucial part of the Cold War at the time, primarily happened in October 1962.
Prior to the clash, the United States government had tried to overthrow the Cuban administration leading to incidents like the Bay of Pigs and the Operation Mongoose.
This was done due to the fact that the Cuban and Soviet government authorities had privately started to construct bases in Cuba for several medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles having the ability to strike the majority of the continental United States States.
What actually transpired during those fateful days in October 1962 is just now filtering out the American general public, and it remains unclear whether the people of the former Soviet Union have ever been told the complete story either.
Given the highly secretive nature of the Soviet regimen during this period in history, it is unlikely that many average citizens were aware of… Bibliography Beichman, Arnold.
Examining this, various authors attest to the fact that the cold war environment was much… Bibliography Carafano.
A Primer on Strategic Intelligence and Terrorism from the 1970s to Today.
These warheads are capable of reaching almost any part of the continental United States.
The presence of these warheads represents an escalation of the conflict with the Soviet Union and its allies, and it represents an existential threat to the United States.
For the first time since the arms buildup between the United States And USS began, we are in a situation where mutually-assured destruction is a legitimate possibility.
The response of the United States to this conflict represents the most significant challenge faced by President Kennedy to this point in his career, and it is imperative that he authorize the right course of action.
Now fifty years or so later, we are in a much better position to answer this question.
United States or any other nation for that matter must not work as the sole superpower because it can cause many political upheaval as we recently witnessed.
We will discuss the Cuban Missile crisis in detail but first we must establish that American history is fraught with events and wars that were fought on the false belief of America's superiority which made it an imperial power.
Examples of these events include the Mexican-American War, the Spanish-American War and not to mention the current conflict with Iraq.
Causes After the Spanish-American War of 1898 that ended the Spanish Empire and Spain's control of Cuba, the United States had given itself the right to intervene in the internal affairs of Cuba and United States businesses established extensive interests on the island.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to install ballistic missiles in Cuba although they had made a promise to the United States that they would not . hen the United States discovered the construction of missile launching sites, President John F Kennedy publicly denounced the Soviet actions, demanding that they remove the nuclear missiles from Cuba. hen this did not work, Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on Cuba, threatening that the United States Days would meet any missile launched from Cuba with a full-scale retaliatory attack later, Soviet ships carrying missiles to Cuba went home.
The United States ended its blockade within a month, and shortly after, all missiles and bombers were removed from Cuba.
Although the successful resolution of the crisis led to an immediate improvement in relationship between the superpowers, and focussed the world's attention on the issues surrounding nuclear capability and deterrence, it also led to the development of a new method of 'crisis management' known as brinkmanship.
This diplomatic theory, which involves using the threat of war in order to coerce an opponent into backing down, would have less celebrated consequences for America in the decades that followed the Cuban crisis.
Kennedy privately assured the Soviets about withdrawal of missiles from Turkey but publicly gave only a non-invasion pledge.
The crisis was averted when Khrushchev, also wary of the danger of a nuclear confrontation, announced on October 28 that he would remove the missiles from Cuba in return for a United States pledge not to invade.
The Cuban missile crisis was the closest that the United States And the U.S.S.. came to a nuclear war during the Cold War period.
This provides us with an imperative to undermine Khrushchev's conceptions either that we are indecisive or that we are unwilling to make the sacrifices implicated by a full-scale confrontation with the Soviets.
On the other hand, we must also strike a balance whereby these sacrifices are not necessary.
Kennedy says he learned many things from the crisis, most importantly, that many differing views are the key to good deliberation.
Today, that idea is often dismissed, calling for a general consensus on a topic, and that his implications for the United States Foreign policy in many areas.
Kennedy's choice to avoid a military attack on Cuba was especially important, as was his decision to negotiate diplomatically with Soviet President Nikita Khrushchev.
President Kennedy learned of the buildup of nuclear weapons, which included the installation of offensive nuclear missiles, on October 16th, 1962.
Washingtonpost.com with Thomas S Blanton, Executive Director, National Security Archive.
The participation of the Soviet Union was perhaps partly in response to… Bibliography Chomsky, Noam.
The threat of an attak on United States soil was made lear to President Kennedy by his Joint Chiefs of Staff, who urged Kennedy to take aggressive ounter-measures.
Kennedys main onern was that aggressive ation on his point ould lead to even more aggressive retaliation on the part of the Soviet Union and ultimately to nulear war.
Largely seen as exerising oerive diplomay to avoid a military onfrontation, Kennedys diplomati efforts in the Crisis have been praised as a defining moment in the Cold War.
The reality of the situation is, however, that behind the senes Kennedy engaged in quid pro quo diplomay to satisfy Khrushhev and avert a war.BakgroundThroughout the latter half of 1962, ampaigns for the upoming Congressional eletions… c.
The crisis pitted two world powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, against each other in what many describe as the closest the world has come to World War III and a nuclear holocaust.
In order to understand the Crisis, it is important to first understand the events leading up to the crisis.
This paper examines the background of the crisis from the Cuban/Soviet point-of-view in depth.
Toward the end of the paper, the United States' perspective of the crisis is discussed with regard to what is described previously from the perspective of supporters of the Castro regime and the now collapsed Soviet Union. ackground After the devastation that the bombs left in… Bibliography Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders,"" 20 November 1975.
Kennedy had few choices but instead did not back down and lead the country through the crisis.
Many critics surmise the failure of the blockade but really its lack of strength came down to the fact Kennedy hesitated because he waited for OAS approval.
Cuban Five as Criminals The Five as Antiterrorists Whether the Cuban Five are terrorists or not has to be seen from an international perspective that is impartial and takes into consideration the viewpoints of the Cubans as well as the Americans.
The question has gained particular relevance in light of the international protests that consider the Cuban Five as antiterrorists and not criminals.
In trying to establish an ascendant trend for the Cuban national and international image, Raul Castro must also deal with the issue of totalitarian rule and that of the state authoritarian leadership in a different manner that one which destroys his authority as state ruler.
However, any such measures must include a combination of the implementation of slow democratic measures, and the maintenance of a certain authority especially from the perspective of any political forces that may rise against the system.
This is part of the model implemented in China, whose aim was precisely that of controlling the political power while being committed to opening up to foreign investments and western influence.
Raul Castro will likely implement Chinese-style, market-oriented economic reforms.06.
And this we would understand…Our ties with the Republic of Cuba, as well as our relations with other nations, regardless of their political system, concern only the two countries between which these relations exist.
And, if it were a matter of quarantine as mentioned in your letter, then, as is customary in international practice, it can be established only by states agreeing between themselves, and not by some third party.
However, in this case we are not talking about quarantines, but rather about much more… Works Cited Kennedy, Robert.
Kennedy had already gone around with Cuba, and did not wish to repeat his mistakes in Venezuela, but he also had no intention of surrendering Venezuela to the Soviet Union in the way in which Cuba had been surrendered before him.
President Kennedy saw South American diplomacy as the route to turning Venezuela away from bonding with the Soviet Union.
He recognized that he could not alienate the rest of South America from the United States, or that would drive them into the sphere of Venezuela's influence over them towards the Soviet Union.
Kennedy calls a meeting with Chavez-Chavez, in private,… Works Cited Brown, Seyom.
Conflict in the international arena is often lead by perceptions and power politics games that often are not based on realistic evidence.
Conflict is nonetheless a measurable phenomena as many conflicts are also based on other issues than misperceptions, power needs or behavioral changes in a country's leadership.
These are different economic interests over material goods, like oil or gas, positional goods like political influence or territorial.
More and more, international relations theorists and analyzers have looked within countries and systems to understand the international arena.
The internal struggles for power, equilibrium and social welfare are as important in the development of world politics as the aforementioned types of causes.
Finally, and most surprisingly, the United States intelligence community retained a remarkable ability to take actions that were not heavily influenced by the political climate of the nation.
I hope by an examination of the correspondence exchanged by these two leaders during the period to demonstrate that Kennedy's handling of the crisis, while marked by some errors, was more responsible than Khrushchev's.
Most of the objects which were made by this community were associated with other civilizations, such as Mayan, Toltec or Chichimecan.
Thanks to the steady food supplies the Olmec population grew and some came to have other occupations.
Once the population grew, so did their farming villages which developed into cities.
Initially it was decided that Vietnam would be occupied by Chinese and British troops and that they would supervise the surrender of Japan.
In 1960 Hanoi instructed the southern communists to establish an organization called the national liberation front.
The purpose of this organization was to overthrow the government of the south.
The intellectuals of the South and who opposed the foundation of the government of South Viet Nam and the communists who had remained in the south after the partition.
The Di-m government was initially able to cope with the insurgency with the aid of United States advisers, and by 1962 seemed to be winning.
Senior United States military leaders were receiving positive reports from the United States commander, Gen.
Kennedy had to find out what the other side really wanted. in 1962, the Soviet Union lagged behind the United States militarily, as Soviet missiles were only powerful enough to be launched against Europe but United States missiles were capable of striking the entire Soviet Union.
In short, the U.S.S.R. wanted security, and security would also mean a safe, and a face-saving way out of the current situation.
The Soviet Union and its puppet nation Cuba relied on the heavy detail they received from their own agencies and believed that as a result of the failure and humiliation of the United States during the infamous Bay of Pigs incident that America would be blind at worst to its nuclear build up in Cuba and impotent at best.
All he had to do was use them. but, clearly, he did not have the stomach to follow it all the way through.
Kennedy wanted to appear strong but did not want to have to be strong image meant everything.
It relied upon covert use of the CIA to make any and all attempts necessary to overthrow the Cuban government.
On the heels of the Bay of Pigs failure, Kennedy attempted another poorly conceived attempt to rid himself of Castro.
The negotiation and circumvention of the many personalities involved in powerful, history-making decisions is a delicate and complex dance that only true masters can maneuver in, and in Thirteen Days both Kennedy brothers and, to a degree, Robert S McNamara were all portrayed as such political masters.
On a somewhat less profound though perhaps more practical level, this film also taught me about the way decision are negotiated between the civilian and military government officials.
His personality and optimism, as well as his heroism in the Second orld ar helped the country to formulate a hope that the 1960s could be a time of renewal and rebirth in the United States of America.
In recent years, the more scandalous aspects of his life have overtaken his historical significance, something that should be remedied and his importance restored.
Most importantly, his actions during the Cold ar between the United States and the U.S.S.R. are credited with saving the world from descending into nuclear war.
After the U.S.S.. threatened to become militarily involved in the crisis, the United States forced its allies to concede defeat.
This discovery was especially alarming because now the U.S.S.. could militarily subdue its rival by easily launching missiles against it.
The collapse of the oviet Union and, with it, the end of the Cold War, signaled a change in the implications of the type of socialism governing Cuba.
The alleged threats that had hovered so close to the continental U.. throughout these paranoid and dangerous days of ideological impasse were now neutralized by the dismantling of the infrastructure that had brandished them.
R., served as an outpost for anti-American hostilities and a potential vessel through which to deliver the devastating blows that may have turned the Cold War hot, now is an isolated bastion for ideals abandoned by most of the world.
It is obvious that this phase has left the field of constructive diplomacy.
The stalemate that has occurred till then makes them more willing to negotiate, so this would be an adequate phase to solve the conflict in a diplomatical manner.
The diplomacy in the de-escalation period should be characterized by small steps towards reducing the tension and towards a gradual normality of the relations between the two parties.
After Fidel Castro's evolutionary movement overthrew the Batista regime in Cuba and declared his country a Socialist nation allied with the Soviet Union -the principle enemy of the United States at the time -many Cubans opposed to Castro flocked to the United States.
Many of these refugees and exiles were wealthy businessmen who were committed to overthrowing the Castro regime.
He was an extremely popular president, and he was the first to travel outside the country, to the Panama Canal, during a presidency.
He also helped create the Panama Canal Project, one of the most important building projects of the time, and still a vital link between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
In addition, it would be advisable that once the blockade is instituted that high-level US. officials begin quiet negotiations with the Soviets in order to diffuse the crisis before it escalates.
While some of Kennedy's cabinet advisors proposed a negotiated settlement for Vietnam similar to one that recognized Laos as a neutral nation, this was not to be.
The administration had just suffered diplomatic setbacks and embarrassments in Berlin and Cuba.
So that it did not repeat this, the covert military option was used, but unsuccessfully.
The war continued to escalate, requiring more United States advisors and military and foreign aid.
Planned and prepared by some civil rights and religious groups, the incident was intended to spell out the political and social challenges African-Americans constantly experienced across the nation.
This topic might be of interest today with the recent cases of killings and discrimination against African-Americans in the United States to the creation of the Black Lives Matter movement.
Beatles on Ed Sullivan Show On this day, the Beatles were introduced to the American public.
A Cold War Comic Interlude Starring Nikita Khrushchev, America's Most Unlikely Tourist.
This paper will analyze several of them, as well as the leadership profile overall, with the purpose of understanding what made Kennedy an effective leader and whether this was indeed the case.
He points out, first of all, that Kennedy had vision, something essential for an effective leader.
In practical terms, vision meant that he knew where the United States should end up in the future and molded his policy accordingly.
One such example of a clear vision for Kennedy was the space program and the Moon Project.
The space program involved not only the vision that competition for the outer space would be the next area… Bibliography 1.
Graduate Faculty of Graduate School of Public and International Affairs.
America has never been without military involvement in the world, at… Bibliography Spanier, John and Steven Hook.
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the U.S., The 9/11 Commission Report.
The audience is a conservative political group that advocates smaller federal government and the right for local communities and states to control as much of their needed government as possible.
The occasion is their annual meeting, and the purpose is to demonstrate that although Kennedy was a liberal in many ways, he was still a great, if flawed, man.
However, his short role in the political history of the Presidency was so pivotal that is necessary to consider what kind of President he really was beyond the hype and the active public relations campaign that kept his many flaws out of the news media.
Because the media remained silent about his personal flaws, the country was able to nearly canonize him after his untimely death.
The United States is, in the words of Harold Lasswell, a ""garrison state;"" a crusading nation that seeks to combat all enemies real and imagined and to remake the world in its own image.
Under the new doctrine, nuclear strategy becomes a means of enforcing an ideology all dissent, or supposed dissent, is rooted out through the threat of ultimate and complete destruction.
The Bush Administration redefined international relations in terms of an axis of good led by the United States and its allies, and an axis of evil consisting preeminently of Iraq, Iran, and North Korea and their terrorist associates.
Why the United States Did Not Use Nuclear Weapons in the Cold War, 1945 to 1965.
In response, Britain bombed factories and airfields near Berlin; the relative inaccuracy of bombing operations of the era lead Hitler to conclude that those raids were intended as attacks on civilians.
To a certain extent, the exchange of attacks on civilian population centers on both sides was the result of inadvertent misunderstanding of intentions that escalated the horrors of Word War II even further.
Revised, Expanded & Updated from the Original Text by Henry Steele Commager.
And in the end maybe these characters do find an excuse, the one that they are both human, bound to fail and to be influenced, sharing the same planet and dealing with the same kind of people.
The two personages enjoyed having power and realized in the end that having power doesn't necessary make them omniscient. oth Robert McNamara and Yuri Orlov had the lives of numerous people in their hands.
Maybe these characters felt the need to retell all their stories, in order to let all the demons trapped inside their conscious out.
The characters presented in the two movies were able to depict the laws and needs of man and rose above law; they become a sort of demigod.
In Yuri's case this was shown during his tramping across west… Bibliography 1.
The Cold War was a period of military and political tension from 1947 to 1991, or from the end of WW2 to the collapse of the Soviet Union, in which the ""politics of war"" masked the business and social agendas of multinationals and ideologues.
I had heard of it, and the U-2 spy plane, but the film really laid out all the events in the order they occurred, and it showed just how dangerous a situation it was.
It also showed that military intelligence works, even though the original flyby was just fairly routine.
If the people who read the spy photographs had been less vigilant, the weapons might never have been discovered, and the situation could have ended far differently.
I think the film did a really good job of portraying just how close the world was to nuclear war, too, which was frightening when you really stop to think about it.
This is also a really good historic look into the presidency,… References Thirteen Days.
The most difficult task of the intelligence officer is to provide warning.
The intelligence community also needs a more risk-taking and failure-tolerant management approach.
Secondly as an ally, Soviet Union was concerned about the fate of Cuba which held a lot of promise for the Communist experiment internationally.
The American leadership understood that what they faced in Cuba was a catch 22 situation.
If they failed to act, they would live under threat and shadow of nuclear war.
If they carried out a full fledge invasion of Cuba, the Soviet Union would respond by taking over West Berlin thereby severely denting the credibility of the United States of America in the eyes of its European allies.
Able master of political chess that Khrushchev was he played the inexperienced but charismatic President Kennedy like a fiddle.
To further support this characterization of the boatlift, Castro himself is quoted as saying that the departing citizens leaving from Mariel are the scum of the country and were surely welcome to leave Cuba for he thought no other country would have them, even America.
He openly denounced the population leaving by way of boat at a 1980 May Day celebration during the height of the Mariel migration. ut the figures about criminality do not alone tell the tale of the character of the migrants.
Many criminals in Cuba have been imprisoned for political activities such as freedom of speech that would not be considered criminal in America.
Many of the boatlift population had engaged in homosexual relations, which are outlawed in Cuba.
The conservative Cuban population of America, however, was by and large… But the figures about criminality do not alone tell the tale of the character of the migrants.
The conservative Cuban population of America, however, was by and large no more amicable to alternative sexualities than the Castro regime.
But more to the point, the hostility to the new immigrants may have been racial.
All new immigrant populations present a new face to older and more established members of the community, but in this case, the new face was very literally a distinctive racial shift in the image of Cubans.
Before the boatlift, Alejandro Portes and Alex Stepick state that Cubans had a face of a model minority, of staunch Cold War anti-communists, of Ricky Ricardo as a friendly image of a Latin neighbor.
In Miami, Cubans were devoted to capitalism, as the first immigrants represented the elite and established commercial classes.
But the new Miami immigrants had lived many years under communist influence, and had no such of a work ethic.
Furthermore, they were met with rejection from the city of Miami, because of their race, sexuality, and perceived social classes, and this rejection led to their marginal within the city, and hence, criminality.
Alejandro Portes and Alex Stepick note that after the Mariel exodus, however Cuban Americans found the Cuban people ranked among the undesirables and a 1982 national poll found that Cubans placed dead last in the public's view of contributions made by different ethnic groups to the national welfare.
Only 9% of those polled considered Cuban influence to be good for the country and 59% deemed it bad.
The fault for this polarization of attitudes towards Cubans however, is complex, lying in the fault of the established community in its expectations of the immigrants, in the difficulties of the immigrants themselves, and to Castro, too.
In this role he plays the role of ""procedural technician,"" controlling access to the President rather than materials.
O'Donnell gives the impression of knowing the people he works with very well, allowing him to make quick, decisive decisions.
He comes to a stalemate with Jackie over the guest list for a party, but trusts that the person seeking to speak with the President has used good judgment in his request and admits him immediately.
He also recognizes his partial role as a functionary, and does not follow the man into the Presidential office, but waits until he's been invited.
Once O'Connell is in the President's office, the President acts as gatekeeper.
He immediately has O'Connell look at the photographs Bundy has brought in because of O'Connell's military background.
This also serves to accelerate group consensus so that… SOURCES TEXTBOOK Holmes, Prue.04.
Prior to September 11, our economic environment was certainly not immune to terror, in comparison to many other nations; we lived relatively terror-free.
Now, however, the aftermath of the terrorist attacks serves as a grim reminder that international relations and security developments can dramatically affect economic performance.
US History is replete with countless examples when macro fundamentals are overtaken by what economists refer to as, exogenous shocks -surprise events that can profoundly and often unpredictably shift political and economic resources, and send even the most accurate forecasts astray.
Commodity shocks, such as the two OPEC jolts in the 1970s, are classic… References Bagehot, Walter.27.
