The transgression continues to pose a number of difficult questions for policymakers in the United States.
Tensions between the United States and Russia are not new, but the invasion of Georgia and the United States response once again stirred the argument over engagement versus isolation.
Conservatives have resorted to the Myth of Munich—the belief that the use of diplomacy and negotiations are ineffective and fail to stop aggression—and charges of appeasement in arguing for forceful intervention in the Caucasus.
This debate, as before, plays out not against facts, strategic options, and consequences, but rather in political commentary and op-ed pages, surrounded by analogy and conjecture, and in an atmosphere of tough posturing and accusations of weakness.
Those four years were every bit as complicated and daunting as the global security situation awaiting the new American president in 2009.
Pursuit of mutually beneficial security agreements were often thwarted by mistake, error, or miscalculation.
A Vienna exchange in 1961 was made more difficult by a failed Bay of Pigs.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev took to reminding countries of the number of hydrogen bombs it would require to destroy them.
In the face of these tensions, two successive United States presidents, Dwight David Eisenhower and John F Kennedy, acted to protect America, often made decisions against apparent self-interest, and managed to protect freedom and avoid war.
Lessons from those four dangerous years, the coldest of the Cold War, are valuable for today’s America and its leaders.
At home, both leaders faced critics who, not unlike those in current American politics, argued that talking with enemies would be a grave mistake and, worse, a sign of appeasement and weakness.
In spite of these criticisms and a number of partisan attacks, Eisenhower and Kennedy each chose to hold summits with Chairman Khrushchev.
The conversations were not always easy, but the efforts of Eisenhower and Kennedy to speak, communicate, and relate with Khrushchev prepared them to deal with the most dangerous days of the long conflict.
The two presidents relied on the wisdom from their experience and responded in tempered ways to limit the overheating of events.
Today, the next United States president can learn much from looking at that time and the approaches of Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy.
Their pragmatism and willingness to talk not only allowed them to manage those crises-riddled years, but demonstrate to today’s leaders the value of diplomacy and provide the lessons needed to overcome today’s challenges.
Rejecting the Munich Myth The coldest days of the Cold War demonstrate that at certain times, especially those replete with crises, threats, and uncertainty, it takes strength to talk.
U.S.-Soviet relations between 1959 and 1963 were far more provocative and challenging than today.
Fortunately for the United States and the world, Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy were willing to take risks for peace despite eliciting questions of their wisdom.
I invited Mr Khrushchev, as you know, to come here so that we might have a chance to discuss some of the obvious reasons for tensions in the world, and particularly between our two countries, because of the outstanding unsettled matters.
I did not ask him here for substantive negotiations, because those are impossible without the presence of our associates.
But I thought that, through this visit of his and through these conversations, possibly I think as I have said to you before, some of the ice might be melted.
For his part, John F Kennedy, during one of his presidential campaign debates with Vice President Richard Nixon, vowed not to sit with Khrushchev without agreed upon preconditions.
But several months into his presidency, when the stakes became clear, Kennedy ceased that posturing and rejected the false binary choice of the Munich Myth.
On the one hand are those who urge upon us what I regard to be the pathway of surrender—appeasing our enemies, compromising our commitments, purchasing peace at any price, disavowing our arms, our friends, our obligations.
A willingness to resist force, unaccompanied by a willingness to talk, could provoke belligerence—while a willingness to talk, unaccompanied by a willingness to resist force, could invite disaster.
The result of those presidencies and engagement with the Soviet Union was a more cautious U.S–Soviet relationship.
The Cold War would endure until 1990 but in the years that followed those coldest days, American leaders sobered by crises and educated by experience 3 Center for American Progress | The Coldest Days of the Cold War completed a Limited Test Ban Treaty, worked toward more effective October 31, 1958 arms control, and limited nuclear saber rattling.
While the threat would Test ban negotiations remain, the dialogue between both sides was much more cautious and begin in Geneva measured as both sides acknowledged a nuclear war could not be won.
Even during the coldest days of the Cold War, Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy and senior American diplomatic officials maintained regular public and private dialogue with Chairman Khrushchev and others.
For instance, the close, honest relationship additional U-2 Flights United States Ambassador to the USSR Llewellyn Thompson developed with Khrushchev paid dividends for both administrations and helped the May 1, 1960 countries work through crises.
U-2 wreckage captured in American U-2 crashes the Soviet Union on May Day Both Eisenhower and Kennedy heard whispers of appeasement for May 8, 1960 their meetings with Khrushchev.
But in the most difficult of times, U.S.S.R establishes formal diplomatic relations with Cuba when communication was needed most, they chose to meet.
It is notable that both Eisenhower at Camp David and Kennedy in Vienna asked May 9, 1960 for a few more minutes of time without staff to talk with Khrushchev Eisenhower takes responsibility for the U-2 and attempt to focus on key priorities.
Eisenhower encouraged the ongoing May 16, 1960 Paris summit opens Geneva negotiations for arms control, while Kennedy supported the establishment of a direct communications link between Moscow and May 17, 1960 Washington and the test ban negotiations.
Paris summit collapses Effective diplomacy cannot be labeled strong or weak or rule out potenJune 6, 1960 Khrushchev promises tial tactics to further relations.
November 8, 1960 If for lack of preparation they break up in bitterness, the prospects of A Kennedy political rally, Kennedy elected as 35th November 5, 1960 United States president peace have been endangered.
In the heat United States breaks off diplomatic of international affairs, temperatures, tensions and tempers will rise relations with Cuba and threats will be made.
Khrushchev regularly threatened the West January 20, 1961 in speech and provocation.
Throughout their coldest years, Presidents Kennedy inauguration Eisenhower and Kennedy would respond to Chairman Khrushchev’s bluster with finesse and conviction, but also with reserve and caution.
April 12, 1961 Soviet cosmonaut Where necessary, they would improve United States military capabilities.
But Yuri Gagarin becomes where Khrushchev would take a provocative step forward, Eisenhower AP Photo the first human in space and Kennedy would hold their ground, seek continued engagement, Fidel Castro at the front April 15, 1961 and keep cool.
As Eisenhower and Kennedy proved, not every crisis is during the Bay of Pigs invasion Failed Bay of Pigs invasion worth fighting over.
Sometimes taking no action is more of a profile in courage than rattling of sabers.
They are likely to be successful only if both sides reach an agreement which both regard as preferable to the status quo—an agreement in which each side can consider its own situation October 21, 1961 Kennedy administration to be improved.
The only time talks are Khrushchev decides to certain to offer no progress is when they are not held. deploy missiles to Cuba National Security Council Finally, credibility matters, especially in a crisis.
The U-2 scuttled the progress made on the test Special communications JFK Presidential Library and Museum link established between ban negotiations, and the world had to wait nearly four years for the Moscow and Washington valuable treaty and the start of effective arms control.
July 15, 1963 Limited Test Ban The Paris summit, with its promise of real disarmament talks, was negotiations begin ruined, and it would take years, and additional crises, before real progress was made in achieving limits to nuclear testing.
Though the Fall 1963 Bay of Pigs fiasco would hurt his reputation in the eyes of the Soviets, Limited Test Ban Treaty Kennedy carefully managed his communications with the Soviets to approved, ratified, entered into force avoid miscalculations and further loss of credibility.
Eisenhower and Kennedy knew a loss of credibility leads to lost progress.
Historical comparisons have limits, yet many of today’s challenges are more complicated than those of 1959–1963 because of the lack of bipolarity in the international system.
It is also clear, given recent events, that talking itself, without substantive exchange, cannot solve problems.
Assertive, rising powers such as Russia and China threaten United States economic and military preponderance.
The United States military is deployed and engaged around the world, and United States leverage is consequently weakened.
The major powers are waging political battles in the developing world, and races for resources and technological innovation fuel that contest.
Finally, a lack of understanding between the major players increases the risk of miscalculation as alliances wrestle with differences over strategic direction.
Those similarities, the prevalence of the Munich Myth, and the increasing relevance of American diplomacy with Russia make a look at the years 1959–1963 valuable.
The exchanges on this topic had become routine, each side raising the merits of its own position while dismissing the objections of the other side.
Responding to Khrushchev, President Eisenhower on April 8, 1958 would declare, “The position of the United States on this matter of testing is well known.
The first, “Open Skies,” would allow for technical collection by unarmed observation flights of military and other activities.
Additionally, an initiative for the international use of outer space for peaceful purposes was presented to the Soviets.
From this exchange of letters, formal talks on nuclear testing between the United States, the Soviet Union, and other nations would commence in Geneva.
The diplomatic discussions did not produce enormous results but they were a start of a conversation that would last for four decades.
The next summer, in August 1959, President Eisenhower announced, “The President of the United States has invited Mr Nikita Khrushchev…to pay an official visit to the United States in September.
The trip, a first by a Soviet Premier, had its share of tension, but in the end it was a convivial affair that gave Khrushchev an understanding of the West, gave Eisenhower hope for progress on disarmament, and encouraged the world with signs of a thaw in relations between the two powers.
Inter-communist tensions threatened Khrushchev’s efforts as Mao considered détente a threat to China’s interests and their shared principles.
Despite these pressures, Eisenhower and Khrushchev each appeared willing to take the risk of meeting and beginning negotiations on a nuclear test ban with inspection.
At Camp David, Eisenhower also managed to convince Khrushchev to drop his Berlin ultimatum.
The ultimatum, issued by Khrushchev in late 1958 to get the West to sign a peace treaty and leave Berlin or face a separate Soviet–East German peace agreement, had upset Eisenhower and threatened Khrushchev’s dream of a “Big Four” summit meeting with the heads of the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and France.
Eisenhower said he would not bargain or hold the summit under the threat.
But with the meeting at Camp David, Eisenhower was able to use the promise of a summit to entice Khrushchev to drop the ultimatum.
Through flattery—Eisenhower told Khrushchev during one session that Khrushchev could “become the greatest political figure in history” if he used his power “to secure peace in the world”—and tough negotiations—Eisenhower convinced Khrushchev to delay proposed aggressive moves on the German situation—Eisenhower tried to open Khrushchev to the West and to policy change on nuclear testing.
The meetings at Camp David were tense with Khrushchev and Eisenhower both frustrated by the lack of progress.
Eisenhower, disappointed the Berlin ultimatum still stood hours before Khrushchev was to leave Camp David, decided to ask for one more walk in the woods to talk privately and directly with Khrushchev.
They two returned from the walk with a Khrushchev having promised to lift the ultimatum and Eisenhower committed to a summit.
The U-2 Incident The Paris summit, scheduled to also include French President Charles de Gaulle and British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan, took on significant importance in the eyes of the world and its key participants.
Eisenhower saw it—and possible progress on arms reduction—as a ratification of the progress made at Camp David and as a potential legacy defining event.
British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan saw the summit as a true step toward reduced tensions.
Yet as negotiators in Geneva continued to work and diplomats in Washington and Moscow prepared for the summit, an American pilot on a classified reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union would change everything.
On May 1, 1960, United States Air Force Captain Francis Gary Powers was flying at 70,000 feet in a U-2 on his mission to photograph Soviet missile sites in Sverdlovsk and Plesetsk when his plane was rocked by an explosion.
Struggling to eject, Powers did not enact the plane’s self-destruct mechanism.
Khrushchev, attending a May Day parade in Moscow, congratulated his military privately for shooting down the U-2 after years of struggling to take down the American planes and developed a plan to utilize the incident for Soviet gain.
The development of the U-2 and the secrecy surrounding its missions were a remarkable feat.
The Soviets knew the flights were occurring and had tried in vain to stop them.
Eisenhower’s decision to continue the CIA’s U-2 reconnaissance flights over the Soviet Union in the lead up to the summit was not made without concern for the impact of an incident involving a U-2 on the summit or U.S.-Soviet relations.
Eisenhower knew the stakes, telling aides, “If one of these planes is shot down, this thing is going to be on my head.
The Eisenhower administration struggled with a response to the incident, wrestling with assumptions and grasping at the available information.
At first, believing the U-2 pilot was dead and much of the evidence destroyed, the administration allowed the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to claim the flight as their own weather mission.
But these statements began to be contradicted, and the Soviets proved the NASA statement false through the revelation that Powers had indeed survived and confessed.
Eisenhower was forced to make a difficult decision between disavowing any knowledge of the mission and admitting to the U-2 mission and its reconnaissance nature.
And he arranged a display of the U-2’s wreckage in Gorky Park to stoke the story further.
But it was the behind-the-scenes implications of the U-2 flight that had the biggest effect on Khrushchev and U.S.-Soviet relations.
Khrushchev had extended himself to Eisenhower over the past two years and expended his political capital on the relationship, the idea of détente, and the promise of Paris.
He would say, “My visit to the United States…had seemed to herald a promising shift in United States policy toward our country.
It could also have been his realization and strategic concern that the earlier U-2 flights had allowed Washington to know the limitations of Khrushchev’s claims of missile superiority.
But the most convincing explanation for Khrushchev’s approach to the incident was his effort to protect the summit and preserve his domestic political support.
Paris Despite this situation and the new tension in the relationship, the plan for the summit proceeded and the powers gathered in Paris.
Eisenhower and Khrushchev arrived in Paris constrained by domestic exigencies, powerless in their need for apology and straight talk, unable to overcome the obstacle created by the U-2 wreckage, but still hopeful.
The summit became a propaganda stand-off, with neither side wanting to offer any additional fodder for the opposing side’s rhetorical complaints.
Wider effects The U-2 incident and the Paris collapse affected more than just the leaders and U.S.-Soviet relations.
From Moscow to Washington, D.C. to Havana, the heightened tensions resulting from the situation would have a lasting impact.
Most directly, the U-2 incident destroyed the progress made toward limits on nuclear testing that had brought the leaders to Paris.
It would take years before the United States and the Soviet Union would enter talks over nuclear testing with the potential for progress that existed before the U-2.
In addition, the U-2 directly contributed to speeding up the arms race.
One reason Eisenhower had kept the missions secret was because as long as there was a perception of a missile gap and Soviets superiority in missile technology, the Soviets would not go about investing in creating such an advantage.
The U-2 incident would alert the Soviets that the United States had learned much about their nuclear capabilities, especially their deficiency of ICBMs.
The U-2 incident and the collapse of the Paris summit had the most impact on Khrushchev’s authority and influence.
He may seem to be the supreme, unchallenged boss now, but conditions may change.
Thus he looked to Cuba, to Berlin, to the Third World for opportunities to stand up to the West.
Khrushchev saw the event as personal and it forced him to “throw up the sponge,” as the warning in 1959 suggested.
His son would later admit the U-2 missions were a “betrayal by General Eisenhower, a man who had referred to him as a friend, a man with whom he had only recently sat at the same table…a betrayal that struck him in his very heart.
Khrushchev would admit in 1969, “Things were going well until one thing happened.
During the early 1960s, Khrushchev’s position would further weaken his economic reforms, including a failed reduction in the military and other domestic programs.
Geopolitically, the U-2 crisis would sow the seeds for the next significant crisis in U.S.Soviet relations by pushing the Soviet Union closer to Cuba and revolutionary Fidel Castro.
The Eisenhower administration’s policies toward Cuba and its revolution did little to enamor Castro with the United States.
The decision to recognize and support the regime of Fulgencio Batista in the early 1950s and the later efforts to shun and plot against Castro had certainly set the course for Cuban relations with the United States, but as of 1960 the course to Communism and Soviet client status was not yet set on the island.
On May 8, 1960— just seven days after the reconnaissance plane was taken down—Cuba and the Soviet Union established formal diplomatic relations and issued a joint communiqué that explained how relations had been set with the 1959 Soviet recognition of the Castro’s government.
In early 1961—17 days before Kennedy would take office and while planning for the Bay of Pigs efforts were well underway—the United States broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba.
On the heels of the reconnaissance plane incident, this Cuban–Soviet relationship quickly became more substantial and more complicated for the United States.
After the collapse of the Paris summit, Khrushchev, while still in Paris, extolled the Cuban revolution and struggle against the United States and encouraged Latin American countries to follow Cuba’s lead.
While, in a June 3, 1960 interview Khrushchev disputed the need for the Soviet Union to base missiles in Cuba because “it is enough to press a button here to launch a missile to any part of the world,” it was reported in the July 9 Cuban Revolución that Khrushchev had told a group of Cubans during a private interview that the USSR would defend the Cuban revolution.
On June 9, 1960, Khrushchev told a group of Soviet school teachers of his commitment to protect Cuba with nuclear weapons.
As the U-2 and Paris drama ran its course, the presidential campaign was playing out in primaries and conventions with United States Senator John F Kennedy triumphing in the Democratic primary to take on Vice President Richard Nixon in the general election.
The rhetoric and the positioning the candidates utilized during the time of the U-2 incident would offer clues to their strategies for the fall.
After initially chastising the Eisenhower administration’s response over the U-2 incident, Kennedy’s line on U.S.-Soviet relations became harder and more effective after the crisis.
But he would soon be forced to reconcile his campaign rhetoric with an approach to governing and dealing with the Soviet Union.
Kennedy was inheriting a U.S.-Soviet relationship severely damaged and a counterpart in Khrushchev—because of personal hurt, political pressures, or both—deeply frustrated with the West.
Speaking in “an hour of national peril” as “each day the crises multiply,” Kennedy framed part of his inaugural address and his first State of the Union address as responses to Khrushchev’s remarks.
He said in his January 30, 1961 State of the Union, “We must never be lulled into believing that either power has yielded its ambitions for world domination—ambitions which they forcefully restated only a time ago.
On the contrary, our task is to convince them that aggression and subversion will not be profitable routes to pursue these ends.
Kennedy’s early presidential rhetoric was that of a president trying to appear more aggressive than Eisenhower.
Despite Soviet objections, despite the resolution of the missile gap, and despite Eisenhower’s warning of the power of the military-industrial complex, Kennedy followed up his words with action by beginning a swift and massive military buildup.
Inspired partly by the feelers coming from Khrushchev, Kennedy asked whether he should meet with Khrushchev.
The gathered wise men agreed a face-to-face conversation might be useful.
Thompson believed that Kennedy could not fully appreciate what he faced in Khrushchev only through second hand accounts.
In addition to heightened rhetoric and military buildup, Kennedy also focused on Cuba and Laos in the first months of the administration.
The failed Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961, in which vastly outnumbered, CIA-trained and armed Cuban exiles attempted to take over the island, was the first significant foreign policy setback of the Kennedy administration.
The failure, similar in its CIA origin, aggressive nature, and poor contingency planning to Eisenhower’s U-2 fiasco, helped shape Kennedy’s opinion of aggressive action and following of perceived experts and hawks for the remainder of his time as president.
Eventually, however, Kennedy came to see neutralization as the only option.
Despite having supported different sides, Kennedy and Khrushchev would support the neutralization brought about by a cease fire.
Vienna The failed Bay of Pigs invasion and setback in Laos put Kennedy on the defensive, sent shock waves of concern among our European allies, and offered opportunity to Moscow.
The summit with Khrushchev—scheduled for Vienna in early June 1961—lay ahead.
He said, “There are limits to the number of defeats I can defend in one twelve-month period.
Less than four years after the surprise, successful launch of Sputnik, Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to go into space on April 12, 1961.
Before Kennedy went to Vienna he stopped in Paris for a visit with French President Charles de Gaulle.
Khrushchev’s attitude was amplified by his need to appear tough on the “capitalist enemy” to assuage doubts at the Kremlin.
There was little discussion of the U-2 incident in the briefing documents for Vienna, but the incident still stung Khrushchev and the damage done by the event would cloud the summit.
Only Ambassador Thompson wrote in a briefing of the possibility Khrushchev might “rake up” the incident or potentially release captured U-2 pilot Powers.
Over two days of meetings Kennedy and Khrushchev talked, argued, and disagreed over the course of history, the meaning of the word “miscalculation,” and the fundamental differences between communism and capitalism.
Khrushchev was relentless, wagging his finger, threatening, and snapping at Kennedy.
On the first, Khrushchev expressed regret over the unhappy development in his relations with Eisenhower.
He called the U-2 flight “the main cause” for the development and suggested the flight was a successful effort on the part of people who wanted to worsen relations between the two countries.
The second day, Khrushchev discussed the situation in Berlin and blamed the U-2 incident for the lack of progress on the matter.
The Vienna summit broke down over the same Berlin challenge Khrushchev had presented to Eisenhower and the West in 1959.
The Berlin question was to be discussed in Paris, but the U-2 incident had eliminated past progress, wasted a year, allowed the issue to fester, and now vex, in a similar manner, the Vienna summit and the new relationship between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
With the official meeting over and the U.S.-Soviet relationship on the brink, Kennedy said to an aide, “I can’t leave here without giving it one more try.
With a stand off over the future of Berlin, Khrushchev said he “wanted peace and that if the United States wanted war, that was its problem.
The potential of the relationship, his impressions of Kennedy, and his ability to appear tough in the face of the charismatic new president helped Khrushchev overcome his hurt feelings and attempt to contain his political challenges.
He would write years after the summit, “Even though we came to no concrete agreement , I could tell that was interested in finding a peaceful solution to world problems and in avoiding conflict with the Soviet Union.
The conservative Chicago Tribune had ridiculed Kennedy as “Little Mr Merit Badge” heading into the summit, but said of the summit, “If Mr Kennedy went abroad as an innocent, he comes home with some knowledge.
After the summit, with the frustrations and fears it produced still echoing through the White House, Kennedy took a harder line that put the hard-line anti-Soviet wing of his advisors and political party in the ascendancy—both rhetorically and in the budget.
In a speech on July 25, Kennedy said, “We do not want to fight—but we have fought before.
As the Western allies balked at a unilateral peace treaty and chose to advocate for maintaining the existing situation, Khrushchev chose to seal the border to West Berlin and erect the Berlin Wall in August 1961.
In the fall of 1961, while United States Jupiter medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles sat on bases in Turkey and Italy, then Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric admitted the missile gap did not exist.
That spelled out the United States strategic advantage and finally resolved the missile gap and called the Soviet bluff.6 This admission, the knowledge that the U-2 program had given the United States detailed information about the location and capabilities of the Soviet ICBM program, and the failure of the Soviet efforts to make intercontinental progress left Khrushchev, who had pushed for and extended political capital on the development of the Soviet intercontinen21 Center for American Progress | The Coldest Days of the Cold War tal capability, in a politically precarious spot once again.
He needed a way to mollify the military, calm the political waters at home, and demonstrate power abroad.7 Despite their ICBM deficit, the Soviets still possessed a large stock of mediumand intermediate-range missiles.
The two most powerful nations of the world had been squared off against each other, each with its finger on the button.
But both sides showed that if the desire to avoid war is strong enough, even the most pressing dispute can be solved by compromise.
But Kennedy and Khrushchev again pushed their nations to the negotiating table against popular and political opinion.
As it had been in 1960 with Eisenhower pushing for a treaty, the two countries stood on the edge of real progress in slowing the arms race.
And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will be necessary to cut that knot, and what that would mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly of what terrible forces our countries dispose.
We are ready for this.2 It was not just personal motives loosening the “knot of war” and driving the test ban cause.
Kennedy wanted a test ban because it would limit the defense spending burden which would help offset the effect of unfavorable United States balance of payments on the dollar and it would limit proliferation of nuclear weapons by stopping the testing that could lead to less expensive and easier to produce nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev desired a limit because the Soviet Union faced such a disparity in strategic ballistic nuclear missiles, especially after the removal of the Cuban base weapons, and because the test ban might prevent or slow the possession of nuclear weapons by China, an increasingly difficult inter-family competitor for Khrushchev.
Our interests converge…not only in defending the frontiers of freedom, but in pursuing the paths of peace…The one major area of these negotiations where the end is in sight, yet where a fresh start is badly needed, is in a treaty to outlaw nuclear tests.
The conclusion of such a treaty, so near and yet so far, would check the spiraling arms race in one of its most dangerous areas.
It would place the nuclear powers in a position to deal more effectively with one of the greatest hazards which man faces in 1963, the further spread of nuclear arms.
On June 20, the Americans and Soviets established a direct communications link between the two governments, a long sought after development.
Former Ambassador to the USSR Harriman and British Lord Hailsham represented the Western allies at the talks and they saw instant interest from the Soviets because, as a low-level Soviet representative explained, the sides had experienced “the breath of death” during the past year.8 As on-site inspections remained unacceptable to Khrushchev, Kennedy pushed for a ban on tests in atmosphere, outer space, and underwater.
It outlawed atmospheric but not underground testing of nuclear weapons.
On September 24, the United States Senate approved the treaty 80 to 19.
It may have taken a brutal summit and crises to change the two leaders, but when the evolution occurred, the tone and reality had changed as well.
In March 1963, 60 percent of Americans believed the Soviet Union would drop a hydrogen bomb on the United States.
Without the Vienna summit, it is possible neither party would have seen the opportunities that existed in the Missile Crisis and the test ban or possessed the intelligence, foresight, and empathy required to work toward those successful resolutions.
Their inclinations to step toward the negotiating table, while somewhat contrary to their default tendencies as politicians, became the primary method for dealing with their Soviet adversary and the crises of those years.
Even Khrushchev would demonstrate with the majority of his actions over those years and his knot analogy that he saw more value in talking than bombing.
Eisenhower and Kennedy’s efforts helped the United States get beyond the standoffs and stop the nuclear threats.
They should also help our current discourse to evolve beyond the Myth of Munich.
For too long, the prospect of being called an appeaser has limited diplomatic engagement.
Both Eisenhower and Kennedy heard the whispers but followed their instincts.
While there were bumps in the road, the world survived the coldest days of the Cold War and developed the blueprint for thaw because leaders on both sides never feared to negotiate.
The lessons provided by the events of those years include the need for engagement, the ability to work through provocation and bluster, the willingness to risk failure, and the maintenance of credibility.
Eisenhower and Kennedy’s decisions to engage led to improvements in the U.S.-Soviet relationship.
Engagement increased the potential for transparency and decreased the chances for miscalculation between two adversaries.
Kennedy’s communications with Khrushchev allowed him to air his concern about miscalculation and helped the two leaders avoid errors during times of crisis.
This inclination eventually led to the installation of a direct line between Moscow and Washington.
Diplomacy, when integrated with other policy tools, also gave both presidents a powerful force multiplier for advancing United States interests.
Eisenhower’s efforts to speak with Khrushchev were paired with his domestic investment programs and use of the U-2 and other surveillance tools.
Kennedy’s tough summit with Khrushchev occurred three months after he authorized the Peace Corps by Executive Order and at the same time he was increasing defense spending.
Diplomacy was just one tool in their presidential repertoires, but for Eisenhower and Kennedy it presented and preserved useful options.
Eisenhower and Kennedy heard whispered allegations of “appeasement” and reminders of Munich as they dealt with the Soviet Union.
But the possibility of being labeled a “Chamberlain” or an “appeaser” deterred neither man.
Both Eisenhower and Kennedy were willing to risk their reputations, their legacies, and their popularity for one more walk, “one more try” with Khrushchev in the hopes it could stave off disaster.
In those moments, Eisenhower and Kennedy were worried more about national interests than the Munich Myth.
As the United States confronts the Russia over Georgia, our leaders should take the same approach.
The History of the 6 United States President John F Kennedy, “UniverCIA , 159.
Little, Brown September 2008). necticut: Easton Press, 1987), 511. and Company, 1967), 143.
Eisenhower, tion: The Foreign Policy of John F Kennedy (New Khrushchev and the U-2 Affair , 61.
We believe that Americans are bound together by a common commitment to these values and we aspire to ensure that our national policies reflect these values.
