Atlee Britain's new labour prime minister, Truman replaced Roosevelt as United States President after Roosevelt's death Stalin the only remaining leader present at Yalta felt he could control the terms of this conference however Truman was a strong anticommunist and didn't allow this.
Events on the 25 June 1950 the North Koreans attacked the south and quickly pushed the South Koreans back into a small corner of south Korea.
Defeat looked inevitable until The USA influeanced the UN to send hundreds of thousands of troops to protect the south.
By November 1950 they had managed to push the communists back the the Yalu river on the border of China however Truman ordered the troops not to invade China fearing an all out nuclear war might occur with the USSR if they did 11 of 38 The Korean War continued... -January 1951, The Chinese Army, with the USSR's backing joined the side of the North Koreans and the South Koreans were Pushed Back to the previous border on the 38th parallel. -They remained at a stalemate there which lasted from July 1951 July 1953 when a ceasefire was agreed.
The USA tried to cover it up however they didn't know that the pilot had admitted spying On the 7th of May Khrushchev announced he had the pilot and plane with the pictures and asked for a full United States apology but Eisenhower didn't give one.
This led to a breakdown of talks at the Paris summit and the cold war getting colder as Khrushchev described the United States as someone impossible to deal with.
Gary Powers was sentenced to 10 years in prison but was swapped after 1 year for another top soviet spy 15 of 38 The Berlin Wall August 1961 on the night of the 13 August barbed wire mesh armed with machine gunners was erected around west berlin and gradually grew into a huge wall keeping East Berliners out of West Berlin, in the first Year 41 People were shot trying to cross. why was it built? to stop East Germans escaping communism through west Berlin. million had done so up to 1961.
This led to a neighboring country to the USA being allied to their greatest rival, this scared Kennedy.
Bay Of Pigs 1961 April 1961 with help from the CIA supporters of Batista landed on the bay of pigs.
Launch a non-nuclear air-strike on cuba and destroy the missiles and Castro 6.
This did not end the Cuban Missile crisis. there were still missiles on Cuba.
He would remove the missiles if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and called off the naval blockade.
He would only remove the Cuban missiles if Kennedy removed his from Turkey.
Kennedy agreed to the first letter however he said that if Khrushchev didn't reply by the 28th he would invade Cuba.
Having learnt lessons from Hungary 1956 the czech people were encouraged not to use violence, a largely peaceful resistance was encouraged in the form of peaceful demonstrations, sit-ins, and peaceful protests.
However there was some light-weight resistance mainly in the form of home-made petrol bombs made by students called molotov cocktails.Underground radio and TV were kept going to inform the outside of events.
However the protests were crushed and Dubcek was forced to resign.He was replaced with Gustav Husak who reversed all the reforms put in by Dubcek in the prague spring.
This led to Brezhnev creating the Brezhnev Doctrine which declared that a threat to one socialist country was a threat to all of them. he indicated that force would be used to keep the satellite states under soviet control if needed. 23 of 38 Reasons for Detente Detente easing of tensions between east and west.
Economic Problems The USA was suffering economically from the war in vietnam and was sufferning from inflation early 1970.
The USSR was suffering because they were running out of money due to the low standard of living and poor industrial efficiancy.
Oil Both the Soviet Union and the USA were worried about the conflict in the middle east. oil supplies from that area were vital for both countries, and the suez canal was important for sea routes. communist and non-communist countries had become involved in the conflict between arabs and israelis.
Initiatives from Nixon President Nixon was keen to establish better working relations between Ussr and also China who was now regarded as another major superpower.
Both Nixon and Brezhnev were keen to improve relations so that they could increase trade. 25 of 38 SALT 1 Helsinki Agreement 1969 1972 and 1975 SALT 1 Strategic Arms Limitation Talks was an agreement which lasted for 5 years and limited the number of ICBM's and ABM' on both sides.
It was a success because it was a step to limiting the number of weapons however it didn't deal with the problem of all of the weapons hat already existed and were stockpiled.
Soviet Invasion December 25 1979 the soviet troops invaded Afghanistan and quickly took over the airport and the presidents palace.
Reactions to the soviet Invasion Brezhnev addressed the world saying that the invasion was justified and that they were invited by the government.
United States president Jimmy Carter was furious describing the soviet invasion as a threat to world peace.
China said that they would support the islamic guerilla group, the mujaheddin to try and regain control of the country.Carter also reacted by boycotting the moscow olympic games, stopping trade with the soviet union to starve them economically and sending 1800 marines to protect the oil routes in the middle east.
The War Continues The mujaheddin were well equipped thanks to China and the USA so they took control of the country and used guerilla warfare tactics to fight the Soviet troops The 125,000 soviet troops could not defeat the rebels and suffered increasing casualties and 1982 the massive attack on the Panjahir valley failed which proved the point that this was, like the war in vietnam for the Americans was unwinnable.
Consequences The new leader of the soviet union Mikhail Gorbachev was elected in 1985 and started talks with the USA in 1987 which ended 1n 1988 at geneva with Reagen In 1988 the soviet troops started to leave and by February 1989 Over 3 million afghans had fled to Pakistan or Iran and 1 million civilians died.
Fighting continued between rival rebel groups even after the soviets had left and those Afghans left suffered major food shortages as the fighting had destroyed so much of the farmland.
The Soviet Union had lost 20,000 soldiers and the economy was greatly damaged as the war had cost them billions of dollars per year. 29 of 38 Renewed cold war 1980 1983 New President Ronald Reagan was a strong anti communist, in his election speech he reffered to the soviet union as "" That Evil Empire"" Reagan increased the USA's spending on weapons from $178 billion to $367 billion Reagan spent more and more money on trying to develop more sophisticated weapons such as the cruise missile, the neutron bomb and the MX missile.
The soviet union was afraid that this new technology would upset the existing balance of terror and lead to mutually assured Destruction Strategic Defense Initiative 1983 United States scientists started work of SDI which later became known as 'Star Wars'. it was a satellite anti-missile system. the aim was to prevent any long range soviet missiles fro reaching the USA by making a huge lazer shield in space 30 of 38 Solidarity in Poland 1980 1983 1980 there were huge protest movements in poland caused by high food prices and fuel shortages.
It started was started off by Lech Walesa, who created the freedom movement solidarity after the shipyard workers at Gdansk went on strike.
Unrest grew into nationwide strikes and Solidarity soon had 9 million members.
The Polish government feared an invasion from soviet troops as had happened in Hungary 1956 and Czechoslovakia 1968 but it didn't come, partly because the soviet union had just invaded Afghanistan.
However when Solidarity kept on growing the soviet union became concerned for one of the key members of the warsaw pact and ordered training maneuvers to be performed on the border of Poland. 1981 the new leader Jaruzelski imposed martial law Political opponents to communism were either imprisoned or forced to hide including 10,000 senior Solidarity members and Lech Walesa.
However support for Solidarity continued and the USA provided secret support for those involved.
Walesa was released from prison in 1982 and was awarded an nobel prize 1983. 31 of 38 Changing Soviet and United States attitudes Changing Policies Gorbachev realised that the soviet union needed modernizing and introduced two new main policies.
Perestroika Means Restructuring that is, changing some economic policies to allow more competition and incentives to produce goods.
Gorbachev believed that they could only survived if they changed from the policies put down by Stalin and modernized.
Glasnost Means Openness, -in this case, restoring faith in government and ending corruption.
Gorbachev believed that people shoiuld not be punished for simply disagreeing with government policies, there should be a more open debate.
The soviet union agreed to leave Afghanistan and not to test any nuclear weapons.
December 1987 Both leaders agree to start dismantling all medium and short range nuclear weapons this was a major step in the end of the cold war.
Reforms in the Soviet Union -Political Prisoners were to be released 1987 People were allowed to buy and sell for profit for the first time in 60 years. Gorbachev allowed freedom of speech These reforms angered hardline communists 33 of 38 End of Soviet control in Eastern Europe 1n 1989, Gorbachev' popularity in the world was at an all time high, in october he was awarded the noble peace prize then in December he and the new United States president , George Bush, met to discuss the end of the cold war.
The communist countries of Eastern Europe had become more and more with the control from Moscow during the 1980's. particularly using more and more demonstrations and the declining economic problems.
March 1989, Gorbachev told the communist leaders of Eastern Europe that the Red Arm would no longer be able to defend them. 34 of 38 Collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe.
Poland June 1989 free elections were held after the increasing pressure from the people in Demonstrations, this was the first time since 1939.
Solidarity won nearly all the seats and Lech Walesa became the new prime minister.
This led to the collapse of the rest of the countries in Eastern Europe East Germany By the Autumn of 1989 Thousands of people were fleeing East Germany through Austria.
Gorbachev told the unpopular East German leader Erich Honecker, to allow reforms.
He responded by telling his troops to fire on the demonstrators, but they refused.
On 10 November 1989 thousands of East Germans marched to the Berlin Wall, and even the guards joind the demonstrators in pulling it down.
The symbolic barrier that divided East and West was gone. 35 of 38 Collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe continued.
Czechoslovakia Thousands of people demonstrated in Prague, tha capital city, on 24 November 1989.
However Alexander Dubcek and the playwright Havel re-appeared and inspired the demonstrations to continue.
Hungary The communist government under Imre Pozsgay accepted the need for change and led the moves for reform in Hungary.
Other political parties were allowed, and in November 1989 the communist party was renamed the socialist party and allowed free elections in 1990 36 of 38 Collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe continued.
Romania In December 1989 there was a short and bloody revolution in Romania.
The hated communist dictator Ceausescu and his wife was executed and a new government set up in his place.
Bulgaria In November 1989 the communist leader, Todor Zhikov, since 1954, resigned under increasing pressure and free elections were held the next year in April 1990 The Baltic States In 1990 Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia declared themselves independent of the soviet union and held there own free elections in which non-communist governments were set up. 37 of 38 The Collapse of the Soviet Union People were unhappy at the slow effect that Gorbachevs reforms were having and saw the easy collapse of communism in Eastern Europe as a weakness.
February 1990, 200,000 people demonstrate in Moscow against communist and on the may-day ceremony Gorbachev was booed.
People within the soviet union disliked Gorbachev, some felt he was doing too much to reform communism and some felt that the wasn't doing enough.
Yeltsin, the Russian Prime minister, led demonstrations against the coup which gained him much popularity as he was seen as the man to save Russia from sliding back into communist control.
Yeltsin went on the end the communist party and disbanded the soviet union in december 1991, the communist flag was lowered for the last time over the Kremlin.
Thanks so much-they're a great help:) chrisReport Tue 8th June, 2010 @ 08:08there graet Tom O'NeillReport Tue 15th June, 2010 @ 10:02They're good notes, but there's nothing here on Vietnam.
Learnt more from this than a whole year with her! :) Oluwafisayo AlasiReport Mon 5th March, 2012 @ 17:40Great stuff here.
Tonye PeppleReport Sun 11th March, 2012 @ 18:21i love you ... no homo this is amazing thanks so much man, punctuation would have been nice, cause sometimes it's hard to understand the sentence.
