Martin J Sherwin At 9m. on an October morning almost 50 years ago, national security advisor McGeorge Bundy entered President John F Kennedy’s White House bedroom to deliver some bad news.
Photographs taken two days earlier by a U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had revealed unmistakable evidence that the Soviet Union had secretly placed mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
At the time, I was a junior officer in the United States Navy attached to Patrol Squadron 31, an antisubmarine warfare training squadron based at North Island Naval Air Station near San Diego, California.
Despite my modest rank, my job—the squadron’s air intelligence officer—made me custodian of our top secret documents, including our deployment orders in the event of war.
Sometime following mid-October, I received an unexpected new set of orders, after I learned that the round-the-world flight I was scheduled to conavigate for an admiral had been scrapped.
Within days, all leave was canceled.According to rumors, the cause was rising tensions in Berlin.
On Monday, October 22, 1962, just hours before Kennedy’s televised speech announcing a naval “quarantine” of Cuba and the demand that Khrushchev withdraw the offending missiles forthwith, I was ordered to remove the war plans from my safe and deliver them to our squadron’s senior staff.
My recollection is that in the event of war, we were to deploy to Baja, California.
Junior officers having more bravado than sense, we joked that the beaches of Baja would be a delightful place to die.
I did not know until I learned about the events I describe below how close to death we all were.
There are hundreds of studies of those terrifying 13 October days during which the pressure of domestic and international politics on both sides of the iron curtain and the personal interests of the principal decision makers nearly ignited a global conflagration.
In the end, nuclear war was averted by the rising panic that engulfed both leaders but that Khrushchev acted on first.
In a surprise announcement over radio Moscow, on Sunday morning, October 28, the Soviet premier accepted Kennedy’s earlier pledge not to invade Cuba as a quid pro quo for the removal of the Soviet missiles.
In fact, World War III was even closer than either Khrushchev or Kennedy ever realized, and it was not going to be started by either of them or Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro.
Kennedy’s and Khrushchev’s shared aversion to armed conflict was essential, but the indispensable ingredient was luck, very good luck, the all too often ignored hidden historical variable.
On October 27, 1962, almost six days have passed since Kennedy announced his decision to “quarantine” Cuba.
This was only the initial step, he said, to force the Soviet Union to remove the nuclear missiles it had secretly shipped to the island over the past several months.
It has become increasingly apparent to Khrushchev, Kennedy, and Castro that the military activities of each passing day has exponentially increased the danger of a hostile incident escalating out of control.
Along with potential clashes on the quarantine line, tension has been increased by the well-publicized buildup of United States forces in the United States and Europe.
The three contending leaders are acutely aware and worried that at any moment events could slip from their control.
In response to Kennedy’s address, he has ordered general mobilization, and commanded his anti-aircraft batteries to shoot down United States aircraft that overfly the island; several low flying USAF reconnaissance jets have had close calls.
Earlier on that Saturday, a Soviet commander, who Castro badgered into action, fired a surface-to-air missile at a USAF U2.
The missile had been fired without Moscow’s authorization, but neither Kennedy nor any of his advisors know that.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff are united in urging the president to bomb the offending SAM site; an act he fears could escalate into a global war.
Certain now that he can do little to prevent an assault, Castro has become grimly fatalistic.
Determined to confront the inevitable head on regardless of the consequences, he has dictated a letter to Khrushchev urging him to launch Soviet intercontinental missiles against the United States should an assault occur.
Living so intensely at the center of the crisis, Castro has abandoned any hope of a peaceful resolution.
Khrushchev, who will remain in his Kremlin office throughout the night, is desperate to avoid Armageddon, or anything approaching it.
He has recklessly gambled that nuclear missiles could be installed undetected in Cuba.
But he has lost that bet and is now frantically seeking to escape the consequences of the dangerous standoff he created.
He wants the crisis resolved peacefully, but he has no intention of giving up the missiles without getting something in return.
Yet, Castro’s call for a first strike is a warning, a realization that he might not be able to control Cuban actions.
Khrushchev is close to exhaustion, nearly overcome by the contradictory emotions that have roiled him for days.
He is 9,000 miles from Havana, but only 32 minutes from an intercontinental minuteman missile launched from Wyoming.
Yet he remains furious about the blockade of Cuba, which he considers an illegal, outrageous act of war.
Kennedy calls it a “quarantine,” but Khrushchev is not appeased by the euphemism.
The folly of degenerate imperialism… act of aggression that pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war,” he angrily writes to Kennedy on October 24.
Khrushchev appears determined then to dare the Americans to sink a Soviet vessel.
But now, three days later, both the mounting tension and the circumstances have changed his tone.
Pacing the floor of the Oval Office, he is talking to his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, wondering if he is being too cautious, too aggressive, too flexible, too rigid, or simply too worried.
He is infuriated with his military chiefs for their cavalier attitude toward war and is losing patience with his advisors, who are still offering contradictory recommendations.
Kennedy and Khrushchev are enemies, ideological and military adversaries, who have blundered into a dangerous confrontation that neither wanted nor anticipated.
Each is aware that an accident or even a misinterpretation can instantly set off a nuclear exchange.
Yet the circumstances of their political and international obligations, as well as their personal interests, compel them to continue to press their goals against each other despite their recognition that nothing they can achieve is worth the consequences of a nuclear war.
On this Saturday evening, the fate of the world is not in the hands of any head of state.
Their arrival two days earlier at the quarantine line launched the United States Navy’s ASW forces into action and turned the area into a veritable war zone.
When submerged, all power generation must be transferred from their three diesel engines to batteries that require periodic recharging.
Yet, for days, it has been impossible for B-59 to rise to recharging depth.
ASW ships and aircraft discovered its location and are harassing it with relatively low explosive practice depth charges and the unauthorized use of hand grenades.
But B-59’s crew is dealing with more than terrifying external explosions.
Designed to operate in the North Atlantic, Foxtrot submarines have no air conditioning, and the engine heat and body odor have turned the air rancid.
The carbon dioxide level is dangerous, and the desalinization equipment has malfunctioned leaving fresh water in short supply.
As the cacophony of the depth charges and hand grenades continue, Captain Savitskii begins to suspect that he is not merely being harassed but is actually under attack.
Ketov, one of the other submarine captains, later wrote about B-59’s experience.
What no one in the United States government knows—not the Joint Chiefs, the CIA, Navy Intelligence, or the skippers of the United States Navy ASW forces chasing the Soviet submarines—is that one of the 22 torpedoes aboard B-59 is armed with a 15-kiloton nuclear warhead.
The range of the torpedo is 19 kilometers and carries an explosive force equivalent to that of the atomic bomb that destroyed Hiroshima.
If fired, it could easily sink several ships, an act guaranteed to trigger a nuclear response.
At this point the nightmarish conditions within B-59 and the terrifying explosions around it, are driving Savitskii to the breaking point.
In a rising fury he orders his special weapons officer to arm and load the nuclear torpedo.
I want to pause here to dwell on the role that chance plays in history, as in each of our lives.
Little in our existence is foreordained, and history is not a story composed of inevitable events.
The destinies of nations, just as the lives of individuals, are moved inexorably forward through crossroad after crossroad by decisions and chance, with the influence of each in constant flux.
Luck, extraordinary good luck or plain dumb luck, took command of events aboard B-59 in the minutes that followed Savitskii’s order.
As the torpedo was about to be fired, Superman miraculously appears and saves the day.
At the last moment, the torpedo was prevented from being fired by the unlikely intervention of a very level-headed naval officer who, merely by chance, had been assigned to travel to Cuba on B-59.
Several versions describing how Brigade Chief of Staff Vasilii Arkhipov prevented World War III have come to light.
While surfacing, his boat “came under machine-gun fire from Tracker aircraft.
The fire rounds landed either to the sides of the submarine’s hull or near the bow.
Although firing live ammunition at a submarine was strictly prohibited, having been a member of an ASW squadron flight crew, I have no trouble believing Ketov’s account.
It is possible that the crew of the Tracker had not gotten the word banning the initiation of hostile fire.
Or, perhaps, the combustive mix of adrenalin, testosterone, and frustration from having chased that submarine around the Caribbean for two days, led the Tracker crew to demonstrate clearly to that sub crew just who had won.
Even when they do their rational best, they are not likely to succeed if they run out of luck.
As long as nuclear weapons arsenals exist, human survival appears to be resting on a foundation no more solid than luck.
