Cold War Conflicts Chapter 18 Section 3 Jason M Hauck I The United States and the Soviet Union A.During the Cold War, conflict between the world’s two superpowers— the United States and the Soviet Union—grew stronger.
A proxy war occurs when two powers in conflict use substitutes instead of fighting each other directly.
C.The superpowers used military and economic aid to win the support of other nations.
In addition to NATO in Europe, the United States also built alliances in other parts of the world.
The Central Treaty Organization , which included Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan, Great Britain, and the United States, was meant to prevent Soviet expansion into the Middle East.
In August 1945, the Soviet Union and the United States agreed to divide Korea into two zones at the 38th parallel.
As American-Soviet relations grew worse, however, two separate governments emerged in Korea—Communist in the north and anti-Communist in the south.
B Tension between the two governments increased and North Korean troops invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950.
President Truman, seeing this as Communist aggression and expansion, gained the approval of the United Nations and sent troops to repel the invaders.
In October, UN forces marched across the 38th parallel with the aim of unifying Korea.
Greatly alarmed, the Chinese sent hundreds of thousands of troops into North Korea and pushed UN forces back across the 38th parallel.
The 38th parallel remained the boundary line between North Korea and South Korea.
To many Americans, the policy of containing communism had succeeded in Asia.
Having a socialist regime so close was considered to be a threat to the United States.
B President Kennedy feared that if he moved openly against Castro, then the Soviets might retaliate by moving against Berlin.
The invasion was a disaster, one hundred and fourteen died; the rest were captured by Castro’s troops.
In 1962 Khrushchev began to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, which were meant to counteract United States nuclear weapons placed in Turkey.
E.The United States was not willing to allow nuclear weapons within such close striking distance of its mainland.
In October, Kennedy found out that Soviet ships carrying missiles were heading to Cuba.
Khrushchev agreed to turn back the fleet and remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba.
The Cuban missile crisis seemed to bring the world frighteningly close to nuclear war.
A hotline communications system between Moscow and Washington, D.C., was installed in 1963.
I The Vietnam War A.By 1963, the United States had been drawn into a new struggle the Vietnam War.
After World War II, most states in Southeast Asia gained independence from their colonial rulers.
France refused to let go of Indochina, leading to a long war in Vietnam.
Refusing to accept the new government, France seized the southern part of the country.
For years, France fought Ho Chi Minh’s Vietminh for control of Vietnam without success.
In 1954, after a huge defeat France agreed to sign the Geneva Peace Accords.
C Both sides agreed to hold elections in two years to create a single government.
Instead, the conflict continued, and Vietnam soon became part of the Cold War.
D.In March 1965, President Johnson sent troops to South Vietnam to keep the Communist regime of North Vietnam from gaining control of South Vietnam.
United States policy makers saw the conflict in terms of a domino theory concerning the spread of communism.
E North Vietnam responded to the American troops by sending more forces into the south.
Despite the massive superiority in equipment and firepower of the American forces, the United States failed to defeat the North Vietnamese.
The growing war in Vietnam soon produced an antiwar movement in the United States, especially among college students of draft age.
The mounting destruction of the conflict, seen on television, also turned public opinion against the war.
Richard M Nixon won the election with his pledge to stop the war and bring the American people together.
In 1973, President Nixon reached an agreement with North Vietnam in the Paris Peace Accords that allowed the United States to withdraw its forces.
Within two years after the American withdrawal, Communist armies from the North had forcibly reunited Vietnam.
