Cuba Page 2 of 7 Collections The Museum’s Collection provides audio, visual, documentary resources, and artifacts related to Cuba, the Cuban missile crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Artifacts and documents include campaign ephemera, newspaper clippings, letters and photographs.
Oral Histories For more information about the Oral History Collection Eileen Albert A home economics teacher in 1963, Albert visited the Capitol Rotunda on the weekend of the assassination to pay her respects to President Kennedy.
At that time, her parents were participating in ""Operation Peter Pan,"" caring for a twelve-year-old Cuban girl for one year until her mother could settle in Miami.
Esteban Caras A member of Assault Brigade 2506, Caras served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force.
Ruben Esquivel Currently a member of the Dallas County Historical Foundation's board of directors, Esquivel was a native Cuban who fled his homeland when Fidel Castro came to power.
Carlos Fonts A longtime Dallas businessman, Fonts was a Cuban native living in exile in Florida when he joined the Bay of Pigs invasion force.
Hector Garcia A native Cuban who fled his homeland when Fidel Castro came to power, Garcia became an active community leader in Dallas.
Rene Gonzalez A member of Assault Brigade 2506, Gonzalez served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force.
Cuba Page 3 of 7 Robert MacNeil A veteran broadcast journalist, MacNeil covered the Cuban missile crisis from inside Cuba and, as a White House correspondent for NBC, covered President Kennedy in 1963.
On November 22, 1963, he was preparing for a high school play, which was delayed one week because of the assassination.
George Perrault A longtime United States Navy sailor, Perrault was part of the blockade of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis.
Stationed in Washington, D.C., in 1963, he was part of the Ceremonial Guard for President Kennedy's casket at the White House and United States Capitol Rotunda.
Delia Reyes A Cuban native now living in Dallas, Reyes fled her homeland when Fidel Castro came to power.
Felix Rodriguez A member of Assault Brigade 2506, Rodriguez served as part of the Bay of Pigs invasion force.
Maury Seitz A former United States Air Force captain who later served as a longtime captain for American Airlines, Seitz was co-pilot on numerous chartered flights that backed up Air Force One during the Kennedy presidency.
During the Cuban missile crisis, his plane carried a JFK decoy during a top-secret flight.
Dennis Vincent An actor and co-founder of the Dallas Children's Theater, Vincent visited Havana twice in 2000 and provided impressions of modern-day Cuba under the control of Fidel Castro.
Cuba Page 4 of 7 YouTube The Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza Channel Living History with Captain Maury Seitz A former United States Air Force captain who later served as a longtime captain for American Airlines, Seitz was co-pilot on numerous chartered flights that backed up Air Force One during the Kennedy presidency.
Compiled using strict editorial standards, the collection includes briefing papers, letters, telegrams, and memoranda of conversations prepared by United States government officials involved in the crisis.
Also available are transcripts and summary reports of meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , but not renditions of the ExCom tapes.
Items are organized chronologically by links in groups of 25, the sum of which provides a dayby-day account of the evolving crisis, United States policymaking, and the diplomacy involved in implementing that policy.
The volume contains a glossary of abbreviations used in the documents, a list of key figures in the crisis, and sources for documents.
The compilation is a major resource for studying the United States side of the crisis.
NPR Ahead of Bay of Pigs, Fears of Communism Fifty years ago today, a brigade of around 1,500 CIA-trained soldiers stormed the beach in Cuba's Bay of Pigs.
It was the opening phase of a secret mission to overthrow Fidel Castro.
Of course, things didn't go as planned, and the lessons learned could apply to United States foreign policy today.
By examining both government documents and photographs students will put themselves into the role of President Kennedy during this crucial period, considering the advice of key administration figures and deciding on a course of action.
Cuba Page 6 of 7 John F Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum Curricular Resources The JFK Presidential Library & Museum developed many wonderful educational resources and lesson plans divided up by grade level.
Resources and lesson plans on Cuba are available for middle school and high school level students.
