Events in Korea 1950-53 5 Korean War Background 5.1 5.2 5.3 Japanese ruled Korea from 1910 1945.
After WWII Japan had lost and left Korea, with the Before 1950 USA was not Before 1950 USSR was not Russian army in the North very interested in Korea. very interested in Korea. and USA army in the South.
BUT in 1949: V USA policy of NATO was formed and Stalin Country divided along 38th Containment: stop was worried, plus USA was parallel. communism helping Japan.
Stalin thought USA was being ‘aggressive’ In the North communists ruled with Kim Il Sung as leader.
In the South elections were USA ideas in NSC 68 held & anti-communist When Kim Il Sung leader of which said USA needed Syngman Rhee was leader.
North Korea told Stalin he more arms & it should ‘roll back’ communism. wanted to invade the South, Stalin thought it a good idea USA believed in Domino as it would cause the USA Theory.
Out of The Chinese admitted to Chinese troops ('People's easily defeated the 300,000 UN troops, losing 390,000 men dead Volunteers') attacked the Republic of Korea's 260,000 were Americans.
They at up to a million Chinese modern weapons supplied captured most of South In danger of being cut off, and half a million North by Russia, and a fanatical Korea. the NKPA had to retreat.
The Americans drove drove the Chinese back, The USA was shocked them back and but 54,000 American Then, on 31 December, and alarmed. recaptured South Korea. soldiers died doing so. half a million more Chinese On 27 June they 125,000 NKPA prisoners troops entered the war and persuaded the United were taken.
Nations to pass a th They drove the Americans 38 parallel in March resolution supporting On 7 October 1950 back (using 'human wave 1951.
He advanced as North Korea, and He threatened to invade The USA sent troops to far as the Chinese advanced into South China.
The Americans threatened to use the atomic bomb if China did not stop fighting.
The Chinese & Koreans agreed to a truce, which was signed on 27 July 1953.
Match the phase with the statement Phase: Statement 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 On 25 June 1950, the North Koreans attacked. th MacArthur reached the 38 parallel in March 1951.
They captured most of South Korea. 500,000 more Chinese troops entered the war and attacked the Americans.
The Americans sent troops to Korea as part of the UN force to reinforce the South Korean Army at Pusan.
They had modern weapons supplied by Russia, and a fanatical hatred of the Americans.
President Eisenhower exiles Batista including sugar supported Cuban plantations & casinos.
JFK continued with stopped & 1,200 exiles peasants & end corruption. the plan, with the exiles were captured by invading Cuba with the Castro's forces USA was opposed to Castro.
USA spy planes destroy the missile launch sites avoid a possible observe Soviet personnel But no guarantee that all the sites nuclear war with & weapons in Cuba. would be hit & risk the Soviets striking the USSR back.
But no guarantee that the Soviet in Cuba. ships would stop & not necessarily get USSR ships seen in the missiles removed from Cuba.
At the same time United States armed forces were put on red alert & the opposed to Castro.
He USSR warned any missile launch would be met with full retaliation. was friends with communists & was a threat to United States business interests.
Neither superpower would JFK was advised that the attack the other as retaliation missiles could be ready to from the other would mean be fired before the end of both countries would be destroyed potentially many October. times over.
It said it was merely helping Cuba defend itself & the USA was taking the world to war.
USA agree to first letter demands then JFK sends a secret message to Khrushchev agreeing to remove Turkey missiles.
But make JFK look weak & risk Soviet action .and continued to receive Soviet support. elsewhereg.
Consequence Some saw Kennedy as a young inexperienced President who Destroy the missile sites & remove Castro, could be pushed around.
United States missiles in Turkey gave the United States a strategic military advantage.
It said it was merely helping options and not always go the direct military one.
United States involvement in Vietnam 5 Vietnam War 5.19 5.20 Background Already involved Truman Doctrine Policy of containment said USA had supported USA to support anti.
French colony since C19th France since the end WWII. communists. called Indochina.
WWII, 1940 French surrender became after 1960 believed in the to Germans.
Cambodia, Laos, advisors. movement led by Thailand, Burma , India etc Ho Chi Minh, who wanted an USA counter the support that North end to colonial rule.
WWII, 1945 Allies victory China. meant France wanted Vietnam back, even though Ho Chi Minh Committed to supporting the South had declared an independent Vietnam government at Geneva Vietnam.
Backed unpopular . 1946 war broke out between leader Ngo Diem with $1. billion in Viet Minh & the French.
President Johnson sends more help to stop Vietcong $500 million pa to the French Johnson not a ‘war monger’ but not want to be seen as soft on as part of their policy of communism containment.
Viet Minh guerrilla tactics meant the French pulled out United States ships attacked by North Vietnamese torpedo boats after defeat at Dien Bien Phu.
Total war Over 500,000 United States soldiers in Vietnam on 12 month tours Draft of young men in the United States army 5.
My Lai Massacre turned United States public opinion against the war An investigation ended in mass murder charges for Lt.
USA people were 5.24 General Giap After a napalm attack shocked & protests increased.
Attacked what they thought was a Vietcong stronghold. middle class people who wanted an end to the ‘pointless’ war.
Soldier Ridenhour who knew many soldiers at 1969 Politics: to be pro-war was political suicide for most politicians.
Realisation that the USA could not win a military victory The events of My Lai shocked the United States people. after the Tet Offensive People lost faith in the United States army Bombing Nixon ordered bombing to be increased.
He hoped this would put pressure on the communists as peace negotiations continued.
When talks broke down in Dec 1972, Nixon ordered a Vietnamization massive bombing campaign.
Between 1969 71 400,000 troops were United States invasion of Cambodia withdrawn from Vietnam.
The United States was unable to cut off the supply lines as the 5.33 communists used trials & bases in Laos & Cambodia.
Nixon was invited to visit China & he asked Paris Peace Agreement 27 January 1972 China to pressure North Vietnam to end the war.
Fighting restarted in 1973, AVRN held for a while but low morale & poor leadership meant that by …… April 1975, communist forces entered Saigon hundreds of thousands of S Vietnamese were executed.
Score each event out of 10, in terms of it being a turning point that influenced the American public into becoming more anti-war explain your score.
Level 2: description Level 3: explains one reason Level 4: explains two reasons 1.
