The first was the industrialized capitalist with the free world on one side and Soviet nations, including the United States and its allies.
The second was the client states on the other, including competition for influence in such places as Egypt, Communist nations led by the Soviet Union.
The Third World consisted of the Congo, Vietnam, and Chile. developing nations, often newly independent, who were not aligned with either 10.9.
These nonaligned countries provided yet another arena for competiTruman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan, which established the pattern for America’s tion between the Cold War superpowers. postwar policy of supplying economic and military aid to prevent the spread of Communism and the resulting economic Fighting for the Third World and political competition in arenas such as Southeast Asia (i.e., the Korean War, The Third World nations were located in Latin America, Asia, and Africa.
They Vietnam War), Cuba, and Africa. were economically poor and politically unstable.
They also suffered from ethnic conflicts and lack of tech, Hungary , and Czechoslovakia and those countries’ resurgence in nology and education.
Each needed a political and economic system around the 1970s and 1980s as people in Soviet which to build its society.
Soviet-style communism and U.S.-style free-market satellites sought freedom from Soviet control.
CST 1 Students compare the present with democracy were the main choices. the past, evaluating the consequences of Cold War Strategies The United States, the Soviet Union, and, in some cases, past events and decisions and determining the lessons that were learned.
China, used a variety of techniques to gain influence in the Third World.
They backed wars of revolution, liberation, or counterrevoluhistorical causes and effects, including the limitations on determining cause and effect. tion.
TAKING NOTES Determining Main Ideas Association of Nonaligned Nations Other developing nations also needed Use a chart to list main assistance.
They became important players in the Cold War competition between points about Third World the United States, the Soviet Union, and later, China.
But not all Third World confrontations. countries wished to play a role in the Cold War.
Indonesia, a populous island nation in Southeast Asia, Cuba also struggled to stay uninvolved.
In 1955, it hosted many leaders from Asia and Nicaragug a Africa at the Bandung Conference.
They met to form what they called a “third Iran force” of independent countries, or nonaligned nations.
Supplied with American weapons, the Afgan mujahideen factions that followed In what ways rebels, called mujahideen, or holy warriors, fought on. the Soviet withdrawal in 1989. were United States involveThe United States had armed the rebels because they In 1996, one of these groups, ment in Vietnam considered the Soviet invasion a threat to Middle Eastern oil called the Taliban, seized power and and Soviet involvement in Afghanistan supplies.
President Jimmy Carter warned the Soviets established an Islamic government. against any attempt to gain control of the Persian Gulf.
WRITING ACTIVITY REVOLUTION For either Cuba, Iran Nicaragua, or Iran, write an annotated time line of events discussed in this section.
