Truman, Kennedy & Nixon Capitalism Communism ) • People make money for themselves • Businesses are owned by the government . & money is shared out equally.
FEARED USSR because… Americans thought they would lose all their money under FEARED USA because… Americans had fought Communism.
They also knew that Stalin (Soviet against the Communists in the Russian Civil leader) killed anyone who disagreed with him.
At conference, leaders disagreed about: o Germany would be divided into 4 zones.
Soviet Expansion Truman Doctrine The USSR expanded their • In 1947, Truman started the containment ‘sphere of influence’ in Eastern policy.
The USA would give East & West was called • East Germany – run by Soviet money & supplies to the Iron Curtain. army. any country fighting • 1947, Stalin set up Cominform.
They thought that that containment the USSR would spread Communism across the world. happened.
The Eastern $17 billion to European countries to zone was controlled by the USSR, and help them rebuild after World War the Western zones were controlled by Two. the USA/Britain (and France, although • The idea was that richer countries they were not very involved). would be less likely to turn to • Berlin was also Communism. split into East & West.
He West Berlin using roads or trains. refused to let Communist • The USA had to fly in all the supplies that West Berlin Eastern needed.
Events in Asia Military Alliances • China becomes Communist – Mao Alliance – countries who agree to protect took over China.
There were two main he signed a treaty of friendship with USSR. alliances in the Cold War, which made each side even more suspicious of each other.
Distrust grew capitalist countries like the USA and UK. between East & West.
United States created the first nuclear Americans were terrified • 1957: USSR atomic bomb. of nuclear war.
United States created the H-bomb (x1000 • 1958: USA power of an A-bomb). set up NASA • 1953: USSR had their own H-bomb. to research space.
United States put first man (Neil • 1959: United States had their own ICBM systems.
Both sides were each superpower look more equally matched and could destroy each other with powerful. their nuclear weapons, so neither side actually wanted to attack.
USSR refused to go to • Showed that no country would be allowed to the summit.
This meant that there leave the Warsaw Pact. was no Test Ban Treaty or solution • Showed the USA would not help out Eastern about Berlin & Cuba.
Events of crisis: Impact of crisis: In 1949, Germany was divided into East In August 1961, East German and • Propaganda – the US Soviet soldiers put up a wall to talked about a prison & West divide East & West Berlin.
United States & Soviet • Families in Berlin were to the West. tanks had a terrifying 18-hour divided, and hundreds Berlin was a good place for the United States standoff before of people were killed to spy on the USSR. pulling back. trying to cross the wall.
Khrushchev thought he was Kennedy accepted leaving East Germany inexperienced so he wanted to test him. the wall it was each year was reduced Kennedy better than war. by nearly 50 times.
Events of crisis: Impact of crisis Cuba is a country Oct 1962: President Kennedy was  Kennedy – better south of the US. told about the missile sites.
He the United States blockade & turned around. looked good. was not Communist, but was left-wing.
United States missiles were • This drove Castro towards friendship removed from • Khrushchev changed his demands, with Khrushchev.
USSR wanted to US, Cuban exiles tried to overthrow avoid nuclear war, • United States plane was shot down over Cuba; Castro.
There were too and signed a Nuclear Kennedy refused to invade Cuba. few exiles and the Test Ban Treaty the invasion failed, • He accepted next year. humiliating Khrushchev’s the USA. first demands.
United States photos showed removed the that the USSR were missiles from building missile launch sites Cuba & USA on Cuba.
These missiles removed their could destroy most of the missiles from USA in 20 minutes.
Events of crisis: Impact of crisis: • Czechs hated Communism because of • In August 1968, • Relations between the East the lack of freedom & the weak the Soviet leader & West became worse, economy sent because Brezhnev said that Czechoslovakia’s money). tanks & 500,000 he would not allow Eastern soldiers into Europe countries to reject • 1968: Dubček became the new Czechoslovakia.
