Missile Crisis Special 14/10/02 Euro-Cuba News is an email magazine that has been published from London since November 1999.
It aims to provide up to the minute coverage of news from Cuba, on Cuba's international relations and on solidarity actions with Cuba from around the world.
This service is free and welcomes input from its readers including comment, articles and solidarity news.
Art Heitzer Top officials involved in the October 1962 Cuban Missile from the US, Cuba, and former Soviet Union, including from the Kennedy administration, have gathered in Havana 40 years later to discuss the events when the world teetered on the brink of nuclear war.
At a similar conference in Cuba 10 years ago, former United States Secty. of Defense Robt.
McNamera indicated that while tens of thousands of United States troops were on full alert and on the verge of being sent to implement the invasion recommendations by top US military leaders -he & other United States officials had not known that the small Soviet garrisons in Cuba were already armed with battlefield nuclear weapons and had authority to use them in defense against such an attack.
This year, we now learn that four Soviet submarines near Cuba were also nuclear armed, and that a United States destroyer was meanwhile dropping ""warning"" depth charges against at least one of them -which was on the verge of launching its weapon in defense.
Per United States military doctrine at the time, either of these incidents would have resulted in a nuclear attack on the USSR, and presumably a similar Soviet attack in return.
Important documentation has been newly released, including as available from the sources below.
The coverage of these events in the United States frequently fails to include much recognition of the attacks and threats against directed against Cuba during this period, including sabotage & assassination attempts, such as under Operation Mongoose.
SAN CRISTOBAL, Cuba | -Surprised by the rumble of the flatbed trucks, Radem Cruz Soto joined neighbors streaming out of their oneand two-story concrete homes in this farming community to throng the main road for a closer look.The transports carried no insignias; the pink-faced young men wore ordinary clothes.
The 19-year-old economics student swelled with pride — and a feeling of relief.Eighteen months earlier, a force of exiles organized, armed and trained by the United States had landed at Playa Giron, a stretch of beach at the mouth of the Bay of Pigs, in an attempt to wrest the Caribbean nation from the socialist revolution of Fidel Castro.The attack was a disaster, but U.S.-backed insurgents continued to hold the Sierra del Escambray mountains around the southern port city of Trinidad in Sancti Spiritus province.
Cubans braced for a larger invasion, this time by United States troops.But with the unannounced delivery of the Soviet R-12 and R-14 medium-range ballistic missiles, it seemed to Cruz Soto that long-awaited help finally had arrived.
A war would have been horrible,'' says Salvador Massip Soto, who was a member of the Cuban Air Force in October 1962.
Many eyes of Cuban and Soviet men who had been willing to give their lives with sublime dignity filled with tears when the surprising, sudden and practically unconditional decision to withdraw the arms was announced,'' a bitter Castro wrote to Khrushchev days after the agreement.
Awaiting an invasion'On the leafy grounds of the Museo de la Revolucion in Old Havana lies the battered turbine of the U-2 piloted by Maj.
The first thing to understand is that the Crisis of October didn't begin in October,'' says senior guide Elio Pena Martinez, the museum's resident expert on the era.
We were awaiting an invasion,'' says Massip Soto, who was operations chief for a helicopter squadron at the Baracoa Air Base near Havana.
The Marines would land here, between Mariel and Santa Fe and here, in the Santa Cruz area,'' he says, tapping stretches of coastline on either side of the capital.
Operation Mongoose, authorized by Kennedy in November 1961, combined diplomatic pressure, economic sanctions and military threats with industrial sabotage and support for insurgents.When Castro asked for conventional missiles to defend Cuba, Khrushchev saw an opportunity.In the years since World War II, the United States had surrounded the Soviet Union with hundreds of nuclear warheads.
Missile bases 90 miles from Florida could even the strategic balance.Khrushchev proposed sending nuclear missiles to the island.
Our inevitable weapons'In San Cristobal, police cleared the Avenida Maceo in advance of the caravan.
Cuba is a sovereign, independent country, and has a right to own the weapons that it deems necessary, and the U.S.S.R. to send them there, in the same light that the United States has felt it has the right to make agreements with dozens of countries, and send them the weapons as that they see fit, without the Soviet Union considering it had the right to intercede,'' he said.
It was a secret that everyone knew,'' Massip Soto says.Everyone except the Americans.
There was no panic'Kennedy ordered the blockade, mobilized hundreds of thousands of troops for an invasion, and demanded that Khrushchev remove the missiles.Eleven years old at the time, Rafael Saumell Muoz remembers images of Castro and Kennedy flickering across the family television screen.
Obviously we were very aware of retaliation the Americans were ready to take against Cubans,'' Saumell Muoz says.
Humiliation and surrender'As Earth edged toward global thermonuclear war, the United States and the Soviet Union opened negotiations.
There is no paper, no document that says only the great powers have a right to have nuclear weapons,'' the museum guide says.
At an airport arrival ceremony, Cuban vice president Jose Ramon Fernandez greeted former United States secretary of defense Robert McNamara, JFK speechwriter and counsel Theodore Sorensen, JFK aide and Pulitzer-Prize-winning historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Gen.
William Y Smith , JFK aide Richard Goodwin, CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, and other United States veterans and scholars.
Also attending the conference as honored observers are several members of the Kennedy family spanning three generations.
Earlier this week, a distinguished delegation of Russian veterans arrived in Havana from Moscow, including former deputy foreign minister Georgy Kornienko, missile deployment planner Gen.
Anatoly Gribkov, former defense minister Dmitry Yazov, and KGB officer Nikolai Leonov.
At the center of discussions will be thousands of pages of newly declassified documents from the Cuban government itself, from the CIA, the Pentagon and the White House, from the Soviet Foreign Ministry and the Politburo, and from Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Brazil, Canada, Great Britain, and Mexico providing for the first time the Cuban and multi-national perspectives on a crisis previously seen only in superpower terms.
Archive director Thomas Blanton said, ""The conference room will echo with words that resonate today, such as 'intelligence failure,' 'pre-emptive strike,' and 'weapons of mass destruction.
On Sunday, October 13, conferees will visit the last surviving structure from the Soviet deployment in 1962, a nuclear warhead bunker at the San Cristobal missile site west of Havana.
On this day in 1962, a high-altitude U-2 spy plane took the first photographs of the Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba at San Cristobal.
The conference will meet at the Palacio de Convenciones in Havana, Cuba.
The conference room itself is closed to the press, except for the opening ceremony at 10m. on October 11; but the organizers will hold daily press briefings each afternoon summarizing the discussion and releasing key documents addressed that day.
For 11 years was policy adviser, legal counsel and speechwriter to Senator and President Kennedy.
Later chief of staff, SHAPE ; Deputy Commander United States EUCOM; four star general.
Later United States Ambassador to Bulgaria and Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution.
A career anti-submarine warfare and sonar specialist, he retired in 1980.
After the Bay of Pigs, assistant to the State Department's assistant secretary for Latin America, Adolf Berle; later, director for Cuban affairs in the State Department.
RUSSIAN VETERANS * Georgy Markovich Kornienko Soviet attaché at the USSR Embassy in Washington in 1962.
Later head of the United States Desk of the Foreign Ministry and First Deputy Foreign Minister under Gromyko.
Currently at the Institute of Military History and General Secretary for the Russian Commission of Military History.
Senior Research Fellow, Institute of Latin America, Academy of Sciences of the Russian Federation and editor of journal on Latin America.
Robert McNamara, Defense Secretary under President John F Kennedy, said after arriving.
Speaking on the eve of a three-day conference involving key American, Cuban and Russian actors in the crisis, McNamara said he was stunned at a similar gathering in Havana a decade ago when he learned how many Soviet missiles had been kept in Cuba.
Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorenson are also attending.
Also there is ex-CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who analyzed the now famous American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Among Cuban actors in that historic episode who are expected to participate are 76-year-old Castro, then a young revolutionary leader in power for just three years.
The crisis erupted in mid-October 1962 when Kennedy learned that in Cuba there were Soviet nuclear warheads capable of reaching American shores just 90 miles to the north.
It was defused two weeks later when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from the island.
In honor of the late American president, several Kennedy family members are attending the conference.
Robert F Kennedy, the president's brother who was attorney general and a key player in the crisis.
The crisis, marking the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, an organizer of the conference, was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the island.As Kennedy's words clicked onto the paper rolling off the teletype machine at military headquarters Oct., 1962, Fernandez knew the Americans meant business.
We no longer live in a world,' he said, `where only the actual firing of weapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nation's security to constitute maximum peril,' "" Mr Bush said.But Senator Kennedy said that President Kennedy, his brother, had carefully avoided a pre-emptive assault against Cuba, instead imposing a naval quarantine after the Soviet Union prepared sites there for nuclear missiles.A ""preventative military action,"" Senator Kennedy argued, was ill advised both then and now.
The Cuban missile crisis was one of the most harrowing episodes of the cold war.
In October 1962, American spy planes confirmed that the Soviets were constructing sites for missiles able to reach the United States.The Soviets denied the presence of missiles in Cuba.
On Oct., Premier Nikita S Krushchev of the Soviet Union backed down, ordering the missile sites dismantled, but only after securing a secret pledge from Mr Kennedy that he would not invade Cuba.
