Israel and the United States have a long history of close intelligence cooperation.
Apart from the regular provision of useful strategic and political intelligence, Israel’s wars against the Soviet‐armed and trained Arab armies afforded invaluable insights into Soviet military doctrine and weapons systems.
The intelligence cooperation between Washington and Jerusalem is one of the cornerstones of the strategic alliance between the two states.
Given the extensive United States military aid to Israel along with Washington’s and the American public’s backing of Israel in the international arena, it has been widely argued that the alliance unilaterally favors Israel.
From the global standpoint, Israel has provided a bulwark that protects United States and Western interests in the Middle East and has taken the brunt of Islam’s Manichean confrontation with Western civilization.
To be sure, Israeli‐American intelligence cooperation has encountered some bumps along the road.
Thus, for example, Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin did not inform the Reagan administration of Israel’s plans to destroy the Iraqi nuclear reactor in 1981, even though the two intelligence communities had signed a memorandum on this issue about a year earlier; Washington responded by chilling intelligence cooperation with Jerusalem for a short while.
Conversely, the US, along with Britain, kept Israel in the dark about secret contacts with Muammar Qaddafi in 2003, which led to the dismantling of Libya’s mass‐destruction weapons program.
Likewise, in May 2017 Trump reportedly shared with Russian foreign minister Lavrov sensitive obtained by Israel about ISIS’ terrorist plans.
These mishaps notwithstanding, Washington and Jerusalem have maintained a strong intelligence relationship since the 1950s.
During the 1950s and 1960s, the Middle East served as a combat testing ground for Soviet military doctrine and advanced weaponry, with the experience amassed by Israel in its wars against the Egyptian, Syrian, and Iraqi armies ‐ trained by Soviet advisers and equipped with Soviet weapons – providing the United States military with operational lessons; information about new Israeli technologies to neutralize the Soviet weaponry; and direct access to Soviet weapons systems captured by Israel.
Within this framework,  In 1966, an Iraqi pilot defected to Israel in a MiG‐21 fighting aircraft.
Ariel Sharon’s division seized a complete Egyptian SA‐6 surface‐to‐ air‐missile battery.
A large number of T‐62 tanks, some of them intact, were captured on the Syrian front during the 1973 war.
Viewing the move as casus belli, United States President John Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on Cuba, leading Khrushchev to back down and to withdraw the missiles in return for the withdrawal of United States nuclear missiles from Turkey.
At the time of this crisis, the Soviets had already gone far in developing nuclear‐equipped intercontinental ballistic missiles.
In the initial years, the launchers and missiles were deployed on the ground and hidden in forests, but by the mid‐1960s they had already been placed in underground siloes.
It had a flight range of 10,500‐13,000 kilometers depending on the weight of the warhead.
Thus, particularly in domains of a clearly technological nature such as the Soviet nuclear threat, it was easy to err through over‐ or underestimation.
Yet, the thick cloak of secrecy surrounding the Soviet Union was its Achilles Heel.
It was the need to ensure secrecy in all areas of life that caused an “information explosion” by requiring to maintain huge databases in an endless quantity of cardboard files crammed with documents; and the more they multiplied the more difficult access to them became.
Most likely, the personal files of not a few members of the Soviet defense establishment with a high security classification were lost over the years, and at some point after their retirement their security classification disappeared.
Indeed, they became free agents, but there were still some difficulties in locating them and gaining access to them.
Against this backdrop, the Israeli intelligence community succeeded, in the latter half of the 1970s and the early 1980s, to provide its American counterpart with highly valuable, original information on the Soviet strategic missile array as it existed at the end of the 1960s.
Based on the information that Israel provided, one could construct a detailed and quite accurate picture of the structure and dispersal of at least some of the Soviet army’s strategic missile brigades.
The missiles were aimed at the Kora testing ground in the northern Kamchatka peninsula—more than 8,000 kilometers east of Baikonur and about 5,500 kilometers east of Plesetsk.
At the same time, it appears that the main importance of the information was technical; it contained detailed technical data on the R‐16 intercontinental missile and its operation.
The data also included highly original information on the thermonuclear warheads of this missile.
Some of the intelligence information could be verified with aerial photographs.
But it also included details, as well as rumors, that were verified only later.
For example, it included a rumor about the fatal disaster that occurred in Baikonur field on October 24, 1960, in which Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, the first commander of the Soviet strategic missile force, was killed along with about a hundred members of his staff.
The occasion was the first test launch of an R‐16 missile to mark the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution.
A short time after the incident, the Soviet authorities reported that Marshal Nedelin had been killed in a plane crash.
Soon thereafter, however, the Italian news agency gave a brief report on the disaster.
Nevertheless, the incident with its full details remained a secret in Russia.
It was only in 1989, almost 30 years later, that the Russian weekly Ogonek revealed the circumstances of the tragic death of Nedelin and his crew.
The accident occurred when a short circuit in the engine of the missile’s prototype caused an explosion as it was being positioned and fueled on the launching pad.
Thus, when the problem that prevented the launching of the missile was discovered, the marshal rushed to the launching pad to learn what had happened with his entourage in tow, and then the explosion transpired.
The planner of the missile, Mikhail Yangel, was saved by being in a bunker far from the launching pad to smoke a cigarette.
Khrushchev also appointed Leonid Brezhnev, who would succeed him as Soviet leader, to head the commission that investigated the disaster.
This was a radiological‐contamination accident that occurred on September 29, 1957, at the Soviet Mayak facility for recycling irradiated nuclear fuel and extracting plutonium for nuclear weapons, which operated in the “closed city” of Chelyabinsk‐40 on the eastern slopes of the southern Ural Mountains.
The disaster ensued when the cooling system of one of the tanks, which contained 70 to 80 tons of liquid nuclear waste at a high radioactivity level, malfunctioned and was not immediately repaired.
Another anecdote that was reported and already known in the West concerned the Tsar Bomba — “king of the bombs” — explosion of a 50‐ megaton hydrogen bomb, the largest explosion yield ever.
The fireball that emerged from the explosion was eight kilometers in diameter, and when the blast wave reached Arkhangelsk, about 2,000 kilometers southwest of the explosion site, it caused ships in the harbor to crash into each other.
The CIA expressed its gratitude to the Israeli intelligence community, noting that the received information was ʺuniqueʺ and had enabled the agency to adjust its intelligence overestimation on the issue in question.
According to a senior CIA official, the information obtained from Israel indicated that the Soviet strategic missile technology was of inferior quality than the CIA had believed.
The official said the United States intelligence community had feared, because of the information gaps it faced, that by the 1970s the Soviets had already developed a technological capability to equip their intercontinental missiles with MIRV warheads.
This technology enables the missile, when reaching the target, to strike a number of objectives simultaneously.
Furthermore, if a MIRV warhead includes decoy devices in addition to nuclear bombs, it is more immune to interception.
Thus, the Israeli information made a particularly important contribution to the United States defensive capability against a Soviet nuclear strike.
The current nuclear threat to the United States comes from North Korea, and, as in the 1970s and 1980s, the United States intelligence community has difficulty collecting and assessing intelligence.
But, unlike the Soviet leadership during the Cold War, which acted in a rational and calculating manner, Kim Jong‐Un’s main hallmark is his unpredictability.
Raphael Ofek is an expert in the field of nuclear physics and technology, who served as a senior analyst in the Israeli intelligence community.
