On October 14, 1962, a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane's photographs confirmed that Soviet missile sites were being constructed in Cuba.
President John F Kennedy immediately formed a fifteen-man executive committee to advise him on policy options.
For the next two weeks the world stood on the brink of nuclear war while EXCOM convened daily meetings and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev huddled with his advisors at the Kremlin in Moscow.
The missile crisis ended on October 28 when, in a public radio address, Khrushchev announced that Soviet missiles would be withdrawn from Cuba.
Genesis Several theories have been given to explain Khrushchev's decision to place missiles in Cuba.
The Soviet leader perceived Kennedy to be weak and indecisive, given his failed leadership during the April 1961 U.S.-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion and the manner in which he handled the affair in its aftermath.
Two months later, during their Vienna summit conference in June 1961, Kennedy's behavior convinced Khrushchev of his hesitancy.
Against the recommendation from his military advisors, who distrusted Castro, Khrushchev placed the missiles in Cuba for the announced purpose of counterbalancing the fifteen United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey that were aimed at Soviet cities.
Soviet missiles in Cuba would negate the leverage the United States gained when it placed missiles in western Europe.
Fidel Castro was deeply disappointed to learn that Khrushchev did not intend to use the missiles for the defense of Cuba against an American invasion, despite his year-long public clamor to defend the island against a United States attack.
Kennedy's reaction is most often placed within the historical context of the Monroe Doctrine and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams’ Cuban policy.
The first declared the western hemisphere off limits to foreign encroachments, and Adams declared that United States security was threatened should Cuba fall into a third party's hands, other than Spain.
These 1823 statements remained policy guidelines and were re-enforced by a September 1960 congressional resolution that authorized the president to direct military intervention in Cuba to rid it of communism.
Kennedy's image had been further badgered by Soviet aggressiveness in eastern Europe and its construction of the Berlin Wall in August 1961.
Almost unnoticed by public policy analysts at the time was Kennedy's response to the building of the wall, with the airlifting of troops into Berlin as a symbolic warning for the Soviets not to advance into the city's western sector and, by implication, elsewhere, including Cuba.
Subsequently some analysts suggested that Khrushchev should have at least paused in Cuba in response to Kennedy's action; domestically political pundits quickly drew a relationship between Kennedy's response to missiles in Cuba and the forthcoming November 1962 congressional elections.
Through that summer the chatter increased and made its way into Washington's congressional circles, which in turn reported it to the administration.
Recalling the failed intelligence by the same communities prior to the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy administration officials publicly dismissed the reports’ validity.
In reality, between May and October 1962, the Soviets dispatched to Cuba 47,000 troops, including five missile regiments, twenty-four launching pads, forty-two rockets, forty-two bombers, forty MiG-21 jet fighter planes, two anti-aircraft defense units, and thirty-six nuclear warheads.
Subsequently the Russians shipped Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles capable of carrying the nuclear warheads.
The first United States suspicion came from an August U-2 flight, but Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, consistently denied the missile presence in his conversations with the president's brother and attorney general, Robert F Kennedy.
On September 11 Khrushchev reassured Kennedy that no offensive missiles were shipped to Cuba.
Cecil W Stoughton, Courtesy of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library Resolution of the Crisis The Soviet cover story was blown with the October 14 U-2 flight that showed the construction of SS-4 sites in San Cristobal in western Cuba.
For the next five days EXCOM reviewed the options and determined a course of action.
Given the congressional resolution that authorized United States military action against Cuba and the forthcoming congressional elections, doing nothing was not an option.
Secret diplomacy would provide the Soviets sufficient time to complete the missiles’ installation and present the United States with a fait accompli.
Kennedy dismissed the joint chiefs of staff recommendation for a land invasion of the island and Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis Lemay's call for an airstrike to eliminate the missile sites.
Because each would cause heavy casualties, including Russian, the president worried that the Soviets might retaliate in Turkey or Berlin, where the United States could not act quickly, and each crisis had the potential to spiral into a wider confrontation.
That left a naval blockade as the most reasonable option, but international law considered it an act of war, which Kennedy wanted to avoid at all costs.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk struck a compromise with his proposal for a “defensive quarantine” against the shipment to Cuba of offensive missiles only.
Kennedy accepted the State Department's legal consul's advice that a quarantine was legal within the parameters of international law.
As such it met United States security needs in the circum-Caribbean region, weakened Castro, and gave Premier Khrushchev a way to back out.
The Monroe Doctrine and Adams’ policy statements were alive and well in 1962.
Kennedy accepted the National Security Council's plan of action on October 17.
Emissaries were dispatched to inform western European allies, appeals for support were prepared for the United Nations and Organization of American States , Khrushchev would be asked to withdraw his missiles, and a United States naval flotilla would be placed in the Atlantic Ocean five hundred miles north of Cuba.
At 5m. on October 18, Kennedy spoke with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, who reassured him that there were no offensive weapons in Cuba.
The next day reconnaissance flights discovered four more operational sites.
United States ground and air forces were put on full alert, with B-52s of the Strategic Air Command ready to attack on a moment's notice.
He notified Khrushchev and sent special emissaries to the western European governments to do the same.
At 5m. he informed congressional leaders and called them to the White House.
At 7m. he delivered a seventeen-minute national television address revealing the presence of missiles and demanding their removal.
He also announced that he was creating a “quarantine” to prevent any more missiles from entering Cuba.
Finally Kennedy declared that any Soviet ships entering Cuban waters would be stopped and searched, and if they tried to run the blockade, he would order United States ships to fire on them.
On October 23 United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson exposed the Soviet missiles before the UN Security Council.
On October 27 and 28 a deal was worked out whereby the Soviet missiles would be removed from Cuba under UN supervision, the Soviet Union would not reintroduce offensive military material to Cuba in return for United States promises to secretly withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey, and it would not invade Cuba.
Castro was infuriated by the U.S.-Soviet deal in which he played no part, making him little more than a pawn between the Cold War superpowers.
Given the embarrassment, in November 1962 Castro refused to permit UN inspectors on to the island to oversee the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles.
The United States relied on its own air and sea reconnaissance to verify the withdrawal.
Castro henceforth isolated himself from the Soviets until the near collapse of the Cuban economy in 1970.
Aftermath Kennedy was lauded at home and in Latin America for his bold action during the missile crisis.
Most of the European allies also applauded the president, but with some hesitancy.
They argued that if war erupted between the superpowers, it would be fought on the ground in Europe and not the hurling of missiles between the United States and the Soviet Union.
A subsequent consequence of Castro's refusal to permit UN supervision of the missile withdrawal came in 1970 when the Soviets commenced construction of a submarine base at Cienfuegos.
United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger was quick to point out that because of Castro's action, the United States was free to take military action in Cuba, a position that prompted the Soviets to halt construction.
Release of new documents and revelations made at conferences in Washington, D.C., Moscow, and Havana in the early 1990s revealed how close the world came to nuclear war.
In October 1962 the Pentagon estimated that 180,000 troops, with a 10 percent casualty rate, would be needed for a successful Cuban invasion.
While the Pentagon had germ warfare plans for pre-invasion use, there is no evidence that the discussion reached the highest levels of policymakers.
At the same time United States intelligence did not know that the Soviets placed 42,000 combat troops in Cuba and that if the United States invasion took place, Soviet army commanders in Cuba claimed that they would have used the short-range tactical nuclear warheads at their disposal.
One positive result of the whole incident was the establishment of the “hotline” or “red telephone,” which afforded United States and Soviet leaders with direct communications to avoid a future nuclear crisis.
