In order to gain a perspective of currents events during the decade in which TIROS was launched, look up, define in your own words, and date the following events: Sino-Soviet Split: The gradual disintegration of diplomatic ties between the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
May 1, 1960, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union.
While American leader’s created a cover story, the Soviets were able to recover the pilot and his mostly-intact plane.
They were also able to develop several of the photographs taken during the mission.
This event happened right before an East-West summit was to take place and served to further deteriorate Soviet-American relations.
The United States was motivated by the fear that the Soviets would have a potential beach-head landing in Guatemala if Cold War events escalated.
This was an invasion of Cuba planned by America and executed by armed Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro.
This was a two-week confrontation among the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba during the Cold War.
During this time, tensions ran high as both countries were positioned to strike each other with missiles and nuclear war seemed imminent.
The confrontation began when a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane found Soviet missiles placed in Cuba, this after America had placed missiles in Turkey.
It ended with an agreement for both countries to dismantle their missiles.
The Geman Democratic Republic places a wall down the middle of Berlin to prevent people from escaping to the West.
Strategic Arms Limitations Treaty—These talks of armament control—which led to another series of talks called SALT II—froze the number of ballistic missile launchers of the United States and the Soviet Union.
Read this letter exchange between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev about a cooperative weather satellite system.
Perhaps we could render no greater service to mankind through our space programs than by the joint establishment of an early operational weather satellite system.
Such a system would be designed to provide global weather data for prompt use by any nation.
To initiate this service, I propose that the United States and the Soviet Union each launch a satellite to photograph cloud cover and provide other agreed meteorological services for all nations.
The two satellites would be placed in near-polar orbits in planes approximately perpendicular to teach other, thus providing regular coverage of all areas.
It is difficult to overestimate the benefit which could be brought to mankind by organizing a world weather observation service with the aid of artificial earth satellites.
Precise and timely weather forecast will be another important step along the way to man's conquering of nature, will help him still more successfully cope with natural calamities and open up new prospects for improving the well-being of mankind.
