In the summer of 1962, the Soviets began moving nuclear missiles and nuclear-capable bombers to bases in Cuba, within easy striking distance of targets within the continental United States.
Following the discovery of the missile sites in October by U2 reconnaissance flights, President John F Kennedy, working in conjunction with a specially convened Executive Committee of the National Security Agency , made the decision to blockade the island of Cuba.
The United States Navy was called into action, and rapidly deployed ships and aircraft throughout the Caribbean and Atlantic, to cut off Soviet shipping.
A wide range of possibilities were on on the table, including armed conflict on the seas, a United States invasion of Cuba, or even the armaggeddon of all-out nuclear war.
At the height of the crisis, a series of communications were exchanged between Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy.
The Soviets backed down, and the offensive nuclear weapons were removed from Cuba.
The world breathed a sigh of relief, and the United States Navy effectively demonstrated the need for seapower in a time of crisis.To commemorate this historic event, the Naval Historical Foundation has been working with the National Museum of the United States Navy to develop a set of three portable display panels telling the story of the “Thirteen Days” of the crisis.
The nearly seven foot tall panels incorporate a chronology of the event, as well as United States Navy, CIA, and White House photography to tell the story.
Following these special events, the panels will be on display in the Navy Museum.We want to give a special thanks to the USS Blandy Association, whose generous donation made this new mobile exhibit possible.Spread the word.
PreviousNext 4 Comments Rich Angelini Reply 18 / Sep / 2012 Everyone associated with the USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr DD850 is honored that you have her photo in the display.
Thank you for helping to publicize this history as we strive to preserve KENNEDY to present a physical experience for visitors regarding visit.
NHF Co-Sponsoring 237th Navy Birthday Celebration | Naval Historical Foundation Pingback: USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr.
