To my disappointment, however, me of the participants seemed to dge the events of 1962 from the per>ective of the cooled political cliate of 1989 detente.
It seems clear, r instance, that the Kennedy Ad.inistration, under heavy political essures, was indeed planning to in*de Cuba in the fall of 1962, and that ie Kremlin sent the missiles to Cuba » forestall an attack.
But Robert S IcNamara, who was John F Kenedy’s Defense Secretary, denied ml Washington had any such plans.
It erified a longstanding suspicion that ie Soviets had managed to get 20 nulear warheads to Cuba, Another 20 /ere aboard a ship blocked by the Inited States Navy.
During the crisis, Moscow had only t) intercontinental ballistic missiles .n Soviet soil.
At the time, American Her re Salinger, former press secreary lo John F Kennedy, is senior edio r, Europe, for ABC News. intelligence thought they had 75 to 100.
And we learned for the first time that the Kremlin had stationed 40,000 Soviet troops inside Cuba, four times more than the Americans believed it had there at the time.
But they convinced the conference that the nuclear warheads had never been attached to the missiles.
While supporting the point that the Cuban leader did not ask for a missile launch, however, Soviet sources said that conversations with Havana after the crisis convinced them that the Cubans did in fact want to launch the missiles.
While the conference helped fill many gaps in the historical record, some questions remain.
One major one is whether the United States didn’t in some sense provoke a confrontation by planning a second invasion of Cuba, even after the embarrassing Bay of Pigs disaster in 1961.
But his insistence that the United States never intended to invade Cuba, either before or during the crisis, flies in the face of the facts.
For reasons that remain a mystery, the Attorney General, Robert F Kennedy, warned two days after the Bay of Pigs that the failed attack might lend to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Cuba at that time was a sharp political issue and there was growing pressure on the White House to do something to get rid of Mr Castro.
The Administration’s response, according to sensitive, top secret documents recently declassified, was to create a vast covert program called Operation Mongoose.
Its aim was to destabilize Cuba and bring down the Castro regime before Oct., 1962.
Edward G Lansdale handed lo the President on Feb., 1962, clearly indicates that Operation Mongoose brought together all the elements needed for a military overthrow of the Castro regime.
Even more interesting is the recent declassification of a report on the Cuban crisis by the commander in chief of the Atlantic Forces, Adm.
McCone to undertake .""massive activity"" under the framework of Operation Mongoose.
This information clarifies Mr Khrushchev’s reasons for sending a message to President Kennedy through his back channel operator, the K.G.B. agent Georgi Bolshakov.
MK McNamara and my other colleagues present at the conference — McGeorge Bundy, the former special adviser to the President for national security affairs, and Theodore Sorensen, special assistant to the President -* all argued that even at the moments of highest tension, President Kennedy would never have ordered an air strike against Cuba or an invasion of the country.
I agree that John Kennedy was not the kind of President who would have wanted to launch a military attack.
We had received the day before a message from Mr Khrushchev offering to pull out his missiles if the United States would guarantee not to invade Cuba.
But then we received a second, much tougher message • from the Soviet leader adding the demand that we withdraw our Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey.
President Kennedy had already ordered the missiles removed from Turkey, but the pullout had been delayed at the request of the Turkish Government, The Turks had just spent a lot ofimonej^nstalling the missiles and didn't Want to look foolish by dismantling them immediately.
For his part, Mr Kennedy was extremely anxious to avoid the appearance of acceding to Mr Khrushchev’s demands.
Eventually, he told Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that the Jupiter missiles would be pulled out, but not as part of the deal.
It was clear at the meeting that day of the executive committee of Ihe National Security Council that we were heading for escalation.
Maxwell D Taylor, . called for an air strike against the missile sites on Monday, Oct., and an Invasion of Cuba soon afterwards.
Mr McNamara says that no air strike or invasion would have been ordered, but that there might have been a tightening of the naval blockade.
But even he says that when he left the White House that night he had the impression that he might not be alive the next Saturday.
The following morning, of course, Mr Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of the missiles.
Pressure from a number of members of the executive committee, not only General Taylor, might have forced the President to take a military action that he did not want to accept.
Rather, two leaders reached an understanding that nuclear war was unthinkable.
And the rapid evolution of relations after the crisis demonstrates that both leaders wanted to work toward a better understanding.
If Mr Kennedy had HVed and if Mr Khrushchev had retained power, they might have brought nuclear arms to a low level on both sides.
