The first was in Korea when China’s intervention snatched imminent victory from General MacArthur.
Only a nuclear strike could save the situation, but President Harry Truman firmly rejected it.
The second time came in 1962, at the moment of greatest tension around Cuba, 40 years ago this October.
And the last was in Vietnam when many American military and political leaders believed that atomic weapons alone could redress the failure of the war’s progress.
On the first and last occasions, American political leaders had a choice.
But during the 13-day crisis of October 1962, events almost spun beyond control of either the White House or the Kremlin.
Because of those differences, the leaders were unable to judge with any accuracy what effect their decisions would have on the other side.
However detailed the information the White House got from its intelligence sources and diplomats, the President based his final decision on his idea of conduct in the Kremlin.
People invariably think in terms of their own traditions, their own culture, which may have nothing in common with the other party’s way of thinking.
Furthermore, a leader will trust his own intuition more than all the intelligence agencies in the world.
Differences in civilization affect a country’s vision not only of the future but of the past.
An aggressive Soviet Union, with the cooperation of a local dictator, Fidel Castro, placed offensive nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, in Cuba, with the intention of cowing the United States.
When President John F Kennedy learned of this, he quite properly threatened the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, who “blinked” first and pulled his men and his missiles out of the island.
The United States rightly won, and Khrushchev was soon swept from power.
At the beginning of 1959 the Soviet leaders could hardly imagine any fate that might link Moscow and Havana.
No specialists in the Central Committee, much less Father, even knew much about Latin America.
The Soviet embassy in Cuba had been shut down as unnecessary back in 1952.
The arrival in Havana of the partisan fighter Fidel Castro on January 1, 1959, and Fulgencio Batista’s flight, attracted little attention in Moscow.
When Father asked for information about Cuba, it turned out there was none to give him.
In 1960 Father decided to send his deputy Anastas Mikoyan to Cuba to discover what motivated Castro.
Mikoyan was an intelligent man and an outstanding negotiator and diplomat.
He visited Father at the dacha on the eve of his departure, and I remember one small episode.
A group of us went for a walk, and one of Father’s aides reported on Castro’s recent trip to Washington to meet President Eisenhower.
The aide tried to persuade the group that Castro was an American agent, or at least ready to dance to the White House’s tune.
He told Father in minute detail about his talks with the brothers Castro and other Cubans.
In his opinion, they were honorable fighters for freedom and must be helped economically and politically.
There was no talk yet of military assistance, and Father was cautious in evaluating Castro.
Meanwhile, Washington continued to exert every effort to push the Cuban leader into the U.S.S.R.'s embrace.
The economic blockade of Cuba announced by the United States was an important factor.
To teach Castro a lesson, after he began to nationalize American petroleum refineries, the Americans stopped buying any sugar from Cuba.
At first Father didn’t believe we would be that customer, since Russia had its own sugar and had never bought any.
But in fact Cuba’s neighbors in the Caribbean increased their sugar production and supplied the Americans.
Father reluctantly approved the temporary purchase of Cuban sugar in. exchange for Soviet fuel.
John Kennedy replaced Dwight Eisenhower in the White House in January 1961, as the situation in Cuba grew increasingly threatening.
Bombs began to explode on the streets of Havana and claimed their first victims.
Cuba was 90 miles by sea from Florida and 7,000 miles from the nearest Soviet port.
Instead he decided to speed up deliveries of small arms, tanks, and artillery—but not directly.
Early on the morning of April 17, 1961, Father’s sixty-sixth birthday, an invasion force landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba.
Reports said that only Cuban émigrés took part in the operation and that the United States fleet cruising offshore was not interfering.
On the other hand, such dedication made a powerful impression on Father.
At three-fifteen on the morning of April 20, Havana Radio announced that the mercenaries had been routed and the Cuban people were victorious.
They would take stock of their mistakes, choose their time, and then bring the weight of their regular army to bear.
The defense of Cuba became a matter of prestige for the Soviet Union, something like West Berlin was for the United States.
If you did not defend that small patch of land deep inside enemy territory that was allied to you, no one would believe in your willingness or, more important, your ability to defend your allies.
That was what motivated President Kennedy to proclaim himself a Berliner.
The Americans would block all access to the island whether by sea or air.
The only resort was to do something extraordinary enough to make Washington understand that an assault on Cuba would have dire consequences.
At the end of May 1962, Father decided to send strategic nuclear missiles to Cuba.
In making this decision, he relied on our Russian and European experience—on our history.
During its entire history Russia had been within range of hostile weaponry.
Russia had to rely on sound judgment on the part of opposing political leaders, on an American President’s not sending his squadrons to bomb Moscow without good reason.
Father assumed that Americans—not just the President but ordinary people—would think more or less the same way.
Father often said that communism was not a dogma but a better, richer, freer life for ordinary people.
When they were convinced, sooner or later, of the advantages of the new system, they would choose it over capitalism, which was increasingly decrepit and convulsed by economic crisis.
For more than two centuries wide oceans had protected their land from enemies.
Unlike Russians, they were used to living in security and were horrified by the possibility, however remote, of any vulnerability.
The presence of Soviet ballistic missiles near America’s borders evoked shock, and even psychosis.
It seemed to Americans that they could continue to live as before only if the missiles were removed from Cuba, and removed at any price.
Neither Father in the Kremlin nor President Kennedy in the White House was prepared for such a turn of events.
They had to look for a way out of the crisis while improvising on the run.
President Kennedy could not for a moment agree to the presence of missiles on the island, even though he understood that the Soviet Union would use them only in case of the most extreme necessity, just as the United States would not launch the missiles it had long before deployed in Turkey, Italy, and Britian.
If he allowed them to stay, Americans would accuse him of treachery and Congress would begin the process of impeachment.
The missiles must be removed, but in such a way that he ,did not lose control of events and unintentionally start a nuclear war.
The White House was unaware of the fact that in Cuba there were not only strategic missiles but also several dozen tactical missiles, also with nuclear warheads.
If America invaded, the Soviet military on the island, under the pressure of the enemy’s overwhelming force and faced with the choice of surrendering or unleashing nuclear strikes on the attackers, would surely choose the latter.
This was even more likely since communications with Moscow, always unreliable, would probably cease altogether at the moment of attack.
With the help of tactical nuclear weapons, Soviet forces—there were 42,000 of them on the island, not the 10,000 reported by the CIA—would undoubtedly repel the invasion, destroy the landing force, and sink American ships.
It was not hard to imagine how the White House would react, and it was unlikely that the world would escape a major war.
Previously there had been threats from both sides, reserves called up, tank treads raising dust along national borders, and diplomatic notes resembling propaganda pamphlets published in newspapers.
Now serious and strictly secret negotiations were held from the first day, which could only mean that the two leaders trusted each other and believed they could agree to prevent a direct clash.
Too much pressure should not be exerted, and no weakness should be revealed.
Only now can we fully appreciate the caution and wisdom of the decisions taken in those days.
For instance, on Monday, October 22, Kennedy announced a quarantine of the island, virtually a naval blockade.
At first Father ordered Soviet freighters to continue forward, despite Washington’s threats.
They were accompanied by submarines, each armed with one nuclear torpedo along with conventional torpedoes.
The submarines’ commanders had instructions to act according to circumstances.
If the ships they were guarding were attacked, they could use their weapons—even the nuclear torpedo.
On the morning of October 24 no more than half an hour separated us from nuclear war.
Fortunately, the time granted the Kremlin for reflection was sufficient.
At literally the last moment Father decided not to take the risk; after all, missiles and nuclear warheads were already in place in Cuba.
Minutes before the confrontation all Soviet transport ships carrying military cargoes were ordered to halt and turn around.
Kennedy also decided not to aggravate the situation, and although he knew nothing about the nuclear torpedoes, he ordered that the quarantine line be parted, first for the Soviet tanker Bucharest and then for a passenger ship flying the flag of the German Democratic Republic.
We stand firm but are not taking any unnecessary risks and are ready for a reasonable compromise.
However, a resolution of the crisis was still a long way off; one unsure step on either side and everything would fall to pieces.
On Friday, October 26, Father was brought the draft of a letter to Kennedy proposing to remove our missiles from Cuba in exchange for a guarantee that the island would not be invaded and that American missiles would be taken out of Turkey and Italy.
At almost the same moment, an intelligence message arrived reporting that America was going to invade Cuba within two days.
Rogers had been saying a noisy farewell to friends before flying to Florida, where he was assigned to cover the next day’s invasion for his paper.
He decided not to complicate negotiations, so he deleted from the letter any mention of American missiles in Europe.
The offer was now that if America pledged not to attack Cuba, the U.S.S.R. would remove its missiles from the island.
The revised letter was sent to members of the Central Committee Presidium, Father made last-minute corrections by hand, and a courier took it to the United States embassy in Moscow.
Moscow time—or around 10:00 in the morning Washington time—on Friday, October 26.
It was quickly translated into English and sent to the Central Moscow Telegraph Office, where everything came to a halt.
The letter that might decide the fate of the world could not reach Washington for at least six hours.
That same Friday, October 26, the KGB station chief in Washington, Aleksandr Fomin, left on his daily hunt for news.
He invited a well-informed correspondent for ABC television, John Scali, to lunch in hopes of extracting something interesting from him.
Scali reported the invitation to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, who in turn mentioned it to the President.
Kennedy decided to bring pressure to bear on the Russians through Fomin.
Fomin has described how Scali, during the lunch, began to to press him, threatening that if Moscow didn’t remove its missiles, the administration would be more and more inclined to accept the military option and invade Cuba without further delay.
The Pentagon, he said, was arguing that it could get rid of both the missiles and the Castro regime in 48 hours.
An indignant Fomin decided to frighten Scali in turn, without, he claims, any instructions from above.
The two finished their coffee in silence and left, Fomin to report to Ambassador Dobrynin, Scali to the White House.
Fomin and Scali were not the only ones to lunch together in Washington that day.
Georgi Kornienko, an official of the Soviet embassy, was instructed to confirm the intelligence report that the invasion was about to begin.
That morning the embassy called Rogers, the reporter behind the story, and invited him to lunch with Kornienko.
There Rogers flaunted his “inside knowledge” that the invasion had been put off.
This information had to be sent without delay, and by the time Kornienko could get back to the embassy, it would already be Friday night in Moscow.
Father stayed in the Kremlin that night, turning restlessly on the couch in his office, half-asleep, waiting for the telephone to ring with news of trouble.
On Saturday morning, the twenty-seventh, he followed his usual routine, without haste or fuss.
After breakfast he turned to official papers and saw the report of Kornienko’s meeting with Rogers.
Apparently he had given way to nerves yesterday, had been too hasty when he sent the President a letter that made no mention of the American missiles in Italy and Turkey.
While Father had been dozing on his couch, President Kennedy had been very much awake—and alarmed.
Scali had hurried to the White House after his meeting with Fomin and had been taken at once to Kennedy, to whom he repeated Fomin’s threat.
Kennedy was extremely disturbed, and by around four o’clock that afternoon Scali had already called Fomin at the Soviet embassy and asked for another meeting.
The U.S.S.R. would dismantle the missiles and remove them from Cuba under United Nations auspices; the United States would end the blockade and promise not to invade Cuba.
Fomin assured him that he would send the proposal to Moscow immediately.
If Rogers’s tale of impending invasion had upset Father, Fomin’s threat to attack West Berlin had unnerved Kennedy.
Kennedy’s proposal duplicated almost word for word the conditions for resolving the crisis that Father had set forth in his letter the previous evening.
By then Scali had already left for his second meeting with Fomin, and Father had long been asleep.
When White House officials read the letter to the end, they realized they had been in too much of a hurry.
It was far better to agree to Father’s proposal than to have proposed a deal themselves.
They told Scali to maintain that not he but Fomin, sent by Khrushchev, had come up with the compromise. a mysterious Russian, Mr X, advanced a proposal here to John Scali, a newsman at ABC News.
As can happen even with important papers, Kennedy’s proposals handed to Fomin about exchanging Soviet missiles for an American promise not to invade Cuba fell victim to Fomin’s own embassy’s bureaucratic intrigues.
When Fomin returned to the embassy after his lunch with Scali, he wrote out a telegram to Moscow with a description of the proposal he had received and gave it to Ambassador Dobrynin to sign.
It was growing late on Friday, but Dobrynin said nothing to him for more than three hours and then returned the telegram unsigned, explaining that no one had authorized him to carry on such negotiations.
Alexander Sakharovsky, but Sakharovsky had it sent back to Dobrynin for his signature the next day.
No one knows for sure whether Dobrynin signed it or not, but I think it highly unlikely.
Because still,another important meeting had taken place on that fifth day of the crisis, October 26.
President Kennedy, afraid to make a mistake and with no great faith in the Scali-Fomin connection, decided to ask his brother Robert to talk to the ambassador.
They met at the Soviet embassy before Father’s letter was read at the White House.
However, Dobrynin pressed him hard on the question of the Turkish missiles.
In this situation Moscow’s receiving Fomin’s conflicting proposal with no mention of missiles in Europe would have complicated Dobrynin’s own game.
So he did not sign it but instead sent a coded message about his meeting with Robert Kennedy.
The ambassador’s report, coming on top of Kornienko’s that Saturday morning, wholly convinced Father he had been in too much of a hurry with his letter to Kennedy proposing the removal of missiles for a mere ending of the blockade.
An urgent message must be sent to the White House—a new version of the letter that made the missiles in Turkey part of the deal.
Father would transmit it by radio so that it was sure to be received before the other one, which was already out of his hands.
This would compromise the secrecy of the negotiations, but it was the only chance to overtake the previous letter.
The White House received the new letter demanding a joint removal of missiles only after the first one.
White House officials were astonished when they read the second letter.
Only the Kennedy brothers knew about the conversation with the Soviet ambassador, but they said nothing.
One more episode had almost irreparable consequences, and it also was due to a mutual incomprehension of the thinking on the other side.
Rudolf Anderson took off in his U-2 for what had become a routine mission photographing Soviet missiles in Cuba.
As the U-2 was approaching the island, one of the newly constructed anti-aircraft missile batteries started the first test of its early-warning and guidance radar.
Shortly after the radar was turned on, the mark of a plane at a very great altitude appeared on its screen.
He in turn tried to contact the commander of all Soviet forces in Cuba, Gen.
The generals had no orders from Moscow to shoot down single American planes.
They were authorized to use missiles only in case of an assault on the island, a massive bomber attack.
Two SAM-2 anti-aircraft missiles broke from their launchers and tore into the clear blue sky.
Informed of this incident, Father sensed that he was losing control of the situation.
Today one general fires an anti-aircraft missile; tomorrow another may launch a ballistic missile.
As Father said later, it was at that moment that he understood intuitively that the missiles had to be removed, that real disaster was imminent.
From then on shooting down American planes without Moscow’s permission was forbidden.
But at almost the same time Father sent orders not to shoot down American planes, Fidel Castro issued a command to open fire on them.
Yankee aircraft were making themselves at home in Cuban skies, just as in Batista’s day, and he had no doubt that his northern neighbor would recognize only force.
He was the president of Cuba, and the planes were flying over his, not Soviet, territory.
Told about the downing of the U-2, Kennedy rejected a proposal for an immediate attack on Soviet anti-aircraft batteries in Cuba.
The President wanted to know if it was a chance attack or if Moscow had hardened its position.
One possibility he did not admit was that Castro, whom everyone in Washington thought was nothing more than a puppet of the Kremlin, might act independently.
The pilots hugged the ground and hid behind every hill, but upon their return technicians counted several holes in their wings made by 30-millimeter shells.
Instead he asked his brother to meet with Dobrynin again and to explain that firing at American planes only strengthened those advocating an immediate invasion.
The next flight of low-flying surveillance aircraft over Cuba was scheduled for 10:00 A.M. on Sunday, October 28.
Nobody in Washington paid any attention to Castro, but the fortunes of the world now depended on him, not on Father or Kennedy.
But we should remember that the book was written a few years later, when everything had been resolved successfully, and that it inaugurated the 1968 presidential election campaign.
Father described the same episode in very different terms in his memoirs, written after he had retired.
Robert came to the meeting extremely tired, with red eyes, complained that he hadn’t spent a night at home in a week, that tension was very great at the White House, and that the President was being pressured from all sides to invade.
The President had not yet made a decision, but he was in a very difficult position.
Each side draws a curtain over its own actions, and the truth lies somewhere in the middle.
On Sunday, October 28, Soviet leaders gathered at 10:00 A.M. not in the Kremlin but in the government guesthouse at Novo-Ogarevo, near Moscow.
During the night it was broadcast on American radio,” answered an aide.
Its long table was covered with folders in red, pink, green, and blue-gray.
Each participant picked up his mail, which had been delivered by courier early that morning.
They decided to have it read aloud, even though a meticulously typed copy lay before everyone.
Father’s aide for international affairs, Oleg Troyanovsky, began to read in his flat, monotonous voice.
Troyanovsky picked up some thin, transparent pages resembling cigarette papers, with a warning at the top of each against making copies, and resumed reading aloud.
Father stared at him intently, listening to every word and several times asking him to repeat passages.
The President was asking for help; that was how Father interpreted Robert Kennedy’s talk with our ambassador.
The tone of the conversation was evidence of the fact that to delay would be fatal.
Before a war started, they had to accept Kennedy’s proposal now, remove the missiles, and be satisfied with his promise not to attack Cuba.
Everything indicated that the President was reaching the limit of his strength.
Of course Father would have liked a more ceremonial assurance of the inviolability of Cuba’s borders, a written agreement or decision overseen by the United Nations.
He spoke for probably about an hour, returning constantly to the premise that Kennedy’s word should be trusted and that he would be in the White House for at least two—perhaps even six—more years.
Robert Kennedy had confirmed that in his last talk with our ambassador and only asked not to be pressured.
Members of the Central Committee’s Presidium supported its First Secretary with their usual unanimity.
While Father ,was persuading those present and, more important, himself, the duty officer opened the door a crack and beckoned to Troyanovsky, who slipped out of the room.
No one would have risked calling the chairman’s aide for anything trivial.
It’s been announced that President Kennedy will deliver a speech on television at 5:00 P.M. ,” Troyanovsky said with unusual rapidity.
No one knows if Ivanov just made this up, assuming that it was better to be early than late, but the general’s words removed any lingering doubt.
American television was actually reporting that the President’s week-old speech of October 22 would be repeated on Sunday.
We can only speculate why our Washington intelligence station turned it into a new address to the nation.
In his opinion, our agreement to remove the missiles should be broadcast at once over the radio.
His stenographers, who were sitting at a small table along the wall, made their preparations.
We deployed missiles there to prevent an attack on the island, to save Cuba and defend socialism.
Whatever doubts Father might have had about his decision to remove the missiles had vanished completely.
If the President announces there will be an invasion, he won’t be able to reverse himself.
We now have a dommon cause, to save the world from those pushing us toward war.
Ask him to meet with Robert Kennedy and advise him to wait for our answer to yesterday’s letter from the President.
After reading Gromyko’s instructions, the ambassador at once called Robert Kennedy.
He made no mention of the Turkish missiles, as Kennedy had not in his letter.
Moscow Radio’s announcer began to read Father’s letter to the President of the United States.
The well-known announcer’s voice, which had sounded somewhat shaky as he said the first few words, regained its usual resonance.
We supplied them to prevent an attack on Cuba, to prevent rash actions.
Naturally he didn’t know of Castro’s order to shoot down the planes, but his prudence saved everyone from harm.
The Secretary of State didn’t realize that it was not really news to his colleague.
After sending the children home, Robert Kennedy hurried to his brother.
I can’t say what they talked about, but the important thing is that the world survived and a process of recovery began.
Relief would most accurately describe the mood in the White House that Sunday.
Those in the Kremlin or, more precisely, in Novo-Ogarevo, felt the same way.
John Kennedy decided to ignore diplomatic procedure, and he sent off his answering letter to Father before receiving the official text of the message from Moscow.
It seemed as if people in both capitals just wanted to escape from the mortal terror of the last two weeks.
We survived, and I could write this article for the anniversary, and you can read it.
You, I, and all mankind might have disappeared from the face of the earth.
The fact that this did not happen is the greatest achievement of those Cold War warriors President John F Kennedy and my father, the premier of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev.
Father said, more than once, “We differed from Kennedy in every respect.
He defended his capitalist belief, his world, and we defended ours, our concept of justice.
Donate Related stories The Time Of The Angelby Don Moser The U-2, Cuba, and the CIA The Cold War Through The Looking Glassby Sergei Khrushchev Nikita Khrushchev’s son recalls a world where the United States was the Evil Empire—and Soviet superpower a carefully maintained illusion.
First Step To The Moonby Alan B Shepard The first American to leave the Earth's atmosphere recalls the momentous flight that put us on a course for the moon.
Mr Smith Goes Undergroundby Thomas Mallon The strangest of all Cold War relics also offers a clue to why we won it Sergei Khrushchev and the Soviet Unionby Chase Brush Much of what we know today about the leadership of the Soviet Union and the mindset of the Cold War era is due to the late son of Nikita Khrushchev.
