But McCone told Kennedy and Eisenhower that at least four kinds of Soviet short-range missiles remained in Cuba, including hundreds of surface-to-surface, surface-to-air, and air-to-surface missiles.
A number of these were so-called dual-use missiles, capable of delivering both conventional and nuclear warheads.
Although they posed no direct threat to the continental United States and could not reach any American cities, they were able to strike the United States naval base at Guantánamo and United States ships close to the coast of Cuba.
Moreover, if Kennedy at some point ordered an invasion of the island—an option that was still on the table— United States troops might well be 1.
The continued presence of these military forces allowed the administration’s critics to accuse the White House of turning a blind eye to the establishment of a Soviet base on America’s doorstep.
This article examines how the Kennedy administration assessed the risk posed by the Soviet short-range missiles in Cuba and the associated combat troops, particularly during the post-crisis settlement period.
The issue had a strong domestic political subtext that played out long after the famous fortnight of late October ended.
Missiles in Cuba had been a topic of discussion well before the dramatic events of October 1962—the intelligence ªle for 1959 reporting claims by refugees that Soviet missiles were present in Cuba was reportedly four inches thick3—and it dragged on well past the famous thirteen days.
Many studies assume a ªnal resolution to the crisis that did not actually exist either in October 1962 or afterward.
Khrushchev’s dramatic retreat on 28 October alleviated the sense of imminent peril but left many critical issues unresolved.
The “November crisis” that ensued played out differently from the scenario envisaged by Khrushchev.
Rather than negotiating from a position of strength to compel the United States to accept Soviet demands on a number of key issues—the Berlin problem, nuclear disarmament, and détente—Khrushchev tried desperately to salvage something from his aborted venture in the Caribbean.
Much to Washington’s frustration, Fidel Castro remained in power and refused to allow international weapons inspectors into Cuba to verify that the MRBMs and bombers had left and were not being reintroduced.
Thousands of Soviet combat troops and technicians remained in Cuba, as did much of the sophisticated weaponry they had brought with them.
The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff continued to prepare to invade Cuba if the diplomatic settlement fell apart.
Even the lifting of the United States naval blockade of Cuba on 20 November was not the end of the crisis.
Much of this “unªnished business,” as Kennedy called it in February 1963, was never fully resolved.
Cuba remained a preoccupation within the United States intelligence community and among United States policymakers, politicians, and journalists well into 1963.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk warned the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in January 1963 that “the Cuban crisis is in no sense over.
In short, the Cuban missile crisis did not simply evaporate on 28 October.
As McCone’s warning to Kennedy and Eisenhower in mid-November implied, even the most fundamental of issues—the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba—continued to dog the Kennedy administration for months.
In addition to persistent rumors that the Soviet Union was still hiding MRBMs on the island, several thousand Soviet troops armed with sophisticated weaponry remained in Cuba.
Their weaponry included several kinds of short-range missiles, some of which were notable primarily for their nuclear capability.
The most contentious of these were the so-called Luna missiles (known as Frogs in 6.
The Kennedy administration’s handling of the longer-term aspects of the Cuban missile crisis settlement, both internationally and domestically, reveals much about its policies toward Cuba and the Soviet Union and about its assessment of security risks.
An analysis of this matter sheds new light on the Cuban missile crisis not only by correcting misperceptions in some recent commentaries but also by revealing that the much publicized aspect of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba was, for the Kennedy administration, both a known risk for some of the acute phase of the crisis and an acceptable risk during the settlement period.
The analysis provided here has the further beneªt of elucidating how policy was made in the Kennedy administration.
Scholars have long disagreed about the inºuence of domestic politics before and during the Cuban missile crisis.
Some have argued that a ªrebreak of sorts existed between international policy and domestic politics—that Kennedy’s Cuba policy was made solely on the basis of what was best for the United States, without any regard to domestic politics.
Revisionists have contended that domestic politics offered a negative, or at least cynical, motivation for decisions, pushing Kennedy to favor unnecessary confrontation over diplomacy.
The bulk of these studies have focused on the thirteen days of peak crisis.
The evidence from this period indicates that domestic political considerations were a fundamental factor in Kennedy’s decision-making and apparently induced him to take a slightly harder line in the post-crisis negotiations with the Soviet Union than he otherwise might have.
But the evidence also suggests that Kennedy was more willing than some of his advisers and many Congressional critics to accept a degree of permanent military risk in Cuba.
The Making of a Controversy The second phase of Operation Anadyr—the codename for the Soviet military buildup in Cuba in the summer and fall of 1962—added tactical nuclear missiles and other sophisticated weapons to the Soviet forces stationed in Cuba in the fall of 1962.
The disclosure that tactical nuclear arms were present in Cuba has been described as “probably the single most important revelation about the crisis since the new sources began to emerge” after the end of 9.
Much of the existing literature reºects uncertainty about when the Kennedy administration learned about these forces, what it knew, and—most important—what it decided to do about them.
The prevailing view has been that the tactical nuclear missiles were, for the Kennedy administration, an unknown risk of the crisis because United States policymakers were seriously considering invasion plans of Cuba ignorant of the risk that they would be confronted with a nuclear battleªeld.
Newly available materials suggest that this prevailing view requires some elaboration and revision.
The controversy about tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba was sparked at an important international history conference in Havana in January 1992 marking the thirtieth anniversary of the crisis.
That conference brought together a number of former ofªcials from the United States and the former Soviet Union and leading ªgures in Cuba, as well as some scholars.
At that conference, General Anatoli Gribkov, who had been one of the Soviet military ofªcers responsible for coordinating Soviet deployments in Cuba in 1962, startled the audience when he seemed to claim that Khrushchev had predelegated authority to the local Soviet commander in Cuba, General Issa Pliev, to use the dozens of tactical nuclear weapons he had on hand in the event of a United States invasion of the island.
In ABC’s primetime news broadcast, the anchorman Peter Jennings broke the news to millions of viewers that “battleªeld missiles armed with nuclear warheads . . . were deployed in coastal areas” of Cuba during the missile crisis and that Soviet commanders were ready to use them against United States troops.
Responding to Gribkov’s original claim about the delegation of command authority, Robert McNamara, secretary of defense in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, stated that the Kennedy administration did not know that tactical nuclear weapons were in Cuba.
He speculated that the Executive Committee of the National Security Council might have given different advice to the president and that the president might have made different decisions.
Some old and much new evidence suggests that the 1992 revelations about Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba should not have stirred as much surprise as they did.
Smith’s comments quoted in Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink, 261.
Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., “Bush’s Thousand Days,” The Washington Post, 29 April 2006, A17.
Apparently, Schlesinger was unaware that his characterization here was outdated and did not take account of the important clariªcations and corrections that had followed Gribkov’s initial statement.
The evidence now available does not show that U.S. ofªcials conclusively knew that nuclear warheads were already present in Cuba, but it does make clear that they explicitly assumed that such warheads had been sent there.
In any case, the striking thing that emerges from this evidence is the extent to which the administration discussed the Luna missiles in late 1962 and early 1963 both privately and publicly.
In the months after the peak of the crisis, policymakers and military leaders debated whether it was an acceptable risk for those weapons and Soviet troops to stay in Cuba, even as the United States government was insisting that some other types of dual-use weapons be removed.
Intelligence ofªcials consistently warned that they could not provide deªnitive proof that nuclear warheads of any kind were present in—or, more signiªcantly, not present in—Cuba.
In the absence of hard evidence, intelligence analysts urged policymakers to assume that nuclear warheads were present in Cuba, a warning that many took to heart.
Rather than becoming a sticking point in the settlement negotiations, the presence of Frog missiles and Soviet combat troops was tolerated by the Kennedy administration, which itself did not want to pay the price of formalizing its no-invasion pledge.
In short, the presence of tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba was a known risk during the peak of the crisis and was regarded as an acceptable risk during the post-crisis settlement period.
Operation Anadyr and the Short-Range Missiles When Khrushchev authorized Operation Anadyr on 24 May 1962, it led to a marked acceleration of the buildup of Soviet military forces in Cuba and 24.
In addition to the MRBMs that sparked so much controversy, Anadyr ultimately included at least three types of short-range missiles, the most contentious of which were the surface-to-surface missiles.
Depending on the model, they were capable of delivering a nuclear warhead with a yield of two to twenty kilotons over a distance of up to 40 kilometers.
With launchers mounted on a tracked amphibious tank chassis, the Frogs were highly mobile nuclear artillery, and their solid-propellant rocket motors made them particularly suited to long-term, remote deployments.
Lunas were considered unremarkable as conventional weapons because they were inaccurate, but when armed with a two-kiloton nuclear warhead they became potent battleªeld weapons.
During the Cold War, the Soviet Union transferred different types of Lunas to a number of friends and allies, including Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, North Korea, Syria, South Yemen, and several countries in Eastern Europe.
In the Cuban case in 1962, the Lunas’ nuclear capability attracted the attention of United States analysts and policymakers from the start.
After United States intelligence and military ofªcials detected the Lunas, they singled them out for special mention in reports and nearly always described them as analogous to the United States Army’s Honest Johns, a weapon notable for its nuclear capabilities.
Available evidence suggests that the Soviet Union secretly sent 36 Luna rockets to Cuba, twelve of which were slated to be equipped with “special” warheads.
One recent study has identiªed the Luna deployment as consisting of twelve nuclear Frog-5 and 24 conventional Frog-3s.
Those designations differ from the ones used by United States military intelligence specialists in 1962–1963.
The nuclear warheads for the Lunas arrived in Cuba in October on the Indigirka.
Detecting and identifying the Luna missiles proved a challenge for U.S. intelligence.
As of late 1962, United States defense and intelligence analysts had spotted four variants of Frogs, which they numbered one through four after identifying them visually by the shape of the nose cone.
Because transporters and launchers were easiest to photograph and identify by virtue of their physical size, the United States analysts based their assessments on photographs of those two parts of the Frog system.
Initially, the Soviet forces parked the Frogs in the open, but when low-level United States surveillance ºights began on 23 October, Soviet troops began hiding and camouºaging the weapons.
Missiles were generally covered or stored in hangars, large tents, or caves and were therefore hard to identify from United States surveillance ºights.
The warheads were even more difªcult to identify directly because they were small, easily hidden in bunkers, buildings, or caves, and tightly guarded by Soviet soldiers.
Intelligence analysts therefore had to rely on circumstantial evidence such as the construction of dome-shaped bunkers and unusual security arrangements.
Other Soviet short-range, surface-to-surface missiles were also present in Cuba, the ªrst of which to be deployed and detected by American surveillance were cruise missiles.
In the mid-1960s, an updated version with a longer range, designated the Frog-7 by NATO, became the standard and may have been shipped to Cuba to replace the obsolete models.
Since the 1960s, a number of other countries have acquired long-range Frog-5s and Frog-7s, including North Korea.
The warhead yields are the capabilities given the respective weapons based on technical characteristics.
The probability is that the warhead yield will be less than the maximum indicated.
The FROG 1 and 2 have both a nuclear and high explosive capability, while it is believed the FROG 3 has only a nuclear capability.
The FROG 4 is possibly designed solely for use with high explosive, but could use the FROG 3 warhead.
Their combat role in Cuba was primarily for protecting beachheads and targeting the United States naval base at Guantánamo Bay.
United States intelligence analysts never identiªed the FKRs, apparently counting them as Sopka missiles.
In the 7 September 1962 revision to the Anadyr plan, Khrushchev approved the Soviet Defense Ministry’s proposal to add 80 nuclear warheads for the FKRs.
By far the most numerous of the short-range missiles were the sophisticated surface-to-air missiles known to Soviet commanders as V-75 Volkhovs and to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as SA-2 Guidelines.
These missiles had a lateral range of 40 to 50 kilometers and an effective vertical range of more than 24 kilometers.
The technology behind the V-75 systems was state-of-theart, in some respects more advanced than the Hawk missiles that the United States had recently begun supplying to Israel.
The V-75 missiles conceivably could also be armed with nuclear warheads, although United States analysts considered such a scenario unlikely and Soviet air defense forces were never known to have deployed nuclear-tipped V-75s.
The Soviet Union also had air-to-air missiles and anti-ship missiles in Cuba.
Soviet military commanders sent as many as sixteen Komar-class guided-missile patrol boats to Cuba.
These vessels were similar to motor torpedo boats, but instead of torpedoes they carried two short-range cruise missiles ªtted with conventional warheads.
The boats were small and fast, but their limited range restricted them to inshore operations, and they were best used against ships and amphibious attacks.
Of these, 42 were advanced MiG-21 aircraft, a supersonic ªghter that could be used for both interception and ground attack.
Defensive During a press conference on 13 September 1962, the president was asked about the threat posed by the military buildup in Cuba, and his answer set forth a dichotomy that framed the issue throughout the crisis and after.
He said that “defensive weapons,” such as those that existed in Cuba at the time 37.
International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1972), 46; and CIA/DIA, “Cuba 1962,” 13 February 1964.
Under pressure from Congress, Kennedy characterized the increasingly strident calls for invasion of the island as irresponsible “loose talk” that only encouraged Castro’s claims of American aggressive intentions.
On 29 August, two weeks before Kennedy’s press conference, a U-2 reconnaissance plane provided the ªrst conclusive evidence that Soviet shortrange missiles were already deployed in Cuba.
That possibility was acknowledged in two statements prepared on 10 January and 5 February 1962 in connection with the Punta del Este conference.
Neither statement was used publicly, but the January version was released to a number of reporters in Washington.
The earliest physical evidence that the Soviet Union was sending SAMs to Cuba came from photography of Soviet ships in early August.
The photographs did not show actual SA-2 missiles, but they did reveal the types of construction and transport equipment associated with Soviet deployments of SAMs in Indonesia in 1961.
McCone argued that the SAMs might be there to provide cover for something more important, perhaps MRBMs.
Senator Keating claimed publicly that he had obtained reliable evidence of the presence of Soviet MRBMs in Cuba.
Nevertheless, the consensus of ofªcial opinion through September and early October remained that the existing armaments in Cuba were defensive in nature and therefore posed no serious threat to other countries in the region.
The tipping point, agreed McGeorge Bundy and other senior advisers at a meeting on 4 September, would be the deployment of surface-to-surface missiles or nuclear warheads.
The NIE deemed it unlikely that the Soviet Union would be so provocative as to cross the threshold from a defensive to an offensive buildup, a judgment that proved famously off the mark.
Unconªrmed reports of the presence of surface-to-surface cruise missiles had been circulating in the intelligence community since early August.
The ªrst photographic conªrmation came from U-2 surveillance ºights on 19 August and another ºight on 5 September.
NPIC analysts identiªed a missile complex at the port of Banes on the eastern end of the island but could not immediately determine the types of missiles.
The president, McNamara, and Rusk were informed of this ªnding on 6 September.
Over the next two weeks, attempts to identify the missiles still were unsuccessful.
The key ªgures in this exchange did not specify whether they were referring to long range or tactical surface-to-surface missiles.
A consensus emerged within the intelligence community that the missiles observed at several coastal sites were cruise missiles with a range of 50 to 65 kilometers, probably derived from the AS-1 Kennel-type air-tosurface anti-shipping missile armed with a 1,000-kilogram conventional warhead.
As of February 1963, they had pinpointed four operational sites, each with eight to ten missiles, at Siguanea, Santa Cruz del Norte, Banes, and Campo Florida.
The remaining missiles remained in crates at several locations throughout Cuba.
United States analysts estimated that the Soviet Union planned to deploy the remaining coastal defense missiles at up to another ªfteen sites.
With the beneªt of hindsight (and, more importantly, information from former Soviet sources) it now appears that United States intelligence counted the total number of cruise missiles in Cuba fairly accurately but failed to recognize that the missiles were of two different types.
By comparing information gleaned from Russian sources with declassiªed United States intelligence data, it appears that the weapons photographed at the four operational sites were the Sopka missiles and that the other missiles, initially observed in crates, were the FKRs.
It is now known that 80 nuclear warheads were in Cuba at the time, but partly because of the failure to identify the types of missiles accurately, United States analysts never fully realized that nuclear-capable cruise missiles were in Cuba.
Under Secretary of State George Ball was the ªrst to disclose outside the administration the news that surface-to-surface cruise missiles were present in Cuba when he told a congressional committee on 3 October that United States intelligence agencies had detected three to four coastal defense missile sites and sixteen Komar class guided-missile patrol boats.
In January 1965, United States intelligence analysts ªrst recognized that surface-to-surface cruise missiles were present in Cuba.
During a military parade in Havana on 2 January 1965, the Cubans paraded three cruise missiles that were slightly different from the usual Kennel variant.
The parade announcer identiªed them as new “land-to-land missiles,” but United States intelligence struggled to identify them positively.
See “Current Intelligence Digest,” 2 January 1965, Country, Cuba, Intelligence Vol.
His statement was regarded as routine at the time, but after the crisis it became controversial in the bitter political ªght to untangle what the administration knew and when it knew it.
The discovery of MRBMs in Cuba, ªrst reported to Kennedy on the morning of 16 October, escalated tensions markedly and injected a new sense of urgency into the debate over the distinction between offensive and defensive weapons.
Throughout the ensuing crisis and its aftermath, Soviet ofªcials persistently denied that the MRBMs were offensive weapons, and Khrushchev adopted the formulation “the weapons you call offensive” when addressing the issue.
Soviet military doctrine used the terms “tactical” and “strategic” differently from the way they were used by Western governments.
The Soviet Union emphasized the role of the weapons, whereas Western military planners stressed technical capabilities such as range and explosive yield.
Regardless, as far as Washington was concerned, the discovery of MRBMs in Cuba crossed the threshold from defensive to offensive as Kennedy had deªned them in his statement on 13 September.
The MRBMs had a range of nearly 1,800 kilometers and could reach Washington, DC, and about half of the continental United States within minutes of launch.
The construction of bases for intermediate-range ballistic missiles with a range of 4,000 kilometers indicated that those missiles were on their way, although none actually arrived.
In early February 1963, this earlier brieªng was revived by members of the Mahon committee, particularly Representative Liscomb, when they suspected serious discrepancies between Ball’s testimony and McCone’s.
Up to that point, however, no ofªcial mention had been made of the Lunas , a weapon notable primarily as a tactical nuclear weapon.
A CIA document distributed to senior policymakers on 19 October warned that refugee reports indicated that Luna rockets were in Cuba, but NPIC analysts scouring the high-altitude photography initially could ªnd no evidence to back up that claim.
But after the ªrst waves of low-level surveillance ºights, which began on 23 October, United States analysts could view greater detail of smaller patches of territory.
A ºight on 25 October photographed a Luna launcher at a large camp at Remedios, a site in central Cuba being prepped to receive IRBMs.
The original plans for possible military action against Cuba did not envisage the use of nuclear weapons.
But when the low-level ºights conªrmed the presence of Lunas, the JCS and the commander-in-chief of the Atlantic Theater , Admiral Robert L Dennison, recognized that they needed to be ready for the possibility that if the president ordered an invasion United States troops could confront tactical nuclear weapons.
Members of the Berlin Ambassadorial Group, which had British, French, and United States representatives, were given a brieªng on 29 October that covered the Frog missiles.
These weapons would be used only in retaliation for the employment of nuclear weapons against United States forces.
Dennison told the JCS that he would modify his plans accordingly, but the Joint Chiefs and McNamara ultimately authorized only part of Dennison’s request, allowing him to equip the invasion force with nuclear-capable delivery systems such as Honest John missiles and eight-inch howitzers.
They did not authorize him to include nuclear warheads without explicit JCS approval.
Honest John rockets were deployed to Florida without their nuclear warheads, and batteries of Nike-Hercules nuclear surface-to-air missiles were also sent to Florida.
Some sources indicate that United States Pershing missiles were sent to Key West with nuclear warheads, although hard evidence to support this claim remains elusive.
No documentary evidence has come to light explaining the thinking behind the decision to withhold authority to use nuclear weapons.
Available documents from the period record the decision without the rationale.
If a record of this meeting ever existed, it probably was destroyed in August 1974.
The prevailing rules of engagement for air defense of Florida stated explicitly that nuclear weapons would not be used.
To compensate, CINCLANT planners tried to reduce reaction times and increase the numbers of troops in order to reduce the vulnerability of the invading force to Soviet tactical nuclear weapons.
By 10 November, United States surveillance had counted 33 MRBM transporters on eight ships heading back to the Soviet Union, and the Kennedy administration had decided to take Soviet leaders at their word that they had deployed a total of 42 MRBMs in Cuba and that all the missiles had been removed.
The focus shifted to other Soviet weapons based in Cuba and whether the administration should push for the status quo ante or accept some of the military buildup.
The early shipments leaving Cuba did not include V-75s, cruise missiles, Lunas, or Il-28s.
The ºurry of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev during the crisis had often been vague and not always consistent about the types of weapons covered.
In the subsequent letters to Khrushchev, Kennedy returned to the “offensive/defensive” dichotomy, repeatedly demanding that the Soviet Union remove its “offensive” weapons from Cuba.
Khrushchev, for his part, repeatedly disputed that label even for the long-range missiles and bombers.
Desch, “‘That Deep Mud in Cuba,’” 333; and JCS, “Chronology of JCS Decisions Concerning the Cuban Crisis,” 65.
United States intelligence analysts had photographic conªrmation of only 33 MRBMs in Cuba and could ªnd no compelling reason not to believe Soviet and Cuban ofªcials when they said that 42 MRBMs had been in Cuba and that all of them had been removed.
Afterward, however, Soviet forces in Cuba continued uncrating Il-28 bombers, constructing barracks for the combat regiments, continuing work on the cruise missile sites, and showing signs that they were still planning to establish submarine bases in Cuba.
Administration ofªcials realized that their interpretation of the agreement was markedly different from Moscow’s.
President Kennedy ultimately settled for less than what he had set out in his 23 October proclamation.
On 2 November, United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson handed to Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan a list of speciªc weapons to be removed.
The JCS had played an inºuential role in devising the list, which reºected the Chiefs’ maximal approach.
Revising the list forced United States policymakers to think carefully about what they considered a real threat and what they could tolerate if need be.
Kennedy and his aides sensed that if they pushed too hard, they might push Khrushchev beyond the breaking point, alienate their allies, and reignite the crisis.
But they also worried that if they were too cautious, they would end up with an unnecessary threat in the Caribbean and all the military and political consequences it would entail.
But they had not yet reached a consensus about the weapons that fell into each category.
No one in Washington questioned that the MRBMs and IRBMs fell squarely within the “offensive” category, but views about other kinds of weapons were more divergent.
The Il-28s, for example, were the subject of extensive internal debate.
The president was reluctant to let the settlement get “hung up” on the bombers and had to be convinced by several of his senior advisers that, as McNamara put it, “it’s absolutely essential that the IL-28s are part of the deal.
What was deliberately omitted from the revised list was as signiªcant as what was included.
The short-range surface-to-surface missiles fell within a gray area in threat assessments.
Those weapons could not reach United States territory but could be used against United States forces at Guantánamo or United States forces that might be ordered to invade Cuba.
The primary concern, however, was that if the Soviet Union continued to strengthen its garrison in Cuba with SAMs, Lunas, and other ground weaponry, the deployments would provide cover for the rapid reintroduction of strategic weapons.
Fears also abounded that warheads could be delivered even more quickly by submarine or by air.
In addition, some ofªcials were concerned that allowing any nuclear-capable forces to stay in Cuba, even battleªeld ones, would set a bad precedent and create political difªculties.
The White House statement of 4 September had implicitly accepted that the short-range missile systems that had been publicly identiªed—SAMs, Komar torpedo boats, and MiGs—were all defensive weapons systems.
Under Secretary of State U Alexis Johnson and Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze speciªcally raised the issue of whether the Lunas/Frogs should be included on the list.
United States ofªcials debated whether the Soviet Union could reintroduce nuclear warheads into Cuba quickly and secretly.
One possibility they considered was that Soviet submarines might deliver the warheads.
Another possibility was delivery by air, especially after the Soviet airline Aeroºot began regular weekly civilian service from Moscow to Havana via Murmansk on 7 January 1963.
Even though President Kennedy did not participate directly in that exchange, the available evidence strongly suggests that he was closely following the issue of the remaining ground forces and accepted the logic.
He recognized that the Soviet Union would have little incentive to remove the remaining troops unless the United States offered a formal UN-supervised guarantee that it would not invade Cuba.
When Sherman Kent, the head of the CIA’s Board of National Estimates, provided a special brieªng to NATO allies on 20 November, the participants pressed him on whether the short-range missiles would be deªned as offensive.
According to Cleveland’s handwritten note on the draft, he conveyed the message by telephone.
My feeling would be that we would be better off to have those units in and not have the guarantee.
McNamara pointed out that “they have patrol craft missiles, the missiles on the Komars.
Interestingly, the main concern was not about the military implications of those missiles but about the lack of public understanding that the missiles were not strategic threats.
Having made that decision, the administration had to defend it on several fronts, confronting tensions between diplomatic expediency, military imperatives, and domestic politics.
The JCS remained uncomfortable about the prospect that Soviet troops and their Lunas would remain in Cuba.
The Joint Chiefs did not deny that such short-range weapons were primarily defensive forces, but the Chiefs were 83.
The ofªcial memorandum of this conversation recorded that “the President commented that the Russians won’t take out their ground forces until we give a no-invasion assurance.
The JCS continued to plan for this contingency; and the United States military buildup that accompanied these plans reached a maximum state of readiness on 15 November.
The JCS also had to provide for the defense of the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo.
Short-range missiles hidden in the mountains near Guantánamo and pointed at the base had attracted the Joint Chiefs’ attention.
They repeatedly raised the issue when they met with the president from November 1962 to February 1963, arguing that the weapons were a threat to Guantánamo and posed a risk that the Cubans could export them to Communist subversives elsewhere in Latin America.
To gather more information about the weapons that were still in Cuba, the JCS persistently called for the resumption of lowlevel surveillance ºights.
No good options were available if another U-2 were shot down over Cuba.
The request to resume low-level surveillance ºights was therefore denied.
Underlying all this discussion was the inevitable uncertainty about the presence of nuclear warheads.
The Soviet Union had offered assurances that all nuclear warheads had been removed well before they actually were.
When the British ambassador to the Soviet Union, Sir Frank Roberts, paid a farewell call to Khrushchev at the Kremlin on 12 November, the Soviet leader assured him that all nuclear warheads were gone from Cuba.
The tactical nuclear warheads did not actually leave Cuba until the following month.
In fact, the Soviet commander in Cuba, Army-General Issa Pliev, did not receive orders to return all of the warheads until 20 November.
The decision not to leave any tactical warheads in Cuba was a policy reversal.
The available evidence from Russian archives suggests that the plan had originally been to hand over the Luna rockets to the Cubans.
Such a step would have been in keeping with the recent policy of supplying Warsaw Pact countries with tactical weapon carriers and launchers.
The Soviet Union was providing launchers and missiles to the East European countries but was keeping the warheads under tight Soviet control.
In times of heightened alert, special Soviet commando units would deliver the warheads to the missiles and supervise their deployment and use.
The Soviet Defense Ministry had also apparently been operating under the assumption that the Lunas and other battleªeld weapons would be handed over to the Cubans.
In early November, Soviet Defense Minister Rodion Malinovksii informed General Pliev in Havana that the Lunas and coastal defense missiles with conventional payloads would likely remain in Cuba, but that no ªnal decision on the nuclear warheads for these weapons had been made.
The factor that apparently changed Khrushchev’s mind was Castro’s seemingly erratic behavior in late October through mid-November.
Khrushchev had dispatched Mikoyan to Havana to reason with Castro and encourage him to relax his hard line on the settlement of the crisis.
Khrushchev’s unilateral decision to withdraw the missiles had infuriated the Cuban leader.
Fursenko and Naftali, “One Hell of a Gamble”; and Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War.
Mikoyan had tried to reassure the Cuban leader that Moscow would provide the means for Cuba to defend itself but would not embark on nuclear war with the United States.
Unaware of this order, the Cubans remained hopeful that the island’s defense still included a nuclear dimension.
United Press International, “‘Would Have Boxed K’s Ears,’ Castro Says,” The Washington Post, 22 March 1963, A14.
Those transporters were apparently loaded onto the Kislovodsk and shipped to the USSR on 5 January.
After this shipment, United States intelligence continued to observe Luna transporters and launchers at Soviet encampments in Cuba.3 The Season of Post-Mortems “The post-mortem season is in full swing,” McGeorge Bundy observed on 30 October.
The diplomatic settlement of the crisis played out against a backdrop of intense partisanship in domestic politics.
Several Republicans had anticipated using the Cuba issue to attack the Democrats and the administration in the lead-up to the 1962 midterm election.
Although the Cuba issue seems to have had little impact on how people actually voted, Republican hawks felt they had been cheated at the eleventh hour.
As a result, they resumed their attacks in November 1962 and kept up the campaign for the next several months.
The administration was under ªre from congressional critics, the press, and Cuban émigrés agitating for a United States invasion of Cuba to oust Castro.
From November 1962 through February 1963, Cuba was one of the thorniest issues confronting the administration.
Cuban émigré groups in Miami, encouraged by Senators Barry Goldwater, Kenneth Keating, and Strom Thurmond, and Representative Donald Bruce, spread rumors that the Soviet Union had sent at least 80 long-range missiles to Cuba—not the 42 Khrushchev had claimed and a ªgure the administration had accepted—and that dozens of long-range nuclear missiles were being hidden underground in the caves that riddled Cuba.
The notion that Soviet ofªcials were unlikely to lie about the number of missiles they had sent and the number they had removed was not at all convincing after the recent dramatic demonstrations of Soviet duplicity which the administration had trumpeted for its own purposes.
In her article, Higgins described the capabilities of the Lunas and said that although the United States had no strong evidence of either the presence or absence of nuclear warheads in Cuba, “the presence of such missiles is taken to indicate that the warheads that give them their punch 107.
Cuba Hides Missiles Underground,” The Chicago Daily Tribune, 7 November 1962, p.
At the time, however, the report was overshadowed by Kennedy’s press conference later that day announcing the Soviet agreement to withdraw the Il-28s and the lifting of the United States naval quarantine.
Even after the deal of 20 November, Kennedy continued to face domestic political criticism, which built through January and early February 1963.
Amid partisan attacks and internal disagreements that threatened to spill out into the open, Kennedy regained the initiative by authorizing a publicity campaign that included the disclosure of an unprecedented amount of detailed intelligence.
This campaign was ultimately successful in silencing the critics and rescuing the generally favorable impression of Kennedy’s leadership that many people retained after the missile crisis.
The president’s own performance during the crisis resonated well with the American public.
A Gallup poll in the wake of the crisis showed Kennedy’s approval rating at 74 percent.
But the surprise outbreak of the crisis was widely seen as the result of a devastating intelligence failure.
Many commentators questioned the competence of United States intelligence agencies and of the Kennedy administration, especially after the Bay of Pigs ªasco.
Additional reports about new and unidentiªed arms shipments to Cuba and indications of round-the-clock work at Cuban military sites were unsettling.
To make matters worse, the administration could not give a ªrm answer to such seemingly simple questions as how many Soviet troops had been in Cuba at the height of the crisis and how many remained.
Having announced that the number of Soviet troops in Cuba peaked at around 17,000 during the crisis, ofªcials had a hard time explaining why the ªgure remained unchanged for months after the crisis even after several announcements that thousands of Soviet troops had been withdrawn.3 The controversy became politically charged.
During the summer and fall of 1962, polls indicated that Cuba was Kennedy’s most vulnerable point on foreign policy, something Republicans had hoped to exploit in the run-up to the November 1962 midterm elections, especially to take the focus away from Kennedy’s preferred topic, Medicare.
Post-crisis estimates retroactively judged that some 22,000 Soviet troops had been in Cuba during the crisis.
Paterson and Brophy, “October Missiles and November Elections,” 94; and Freedman, Kennedy’s Wars, 161.
Having been robbed of what seemed like a national security trump card before voters went to the polls, critics staged a series of congressional inquiries into a range of issues involving Cuba.
The Kennedy administration generally stuck to a tight ofªcial script, which was notably candid about the forces remaining on the island.
The accusations from critics varied but generally involved the notion that the administration was being too soft on Cuba.
Keating and others accused the administration of negligence in reducing aerial surveillance in September and early October and alleged that the White House had deliberately created its own “October surprise” to steal the 6 November election; that the administration was being duped by Khrushchev and Castro, and that long-range missiles were being hidden in caves in Cuba.8 Of these accusations, the last proved the most persistent, frustrating, and difªcult to rebut largely because proving the negative—that missiles were not being hidden in caves—was impossible.
One of the most signiªcant operational ªndings of internal postmortems of intelligence was an upgraded assessment of the Soviet combat troops in Cuba, which were revealed to be more tightly organized, more numerous, and better armed than had previously been recognized.
Three were stationed near former strategic missile bases (Santiago de las Vegas and Artemisa in western Cuba and Remedios in central Cuba), and the fourth was near the site of an important Il-28 and 115.
See, for instance, CFP-DCSOPS-6, “Cuba-Threat and Army Plans,” 7 December 1962, in GEOG G Cuba 370.
United States Forces, 228.01, United States Army Center for Military History.
The Stennis Committee identiªed this late identiªcation of the Soviet ground combat forces as an intelligence ºaw.
The signiªcance of this last item was not lost on intelligence analysts.
Analysts concluded that the original mission of these forces was to provide local ground defense against either a United States invasion or Cuban sabotage to protect the MRBM and IRBM sites.
But even as the MRBM and IRBM sites were being bulldozed, the construction of barracks suggested that Soviet leaders had no intention of withdrawing those troops.4 On a number of occasions through January and February, United States ofªcials testifying before congressional committees laid out detailed information about the remaining short-range missiles and the remaining Soviet combat troops, and again said that they expected Moscow to withdraw the troops.
They drew analogies between Lunas/Frogs and Honest John missiles and referred to the Soviet armaments as “advanced-type tactical rocket launchers, anti-personnel weapons with a 121.
This assessment continued through the 1960s based on such evidence as the arrival in Cuba of some wives of Soviet personnel.
Instead, committee members focused on the possible presence of long-range strategic missiles in Cuba and the arming of MiG-21s with nuclear weapons—a less likely but more sensational scenario.
Word had leaked out that McCone, a Republican, had been warning since September that the Soviet Union might be installing MRBMs in Cuba.
Congressional Republicans jumped on apparent inconsistencies between what McCone was saying and what other members of the administration with more dovish reputations were saying.
Kennedy and the ExComm decided to end the speculation once and for all.
Perhaps drawing lessons from the “missile gap” myth of three years earlier, which several senior administration ofªcials, including Kennedy himself, had helped to perpetuate, the president endorsed McNamara’s proposal for greater transparency by laying out in a public brieªng what had been withdrawn from Cuba and what was still there.
By highlighting some of the other sophisticated, nuclearcapable weaponry still in Cuba (the MiG-21s and the armored battalions with their Luna missiles), the brieªng could blur in the public mind the distinction between offensive and defensive weapons.
Despite this risk, McNamara went ahead with the plan on 6 February by staging an elaborate, nationally televised special brieªng on Cuba from the State Department’s auditorium.
United States Congress, Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Hearing, 16 January 1963, in SFRC, ESSFRC, 1963, 66.
John G Norris, “Administration Case on Cuba Not Air-Tight,” The Washington Post, 8 February 1963, A11.
It included dozens of surveillance photographs and detailed information about the capabilities of the military equipment and forces in Cuba.
McNamara and John Hughes from the Defense Intelligence Agency went into a level of detail that had previously been reserved only for classiªed brieªngs to congressional committees.
They provided speciªc numbers of Soviet and Cuban weaponry along with graphic highand low-level surveillance photos.
They showed photographs of Luna missile launchers, coastal defense missile installations, and most of the other weapons systems for which they had veriªable surveillance photographs.
At the same time, he expressed frustration with the growing chorus of congressional and press criticism and urged 130.
Five leading congressional critics of the administration’s Cuba policy—Keating, Thurmond, Rep.
Armistead Selden, Jr.—responded to McNamara’s brieªng by staging their own televised news conference accusing McNamara of deliberately playing down the implications of the continuing Soviet military presence in Cuba.
They said that even the so-called defensive forces remaining could be a menace by enabling the Soviet Union to bring in offensive weapons furtively.
Each legislator stressed, however, that he was not advocating direct military action.
This allegation echoed Keating’s pre-crisis charges that the White House had adopted a “look-the-other-way policy” regarding the Soviet military buildup in Cuba.7 The administration faced two ªnal political challenges.
The ªrst was to explain the apparent inconsistencies between the public statements of McNamara and McCone.
One of the key points of contention was the signiªcance of the remaining Soviet ground forces.
According to Bundy’s summary of the meeting, they agreed that apparent discrepancies regarding some of the most provocative military forces should 135.
John G Norris, “Hill Critics Ask Tough Cuba Stand,” The Washington Post, 9 February 1963, p.
To assuage Keating, McCone agreed to meet with the senator so that Keating would have the opportunity to convey the information he claimed to have.
When they met, Keating insisted that more missiles and troops remained in Cuba than the administration had acknowledged.
Keating also told McCone that nuclear warheads for Lunas were being hidden in caves, a charge that government experts rebutted by pointing out that such an arrangement would be “unduly hazardous and inconvenient” when more suitable storage bunkers were available.2 Although the Cuba issue did not completely disappear, this wave of criticism proved to be the last sustained congressional attack on the Kennedy administration’s handling of the missile crisis.
Despite Congressman Selden’s efforts to keep the Cuba debate alive by having the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Latin America hold hearings, Congress generally moved on to other issues.
United States intelligence had conªrmed through radio intercepts that a shipment containing a small amount of radioactive isotopes had arrived in Cuba aboard the Michurinsk in mid-January.
Although United States intelligence ofªcials did not know for sure that the Soviet Union had delivered nuclear warheads, they never argued that the Soviet Union had not delivered them.
United States policymakers did know, as of 26 October, that in addition to the MRBMs, the Soviet Union had deployed nuclear-capable battleªeld rockets in Cuba.
The controversy in recent years over whether the Lunas and other tactical nuclear-capable missiles were a known risk of the Cuban missile crisis implies in part that the United States intelligence community failed to detect the tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The CIA underestimated by about half the number of Soviet troops in Cuba, and the agency detected only 33 of the 42 MRBMs in Cuba.
Moreover, the much-contested “photo gap” in the fall of 1962—arguably more a political failure than an intelligence one—imposed limits on the photographic surveillance that might have detected the long-range missiles sooner.
But apart from the misidentiªcation of the crated FKR’s, intelligence reporting on the tactical nuclear weapons proved relatively accurate within the known and acknowledged technical limits of the time.
United States intelligence ofªcials openly acknowledged that they could not prove one way or the other whether nuclear warheads of any kind were present in Cuba.
This admission did not signal a failure of diligence or imagination; rather, the existing technical capabilities did not permit certainty on this matter.
Faced with that uncertainty, policymakers, analysts, and military planners were obliged to assume that nuclear warheads were in Cuba.
Policymakers accepted, internalized, and applied this principle to more than just the MRBMs.
We were intrigued by the fact that we never found a nose cone , never found an identiªable nuclear weapon in Cuba.
We have to assume that they were there, but they are not too difªcult to conceal, maybe ªve or six feet long.
It is possible that the quarantine intercepted the later shipments of this total effort, and that this might have included the nose cones, but we just don’t know.
We never found them.3 The following week, Rusk told the same committee that he could not say for sure whether nuclear warheads were still in Cuba.
McNamara provided even more detail and partly contradicted Rusk’s statements in his 6 February 1963 televised brieªng.
I believe we observed it in certain vehicles and we observed the movement of those vehicles out of Cuba, and we traced the shipment of those vehicles on ships back into the home waters of the So149.
Rusk’s Testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 11 January 1963, in SFRC, ESSFRC, 1963, 8.
Few other ofªcials during or after the crisis were willing to say whether warheads had been in Cuba, and almost no one was willing to discuss the sources and methods of intelligence gathering in such speciªc terms.
The intelligence basis for McNamara’s statement (assuming it is accurate) remains unclear.
Unlike with the coastal defense missiles, which United States analysts never accurately identiªed, the CIA had an accurate understanding of the capabilities— and limitations—of the Lunas and also their role in Soviet military doctrine.
United States ofªcials knew that the Lunas, MiG-21s, and V-75s they had seen in Cuba were capable of delivering nuclear warheads.
But analysts and policymakers all believed it was highly unlikely that the MiG-21s and SA-2s would be used for nuclear delivery.
Given numerous opportunities to contest the claim that the Frogs in Cuba could be armed with nuclear warheads, United States ofªcials never did.
Behind closed doors and in public, senior ofªcials routinely described the Lunas as analogous to the United States Army’s Honest John, a missile known primarily as a ªrst-generation tactical nuclear weapon.
The available evidence shows that in only one instance did a United States ofªcial categorically state that the Lunas in Cuba were not armed with nuclear warheads, and his assessment was ºawed.
A memorandum dated 29 October 1962 addressed to George Ball and signed by U Alexis Johnson but drafted by Raymond Garthoff discussed the coastal defense missiles, the Lunas, and the Komar torpedo boats.
The memorandum judged the Komar torpedo boats the “most susceptible of offensive employment” and recommended that the United States fallback position should be to drop the demand for these three weapons systems to be removed from Cuba.
Lunas were so inaccurate that they had little utility as conventional weapons in combat.
Because they followed an unguided ballistic trajectory and lacked in-ºight targeting capabilities, they could not be relied on to hit a speciªc target.
Missile accuracy is measured in terms of Circular Error Probable , a ªgure calculated by taking the radius of a circle centered on the target in which 50 percent of the missiles ªred are expected to land.
With the relatively small blast zone of a conventional high explosive warhead, measured in tens of meters at most, this inaccuracy rendered Lunas of little value as conventional weapons.
Indeed, they proved to be so when used with non-nuclear warheads in later conºicts.
But if equipped with nuclear warheads, they would pose a severe hazard to any invasion force.2 160.
For a description of the effects of a Luna rocket armed with a nuclear warhead, see Fursenko and Naftali, “One Hell of a Gamble,” p.2.
Although the extent of what has been called the “nuclear romanticism” of Soviet military planning was not fully documented until decades later, Soviet military ofªcers had made no secret of their increasing emphasis on nuclear forces in their war planning.
Like the United States Army’s Honest John rockets, with which the Lunas were so often compared, the deªning characteristic of the Lunas—and the very reason for their existence in the ªrst place—was that they introduced a battleªeld nuclear capability to ground forces, thereby ªlling a gap between long-range strategic missiles and traditional battleªeld artillery forces.
Their strengths could be most effective against concentrations of troops on the move—as would have been the case with a United States invasion of Cuba.5 Perhaps the most intriguing evidence of all regarding what the Kennedy administration knew about the tactical nuclear warheads in Cuba was an exchange between President Kennedy, Marine Commandant David Shoup, and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson on 29 October 1962, secretly captured by Kennedy’s White House recording system.
If nuclear weapons start down there, I’d say we’re at nuclear couldn’t afford to let them do that.
But my guess is, well, everybody sort of ªgures that, in extremis, that everybody would use nuclear weapons.
The Costs and Consequences of United States Nuclear Weapons since 1940 (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1998), 155.
United States intelligence at the time did not know that the ªrst Lunas delivered to the Warsaw Pact were deployed with Soviet forces in the German Democratic Republic, a deployment that was conducted simultaneously with Operation Anadyr; it began in May 1962 and was completed on 30 September 1962.
During the Cuban missile crisis, those tactical nuclear missiles in East Germany apparently were placed on alert.
See Uhl, “Nuclear Warhead Delivery Systems for the Warsaw Pact”; and Uhl, “Storming On to Paris,” 61.
Conclusion The risk of nuclear war during the Cuban missile crisis is inherently difªcult to measure.
The 1992 controversy about the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba in October 1962 convinced some that a crisis already widely regarded as the most perilous moment of the Cold War was even more dangerous than they had imagined.
When President Kennedy and his advisers were contemplating military action against Cuba, including a possible ground invasion, they did so without knowing for sure that Soviet tactical nuclear weapons were present in Cuba.
The direct threat posed by the tactical nuclear missiles was far less than that posed by the MRBMs and IRBMs, which, unlike the tactical weapons, could strike targets in the continental United States.
The real risk was that any use of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba could have led to uncontrollable escalation culminating in global thermonuclear war.
Contrary to hyperbolic claims that followed General Gribkov’s initial remarks, Soviet tactical nuclear weapons were not on hairtrigger alert during the missile crisis.
Nor could they have been put on alert at any subsequent stage unless Soviet command-and-control procedures had broken down or had been altered by leaders in Moscow.
No hard evidence has come to light indicating whether the tactical nuclear missiles had a deterrent effect on President Kennedy.
The available evidence suggests that the detection of Luna deployments in Cuba did not fundamentally change the advice the president received.
Presumably referring to the strategic missiles, Kennedy told some of his senior advisers at a December 1962 defense budget discussion that “what they had in Cuba alone would have been a substantial deterrent to me,” a remarkable confession for a Cold War president to make even in private.
Kennedy was neither oblivious nor cavalier when it came to the risks of tactical nuclear weapons, nor did he subscribe to the view expressed by Dwight Eisenhower almost a decade earlier—when tactical nuclear weapons were just starting to be deployed widely by both sides—that the bomb should be regarded as just another weapon.
On Historical Judgment and Inference,” 174; and Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War, 469.
The record suggests that after 28 October his policy was driven by his effort to deºate the pressure from the political right and his more hawkish advisers, who insisted that he take a harder line, while also pushing ahead with his own desire to forge an accommodation with Khrushchev that would bring the crisis to a conclusion, a pattern that also seemed to characterize the secret deal to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.6 United States intelligence analysts never fully lost sight of the Soviet troops or the Lunas even as these deployments faded as a priority after February 1963.
But a decade and a half later, one of his successors, Jimmy Carter, did pay such a price.
After the early 1960s, the remaining Soviet troops had disappeared from public view.
They suddenly “reappeared” in October 1979 when news broke that the CIA had “discovered” in Cuba a brigade of about 2,600 Soviet combat troops.
This disclosure by Senator Frank Church, a Democrat involved in a tough reelection ªght, created a political ªrestorm for the Carter administration.
Bundy wrote that after the “offensive weapons” were removed, the ongoing presence of Soviet troops in Cuba ceased to be a priority for the administration and the intelligence community.
He noted that the Kennedy and Johnson administrations had known about the remaining Soviet ground forces, debated the nature of the risk, and decided that a few thousand Soviet troops in Cuba posed no meaningful threat to the United States or other countries in the region.1 Acknowledgments The author would like to thank William Burr, Melvyn Lefºer, Timothy Naftali, Marc Selverstone, Marc Trachtenberg, Philip Zelikow, and the anonymous Journal of Cold War Studies reviewers for their helpful suggestions and comments on earlier drafts of this article.
Bundy also pointed out that the focus of the Kennedy administration’s deliberations was naturally on “offensive” weapons.
