The Churchillian model chosen, changes required by the Cabinet Office and Macmillan’s desire to rebuke those political opponents who claimed that the crisis demonstrated a lack of British influence in Washington, however ensured a focus on his personal relationship with President Kennedy.
Careful reconstruction of Macmillan’s real-time experience of the Cuban missile crisis demonstrates the limitations of his own account of this event.
Keywords British foreign policy, cold war, Cuban missile crisis, memoir-writing, Macmillan, personal diplomacy, United Nations In October 1962, Harold Macmillan had been Prime Minister for nearly six years.
His account of those momentous days appeared almost 11 years later when At the End of the Day, the sixth and final volume of his memoirs covering the period from 1961 to 1963 was published on 26 September 1973 in Britain and on 9 January 1974 in the United States.
By this time, Macmillan, 68 at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, was nearing his 80th birthday.
Although the physical infirmities of age were exacerbated by his Great War wounds, he nevertheless remained mentally robust.
This might help to explain how the autobiography of ‘Mr Harold’ eventually ran to 3763 pages and some 1. million words.
Macmillan was active in the publishing business before he was first elected to Parliament in 1924.
However, unlike his elder brother Daniel, a political career was always his priority.
Publishing was a sideline undertaken when on the backbenches or out of Parliament and certainly something he had little time for during his long continuous stint in Cabinet from the return of the Tories to government on 26 October 1951 to his health-induced resignation as Prime Minister on 18 October 1963.
Nevertheless, he was pleased to be one of the few in Cabinet who had practical experience in business2 and always knew that he would return to publishing when his political career was over.
He attended his first Board meeting on 31 October 1963 and had, by the end of that year, assumed the company chairmanship.
It was not until the New Year that he felt well enough to set about addressing the managerial and financial problems inherited from Daniel’s long and idiosyncratic reign as chairman.
The truth is that I am still in a kind of daze – like a man who has had concussion.
I can just manage to concentrate on a limited range of problems but all the flexibility and resilience of my mind has gone.
However, I suppose this is the result partly of the operation but partly of 10 years and more of tremendous work at tremendous pressure.
The first brief mention of the memoirs project in Macmillan’s diary was not until a month later, when he discussed the idea with one of Churchill’s former research assistants, Bill Deakin of St Antony’s College, Oxford.
Exhaustion and publishing demands were not the only reasons for avoiding haste in such matters.
Macmillan was acutely conscious of the damage done to the efforts of his successor, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, to secure a Conservative re-election that year by the rush into print in early 1964 of disgruntled former ministers, Iain Macleod and Lord Kilmuir.
In this, he consciously aped Churchill’s technique, borrowed from Daniel Defoe’s Memoirs of a Cavalier, of a chronicle of events linked by his own role as witness or participant; an approach ‘suited to somebody who cannot aspire to be a historian but who is striving to describe and communicate through one’s own experiences the events’.9Macmillan also aped Churchill’s tendency to pack his pages with contemporary documents, including in his case liberal quotation from his own diaries.
He went through the manuscript diaries selecting around 50 per cent of the total for this purpose.
From letters, memoranda and other documents you can form your own judgement’.10 The view that his work was this type of history rather than a memoir was certainly held by his publishing director, while press notices observed that these many words revealed little of their author.
Macmillan set out with some trepidation on his task, commenting ‘I am beginning to be rather concerned as to whether I can do this or shall have to fall back on allowing someone else … to write it for me’.12 David Dilks, who had been Anthony Eden’s ghost-writer, provided advice initially.
On visiting Macmillan’s Sussex home, Birch Grove, Dilks was apparently ‘impressed by the size of the collection [of Macmillan’s papers] and the good arrangement’.13 Macmillan had taken care to again copy Churchill, in this case by taking away duplicates of all possible documents for his private archive.
These and related background reading were sorted for him by Anne Glynn-Jones into subjects corresponding to the thematic chapters through which he structured the volumes.
Macmillan then dictated to two secretaries who created a rough draft to be amended.
By the start of September 1964, he had completed some 35,000 to 40,000 words as a sketch of the entirety.
At that stage, only three volumes, as with Eden’s memoirs, seem to have been contemplated.
I have been reading all sorts of books of reminiscences … I cull a few points, here and there, for my own book.
I have now finished the synopsis of the 50 years – 1914–64 … It is hard to see how this enterprise is going to succeed.
However frightening, it was at least an opportunity to indulge Macmillan’s favourite habit of reading.
Trained by publishing, he was both a voluminous and reflective reader, usually noting his views in pithy comments in his diaries.
Sometimes he would use these comments to assess issues he was currently dealing with.
Interestingly, not least in light of his attitudes towards the Cuban missile crisis, what emerges from analysis of his reading is a stress on the interplay between character and circumstance.
Instead, he spent part of Sunday 21 October 1962 reading an old life of the Young Pretender19 he had found in the library at Chequers before a message arrived from President Kennedy at 10.00m. that evening warning of the developing stand-off over Cuba.
This was his first reference to this emergency in his diaries, though in At the End of the Day he refers obliquely to the guarded warnings given to British intelligence officials in Washington two days earlier.
Thereafter, the pressure of the crisis that ensued was such that even Macmillan was unable to keep up his reading, though the one work he did finish during this time – Sir James Mackintosh’s writing on the ‘Glorious’ Revolution – saw him continuing to read about the problems of the Stuarts rather than the present.
Macmillan does not seem to have been reading much else during the crisis itself.
It was not until Monday 5 November that correspondence began significantly to accumulate again in the files.
With this final volume, however, the BBC decided that they had so much good material that they needed to do two programmes, one looking at policy issues such as Cuba broadcast on 19 September 1973, and the other covering security and scandal matters transmitted on the day of publication.
In June 1960, he noted that the Castro regime that seized power in Cuba the previous year was ‘confiscating all the American properties and threatening to seize the oil refineries … The Americans are pained and uncertain. (what a pity they never understood “Colonialism” and “Imperialism” till too late!)’.26 Cuba, however, hardly seems to have featured in his first talks with President Kennedy in April 1961 just a couple of weeks before the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
Macmillan had been aware of the planning for this under Eisenhower and discussed the idea with Kennedy,28 but does not seem to have considered it likely to succeed.
Nor were the British very inclined to share the Administration’s anxiety to lance the Cuban boil.
One of Macmillan’s constant refrains was the need for trade expansion, not least as a means of tying in countries to the West.
They had earlier refused Castro’s request for jet fighters under American pressure.
This new intervention, however, in their view would not change the regime, only counterproductively drive it closer to the Russians.
Indeed, it appears that a combination of United States trade pressure and military exercises suggesting imminent invasion of Cuba helped, as this view might have predicted, to create the circumstances in which Khrushchev decided to send missiles to Castro in May 1962 .31 The British had not warmed to similar American pressure previously to interdict trade with China.
Nor was it good for an economy that, as Macmillan reminded the Secretary of State, Rusk, in June 1962, was much more heavily dependent on trade than that of America.
He was therefore apt to react angrily to what he saw as sharp American practice in arms trade, as over the sale of Hawk missiles to Israel in August 1962.
Furthermore, Kennedy’s urging of British support for the embargo to Lord Home, the Foreign Secretary, during the latter’s Washington visit in late September 1962, as the President moved towards difficult mid-term elections, met with observations that British shipping interests could only be coerced by new legislation difficult to justify in peacetime.
An important factor in such developments was the growing public concern about nuclear testing.
Accordingly, while Macmillan’s diaries for 1962 are full of his efforts to promote a test ban to both the Americans and Russians, Cuba did not trouble the Prime Minister until Kennedy’s fateful message arrived.
The brief exception was when Home returned from Washington, prompting Macmillan to reiterate in his diary his objections to a trade embargo.
He also noted, ‘The Russians are clearly using Cuba as a counter-irritant to Berlin’.36 This suggestion was put to Home by Kennedy.
Throughout the crisis, it was invariably Kennedy, rather than Macmillan, who raised Berlin in their telephone conversations.
This is despite the fact that Berlin, like nuclear tests, was rarely far from Macmillan’s thoughts from when Khrushchev demanded the withdrawal of allied troops from the city on 10 November 1958.
In contrast, that Cuba had a political significance well beyond that of a pawn in the Cold War for his ally does not seem to have been at the forefront of the Prime Minister’s mind in the run-up to the crisis.
Nor does Macmillan note at the time or subsequently the growing pressure on Kennedy from senior Republicans, particularly Senator Kenneth Keating, claiming that the Russians were deploying missiles in Cuba,38 even though he hints in At the End of the Day that British intelligence was also suggesting a build-up there.
This claim was publicly denied by Kennedy on 4 September 1962, but was confirmed by Dutch and French intelligence by the time the missiles arrived mid-month.
Conclusive proof both of missiles and Ilyushin -28 bombers being assembled was provided by a U2 over-flight on 14 October and presented to the President in Washington at 8.45m. on 16 October.
Neither the British ambassador to Washington, David Ormsby-Gore, nor the American ambassador to London, Bruce, was told of this until 21 October,41 before Macmillan, as Kennedy’s hastily convened Executive Committee debated what to do.
What it did not require was a similar build-up of North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces; Macmillan therefore responded to hints from Washington of the need for heightened alert levels by telling General Norstad – the retiring Supreme Allied Commander, Europe – at a dinner in Norstad’s honour that evening ‘that “mobilisation” had sometimes caused war.
Here it was absurd, since the additional forces made available by “Alert” had no military significance’.44 Norstad agreed, assuring Macmillan the following day that these representations had been successful with Washington.
Such calls for a conference were also later issued by Commonwealth figures such as President Nkrumah of Ghana and his friends in the non-aligned movement.
The risk that Acting UN SecretaryGeneral, U Thant’s, appeal for mutual restraint would exacerbate the problems of managing febrile world opinion may also explain why Macmillan described this as a ‘very dangerous message’ to Kennedy in conversation on 24 October,48 also commenting in his diary, ‘Now that Russians have been proved blatant liars, no unpoliced agreement with them is possible’.49 A conference, which as he noted to Ormsby-Gore on 22 October would also be an opportunity for the Russians to broach issues like Berlin,50 was therefore full of risk.
On 24 October, Home raised with Ormsby-Gore the possibility that a general conference on disarmament, with Cuba as a preliminary, might be a way forward, and certainly preferable to a bases swop, with all that entailed for Berlin.
Home’s idea was therefore a non-starter;53 thereafter, discussion of a conference dropped from British contributions to the crisis.
Meanwhile, on 23 October, there were no further conversations with Kennedy.
Macmillan did meet a Labour delegation who asked if he would go to Washington,54 as Attlee had done at a similar juncture during the Korean War.
Though he raised this possibility with Kennedy the following evening, in his diary the Prime Minister merely noted, ‘They hadn’t much to say’.55 Nor did his diary entry refer to the related problems of managing the press and public opinion, despite a note from his private secretary, Tim Bligh, warning that lobby correspondents were asking if Britain had been consulted on the developing crisis.
Notwithstanding his earlier belligerence, Macmillan now asked for time to think about this, though he was glad to hear that United States plans for an invasion were continuing.
At the time of the conversation, it is not clear whether he was aware that Russian ships were already starting to turn round.
By the time he came to write his diary entry for 24 October, presumably at some point the following day, this had been confirmed for him from both British and American intelligence sources.
This, and the soft answer Khrushchev gave to U Thant, may have determined how the Prime Minister replied to Kennedy’s question.
Instead, he advised that UN inspection of the sites, to ensure their immobilisation, would remove the threat they posed, without the need for military action.
Any ideas of an inspection regime were not discussed by the two leaders that evening.
The latter option was put to the British, French and West German ambassadors in Washington that evening.
At the same meeting, the ambassadors were told of the American estimation that the Russians had intended a showdown over Berlin on completion of the Cuban bases, to coincide with Khrushchev’s upcoming visit to the United States.
That, of course, depended on completion without detection, no longer a possibility.
Khrushchev also plainly failed to consult his ambassador in Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, either about the missile deployment or the likely American reaction.
Towards the end of the crisis, Britain’s ambassador to the Soviet Union, Sir Frank Roberts, acutely recalled ‘Khrushchev’s well-known proclivity for setting out courses of action without knowing where they could lead him, coupled with his undoubted talent for making the best of the resulting situation’.65 Whether his improvisation on 26 October turned out best for him is another matter.
Khrushchev suggested to Kennedy the possibility of dismantling the missiles in Cuba, first in return for a guarantee that Cuba would not be invaded, tightened in a second message by linkage with the quid pro quo of American withdrawal of the 15 Jupiter Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles installed in Turkey in 1961.
Neither Macmillan nor Kennedy was aware of this when they spoke that evening at 11.15m. ,66 though the latter mentioned some unofficial hints along similar lines from Russian officials.
This was, however, sufficient to pique the Prime Minister’s interest in an analogy with pre-1914 Belgian neutrality.
He then returned to the idea of U Thant leading a team to ‘ensure that these missiles were made inoperable during the period of any conference or discussion’, before dropping into the conversation about his own swop proposal, the immobilisation of the 60 Thor IRBMs deployed in Britain in 1958–1959.68 This would have been a significant gesture as normally 65 per cent of this force was on 30 minutes readiness.
Indeed, at 11.00m. on 27 October , the Prime Minister agreed a move to Alert Condition 3 for Bomber Command, which meant that 59 of the Thors were at 15 minutes readiness, remaining so until 5 November.
None of this, however, was mentioned at the time in Macmillan’s diary, or subsequently in At the End of the Day.
Nor was the fact that, despite the President’s non-committal response, particularly to the Thor swop, these three schemes were then reiterated in a message to Kennedy in the early hours of 27 October .70 There are, indeed, no diary entries at all for Saturday 27 October.
From the diary of Macmillan’s press secretary, Harold Evans, it is clear that the day was spent in great anxiety that Kennedy might have decided that there was no other way and ‘was hell-bent on destroying the missile sites.
In these circumstances, Macmillan ‘felt he must intervene’ in ways that would achieve the immobilisation of the weapons without resort to United States military action.
These anxieties would not have been assuaged by Ormsby-Gore’s telegram received at 4.00m. that morning.
At least, Rusk confirmed that the three principal European allies would be consulted before any such eventuality occurred.
ExComm began to meet that day at around 10.00m. , by which time it was already 3.00m. in London.
It is therefore difficult to endorse the claim of scholars such as May and Zelikow that both Macmillan and Ormsby-Gore became de facto members of ExComm for the duration of the crisis.
The fact that the former was not physically present, sometimes only received limited reports on what was transpiring in Washington from Ormsby-Gore and often had to wait for hours for detailed telegrams to come through necessarily limited Macmillan’s direct knowledge of events across the Atlantic.
One example is the news of the shooting down of the United States U2 surveillance aeroplane over Cuba, which very much exercised ExComm that afternoon and apparently helped to decide Khrushchev that a climb down was required.
A telegram from the British embassy in Cuba bearing this news did not arrive until 6.38m. on 28 October, having seemingly been nine hours in transmission.
Another example is that, in the ExComm discussions earlier that day, the text arrived of Khrushchev’s latest message to Kennedy.
In contrast, the copy of this broadcast message in the Prime Minister’s files is from the news agency Reuters.
In ExComm, this message was regarded as further moving the goalposts, by linking not only removal of weapons from Cuba with analogous weapons in Turkey, but also agreement about the inviolability of both countries.
From the hand-written notes by Home on the British copy of the message, Khrushchev’s latest communication appears to also have caused alarm, but in a somewhat different manner.
The build-up, he observed, goes on – a point made by Kennedy in his noon broadcast – while the United States had rejected the Turkey linkage.
Home’s comments ended, ‘Still trying to keep it to this hemisphere’.78 This kind of language no doubt reflected British attempts to respond to American sensitivities, tutored by the 1823 Monroe doctrine, about outside interference in their part of the world.
From the file, it is not clear at what point in the day Home made these notes.
Home’s suggestions therefore focused on Cuban inviolability and/or of a nuclear-free zone in Latin America.
The reciprocity in the European area that the Thor offer undoubtedly constituted was additional, something to be used ‘if it would make all the difference’.79 A telegram sent to the Washington embassy at 2.30m. asked that Rusk also be informed of these instructions.
It was not until 8.07m. that Kennedy’s response to Macmillan’s memorandum of their previous evening’s conversation arrived in London.
This message is not mentioned in Harold Evans’ diary, but it seems to have been the cause of the anxiety he notes.
I do not feel that this country should allow itself to become engaged in negotiations affecting the individual security interests of our NATO allies.
Any initiatives in this respect, it seems to me, should appropriately come from Europe.
In the meantime, I continue to believe that we must secure the actual dismantling of the missiles currently in Cuba as the first order of business.
In particular, the penultimate paragraph seems to have been interpreted as an invitation for an initiative along the lines already broached with the President.
No further work on the missile sites in Cuba, No imports of ballistic missiles into the island, and The existing missiles in Cuba being made inoperable (which can be done without any breach of military security), all these under UN authority.
Lift the quarantine, and Not take any physical action against Cuba during the standstill.
Seemingly, it was not until after this point that a telegram from Dean arrived at 9.31 p.m. indicating U Thant’s response to the British proposals.
Dean reported that in the conversation he had with U Thant at 1.00m. , it was clear that the idea of following in the footsteps of his late predecessor, Dag Hammarskjöld, and actually going into the field to address problems had not occurred to the Acting UN Secretary-General.
U Thant, however, considered the idea of leading an inspection team, but treated it as separate from issues such as Turkey or the inviolability of Cuba.
The rest of Ormsby-Gore’s telegram was taken up with how the Americans were responding to the Khrushchev broadcast and with Kennedy’s thoughts about Turkey.
The Turkish ambassador to the United Nations made the displeasure of his government at this suggestion apparent to his American counterpart, Adlai Stevenson, at a meeting that evening.
However, in fact, the problem was how the Americans should react to Khrushchev’s linkage of Cuba and Turkey; a major theme of the ExComm discussions that day.
As the President’s brother, Bobby Kennedy, put it that afternoon, the Soviet offer ‘is very reasonable, and we just turned it down.
Turkey and the bases in Cuba … and suddenly we drop a bomb on Cuba’.87 The dilemma, as the President put it a little earlier, was that they were quite happy to discuss Turkey, but they wanted to secure a standstill from Khrushchev first.
Kennedy may, by this time, have received Macmillan’s message and picked up the term standstill from there.
Attempts to clarify whether this was the case are not helped by the almost total absence on this vital date from their reconstruction of events in Washington by May and Zelikow of communications between the President and Prime Minister.
In any case, as Macmillan was in no position to know, those around Kennedy were concentrating on the Turkish issue, rather than any idea of a standstill.
By this, he meant that the facilities for United States Polaris submarines agreed with the Eisenhower Administration at Holy Loch in 1960 as replacement for the phasing-out of the Thors due to start on 1 April 1963.
Clearly, as George Ball noted, similar arrangements could be made with the Turks.
As Kennedy noted, this was made more problematic because the Turkey/Cuba swop had been raised publicly by Khrushchev.
His approach to ExComm that day was therefore about how to respond without appearing to cave in, not least to his NATO allies.
United States ambassadors were therefore told to avoid any Cuba/ Turkey linkage.
Bruce was certainly under the impression that the Turkey option had been rejected.
Furthermore, after much discussion of how this might be approached, ExComm agreed that Thomas Finletter, the United States permanent representative, should brief a NATO Council in Paris on Monday 29 October.
His briefing notes were passed on to the British government at some time on 28 October.
Instead, the build-up of the missile sites continued, and ships were still heading to the quarantine zone.
The United States message to its allies was therefore that military action, for which a build-up throughout the crisis had been taking place, may be imminent and that missile trades were not on the table.
Nor, at the time, did the President’s public reply to Khrushchev, responding to his offer on Cuba and ignoring Turkey, which was received in London at 1.30m.
Subsequently, in At the End of the Day, Macmillan was to credit this with successfully solving the crisis without resort to conflict.
Yet, on that Sunday morning, he clearly remained concerned to avoid such a denouement.
It also stressed a continuing wish to send his message to Khrushchev ‘when it is apparent that he is not giving way and before you are forced by his stubbornness or by the local situation to take drastic action.
The text as actually transmitted, seemingly at 9.52m. , was rather more anodyne, but still contained the timing question.
In At the End of the Day, Macmillan says that he then decided the timing issue for himself in the absence of further communications from an early morning Washington.
The message transmitted to Moscow at around noon ), however, was rather different from the draft he had sent to Kennedy the previous day.
Evans described this as ‘a mouselike message’.102 In the absence of American approval of any other message, it however picked up on the one aspect of Khrushchev’s communication that Macmillan, who had long been seeking such a test ban agreement, could legitimately address.
From Macmillan’s point of view, it certainly gave a fillip to his efforts for a test ban agreement and a reduction in Cold War tensions.
Khrushchev published some expurgated memoirs in 1971, the year of his death.
However, the untimely death of John Kennedy in 1963 ensured that the other Western principal in the crisis had not published memoirs.
There was at the time, only Robert Kennedy’s posthumously published account, ghost-written for him by Theodore Sorensen,109 to which Macmillan obliquely refers briefly in his own book.0 Macmillan had some trouble settling on a title for this final volume covering 1961– 1963.
Initially, he suggested ‘The Grand Design’, a phrase he had repeatedly used to title policy documents since the 1920s.
However, he noted, ‘since most of my plans failed it might seem rather ridiculous’.111 Instead, At the End of the Day was chosen to match the reflective nature of the photograph by Lord Snowdon selected for the dust jacket.2 He had even more trouble getting his text past the Cabinet Office.
The then Cabinet Secretary, Sir Burke Trend, wrote ‘you have perhaps given yourself rather more of a free rein … than in the earlier volumes’.113 There was particular concern about verbatim quotes from classified letters, minutes and transcripts of telephone conversations.
This reflected that Macmillan had indeed taken a Churchillian approach to this work.
Four were deletions advised to avoid giving offence to foreign governments who might have objected, for instance, to a diary quotation referring to the French as contemptuous, the Germans as very frightened, the Italians as windy and the Scandinavians as sour as well as windy.
It is likely that this reflected publisher reluctance to comply when already close to publication with changes that ‘would spoil the book and entail very expensive correction if we were to paraphrase them’.118 The company certainly thought the Cuba section an important part of the book.
The object was not just to puff the book but also to engage with media and Opposition allegations at the time of the Cuban crisis that the British influence on the United States had been negligible.
These included Kennedy’s message of 22 October, suggesting that the two men ‘discuss the situation between ourselves by means of our private channel of communication’.123 This channel was the KY-9 scrambler telephone, installed on 6 September 1961, supplemented by the KW-26 teleprinter.
Macmillan commented in his diary on 4 November – reproduced in ‘On the Brink’ – that these worked without a hitch.
The President also apparently kept on forgetting that he had to take his finger off the button to allow Macmillan to speak.4 This may account for the apparently unenlightening nature of the transcripts.
But then, as anyone who has tried to recapture the fire of a Lloyd George from the reproduction in Hansard would know, transcripts convey only a part of orality.
In a passage Macmillan drafted to add to the chapter but which was not in the end included, he noted, ‘We used flat and commonplace phrases of everyday life and humdrum affairs.
Nevertheless, we both knew we were discussing the future, and perhaps the survival of the civilised world’.125 In a talk between two men who clearly trusted and liked each other, there are always likely to be unspoken assumptions and understandings that a transcript may not capture, such as the somewhat hesitant way in which Macmillan introduced the Thor offer on 26 October.
From the initial reviews onwards, these passages have instead been taken to demonstrate that Macmillan served as ‘a sounding board’ for Kennedy to test out his ideas.
Some, such as the question about invasion asked on 25 October, have nevertheless been seen very definitely as consultation.7 Less noticed, though probably no less significant, were the discussions about how to approach the United Nations.
In the past, it has often been thought that the main British contribution to the management of the Cuban crisis was advice from Ormsby-Gore about the breadth of the quarantine and the publication of the photographs of the missile sites.
Macmillan no doubt believed that his ambassador did make a significant contribution to the first of these.
Curiously, he does not mention the second in ‘On the Brink’, though de Zulueta’s warnings to senior American intelligence officer Chet Cooper of the likely scepticism of the British press seem to have been the significant factor.9 What has been less explored is the British approach to the UN side of the crisis.
In the historiography, Macmillan’s interest in this has been overshadowed by the Thor offer.
However, in the same conversation that he raised this with Kennedy, on 26 October, he also reiterated the idea of a UN mission to ensure the missiles were inoperable.
Once the ships were no longer arriving, this was the crucial issue for Macmillan, hence his change of mind over the merits of military action.
Indeed, getting a credible UN inspection regime in place was a key means of avoiding such military action, with all the risks that implied.
British experts believed this could be achieved by preventing the use of the ramps and placing the missiles elsewhere.
A credible inspection regime was also, incidentally, a way of making progress on the test ban issue.
The Thor offer was thus a backup; its minor role in ‘On the Brink’ is accordingly appropriate.
Like Kennedy, Macmillan responded to the offers Khrushchev made around Cuba in his message of 26 October concerning dismantling in return for Cuban inviolability and ignored the Turkey element.
In his subsequent comments, he makes it clear that he did not regard the Turkey missiles as particularly important – except for the Turks.
He and Home wanted to keep the Turkey issue out of play and resolve matters through the United Nations, and hence the instructions to Dean.
As Kennedy said in ExComm on the morning of 26 October, the missiles could only be removed by negotiation, trade or invasion.
The British line was that they could be negotiated away through a combination of assuring the territorial inviolability of Cuba and inspection to render the missiles inoperable.
It is clear that when Adlai Stevenson raised these points for the first time in ExComm a few moments later, he had already been talking to Dean about them.
There was some initial scepticism, particularly from John McCone, the Central Intelligence Agency director.
However, the idea of a mission – using British, French and other European inspectors – gained traction.
This was the message that Macmillan in ‘On the Brink’ saw as solving the crisis.
He probably also believed this, both at the time and when this chapter was written.
The absence of a diary entry for that date is probably a factor, given how important the diaries proved as a mainstay of his text, particularly in Macmillan’s later volumes of memoirs.
Nevertheless, it seems remarkable that Dean is only mentioned once in the whole of At the End of the Day, as having played a useful supporting role to Stevenson.
Given Macmillan’s habitual antipathy to the latter, this was an unusual,135 and probably unwarranted, act of generosity to Stevenson while equally ungenerous to Dean.
Incidentally, this focus and the Cabinet Office stipulation not to offend foreign governments also means that the very considerable efforts expended by the British on inter-Allied and inter-Commonwealth relations during the crisis to maintain solidarity with the Americans are also largely overlooked in his account.
There is, however, another reason for the occlusion of the UN dimension.
Macmillan’s line on the United Nations developed out of his communications with Kennedy.
He probably assumed that they were thinking along similar lines, as indeed they were, though with subtle nuances in terms of tone and timing.
He does not go into much more detail in ‘On the Brink’ on a second of the three ways Kennedy instanced in ExComm of getting the missiles out of Cuba, that of invasion.
Instead, he briefly sketches over the tentative approaches the British had received from the Russian embassy in London alternatively to propose a Summit, both because they were largely irrelevant but also because of the embarrassing linkage to the (unnamed here) Yevgeny Ivanov, who was also to feature subsequently among the lurid details surrounding the 1963 Profumo scandal.
The plan for invasion, scheduled for 29 October, is only mentioned later as Macmillan’s explanation for why the Russians caved in rather than pursuing the trade with Turkey that they had demanded.
Parenthetically, it might be noted that this suggests that Macmillan, unaware of the President’s dovish response to the U2 shooting on 27 October, remained convinced that Kennedy intended to go through with the invasion of Cuba and that the threat of this bellicosity was significant in resolving the crisis.
This third option, the trade, was not to be placed in the public domain until 1978 and only fully declassified in 1991,137 long after Macmillan’s death in 1986.
In his comments, in ExComm, Kennedy implied that these options were alternative strategies.
But the British did not know that Bobby Kennedy had indicated to Anatoly Dobrynin, the Russian ambassador to Washington, that the Jupiters could quietly be withdrawn from Turkey within four to five months should a satisfactory arrangement on Cuba be reached.
In part, this was because they discounted such a possibility as being outside the Western hemisphere.
But it was also because the Americans deliberately misled them, their Allies and indeed their own ambassadors on this point.
His attempt to rationalise this, suggesting it was the looming threat of American military action that prompted Khrushchev’s move,139 was nevertheless astute.
Deliberate American dissimulation both distracted from the Turkey offer and ramped up as far as their allies were concerned the risk of warfare.
In order not to be seen to be letting down their allies, they instead misled them.
The worse example of lack of consultation from the Americans was thus not one Macmillan could try to downplay in ‘On the Brink’ because he did not know about it.
Ironically, however, neither did those complaining at the time about lack of consultation.
When this story did eventually come out, Macmillan’s account had at least scotched the idea of lack of information, even if it was now apparent that it was not always complete.
Macmillan’s government was seen as pursuing a Thor trade that would never shape Washington’s thinking, because the Americans were already moving to the Turkey swop instead.
This is despite the fact that the same sentence went on to acknowledge that ‘not to do anything (except to talk to the President and keep Europe and the Commonwealth calm and firm) was prob the right answer’.140 Indeed, the British did not do anything that they considered out of keeping with the American line.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that the effect of the Turkey swop revelation was to further downgrade the significance of this UN element of the solution of the crisis.
This is not to say that it was central to the actual decision of Khrushchev to withdraw.
The threat of invasion and the Turkey deal, in that order, seem to have been the drivers there.
So, while it did not play the primary importance in the immobilisation of the missiles that the British had envisaged, it was certainly not insignificant.
Before publication, The Spectator referred to At the End of the Day as the most eagerly awaited book in the series.
This, though, was because it expected revelations not about October 1962 but about the end of Macmillan’s premiership in October 1963.
Cuba was not as central to the reception of the book as the pre-publicity had assumed.
At a time, when respectable fiction sales were around 5000 copies, the figure reported of 20,326 non-US sales by the end of 1979 was certainly good.
However, it was still way behind the sales figures for the first two volumes of the autobiography.
Furthermore, ‘On the Brink’ does not seem to have helped sales in the United States.
Just over two years after publication, Harper and Row wrote that sales had been very slow and ‘we must let the book go out of print’.143 At least one American reviewer seems to have spotted the Churchillian approach, writing of a work ‘laid out on the grand scale of a Gibbon or a Macaulay, though lacking their stylistic eloquence and organ tone’.144 Like Churchill’s works, it arrived freighted with passages from contemporary documents.
As has been observed, in Churchill’s volumes, these gave a sometimes spurious authenticity to his accounts.
In Macmillan’s works, such passages present his view of the Cuban missile crisis largely in terms of his relationship to Kennedy.
Public responses, such as the demonstrations outside the American embassy organised by the anti-nuclear Committee of 100,146 are conspicuously absent in Macmillan’s account.
Instead, not least because of Macmillan’s focus on his relations to Kennedy, his portrayal of the Cuban missile crisis conceals as much as it reveals about the British experience of that event.
Acknowledgement I am grateful to Len Scott, Willie Thompson and Mark J White for their comments on an earlier draft of this article.
I am grateful to Alysoun Saunders and Helen Melody for access to these archives.
Uncatalogued folder ‘Past Masters 1’, speech to sales representatives, 18 March 1966.
Uncatalogued folder ‘Harold Macmillan general’, Macmillan to Lord Carrington, 6 August 1980.
He noted in his diary for this date, ‘Ever since the end of the Cuba crisis I have felt very ill’, a malady that a bit of shooting over the weekend appeared to have cured.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, Richard Garnett to Macmillan, 31 July 1973.
Political, Military and Intelligence Aspects (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1999), 21.
A Case Study of the Leyland Motor Company Contracts with Cuba’ in Alastair Hennessy and George Lambie The Fractured Blockade: West European-Cuban Relations during the Revolution , 166.
MS Estabrook: ‘Background Dinner with Prime Minister Macmillan’, 21 February 1962.
This interpretation has been borne out by subsequent evidence from Soviet witnesses such as Alexander Alexeyev, the then Soviet ambassador to Cuba.
It is possible Macmillan conflated that with the previous one which had run into the early hours of that morning.
Nasuh Uslu, The Turkish–American Relationship between 1947 and 2003 , 159.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 1’, Macmillan to Maclean, 20 June 1972.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, Garnett to Macmillan, 29 August 1972.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, Trend to Macmillan, 2 March 1973.
M&Co: Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, Martin Charteris to Macmillan, 20 March 1973.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, unnamed to Macmillan, 7 March 1973.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 2’, suggested amendment to 220.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘Harold Macmillan General’, David Ballheimer to Maclean, 22 November 1979; note to Macmillan, 26 February 1980.
Winds of Change sold 40,453, Blast of War 33,052, Tides of Fortune 18,676, Riding the Storm 16,310 and Pointing the Way 11,981.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘Past Masters 1’, Doris Karfinkel to Garnett, 27 April 1976.
Uncatalogued folder, ‘At the End of the Day 1’, unattributed review enclosed with Cass Canfield to Maclean, 14 November 1974.
From 1989 to 1999, he ran the Institute of Contemporary British History and in 1999–2000, he was Fulbright-Robertson visiting professor of British history at Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri.
His research interests span from setting up the sport and leisure history seminar at the Institute of Historical Research, through founding the journal National Identities, to his recent project on political culture and conflict in Iraqi Kurdistan.
Identities, Cultures and Perspectives 1900–39 and ‘Democracy, Cosmopolitanism and National Identities in a Globalising World’ in a special retrospective issue of National Identities 13, 2011.
He is also the editor of Harold Macmillan’s diaries, published in two volumes in 2003 and 2011.
