Cold War Nuclear Missiles in Miami 1962-1979 Charles D Carter In November 1960 John F Kennedy was elected President ol the United States.
The most historically significant of these occurred in 1962 when Moscow surreptitiously implemented a clandestine plan to locate nuclear-capable surface-to-surface missiles in Cuba.
In response, the United States blockaded the island of Cuba by surrounding it with naval ships, creating an umbrella of Air Force interceptors and bombers, and implanting surface-to-air and surface-to-surface missiles in South Florida, thereby creating an air defense network for the southern hemi­ sphere.
This plan brought the world to the brink of thermonuclear war and the potential for mutually assured destruction of humankind.
The denial of information on the deployment of the missiles and deceiving United States policymakers about the Soviet Union's intent was the foundation of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's audacious Cuban venture.Nikita Khrushchev decided to plant offensive missiles in Cuba in the spring of 1962.
During that summer, a close circle of collaborators and contacts expanded to include Russian and Cuban military leaders, while secrecv and need-to-know prevailed.
The most senior Russian offi­ cers brought into the plan were at least told that Cuba was involved in the operation, but only a few were informed of the exact nature of the mission.
The top civilian and military officials conceptualizing the operation did not see eve-to-eve about the likelihood of pulling oft a successful deception.
Russian experts believed that the deployment could be made expeditiously and secretly, without the United States discovering the missiles.They were confident that the missiles could be hidden, claiming that they could be placed so as to blend in with the palm trees.
Secrecv surrounded the first Soviet delegation that went to propose the plan to Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders.
The group included several missile construction specialists and other militarv experts, whose job it was to determine whether the missiles could be deploved in secrecy.
Once it was explained to Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro that the supposedly ""Chief Engineer"" in the group was a militarv commander and that they needed to meet with Fidel Castro immediately, thev were shown into the leader's office.
In June and July, the USSR began to charter W estern ships ro carry eneral cargo from the Soviet Lhion to Cuba, reserving its own freighters for carrying military cargo.
A Cuban delegation led by Raul Castro trav eled to Moscow 2 July to discuss Soviet military shipments, including nuclear missiles.
Khrushchev Cold War Nuclear Missiles 7 met with the Raul Castro on 3 July.
Raul Castro initialed a draft treaty with the Soviet Defense Minister that governed the deployment of Soviet forces to Cuba.
This pact was not to be publicly revealed until a visit that Khrushchev planned to make to Cuba in November.
The plan was approved by Khrushchev on July 7, 1962.12 The Russians began to dispatch officers and specialists covertly to Cuba by air.
On 10 July, the first Russian general arrived in Cuba to com­ mand the Soviet contingent.
On 17 July, Havana announced that Cuba and the USSR had signed an agreement establishing a regular MoscowHavana civil air route.
United States intelligence analysis at the time speculated that the new Tu-114 flights were bringing Soviet military officers and sensitive electronic and signal-monitoring equipment to Cuba.
The then Minister for Industry, Ernesto “Che” Guevara, and the head of the Cuban militia led another delegation to Moscow from 27 August to 2 September.
The purpose was to introduce Fidel Castro’s revi­ sions into the draft treaty.
The Cubans proposed that the deployment be made public in order to head off any American overreaction; Khrushchev, however, successfully argued for continued secrecy.
The first SS-4 missiles arrived in Mariel, a Cuban port city, on board the Omsk on 8 September.
The Indigirka brought the initial shipment of nuclear warheads on 4 October.
Allied bombers on Germany throughout World War II.1' The United States received reports from friendly nations, newspaper correspondents, and other sources indicating that hundreds of Russian troops in fatigues had been seen in Havana and in seemingly endless con­ voys along Cuba’s main highways.
The information was funneled through counterrevolutionary organizations and their press in the United States, especially in Miami.
The CLA discounted the information, because it did not consider the groups and people peddling it to be cred­ ible.
This strategy was highly effective, according to a former Cuban intelligence officer.1 Reports flooded in from Cubans, tourists, foreign diplomats in Cuba, and newspaper officials reporting in a private capacity.
At the CIA focal point at Opa-locka, Florida, intelligence officers screened countless 8 TEQUESTA reports and debriefed Cubans who had fled the island.-0 Soviet spokes­ men kept up a steady stream of denials and disinformation in September.
On 4 September, Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin sought out Robert Kennedy and stated that he had received instructions from Khrushchev to assure the President that there would be no surface-to-surface missiles or offensive weapons placed in Cuba.
Dobrynin also added that the Attorney General could assure his brother that the Soviet military buildup was not of any significance.
On 6 September, Theodore Sorenson, special counsel to President Kennedy, met with Dobrynin, who reiterated his assurances that Soviet military assistance to Cuba was strictly defensive in nature and did not represent a threat to American security.
The following day, Dobrynin assured the United States Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, that the USSR was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba.
On 11 September, TASS announced that the USSR neither needed nor intended to introduce offensive nuclear weapons into Cuba.
On 13 October, a high State Department official, Chester Bowles, questioned Dobrynin on whether Moscow intended to put offensive weapons in Cuba; the Ambassador denied any such intention.
The fol­ lowing day a U-2 aircraft photographed the area of San Cristobal, where the first missile unit was being deployed.
On 22 October, President Kennedy revealed the missile buildup to the world.
The clandestine operation by Russia to place medium-range and intermediate range ICBMs in Cuba allowed them to target almost the entire continental United States.
The offensive military equipment was accompanied by Russian military troops and commanders with the authority-to launch the missiles toward the United States.
The President and the Executive Committee were seeing explicit details of the Soviet nuclear offensive buildup.
Theywere following the advances of the MRBMs and IRBMs toward operational status with each days low-level recon photos.
The missions, as the President knew, were dangerous and might escalate the crisis beyond the control of either side.
However, Arms' units in the United States would have had trouble fielding mechanized and logistical assets, while the United States Naw could not supply sufficient amphibious shipping to transport even a modest armored contingent from the Army.
Initial strikes would eliminate SAM sites and associated conventional AA defenses.
These strikes would be followed by massive attacks on Cuban hostile aircraft and other offensive weapons including, after their pres­ ence was discovered and until thev were withdrawn, MRBMs and IRBMs.
Subsequent attacks would target troop concentrations, artillerv, and armor.-'’ On October 15. the 82n<^ and 101st Airborne D ivisions were alert­ ed for immediate movement to southern Florida in order to counter the manned bomber threat.
In addition, the 1st Armored Division from Fort Hood, Texas, augmented by the 2/69ri Armor from Fort Benning.
Georgia, deployed to Fort Stewart, Georgia, in preparation for move­ ment by ship for the invasion ot Cuba.
The entire operation took just 18 davs.-6 For six weeks the 1st Armored Division conducted live-fire training and amphibious exercises on the coasts of Georgia and Florida from its temporary home at Fort Stewart.
The Division consisted of 19.000 troops.,000 tanks, and an arsenal ot Hottest John surface-to-surface nuclear-capable missiles.
Throughout the Crisis the 1st Armored Division was in a position to move out for an invasion of Cuba within a matter of hours.
Fortunately, before an invasion or a nuclear exchange could occur, the Soviet Union withdrew their missiles from Cuba and ended the crisis.
One Automatic W eapons AD Battalion was sent to protect the stag10 TEQUESTA in„ bases while twelve support units, ranging in size from detachment to battalion, also deployed to Florida to provide logistical support.
Battery B, 1st Automatic Weapons Battalion, 59th Artillery arrived in Florida on October 25, 1962.
These weapons were of little threat to the supersonic Soviet aircraft then in Cuba, and they provided psychological support more than defense.
The next day Foreign Minister Gromyko met with President Kennedy for two hours.
Gromvko assured him that the Soviet aid to Cuba “pursued sole­ ly the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba and to the development of its peaceful economy.
The following day, Gromvko assured Kennedy that Soviet Cuban aid was only for the “defensive capabilities of Cuba.
On October 22, congressional leaders were shown the photographic evidence of the Soviet missile Cuban installations.
At TOOm., President Kennedy addressed the nation on the missile crisis in Cuba.
In his address, he assured the citizens of America of the following course of action:--’0 1.
A strict quarantine on all offensive militarv equipment under ship­ ment to Cuba was being initiated.
The United States would continue and increase surveillance of Cuba and its military buildup, and the Armed Forces would prepare for any even­ tualities.
The United States would consider anv nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack bv the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union.
The United States would reinforce the United States base at Guantanamo, and addi­ tional military units would be on a standby alert basis.
The President called for an immediate meeting of the Organization of American States, to consider this threat to hemispheric securin’ and to invoke articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty’ in support of all nec­ essary action.
The President requested an emergency meeting of the Security Council of the United Nations to call for the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons in Cuba before the quaran­ tine would be lifted.
The United States would call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and elimi­ nate this clandestine, reckless, and provocative threat to world peace and to establish stable relations benveen the nvo superpower nations.
Military Blockade of Cuba Shortly after dawn on 23 October, Navy pilots of Light Photographic Squadron 62 and Air Force pilots of the 363rc* Tactical Reconnaissance Wing took off on the first low-level photo missions over Cuba.
It stated that as of 2:00m., 24 October, forces under his command had instructions to intercept any vessel or craft proceeding toward Cuba and to interdict the delivery' of surface-to-surface missiles; bombers; bombs; air-to-surface rockets and guided missiles; warheads; mechanical and electrical equip­ ment for such weapons; and any other materials subsequentlv designated bv the Secretary of Defense.
B-52 bombers, armed with nuclear weapons, flew continuously, ready to head tor pre-assigned targets in the Soviet Union.
A thousand Air Force bombers and fighters were transferred to Homestead and MacDill Air Force Bases, and hundreds of Navy and Marine Corps planes were sent to Boca Chica Naval Air Station at Key West or operated off of eight aircraft carriers operating in rhe area.
In addition to the United States naval quarantine and the preparation for nuclear war with the Soviets, Kennedy planned an amphibious invasion of Cuba by the 1st Armored Division.
Ground units slated for the invasion included the First and Second Infantry Divisions, the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions, and 12,000 Marines, already afloat in the Caribbean.
With this speed and altitude, the Soviets and Cubans had no warning, only the sonic roar as the reconnaissance planes flew by on flight profiles that brought them in low over the Gulf of Mexico with a pop-up over the target.
At the successful conclusion of each mission, the \T-62 pilots would paint another dead chicken on the fuselages of their Crusaders to symbolize “Castro’s chickens coming home to roost.
Although there were Air Force and Navy units capable of defending South Florida against an enemy bomber, it quickly became apparent to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and military strategists that the United States had failed to provide a ground-based air defense to adequately defend an attack front a fleet of Russian bombers front the southern hemisphere.
To do so would require an air defense system of surface-to-air missiles.
The Army's Nike Hercules surface-to-air and surface-to-surface mis­ sile air defense system with an awesome strategic nuclear deterrent capa­ bility was currently defending many other cities, industrial complexes and military installations.
The Nike Hercules also had both convention­ al and nuclear capability, which was initially deployed to South Florida.
A Nike Hercules with a conventional warhead could intercept and elim­ inate a single enemv aircraft whereas with a nuclear warhead, it could wipe out an entire fleet of enemv aircraft.
An additional benefit of the nuclear warhead was that it neutralized anv nuclear weapons carried by enemy aircraft that might continue forward after the explosion.
Deployment of Surface-to-Air Missiles to South Florida The Defense Department had alerted the Army 6^ Group at Fort Bliss on 20 October to prepare for movement to Florida.
At this same time, the 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery , was preparing for a mission such as this.
The 2/52 was under the command and control of the 6C^ Air Defense Artillery Group located at Fort Bliss.
It was comprised of a headquarters battery and four Nike Hercules field batteries.
Hercules missiles at the D Battery' missile site, near Krome Avenue and Tamiami Trail, 20 February' 1963.
Soldiers working on radar equipment at one of southeast Florida’s missile sites, 1963 August 3.
On Thursday, 25 October, orders were issued for the HHB, Batteries A, C, D, 10th Signal Unit, and 200thOrdinance Detachment to depart for Florida by rail.M Their primary mission was the first line of defense against the threat of Russian bombers from the southern hemisphere.
The 2/52 was scheduled to deploy by troop train on Friday October 26th but were delayed in deployment from Fort Bliss due to a bridge being washed out after heavy rains some distance east of El Paso.
Temporary repairs were made, and the train with crept across the washout area and then headed east on Sunday 28 October.Travelling by way of New Orleans, the battalion arrived in Homestead, south of Miami, on 31 October.
The Florida East Coast Railway delivered the troops to deep south Dade.
The rail's right-of-way paralleled United States Route One for a large por­ tion of the journey.
Troops moved through a counts’ whose residents were buss’ stocking up on food items amid wide-ranging discussions over the severity of the crisis, and concern for the future.
Especially concerned was the city and county’s large Cuban exile population, who gathered in today's Little Havana and elsewhere, engaging in passionate discussions of the crisis, and pouring into churches to pray for a resolution of this threat to the well-being of the world, as well as for the end of the Castro dictatorship.
Once the 2/52 arrived at Homestead AFB, the men deployed to the various locations where the missiles and radars would be set up.
State police pulled over some of the trucks on the way to South Florida with warnings of citations for weight, lights, and other code violations.
This action was to respond in kind to the Soviet resumption of testing after the tacit 1958-1961 test moratorium.
Most of these shots were conducted with free-fall bombs dropped from B-52 bomber aircraft.
Twenty of these shots were to test new weapons designs; six to test weapons effects; and several shots to confirm the reliability of existing weapons.
The Thor missile was also used to lift warheads into near-space to conduct high altitude nuclear explosion tests; these shots were collectively called Operation Fishbowl.
Conventional Warheads Although many Nike Hercules sites were equipped with nuclear war­ heads, the South Florida units arrived with conventional warheads.1 This was due to regulations that required a missile battery to become cer­ tified before being armed with nuclear weapons.
This included site secu­ rity and an “inner security area” within a security area known as “exclu­ sion area” with military police and dogs.
Since the arrival of the Nike Hercules units had to set up very quickly in tents and the only securitv was rolls of concertina barbed wire and roving armed soldiers, it would take time for nuclear certification.
Additional missile units in the Miami, Homestead, and Key West were equipped with HAWK missiles for the low-flying and slower aircraft that could slip in under the normal field of vision for the radar system of the Nike Hercules missiles.
The 8^ Battalion of the 15^ Artillery' arrived from Fort Lewis, Washington, and set up Hawk missiles at Patrick, MacDill, and Homestead Air Force Bases and and the 6^ of the 65 in Key West.
Living Conditions41 The soldiers of the 2nc^ of the 52n<^ arrived mid-morning October 31 via rail, with minimal ground equipment.
They then set up working air defenses under the most primitive conditions.
Although military planners typically located air defense sites in major cities and their sub16 TEQUESTA urbs. in South Florida the first duty stations were located in the Everglades or in the midst of south Dade County bean and tomato fields, o At these primitive South Florida field locations, constantly running tac­ tical generators provided electricity.
Because showers were not immediately available at the temporary sites, soldiers bathed in nearby canals or travelled to Homestead AFB only once a week on an Army bus.
Some shaved in their steel helmets rather than making the trip to Homestead AFB or a Carol City school where a local principal offered the locker room showers to the soldiers of C Battery after normal school hours.The Army tried to improve the conditions lor the troops at the tem­ porary sites as quickly as possible by installing wooden floors lor the tents and wood walkways to permit dry travel between battery facilities.
Tents were constructed with sinks and showers in order to provide proper hygiene and boost morale; however, “little could be done to ameliorate the heat, humidity, and effects of the insects.
Meals were cooked on open gas ranges, and the soldiers ate from mess kits, and shaved from their steel helmets using cold water trucked in from a fire hvdrant.
Missile Site Locations The 13'^ Group and 2/52 Headquarters and the headquarters bat­ teries based their operations at Princeton in the former B & L Farms tomato packing house.
The exact location was SW 244th Street and SW 137th Avenue on the west side of United States Highway 1.
Battery A was deployed to an area near the main entrance to Everglades National Park on the west side of SR 9336.
The launching area was along Canal C-l 1 1 and the administration and 1FC was approximately one mile north on the same side of the highway.
He is a member of the 13th Artillery Group, trained in using HAWK and Nike-Hercules rockets to shoot down enemy jet fighters.
Their base is a rudimentary camp set up in former bean and tomato fields.
The soldiers' biggest gripe, after boredom, is the South Florida mosquitoes."" — Caption in the Miami News, 1963 August 18.
Battery C deployed to Carol City, with the launch area along the Snake Creek Canal between NW 57thAvenue and NW 47thAvenue.
The administration and IFC areas were located approxi­ mately one mile east near what is now NW 195thDrive and NW 52nd Avenue.
Battery D located to a site between Perrine and Kendall west of US Highway 1.
Cold War Nuclear Minilei 19 Tactical considerations and the requirements of each particular weapons system determined the site locations.
I hese considerations often meant locating the sites in areas prone to flooding.
Commanders did not always listen to the warnings of local residents about the hazards associ­ ated with the temporary sites.
When A Battery set up operations near the entrance to Everglades National Park, local farmers told the commander that a better location should be found because any rain would flood the area.
Ignoring the local knowledge, the commander deployed his troops anyway.
Soldiers had to truck in numerous loads of fill dirt just to stay above water.
The United States Army Corps ot Engineers con­ structed permanent structures to house and facilitate the men, the equip­ ment and the overall operation of a nuclear missile site.
In the summer of 1965, the batteries relocated to newlv constructed, permanent sites.
Site Configuration Nike sites around the continental United States and in the NATO countries were varied in their configuration based on several factors.
These factors included variables such as having been converted from an Nike Ajax to a Nike Hercules site, environment, and topogra­ phy.
Some launcher areas were below ground and raised the missiles on elevators, some missiles were in air-supported tents with a -2 foot-long zipper, and others were in above-ground section barns.
The missiles in South Florida were all in section barns since the sites were all within less than six feet above sea level and surrounded bv water.
The radar section has to be a certain distance from the missiles so the Missile Tracking Radar could move mechanically fast enough to keep up with the launched missile to send location signals and receive burst commands.
Soldiers walk down “main street"" of their missile base camp, 1963 Aug 3.
The Nike reaches Mach 3. (approximately 2700 mph); as a consequence of this enormous speed, it actually travels high­ er than its intended target and dives back down for the interception and detonation.
B Batterv was the onlv Nike Hercules site to have the High Power Acquisition Radar with added features and capabilities.
The remaining batteries continued to use the Alternate Battery Acquisition Radar they had used during the initial deployment.
Administration Area The administration area consisted of the living quarters as well as eat­ ing, recreation, and day-to-day administration and operations.
Outside of the administration building, but considered part of the administration area, were a main gate securin’ guard shed, water pump and pump house, sewage pump, athletic courts, paint, oil, and liquids shed, sewage treatment planr and drainfield, and a motor pool.
Facilities and equipment included main gate sentry, two perimeter security stands, exclusion area security building, water supply well, pump, and storage tanks, generator sheds, paint, oil, and liquid shed, launch control trailer , ready building, sewage pump station, sewage treatment facility and sewage drainfield, military police kennels, missile assembly and warhead building, three missile section barns, surrounded by a limestone berm containing a sec­ tion control room, generator shed, and a fuse detonator magazine.
Nuclear Certification Now that the missile sites had the facilities and staff to become cer­ tified for nuclear warheads, the process began.
In late 1965, the first nuclear warheads were installed on the Nike Hercules missiles in South Florida.
Florida Too Important to Remove Air Defense Military strategists realized that Russia had not increased the size of its fleet of bombers as originally assumed but rather, increased the size of its ICBM fleet capable of delivering nuclear warheads anywhere in the United States.
The Nike Hercules was useful against airplanes of a certain speed and altitude.
The military needed to shift the costs from the Nike Hercules program to the anti-ICBM program.
Research by the United States military on the Nike Zeus missile system had developed to the point where small improvements would allow it to be used as the basis of a ""real” ABM system.
Work started on a short-range, high-speed counterpart known as the Sprint to provide defense for the ABM sites themselves.
Bv the mid-1960s, both systems showed enough promise to start development of base selection for a limited ABM system dubbed Sentinel.
At about the same time, the USSR reached strategic parity with the United States in terms of ICBM forces.
A nuclear war would no longer be a favor­ able exchange for the United States, as both countries would be devas­ tated.
This led in the West to the concept of mutually assured destruction in which any changes to the strategic balance had to be careful­ ly weighed.
ABMs now seemed far too risky—it was better to have no defense than one that might trigger a war.
In 1972, the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treat}. a treatybenveen the United States and the Soviet Union, limited both countries in the use of anti-ballistic missile systems used in defending areas against missile-delivered nuclear weapons.
It reduced the number of sites to one per party, largely because neither country had developed a second site.
The sites were Moscow for the USSR and Grand Forks Air Force Base, North Dakota, since its Safeguard facility was already under construction for the U.S.4 As a direct result, in 1974, the Arms' Air Defense Command and formerly the Arms' Antiaircraft Artillery Command . svhich had been established in 1950. was disbanded.
All 24 TEQUESTA remaining Nike Hercules sites were deactivated except the batteries in Alaska and Florida, these being retained due to their proximity to Communist countries.
When deterrence became a part of the United States’ national strat­ egy, ARADCOM was key and essential to that effort.
Nuclear Deactivation In the spring of 1975, the Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered the Army to remove the W-31 nuclear warheads and replace them with conventional high explosive T-45 fragmentation warheads.
This operation, named in “Operation Golden Shoes,” involved the support of the Army 295th Military' Police Company , Army Chinook CH-47 and Huey helicopters, and Air Force C-141 heavy-lit cargo aircraft.
By late summer, all the W-31s in South Florida had been replaced with T-45s.
By June, all Alaska sites had deactivated, and the batteries of the 2nd Missile Battalion in Florida became the last remaining Nike Hercules missile units defending America within the continental United States.
Standing Down In September 1979, the 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery , including its headquarters and four firing bat­ teries, stood down from its defense mission within the continental United States, moved to Fort Bliss, and became a training battalion in support of NATO countries who were still using Nike Hercules as their national air defense system.
Cold War Nuclear Missiles Deterrence to War On 23 July, 1963. the men in the Nike Hercules units of the 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery were awarded the Armv Meritorious Unit Commendation.
The award was for exceptionally meritorious achievement in the performance of outstanding services in the defense of their country during the period 20 October 1962 to 1 June 1963 while conducting active aerospace defense of the continental United States.
Under almost primitive field conditions the Army missile units and their supporting detachments were deployed to complete a defensive ring around southern Florida against the threat posed to the United States during the Cuban crisis.
The supersonic ring of weaponry had provided an air defense nerwork with multiple missile systems integrated into a single svstem for the first time.
The men were aware the Russians would need to destroy this svstem to achieve reaching targets farther north.
Training NATO Countries In September 1979, the 2nd of the 5nd stood down from its CONUS defense mission, moved to Fort Bliss, and became a training battalion, in support of NATO countries who were still using Nike Hercules as their national air defense svstem.
Four years later on March 15, 1983, the 2nd Missile Battalion 52nd ADA was deactivated in a cere­ mony at Fort Bliss, Texas.
This was the last time a Nike Hercules unit existed in the Continental United States.
The Army continued to use Nike-Hercules as a front-line air defense weapon in Europe until the Patriot missile batteries were deployed.
Other NATO units from West Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Greece, continued to use the Nike-Hercules for high-altitude air defense until the late 1980s.
With the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, the units were deactivated.
Different Mission Different Weapons On April 16, 1988, The 2nd Missile Battalion of the 52nd ADA Regiment was reactivated at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, as a HAWK unit.
In 1990, The 2nd Missile Battalion was reactivated as a Patriot Missile Battalion and deployed to Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Kuwait as a unit of the of the XVIII Airborne Corps at Fort Bragg.
The 2nd of the 52nd served in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm.
It was awarded the Valorous Unit Award and an embroidered streamer for the defense of Saudi Arabia and liberation of Kuwait.
On 15 August 1996, under the control of the 108th Brigade (now located at Fort Polk, Louisiana, as a Patriot and Avenger brigade), the 2/52 ADA moved to Fort Bliss.
Still under the control of the Airborne Corps at Fort Bragg, the 2nd of the 52nd added an airborne tab above its patch.
The 2nd of the 52nd was the brigade's only unit to serve on jump status.
This platoon had the distinction of being the first ADA unit to be deploved in the opening days of the Gulf War.
In 2010, South Korea and Italy removed the last of the Nike Hercules as their national air defense weaponry.
Everglades National Park In 1980, the facilitv was transferred to the National Park Service and since then has been used as the Daniel Beard Research Center, where, among other science projects, scientists study and assist in the eradication of non-indigenous species in Florida.
In 2007, A Battery received National Register of Historic Places sta­ tus due to its significance in the history of the United States and its impact on the culture of South Florida.
It has been designated as a National Historic District with twenty-two remaining structures from the Nike missile site.
Since 2009, the staff of Everglades National Park has conducted tours of the partiallv-restored Nike site from December through April.
A ceremo­ ny to commemorate the men who served in South Florida from 1962 through 1979 was conducted by the Everglades National Park on Sunday, October 21, 2012.
Key Largo In 1980, the year after B Batter)closed as a Nike missile site, the B Batter)administrative building was used to house Cubans who came to Miami as part of the Mariel Boatlift.
Since then, the administrative and IFC areas have been transferred to the Navy and finally to the Florida State Parks.
The former launch area was transferred to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in 1980 and became the Crocodile Lake National Wildlife Refuge.
Hialeah/Miramar The administration of an IFC area was transferred to the United States Navy in 1 980, who converted it into a United States Naw and Marine Reserve Training e> Center.
The launch area was completely demolished and is the future site ol the Florida National Cuard Snake Creek Training Center.
Krome Avenue and Tamiami Trail In 1980, the administration and IFC area was utilized to house Cuban refugees during the Mariel Boatlift.
The launch area was used as a detention center for those who were considered as high risk and need­ ed to be detained.
It remained as a federal detention center for Cuban, Haitian, and other non-Americans who were deemed mentally incapable, criminals or deportees.
So did State Department official George Kennan, then stationed in Moscow, who in 1946 warned of Soviet inflexibility.
The United States, wrote Kennan, would have to use “vigilant containment"" to deter the USSR's inherent expansionist tendencies.
Cold War Nuclear Missiles 29 7 Garthoff, 15; also, Gribkov and Smith, 14.
This source draws exten­ sively on input from key Soviet/Russian and American officials who had a hand in the crisis.
There is conflicting source information on the number of warheads specifically for the SS-4 missiles.
This issue cannot be resolved based on current evidence, but 36 appears to be a likely figure as that tracks with Soviet doctrinal requirements for re-fire missiles.
This is a special issue on intelligence and the missile crisis, edited bv James G Blight and David A Welch.
It is a unique collection of articles on the roles played bv different intelligence services.
Although uncertain about the status of the weapons in Cuba at the time ot discovery, we now know that only some ot the nuclear-capable delivery systems were readv tor action in late October.
Ot the 36 SS-4s deploved, tor example, only about half were readv to be fueled—an 18-hour process— and not one had been programmed tor flight.
After the end of the crisis in late October, all United States Army forces deployed to Florida and Georgia were ordered to return to their home stations, except the three AD battalions and their support units.
Other units deployed to Florida were the 6rh Missile Battalion , 65th Artillery', from Fort George G Meade, Maryland; the 8th Missile Battalion , 15rh Artillery, from Fort Lewis, Washington; and Battery B , 1st Gun Battalion, 59^ Artillery, from Fort Bliss.
Nikita Khrushchev announced the end of a three-year moratorium on nuclear testing on 30 August 1961, and Soviet tests recommenced on 1 September, initiating a series of tests that included the detonation of Tsar Bomba.
It was the largest nuclear weapons testing program ever conducted by the United States, and the last Cold War Nuclear Missiles 31 atmospheric test series conducted by the U.S., as the Limited Test Ban Treat)’ was signed in Moscow the following year.
