The famous proposal for endsuperpower intelligence services sponsored THE SCALI-FEKLISOV CHANNEL ing the crisis, which Robert Kennedy later by Crown Publishers, Inc.
IN THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS recalled as having made his brother “for the To understand better what can be learned first time hopeful that our efforts might posfrom these documents, it is helpful to revisit by Alexander Fursenko sibly be successful,” had not come from him, the standard account of the role of the Scaliand Timothy Naftali but rather had come out of the blue from Feklisov channel in the resolution of the Scali.
From the time that former State Departcow, vigorously disputed Feklisov’s acAccording to the traditional version, ment official Roger Hilsman revealed in count.
Scali received a call at his Washington office 1964 that ABC News television corresponFeklisov’s surprising assertion3 and from Feklisov on Friday, October 26.
Scali dent John Scali had served as an intermediScali’s immediate rejection of this revisionhad been meeting off and on with this Soviet ary between the United States and Soviet governist history posed three questions for students Embassy official for over a year.
Until 1989, it was generally asb) Did Feklisov act on his own or did the KGB Resident, or chief of station, in sumed that the Kremlin had used Feklisov, Scali suggest a settlement for his own govWashington.
The lunch was set for 1:30 ground to a halt. the SVR (Foreign Intelligence Service, the m.
But at a conference of scholars and new name for the First Chief Directorate of “When I arrived he was already sitting former officials in Moscow in January 1989, the KGB), resolve some, though not all, of at the table as usual, facing the door.
Introduction by Raymond L Garthoff prise selections from six categories of material.
Still, it is an the crisis broke; fifth are three messages from tions. important step forward.
Havana to Moscow reporting on First Deputy The precrisis reports of Ambassadors The documents were acquired through the Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan’s negotiations Alekseev and Dobrynin help to set the stage, but efforts of the author and of the National Security with Prime Minister Fidel Castro and other Cuban they do not add much to what has been known.
Shortly before presstime, a second group of dent Kennedy on 9 January 1963, in effect closing Cuba in his meeting that same evening with declassified Foreign Ministry documents reached the post-crisis diplomatic negotiations.
A few of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and a message NSA; however, these consisted mostly of previthese have been released earlier, in particular one giving Gromyko’s evaluation of the situation on ously-published Kennedy-Khrushchev correon Mikoyan’s talks with Castro.
But officials of the marked a watershed in the history of relanew detail how North Korean leader Kim Il Department withheld them (in a manner that tions between the Soviet superpower and Sung was also able to press his militant unfortunately has become a recent pattern), one of its closest non-European allies. agenda on an even stronger Soviet leader, allowing only a few to have a peek at them at Thanks to declassified documents from Joseph Stalin, with disastrous consequences, their discretion.
Some were also made tal to American conduct during the Cold cow, published in this issue of the CWIHP available to the makers of television docuWar.
But until very recently, the existence Bulletin, reveal that for Nikita Khrushchev mentaries, or published in Russian.
Now and importance of parallel commitments and his colleagues in the CC CPSU Prethey have become available to scholars, with and influences on Soviet foreign policy were sidium , the Soviet-Cuban “axis” copies available for research at the National often grossly underestimated.
So peripheral Warsaw Pact during the crisis, the events of MISSILE CRISIS FOR WARSAW was the alliance to the Soviet Union’s hanOctober 1962 did have important effects on PACT NUCLEAR OPERATIONS dling of the crisis that it was not until long the alliance, particularly on the nuclear comafter the matter had been resolved that the mand-and-control arrangements that were by Mark Kramer Soviet Prime Minister, Anastas Mikoyan, established in the mid-1960s.
Hungarian archives to show how the Cuban evidence suggests that the Soviet Union That the Warsaw Pact was of only marmissile crisis influenced Warsaw Pact nuclear neither consulted nor even informed its East ginal significance during the Cuban Missile operations.
Moreover, the crisis was far outside dence has emerged from East-Central Euallies about the removal of the missiles. the European theater, and East European rope to permit several tentative conclusions.
The joint alert was formally canthe standoff in the Caribbean was a matter saw Pact nuclear operations, and examine celled on 21 November 1962, the same day for the Soviet Union to handle on its own, the East European states’ unsuccessful efthat the Soviet Union ended its own unilatnot a matter for the Warsaw Pact. forts to alter those arrangements.
Thus Scali described in the United States will not invade Cuba posal as the basis for a resolution of the a 1964 television broadcast how this meetwith its troops and will not support crisis.
Scali said that Feklisov feared any other forces which might intend to Khrushchev offered to accept the implicit that war would begin soon, and was so invade Cuba.
Then the necessity for terms of October 26 and ignored the Turkish concerned that he volunteered a way out of the presence of our military specialissue raised in Khrushchev’s letter of the the stalemate. ists will be obviated. 27th.
But United States guarantee not to invade Cuba—that dismantled under United Nations superviwhen the letter was coupled with what Scali seemed to incorporate much of what John sion. had relayed from Feklisov, the Kennedy adScali and Aleksandr Feklisov had discussed. b) Fidel Castro would promise never to ministration believed it had received an acBoth men were proud of their accomplishaccept offensive weapons of any kind, ever. ceptable offer from the Kremlin.
Rusk inment. c) In return for the above, the United structed Scali to contact Feklisov to make KGB records suggest that neither the States would pledge not to invade Cuba. clear that the United States found a basis for agreetraditional version nor Feklisov’s revision is Feklisov was confident that if United States Amment in his offer. entirely accurate.
Feklisov’s cables to Mosbassador to the United Nations Adlai Sometime between 7:30 and 7:45m. cow from October 26 and October 27 and Stevenson “pursued this line,” Soviet UN on Friday evening, Scali and Feklisov met at evidence of how the KGB handled them ambassador Valerian Zorin “would be inthe Statler Hotel, near the Soviet Embassy.
He was authorized by the highest ausented to Rusk on the afternoon of October delegate to the UN had already made a thority to say that there were “real possibili26. similar proposal in a session of the Security ties in this ” and that “the represenFeklisov’s cables, moreover, paint a Council but that it had been met with sitatives of the USSR and the United States in different picture of his relationship with the lence.
Feklisov listened carefully, then rewhom he could exchange political informatelephone number, to be sure he could be peated the proposal to be sure that he undertion.
In his cable to Moscow on October 26, reached at any time. stood the White House’s offer correctly.
Roger Hilsman, State’s direcconfirmation that Scali spoke for the White year,” he wrote.
This statement, of course, tor of Intelligence and Research, and SecreHouse.
Finally, Feklisov added that it was would not have been necessary had Moscow tary of State Dean Rusk were extremely not enough for there to be inspection of the already considered Scali a channel to the interested in it.
Rusk considered this to be dismantling of Soviet missiles, it would be United States government.
In previous cables Feklisov the first concrete offer from the Soviet leadnecessary for UN observers to observe the had referred to Scali only using a codename. ership for ending the crisis.
The letters alwithdrawal of United States forces from the southern This was the first time he introduced him and ready exchanged by Khrushchev and United States.
In Feklisov’s version, Scali is the one way out of the deepening crisis. as the ExComm was discussing a formal who is fearful of war.
Khrushchev tacked Cuba, “would West Berlin be occufer” from the KGB representative as an had upped the ante.
Feklisov reported that he had replied elaboration of a more general proposal conthe United States dismantle its Jupiter missile bases in defiantly that all heaven and earth might fall tained in a private letter from Khrushchev Turkey before he went ahead with any deal upon NATO if the United States were to attack Cuba. that arrived late in the afternoon of October that would strip Cuba of Soviet missiles.
Feklisov United States government’s strong disapproval of the added that given the size of Soviet convenWe, for our part, will declare that our new terms.
Although Feklisov defended his tional forces on the line dividing East and government’s new position, the KGB ResiWest Germany, the situation would be very C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 61 difficult for the West.
And to make matters whatever reason, forgotten the balance of In following the course taken by this worse, he expected the crisis to unify the his historic conversation with Scali. important telegram, we see that it could not entire Socialist bloc, including China.
PerThe SVR record on the second Scalihave played any role in shaping Khrushchev’s haps for dramatic effect, Feklisov assured Feklisov meeting of October 26 is less conletter of October 26, which proposed a U.S. his American interlocutor that the Cubans, troversial.
The account that Feklisov cabled guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba and especially Castro, were ready to die like to Moscow differs little from what the Amerias a means of resolving the crisis, or even in heroes. can journalist reported to the State Departinfluencing the letter of October 27 that Feklisov’s report to the KGB Center ment.
Feklisov reported that Scali, who had asserted a parallel between United States bases in creates the impression that the direction taken initiated the meeting, laid out a formula that Turkey and the Soviet missile installations by the discussion depressed Scali even furcould be the basis for negotiations between in Cuba. ther.
The only Feklisov’s telegram arrived in Moscow said after hearing what the Soviet response difference between the Feklisov and Scali well after Khrushchev had would be to the use of American military accounts is that whereas Feklisov described sent his letter of October 26 to Kennedy. force against Cuba.
According to Feklisov, this as a new American proposal, Scali reBecause it was not expected that Feklisov Scali fell into such a state of anxiety that he layed to the State Department that Feklisov would act as a channel for resolving the began to muse about possible ways out of the had responded energetically to word of forcrisis, this telegram was not given priority conflict.
Scali is reported to have tailing both of his conversations with Scali. staff of the Chairman, Semichastny.
In retrospect, it seems odd that at a time plicably, the telegram sat in Semichastny’s What is most significant about the verwhen the Kremlin was hungry for any news office for another four hours before the Chairsion that Feklisov cabled to Moscow is that about United States intentions, Feklisov would have man decided to send it to Foreign Minister the KGB resident did not take Scali’s musings waited so long to inform Moscow as to what Andrei Gromyko.
Feklisov was that by the time the Ministry of Foreign this as a proposal, Feklisov told Scali that accustomed to cabling his superiors at all Affairs received a copy of the Feklisov cable, what he was saying sounded a lot like somehours.
And he had approximately five hours Khrushchev had already sent his second, thing already proposed by the Cubans in the between the end of the lunch and his next October 27 letter to Kennedy referring to the Security Council, which had been ignored discussion with Scali to tell KGB Center that Jupiters in Turkey. by United States Ambassador Stevenson.
In his memoirs, The Scali-Feklisov meeting on October Scali responded that he could not recall any Feklisov has explained this gap by saying 27 looms even less significant in Russian American rejection of a similar Cuban prothat he did not expect anything to come of his records.
Again Khrushchev could not have posal, he said he was convinced that such a discussion with Scali.
Indeed, he writes that seen it in time to affect his strategy toward demarche at this time by Castro would meet he did not even bother to mention the meetthe Americans.
Feklisov sent a short report with a positive reaction from United States civilian ing to the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoli after Scali scolded him for Khrushchev’s and military circles.
Scali’s confidence surprised Feklisov, in the midst of giving this report to Dobrynin, This cable did not reach the Chairman of the who began to wonder whether indeed Scali Feklisov received Scali’s request for a secKGB until 4:40m. on October 28. might know something about the White ond meeting.
Not only did Feklisov have to Semichastny’s reaction was to forward the House’s negotiating strategy.
When Feklisov leave the embassy before completing his letter to the Foreign Ministry, where it arinquired as to exactly who might be interbriefing for Dobrynin but he had to put off rived at 7m.
Moscow time, an hour after ested in this kind of proposal, Scali avoided cabling Moscow until returning from the Khrushchev had publicly accepted the giving any names.
As Scali and Feklisov parted, the There was soon to be as much confusion the crisis.
KGB officer concluded that despite having in Moscow over what Feklisov was doing as The KGB materials substantiate claims taken an interesting turn, the meeting itself in Dobrynin’s embassy.
When Feklisov’s Although of less consequence in light of this having discussed a political solution with long cable arrived in Moscow at 2:20m., information, it is nevertheless interesting to Scali at the first October 26 meeting.
In fact, Saturday, October 27 (Moscow time was consider the contradiction between the conFeklisov categorically denies that he or Scali eight hours ahead of EST), the chief of the temporaneous accounts by Feklisov and Scali made any attempts to formulate a way out of First Chief Directorate , the foreign of their meetings on October 26.
The KGB documents suggest that in by Soviet and then Cuban counterparts.
For the Feklisov-Scali tion, National Security Archive. the crisis that, among others, UN Secretary exchange, see Bruce J Allyn, James G Blight, and 15.
It appears that Feklisov first made this assertion to a continued to wait before sending Moscow any word on contradiction between their respective Russian scholar in 1987.
However, the determination of who had been the Counsellor in the Soviet Embassy at until approximately midnight, four hours after Feklisov which man actually proposed this plan is the time of the Missile Crisis, told Raymond Garthoff and Scali parted.
A 1988 when the latter stubbornly refused to do so, he sent it As we now know, President Kennedy article by Garthoff was the first published account of the anyway.
The former Soviet ambassador rejected this decided not to use the Scali-Feklisov chanScali-Feklisov channel to raise doubts as to whether account, saying that Feklisov had not needed his signanel to settle the crisis.
On the night of Feklisov had been authorized by the Kremlin to make ture to send a KGB cable.
The Soviet Story,” Foreign Policy 72 (Fall Scali, Delo 116, T 1., SVR Archives.
Spravka on Delivery of Scali report of 27 October invade Cuba, Kennedy offered a secret unbook will be written by a team.
The Fursenko/Naftali 1962, ibid. dertaking to remove Jupiter missiles from study of the superpowers and Cuba, 1958-1963, will be 19.
U Thant, “Statement in the Security Council,” 24 the first book in the series.
It will be followed by a October 1962, in Andrew W Cordier and Max Turkey.
U Thant, 1961-1964 as a prime example of how governments can of KGB-CIA operations in Berlin by George Bailey, , 237misinterpret each other, especially in the Sergei Kondrashev, and David Murphy; and a history of 240.
Soviet intelligence operations in the United States by grip of a crisis.
In their first public foreign policymaking in the Kennedy years that named accounts, both Scali and Hilsman misremembered the Scali as an intermediary between the United States and Soviet details of the proposal.
They had Khrushchev giving the governments at the climax of the missile crisis.
Just as pledge to keep Cuba free of offensive weapons, not Hilsman’s piece was to appear in print, John Scali Fidel Castro.
For Scali’s confidential description on World Report carried an article about Hilsman’s rev26 October 1962 of what he had just heard from Feklisov, elation in its 17 August 1964 issue.
Hilsman’s excerpt which confirms Abel’s and Salinger’s accounts, see finally appeared in the 25 August 1964 issue of Look.
Khrushchev to Kennedy, 26 October 1962, in Chang C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 63 FOREIGN MINISTRY DOCUMENTS not, however, include the reports on Dobrynin’s to 7 January 1963, by contrast, is completely continued from page 58 delivery to Robert Kennedy on October 29 of a omitted, apart from Kuznetsov’s subsequent fiing.
Gromyko not only had obtained no hint of draft written agreement, and its sharp rejection in nal meeting with the president on 9 January 1963. the American discovery of the missiles, he reanother meeting on October 30.
This negotiation settled the issues of dismantling ported that from all available information, inThe reporting on Mikoyan’s talks in Cuba, and withdrawal of the missiles, bombers, and cluding Soviet intelligence (referred to by the while not complete, does give the main discuswarheads, and verification of the withdrawal of usual circumlocation as information received sions in considerable detail.
Incidentally, apart missiles and bombers by cooperative measures, “through unofficial channels”) and from other from Mikoyan’s efforts to persuade Castro to but was unable to formulate agreed terms for countries , “the acuteagree to the withdrawal of Soviet IL-28 bombers assurances against a United States invasion of Cuba and ness of the anti-Cuban campaign in the United from Cuba and his reassurances on Soviet supeventually left it to rest on the presidential stateStates has somewhat abated,” and that under port on other matters, both Mikoyan and Castro ments.
Notwithstanding on earlier Soviet and Cuban thinking and actions. question of the Soviet military presence remainhis own knowledge of the secret missile deployBoth, for example, had clearly concluded by ing there, a diplomatic dialogue on which continment underway, he even said, “Everything that October 27 that an American attack on Cuba was ued into April 1963) but also with the subject of we know about the position of the USA governimminent—although they drew different conclua nuclear test ban.
A test ban was then being ment on the Cuban question permits the conclusions on what the Soviet Union should do about discussed in the Kennedy-Khrushchev exchanges, sion that the situation in general is completely it.
Kennedy and Rusk. not thought at all about the bases in Turkey” as a It is not my purpose here to try to summarize Dobrynin’s cables on his meetings with tradeoff until the Americans, specifically Walter or even note the many interesting matters on Robert Kennedy on October 23, 27, and 28—or, Lippmann in a newspaper column on October 25, which these documents throw light.
The specific rather, the excerpts that have been released— had raised the matter.
He also did not disclose to points I have raised, as well as my references to help to clarify these important exchanges.
Among Castro—who had found the idea of a tradeoff some aspects of the subject not dealt with, are other things, they make clear that there was not repugnant—the secret understanding reached with only illustrative.
These documents, and others merely a statement by Kennedy, but “an underKennedy on the withdrawal of the missiles from that should follow, will undoubtedly add to our standing” on withdrawing the American Jupiter Turkey. understanding.
Nearly every day, the air space and forward with corresponding official declarations ment of the Soviet government to provide assisterritorial waters of Cuba are violated by Amerisigned by Fidel Castro.
The goal of these declarations is to attract the pointed to the defensive nature of Cuba’s military Cuba and diverting passenger and transport ships attention of the appropriate international organipreparations and noted that Soviet military spebound for Cuba.
The landing of counter-revoluzations and all of world public opinion to the cialists are in Cuba to teach the Cubans how to use tionary bands of spies and arms has been inprovocational and far-reaching acts of the USA, defensive equipment presented by the Soviet creased. to unmask the aggressive schemes of the United Union.
Several USA press agencies, commentThe constant acts of provocation are carried States in relation to Cuba, and to ward them off. ing on that part of Kennedy’s statement, underout from the territory of the USA base at In these declarations the government of Cuba line the evidence of that the fact the president of Guantanamo, most often in the form of shooting precisely makes the point that the anti-Cuban the USA obviously preferred an attempt to calm at Cuban patrols.
Especially noteworthy among actions and schemes of the USA presents a threat down those circles in the USA which are supportall these provocations are far reaching acts like not only to Cuba, but to the whole world. ing quick, decisive actions against Cuba.
In the USA government’s anof Soviet troops and of the fact that Cuba has According to certain information, the USA nouncement, it is noted that in the event of a turned into a military base of “world CommuState Department through its ambassadors notirepeat of “an incident of this type,” the armed nism” which presents a grave threat to the USA fied the governments of Latin American counforces of the United States “will take all necesand all Latin American countries.
Under this tries that they can expect changes in the situationiin sary retaliatory measures.
It is entirely evident pretext, the press, certain American senators and continued on next page 64 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN FOREIGN MINISTRY DOCUMENTS tic reaction.
One can also assume bidding or tightly limiting visits of any groups or Cuban communique about that the most wildly aggressive powers in the individuals to Cuba, and also their contacts with Guevara’s visit to Moscow was greeted by the USA (the Pentagon, the Cuban external counterCuban delegations in third countries.
People who Cuban leaders and the vast majority of the Cuban revolution, and others) will continue to exert visit Cuba or make contact with Cuban delegapeople with great enthusiasm and gratitude.
The pressure on Kennedy in order to realize the most tions in third countries are subject to arrest, reCuban leadership and Fidel Castro himself sugdecisive actions against Cuba. pression, investigations upon return to their homegest that these warnings will help to prevail those The campaign of anti-Cuban hysteria has land.
The USA does not lack means for organizforces in the USA which are warning of the been conveyed via American propaganda to Latin ing broad and loud provocations against Cuban outbreak now of a world conflict, and are staving American countries too.
The can countries into their aggressive actions will visited Cuba to make anti-Cuban statements, and unlawful denial of Cuba’s application to join the most depend on the positions of the governments so forth. so-called Latin American Free Trade Association of Mexico and Brazil.
This is shown by such facts as the counter-revolution, unmasking before world pubthe struggle between them on these issues. organization by the United States of schools for lic opinion the aggressive designs of the USA, and The mood of the overwhelming majority of instruction in methods of street-fighting and antibroadening its anti-American propaganda in Latin the Cuban people is defiant, and regardless of the partisan struggle in many Latin American counAmerica.
At the end of August, taking into reality of the threat of intervention, no panic or tries (in Panama, Peru, Colombia, Equador, Boaccount the activization of provocative actions by fear before the threat which is hanging over Cuba livia, and others); continuing intensive instructhe USA and the possible increase in the unleashis observed in the masses of the people.
Archive of Foreign Policy of the Ruscontinue to express their support for the principle and individual Latin American officials; in timely sian Federation , Moscow, copy courof non-interference and self-determination of fashion and aggressively, they speak at internatesy of National Security Archive , Washpeoples.
Rusk which concluded yesterday 1962 Rafael] Rodriguez, the crews of Japanese fishing proceeded, according to information which we boats who are now in Cuba, citing the danger, received, amidst sharp disagreements.
A particuTOP SECRET posed the question of leaving for their homeland larly big conflict arose around the text of the Making Copies Prohibited right after the first attack on Havana. communique.
Castro said that of genuine friendship for Cuba from the Soviet There were changes along three main lines, dethis report will be regarded by the whole Cuban government and personally from N.S. spite the fact that the USA got the “tough meapeople and supporters of the Cuban Revolution in Khrushchev, and expressed for this his sincere sures” it was after. other countries as a reliable shield against the thanks.
First, on trade—the USA did not manage to aggressive intrigues of the American imperialRodriguez recounted that the TASS declasecure recommendations for a total cut-off of ists. ration had been received with great enthusiasm in trade with Cuba.
Regarding this, he, Rodriguez believes that the publication of those countries’ trade with the Soviet Union and nonetheless, is allowing a sharp increase in antithe TASS dispatch increases the authority of the other Socialist countries.
Chile, which has the Soviet propaganda in the USA and in countries Soviet Union in the eyes of the Cuban and other most intensive trade with Cuba, was noteworthy under its influence.
Latin American peoples and helps those not infor its insistence on its right to trade with Cuba.
Raoul Castro believes that N.S. significant elements which are attracted to the Second, regarding so-called measures of Khrushchev’s conversation with [ United States Secretary unruliness of the revolutionism of our Chinese security.
The USA tried in the communique to of the Interior Stewart] Udall on the Cuban quesfriends understand the difference between a truly single out the Caribbean Basin region as the most tion, during which the government of the USA revolutionary policy and a policy of revolution“threatened” by Cuba and in need therefore of its was warned without any hint of propaganda about ary phrases. own separate organizational measures.
As is all the consequences which could result from its In Rodriguez’ opinion, in Cuba for a long known, even on the eve of the meeting plans were treacherous actions towards Cuba, is even more time already Chinese representatives have had no put forth for the creation inside the OAS of an important.
X.62 A DOBRYNIN among the population of Cuba itself; in the same pressure on the meeting.
The the unilateral measures which the government of October 1962 West Berlin issue at present remains sharpest and the USA itself is now considering regarding a most fraught with dangers. maximum limitation on the use of ships of variTOP SECRET ous countries in trade with Cuba.
Ships of all countries will not be allowed cording to information which we received, the into ports of the USA and will not be allowed to USA policy toward Cuba occupied a major place TOP SECRET take on any cargo for the return voyage, if in the in the work of the meeting.
No cargo belonging to the government of intervention in Cuba,” because such intervention the USA (for example, big shipments for “assiswould unavoidably prompt serious counter-meaTo the CC CPSU tance programs) may be carried on foreign ships, sures from the USSR, if not directly aimed at the Everything which we know about the posiif ships of the same owners are used for the USA, then in other regions of the world, particution of the USA government on the Cuban quesshipment of goods to Cuba.
This point is directed larly in West Berlin; for many years [intervention allows us to conclude that the overall situaagainst “non-communist” countries and allies of tion] would complicate the mutual relations of the tion is completely satisfactory.
This is confirmed the USA, many of whom have now reluctantly USA with the countries of Latin America, Asia, by official announcements of American officials, given in to American pressure. and Africa, and overall would create more probincluding Kennedy, in his discussion with us on 4.
October 18, and all information which reaches us owners of which are American citizens (although 2.
The Soviet government recognizes the great ening of all aspects of the struggle against the demonstrations.
The USA’s concrete course in importance which the Americans place on Cuba Castro government.
It is revealing that Kennedy this case will depend on the situation. and its situation, and how painful that issue is to today signed a declaration, accepted by the Ameri3.
At the Cuban emigration it would be hardly possible to American intervention in Cuba.
There is no same time he signed a Congressional bill, giving form a sufficiently authoritative government and single opinion as to how and where that rebuff him the right to call up 150,000 reserves. in any case such a government, created on foreign will be given, but that it will be given—they do territory, could not count on broad popularity not doubt.
Cuba without what, while the sharpness of the West Berlin took place. the Soviet Union, he declared, is one thing; a question has stood out all the more.
Newspapers Rusk, continuing my conversation with Cuba where “Soviet operators” run things is bleat about the approaching crisis vis a vis West Kennedy, touched on the Cuba issue.
Berlin, the impending in the very near future that President Kennedy considers that issue very The USA government and he, Rusk, are signing of the agreement with the GDR, and so important, that it carries great significance for the baselessly scaring the American people with “Soon.
The goal of such a change in the work of the USA, since it concerns the security of the Westviet operators,” I answered.
The Soviet Union is propaganda machine is to divert somewhat pubern hemisphere.
As the President said, the USA providing assistance to Cuba in only a few areas, lic attention from the Cuba issue.
All this is not has no intention of intervening with its own including whatever we can do to strengthen its without the participation of the White House. armed forces in Cuba.
The Cuban themselves are Even the rumor to the effect that the Soviet from the fact that everything that is happening in running everything on Cuba, and the USA knows Union has made it known that it can soften its Cuba is of a defensive nature and will not turn that perfectly well. position on the Cuban issue if the West will soften Cuba into an attack platform against the USA and The situation has rapidly worsened, declared its own position in West Berlin was basically the countries of Latin America.
But from July, Soviet The wide publication of the results of an defining its position on the Cuban issue, as anweapons have flowed into Cuba.
But it is unclear how the Americans are against an American intervention undertake actions aimed at foisting its system and situation will develop in the future. in Cuba serves this same goal.
Besides this, declared Rusk, according to have to note that the leadership of the institute in The government of the USA places exprecise data in American possession, the Cuban the past traditionally were more sympathetic to tremely high significance on these two condiregime continues to actively carry out subversive Republicans.
It would be hoped that neither the first, nor work against a number of Latin American councase deserves special attention.
This sugissue had been caused by the hostile policy of the to strengthen their own defense capability.
Cuba represented no extreme groups in Congress will be less during believes that it must dictate to the Cubans the sort threat to the USA either before July, or after July. the recess. of domestic regime that should exist in Cuba, and As far as the declarations regarding subverThe position of the USA allies, particularly the social structure under which the Cubans should sive work by the Cubans is concerned, I can only the British, also played a role.
There is no such basis, and such a basis cannot be. kind of sudden change took place.
The sive activities, said Rusk, the USA government corresponding official public statements, and also actions of the USA are in flagrant contradiction has irrefutable proof of the assistance provided the assurances given to us that the USA has no with these principles.
The USA is undertaking by them to various subversive groups in Latin plans for intervention in Cuba (which undeniably steps to cause hunger in Cuba.
For the govcommits them in many respects), it is possible to it is undertaking towards this end unmask the ernment of the USA there is nothing to discuss.
It say that in these conditions a USA military adUSA policy even more clearly.
The Cubans, with knows for sure that the Cubans provide such help venture against Cuba is almost impossible to ever more decisiveness, are speaking out and will and are carrying out subversive work against a imagine. continue to speak out in defense of their country number of Latin American countries. and will strengthen its defenses.
Rusk expansively spoke of the “community 19/X-62 A GROMYKO The Soviet Union is helping Cuba.
It is of interests” of the countries of the Western trying to provide the Cubans with grain, and help Hemisphere.
Soviet the solidarity of the countries of the Western tion by Mark H Doctoroff.] specialists are helping Cuban soldiers to master Hemisphere and the community of interests of certain types of defensive weapons.
Each one of them Americans themselves don’t believe it. has a right to decide its own internal affairs upon 68 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN consideration by its people.
Cuba is one of these every day American generals and several minisin 1956. sovereign states. ters speak about it.
I deflected this effort to introduce an analBesides that, I declared, if Rusk’s reasoning Regarding Iran, I said to Rusk that we posiogy and I briefly pointed out the groundlessness and the entire conception which the USA govtively view the agreement between the Soviet of such an analogy. ernment defends were to be applied to Europe Union and Iran that foreign missile bases will not Rusk said that he did not agree with our and to Asia, then no doubt the conclusions which be built on Iranian territory.
But Rusk will not, interpretation of the question and rejection of the would flow from that would not please the USA. apparently, deny that the Iranian Army is led by analogy.
About the same could be said He said that “in the Stalinist period” the its own people with bread and strengthening its about many other countries.
Soviet Union conducted a foreign policy which security in the face of a threat of intervention.
Rusk declared that—whether I believe him forced the USA to create its bases overseas and to With such a conception the Soviet Union cannot or not—that’s something else, but he categorideploy its forces there.
It is hoped that the USA government too cally asserts that besides the territory of the USA example—Korea and the Korean peninsula.
He will more soberly approach the entire Cuban itself, American missiles and atomic weapons are said, that before the events in Korea the USA in issue and will reject a hostile policy toward in only three countries. fact did not have a single division up to strength.
But the situation claims toward Cuba, for instance, financial, then Yes, declared Rusk, England is one of them. changed because of the Korean War.
Before this it can bring them up with the Cubans at negotiaHe didn’t name the others. there was such a thing as the Berlin Blockade, tions aimed at settling them, and the Cubans, as As far as Japan is concerned, declared Rusk, which also played a definite role in the change in is known, are prepared for this.
All this is reflected, said Yes, declared Rusk, but nonetheless Cuba nuclear weapons of the USA are in Japan.
They Rusk, in the armament program. has violated the peace on the continent, nonethedon’t have any of those weapons in South Korea He again began to speak about the influence less, beginning in July, the situation has taken a either, if, of course, the actions of North Korea of the “Stalinist policy” on the policy and actions dangerous turn.
The Soviet Union appeared in will not make it necessary to change that situation. of the Western powers.
A large quantity of Soviet weapons apIn general, declared Rusk, the significance including the USA, cannot but take that into peared in Cuba.
All this has complicated the of American foreign military bases is greatly account even now. situation. exaggerated, and they don’t deserve it.
In several Responding to these statements of Rusk, I No matter how often Rusk repeats, I decountries, in actual fact there are not such bases, stressed that the Secretary of State of the USA clared, the assertion about some sort of turn of while you, Rusk said, believe that there are.
In had drawn an extremely depressing and oneevents in July, about the danger allegedly emaparticular, the Scandinavian countries are among sided picture of the foreign policy of the USSR in nating from Cuba, in actuality, the situation those countries. the postwar period, including during the Stalin remains simpler.
The Cubans want Cuba to Responding to that, I said, that in certain period.
You, Americans, fact that the army of the Soviet Union routed the USA, the presence of American military bases know better.
But the USA has military agreeHitlerite army and as a powerful avalanche moved and numerous military advisers in such countries ments with those countries which include an obinto Western Europe, it was not used contrary to like Turkey, Pakistan, Japan, not even speaking ligation to let these types of American weapons the alliance agreements and had stopped followabout such countries as England, Italy, and a into the country at any time.
And in that number of other countries of Western Europe, different from the practical existence of American situation, if the Soviet Union, the Soviet governand also Asia and Africa.
It appears that the USA military bases in such countries, especially conment, had had expansionist intentions, it could can have military bases in these countries, considering that certain types of weapons may at the have occupied all of Western Europe.
But the clude with them military agreements, while the present time be delivered very quickly.
Soviet Union had not done that and had not Soviet Union can not even provide assistance in Rusk did not respond to that statement, and started to do it.
Khrushchev, have taken a number of foreign countries, on the territory of which, in your over, to conduct toward Cuba a hostile and agpolicy steps which earlier had not been taken. opinion, there are American military bases, in gressive policy.
Cuba simply wants to be indeYou are familiar, no doubt, with that which has actuality there are none.
That which the Cubans do to strengthen been done in the foreign policy of the USSR recently took a big step forward towards the their country and its independence—that doesn’t regarding the condemnation of Stalin’s Cult of Soviet Union.
Overall, the significance of our present a danger to anyone, all the more to such a Personality.
Any assertions about signing of the Austrian State Treaty, which was To this statement I answered in such a way, the existence of such a danger are just absurd. evaluated positively throughout the world and that the USA foreign military bases—this is a Rusk said that the USA is interested in Cuba which helped to make possible an improvement subject which is pretty well known, practically just as the Soviet Union was interested in Hungary of the situation in central Europe.
Cuba., that is, in other words, increasing the number Rusk’s reasoning revolved mostly around a circle Rusk did not challenge the declaration reof non-permanent members from six to eight. of questions related to Soviet assistance to Cuba, garding the capability of the Soviet army to From his comments it was clear that he was primarily arms. occupy all of Europe, if the Soviet Union had talking about a change in the membership of the By Rusk’s behavior it was possible to obstriven for that after the rout of Hitler’s Germany.
UN and introducing into the membership correserve how painfully the American leaders are Nor did he challenge the significance of the sponding changes. suffering the fact that the Soviet Union decisively foreign policy steps of the Soviet Union introI said that the step Rusk had mentioned was has stood on the side of Cuba, and that the Cubans duced after the condemnation of the cult of perimpossible to implement, simply because the are conducting themselves bravely and confisonality of Stalin.
More to the point, he let it be PRC—one of the permanent members of the dently.
Kennedy managed to hide his feelings understood that in general he shares these thoughts, Security Council—is not participating in the work better.
But he too, when he spoke about Cuba, although he did not make any direct comments. of the UN because of the policy of the United States formulated his ideas with emphasis, slowly, obHowever, he at this point started to talk Government.
It is characteristic about the fact that the USA, at the end of the war, will not agree even to consider that issue. that Rusk, during our entire conversation with and also in the first postwar period to the greatest Rusk in fact did not challenge our declaraKennedy, sat absolutely silently, and red “like a extent conducted itself well.
In the conversation with him later he had not tried to use the advantage which it had at mended was not realistic in view of our objeccouldn’t hide his feelings very well. that time vis a vis its monopoly possession of the tions.
Here he noted that China, evidently has atomic bomb. more than a few problems, including internal, 20.
I said, that the argument, as is well known to In this connection he brought up the Baruch Rusk, was caused by mutual territorial claims in Plan, saying that he was wondering why the the border region.
The Soviet government beTOP SECRET Soviet Union had not associated itself with the lieves that the sooner the sides come to an agreeMaking Copies Prohibited Baruch Plan. ment on a mutually acceptable basis, the better.
I gave an appropriate answer and briefly set let Rusk know that our discussion of this issue CIPHERED TELEGRAM forth our position.
Evidently, Rusk’s own goal was to let us Rusk said that he had a commission from the Rusk did not go into details and limited know that the government of the USA looks president to send via me a personal presidential himself to the above comments about the Baruch favorably on the Indian position.
Khrushchev /to be sent sepaPlan. about that as if offhandedly, obviously not wantrately/, and also to provide for information the Suddenly Rusk jumped to the issue of the ing to create the impression that the USA was text of the president’s address to the American Communist ideology and the influence of the greatly interested in that issue.
He also jokingly people, which he intends to deliver at 7 this Soviet Union on other countries.
He tried to observed that the Chinese-Indian border conflict evening on radio and television /transmitted by assert that the main reason of all the complicais, excuse me, the only issue on which the posiTASS/. tions in international affairs is that the Soviet tions of the PRC and Taiwan correspond.
Rusk warned then that at this time he has Union by some or other means influences the With this, the conversation, which had coninstructions not to answer any questions on the situation in other countries, inspires dissatisfactinued with some difficulty for about two hours, text of both documents and not to comment on tion with the existing regimes and so on.
Further there was a conversation on the them. complained because the USA does not assert German Question, the contents of which are “These documents, he added, speak for themsuch influence and cannot assert it, since it does submitted separately. selves.” not enter into its political plans.
Rusk tried again to stress, obvigovernment cannot be justified by the absolutely cally repeated what he had said earlier.
AVP RF, copy courtesy of NSA; thrown down by the Soviet Union to the USA in for possible grave consequences of the aforetranslation by Mark H Doctoroff.] the form of military deliveries to Cuba.
Gromyko, with whom they met 23 October 1962 Union in this case not responding with military only a few days ago, while now the USA adminactions directly against the USA itself or by istration is seeking with artificial means to create delivering a blow to their positions in West Bera grave crisis.
He was clearly in a CIPHERED TELEGRAM ment of our military deliveries to Cuba, which nervous and agitated mood, even though he tried delivered a serious blow to the USA’s positions to conceal it.
Union for the sake of its positions would unavoidBefore I left, Rusk noted that there is no In a briefing conducted by the USA Ministry ably lead to an even quicker and more serious plan, so far, to publish the personal letter of of Defense yesterday evening, [Secretary of Deundermining of their positions around the globe.
That which Kennedy said yesterday in his cannot be excluded. clared that the USA will not stop short of sinking appeal to the American people and the complex Soviet ships which are bringing “offensive types” of measures which were announced in this con22.
AVP RF, copy courtesy of NSA; It is reported that the President’s official ons to it, or even our missiles for Cuba.
Alekseev to the USSR MFA, 22 October 1962 members of the Organization of American States.
In this regard, some information which we For the practical implementation of the quaranhave just received by confidential means and tine in the area of Cuba, there has been assembled, which we are now reconfirming, may be interestTOP SECRET according to the reports of military observers, ing.
Soviet ship approaches Cuba (we broadcast simithe status quo in the world had changed, and had The Cuban command gave an order for full lar commentaries via TASS). changed not to the benefit of the USA, as a result mobilization of the army and occupation of deAn analysis of the public statements which of the well-known development of the Cuban fensive positions.
Besides telegraphic dispatches Kennedy has made, his message to N.S. events, in particular the open deliveries of Soviet of information agencies and Kennedy’s speeches, Khrushchev, and also the statements of officials weapons to Cuba.
X.62 ALEKSEEV I To try to “take up the gauntlet” of that “the penetration and establishment of influence” challenge which Kennedy believes has been by another great power, the USSR, in the Western C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 71 Hemisphere itself.
And all their previous positions after having been subject development of events and as a means of putting this is happening at a moment—as asserted by to strong pressure from the USA, which is assertextra pressure on the USA government, it is representatives of the military brass—when ing that the Soviet missiles now threaten the Latin possible that it would make sense to undertake America for the time being still has an advantage American countries too.
We should, it’s to hurry on all the above measures, since an tends to prevent a further disadvantageous develtrue, note that Brazil, Mexico and Bolivia abextreme aggravation of the situation, it goes withopment of events. stained from the vote on the paragraph which out saying, would not be in our interests.
It would In Berlin also, the USA is constantly on the envisaged the application of force. make sense to use also the desire of neutral states, defensive, which does not add to the 4.
On the domestic political plane, Kennedy and not only them, to find a way to settle the Administration’s prestige.
The latest meetings obviously is counting on his last step to pull the current conflict.
Gromyko (this argument was attribrug out from under the legs of the Republicans, only at the UN, but also among the diplomatic uted to Rusk) strengthened the President’s and whose leadership in recent days officially ancorps here.
Rusk’s belief that the Soviet Union seriously nounced that they consider the Cuban issue a Overall, here in Washington the tension intends to sign a peace treaty with the GDR, with fundamental issue of the election campaign, havaround this situation continues to grow.
This, almost unavoidably will bring tivity on that issue. worry a lot, anticipating the arrival in Cuba of the about a crisis at the end of the year, since the USA However, it is necessary to stress that the first Soviet ship (many people are expressing this will not withdraw its forces from West Berlin. events connected with Kennedy’s announcement question directly to the Embassy) and how this Wouldn’t it be better then to try to force the Soviet yesterday obviously have overtaken the signififirst “test of strength” will end.
It follows, evidently, to recognize that to go pretty far in a test of strength with the Soviet USA Dobrynin to the USSR MFA, the supporters of this course for the time being Union, hoping that in the location of the conflict 24 October 1962 have taken the upper hand in the USA governwhich was chosen by him, the President, ment. the USA has a greater chance than the USSR, and TOP SECRET 3.
In this regard it should be appropriate rebuff to the USA and which would ously excited condition and his speech was rich in noted that although the West European and Latin make the USA vulnerable to the possibility of repetitions and digressions.
R Kennedy said American diplomats express alarm about the posactions which we may take in response.
In approximately the following. sible consequences of realizing in practice the particular, as it seems to us, it would be possible I came on my own personal initiative withannounced “quarantine” of Cuba, they express, to review the question of hinting to Kennedy in no out any assignment from the President.
In particular, it be(as a first step, the organization of a blockade of velopment of events.
Most important is the fact came known to us that the Chilean representative ground routes, leaving out for the time being air that the personal relations between the President in the Organization of American States received routes so as not to give grounds for a quick and the Soviet premier have suffered heavy daman instruction to support the USA proposals this confrontation). age.
I told this to the President, the seriousness of the consequences of which for Soviet government.
Simultaneously, his thoughts who accepted it with satisfaction as the position the entire world are entirely unforeseeable.
Khrushchev recently spoke about who, despite the big disagreements and frequent ment, been expressed in very harsh tones, so a that in particular in a conversation with aggravations in relations between our countries, discussion with him hardly could have been of Ambassador Kohler.
I hope the President has always trusted on a personal much use; second, he had once again asserted the that the President also maintains the same point of level.
The message which had been sent by N.S. defensive character of the deliveries of Soviet view, I added.
On the relationships between the Khrushchev via the Soviet ambassador and weapons, although the President at that moment heads of our governments, on which history has Sorensen, about knew that this is not so, that they had deceived him placed special responsibility for the fate of the the fact that during the election campaign in the again.
As far as the confidential channel is conworld, a lot really does depend; in particular, USA the Soviet side would not do anything to cerned, what sense would that have made, if on the whether there will be peace or war.
The Soviet complicate the international situation and worsen highest level the level of the Minister of Foreign government acts only in the interests of preservrelations between our countries, had made a Affairs precisely the same is said, although the ing and strengthening peace and calls on the great impression on the President. facts are directly contradictory To that same United States government to act this way too.
All this led to the fact that the President point, added R Kennedy, long ago I myself in fact Stressing again the basic principles of our policy believed everything which was said from the received the same sort of assurances from the on which we will insist without any compromises Soviet side, and in essence staked on that card his Soviet ambassador, however, all that subsequently (in the spirit of our declaration and N.S. own political fate, having publicly announced to turned out to be entirely not so.
He is convinced of that There, you see R Kennedy quickly put I once again set forth to him our position in even now.
It was for him a great disappointment, forth, what would have been the point of us the above-mentioned spirit.
C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 73 Saying goodbye, already at the door of the the-clock broadcasts to Cuba—24 hours in SpanArmed Forces at the highest state of military Embassy, R Kennedy as if by the way asked what ish and 12 hours in Russian. readiness.
This order, as far as I know, has not At the present time, one third of the entire Soviet work on explaining to military men the Declarabeen changed. radio transmitting capability is used to jam fortion of the Soviet government.
The Ministry of on ships, in military schools and in military don’t know how all this will end, for we intend to Communications of the USSR has no reserve institutions the Declaration of the USSR governstop your ships.
He left right after this. radio stations. ment was listened to collectively on the radio, Overall, his visit left a somewhat strange We request agreement. talks, meetings and gatherings are taking place, impression.
He had not spoken about the future where members of military councils, commandand paths toward a settlement of the conflict, Deputy Head, Department of Agitation and Proers and heads of political organs speak.
In the us. military regions special leaflets with the text of We think that in the interests of the affair it the Declaration of the Soviet government were would be useful, using this opportunity to pass on published and transfered by air to far-away deto the President, through R Kennedy, with whom 24 October 1962 tachments and garrisons.
At the Kharlamov) Nov. that from Nov. the amount same time Soviet soldiers express readiness to 24.
American adventurists unleash a war, they will 24 October 1962 be dealt the most powerful crippling blow.
They all declare that they will broadcasts from Moscow to Cuba up to 10 hours serve as much as required in the interests of the per day.
At the present time these transmissions CC CPSU strengthening of the preparedness of the troops. are conducted every day for two hours.
After a meeting of neuver as an attempt to deflect the Security Counthe 15th Division of the Moscow District Air CIPHERED TELEGRAM cil away from the essence of the case, particularly Defense Forces 20 soldiers reported with a refrom the aggressive actions of the USA, which quest to enlist for addional service.
Following On 25 October in the Security Council, had violated the UN Charter and which had the example of Communists Sergeant Kaplin and Stevenson, speaking first, read out Kennedy’s created a threat to peace.
The attempts of the USA representative to strengthened desire of individual soldiers to deFrom our side we made public Comr.
N.S. turn the Council into a tribune for base propafend Cuba as volunteers.
On just one day in the Khrushchev’s response to U Thant on his appeal, ganda met no support from other members of the 78th motorized infantry training division of the which was transmitted to U Thant before the Council.
Ural Military District, 1240 requests to be sent to opening of the session.
Khrushchev and Kennedy, the readiness of the entire unit to leave for Cuba.
Caribbean Sea region and in the whole world of stressing that as a result of that exchange of In response to the directions of the Soviet the message from the head of the Soviet governmessages a new situation had been created in the government relating to the aggressive actions of ment.
Riad and Quaison-Sackey proposed the American government, military personnel Stevenson’s speech at today’s session, resuspending the session so as to allow all the heighten their vigilence and increase their pergardless of his attempts to assert once again that interested sides, with the participation of U Thant, sonal responsibility for the maintenance of miliCuba has at its disposal an offensive weapon, and to conduct the necessary negotiations, having in tary readiness.
In the 3rd Corps of the Air that this creates a danger for the Western hemimind that the Council sessions will be resumed Defense Forces of the Moscow Military District, sphere, had in essence a defensive character.
He depending on the result and process of the negosoldiers work at night in fulfillment of daytime made a declaration as if the USA had not sought tiations. norms.
Following the declaration of the expectation of a Soviet veto in the Security Counthe negotiations.
In this way, no votes were taken Government of the USSR, the number of applicil.
Security Council even before the Organization of American proposal, and the neutral one/, and they During the explanation of the declaration of the American States had started to work and had remained in the Security Council file. x/ the Soviet Government, no sorts of negative given its approval for the “quarantine” measures.
Stevenson tried to present the matter as if he was after it had already basically been decided that in We are reporting for your information. talking not about unilateral measures of the USA, relation to the start of negotiations between the but about the agreed actions of the Organization interested sides consideration of the issue in the R MALINOVSKII of American States.
Security Council is not ending, and that the issue A EPISHEV In our speech we showed the lack of foundaremains on the Security Council agenda, moretion of all of these assertions by Stevenson, stressover, the Council sessions may be resume at any 24 October 1962 ing that, as the discussion in the Security Council time depending on the course of the negotiations had confirmed, the USA had no sort of justificabetween the interested sides.
F 5, Op., D 400, Ll.-71, TsKhSD; tions for the aggressive actions which it had as we understand it, it would be premature to raise translation by Mark H Doctoroff.] undertaken, which had created a threat of thermothe issue at the XVIIth session of the General nuclear war.
Precisely this has now prompted Assembly if the possible new consideration by the United Nations, Valerian Zorin, to the the USA to give its agreement to enter into negothe Security Council will end without result.
We ridiculed the maneuver which After the session U Thant informed us that Stevenson had made at the session in showing the he intends to begin negotiations with us, the photographs which had been fabricated by AmeriCubans, and the Americans tomorrow, 26 OctoTop Secret can intelligence which had been assigned the role ber.
He will meet with each delegation individuC OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 75 ally.
We will report our thoughts about this An analogous declaration was made in the name At the same time it is not possible to exclude meeting in supplementary fashion. of the Organization of American States, which, that the general American plan of actions really evidently, is aimed at giving that fact extra “legal may include the implementation of such an over25.
In their declarations there is made a flight, especially if the adventurist moods of pretty clear hint to the effect that the mentioned certain members of the circle which is close to the ———————— “fact” gives the USA government “a foundation” President are taken into account.
USA Dobrynin to the USSR MFA, sible commando raid, have received wide circu27 October 1962 lation.
Several of them in this regard express the opinion that an ultimatum to the Cuban govern27.
The United States president elected to transmit morning demanding that the United States agree this sensitive message through his brother, AttorAnatoly F Dobrynin’s Meeting to remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey in ney General Robert F Kennedy, who met in his exchange for a Soviet removal of missiles from office at the Justice Department with Soviet amWith Robert F Kennedy, Cuba.
The letter struck United States officials as an bassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Saturday, 27 October 1962 ominous hardening of the Soviet position from That meeting has long been recognized as a the previous day’s letter from Khrushchev, which turning point in the crisis, but several aspects of by Jim Hershberg had omitted any mention of American missiles in it have been shrouded in mystery and confusion.
While Soviet Committee of senior advisers, President Kennedy deal, or pledge, but had merely informed Dobrynin ships had not attempted to break the United States naval decided on a dual strategy—a formal letter to that Kennedy had planned to take out the Ameriblockade of Cuba, Soviet nuclear missile bases Khrushchev accepting the implicit terms of his can missiles in any event.
Hopes only on the basis of a secret understanding, not as assassinated while seeking the Democratic nomithat a satisfactory resolution to the crisis could be an open agreement that would appear to the nation for president.
While Thirteen Days dereached between Washington and Moscow had public, and to NATO allies, as a concession to picted RFK as rejecting any firm agreement to dimmed, moreover, when a letter from Soviet continued on page 77 76 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN EXTRAORDINARY necessary to mention his name, but he did it). the answer should be given by the Government of I responded that in the Embassy no one Cuba.
WASHINGTON besides me knows about the conversation with Tell U Thant that in our opinion, his journey him yesterday.
R Kennedy said that in addition to Cuba with a group of accompanying officials SOVIET AMBASSADOR to the current correspondence and future exchange would have a positive significance. of opinions via diplomatic channels, on important Telegraph upon implementation.
Khrushchev rectly, avoiding any intermediaries. the contents of your conversation with him.
October 27, and that response will be the most Kennedy that the tardiness was caused by a delay ***** favorable.
The main thing which disturbs the of telegrams at the telegraph station.
President, precisely the issue of the dismantling Coded telegram from Soviet official Georgy under international control of the rocket bases in 28.
You must declare to U Thant that built on mutual trust, will open the way to the orders have been given to the Soviet officers in resolution of other ripe problems.
Also inform U Thant about the members of the government that it makes no Soviet government’s agreement to his proposal sense to try to use the situation that developed to R Kennedy, with whom I met, listened very that representatives of the International Red Cross Khrushchev’s detriment.
Exbe allowed to visit the Soviet ships bound for conducted talks with 50 of the most prominent pressing thanks for the report, he said that he Cuba in order to confirm that on them there are and trusted observers in the USA and allied would quickly return to the White House in order none of the types of weapons about which the countries. to inform the President about the “important President and government of the USA show con2.
Kennedy, in Salinger’s words, is now response” of the head of the Soviet government. cern, calling them offensive weapons.
You must inform U matter what, publish evidence that the missiles Kennedy, “today will finally be able to see my Thant, for his personal information, that on those have been dismantled and taken away.
Kennedy with satisfaction, it is necessary to Stress that the Soviet government has taken the same to us.
Khrushchev’s response. which have begun on U Thant’s initiative, beare secret.
We must publish evidence that they In parting, R Kennedy once again requested tween him and the representatives of the USSR, are no longer on the launching pads and that they that strict secrecy be maintained about the agreeUSA, and Cuba, aimed at liquidating the dangerhave been taken away. ment with Turkey.
In order to withdraw the Jupiters, this was also the first deflect these attacks, Kennedy must receive evipublic indication that the issue had even been dence to the effect that Castro has no “offensive” privately discussed. weapons.
One of the first AND THE Soviet account of the event to emerge was conissues to be resolved can and must be the issue of tained in the tape-recorded memoirs of deposed ARCHIVAL SITUATION a test ban.
It was signed into law by publicly stated that Kennedy will meet with Russian President Boris Yeltsin on 20 February Khrushchev Remembers, in the form of a paraKhrushchev if he comes to the General Assemphrase from memory of Dobrynin’s report, did 1995 and was published in Sobranie bly.
The Cuban crisis showed that the issues range of topics, and much of it has no direct to Dobrynin that if his brother did not approve an on which the improvement of Soviet-American attack on Cuba soon, the American military might bearing on the archives.
The Last Testament), published posthave a direct--and, unfortunately, highly results of the settlement of the crisis.
Points 1 and humously in 1974, touched only briefly on the close to war for it to be possible to forget about Robert Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting, but included 2 of Article 13, which entitle “organs of state this and to allow ourselves to delay even longer in authority” to restrict access to “information the flat statement that “President reaching a resolution to the problems which have Kennedy said that in exchange for the withdrawl resources pertaining to the activities of these become urgent.
However, the President still does of our missiles, he would remove American misorgans,” effectively leave the individual state not have a prepared decision about the expediministries and agencies with full discretion siles from Turkey and Italy,” although he deency of a meeting and about the issues which scribed this “pledge” as “symbolic” since the over their own archives. should be considered.
Over the years, many scholars of the Cuban legislation passed in the spring of 1994, but it 6.
Kennedy speechwriter Theodore Sorensen (and Khrushchev his personal thanks for the hospitalthe uncredited editor of Thirteen Days) admitted, ity which had been given to him in Moscow. after prodding from Dobrynin, that he had taken it upon himself to edit out a “very explicit” XI.I.62 G ZHUKOV reference to the inclusion of the Jupiters in the final deal to settle the crisis.
AVP RF, copy courtesy of NSA; translaNow Dobrynin’s original, contemporanetion by Mark H Doctoroff.] ous, and dramatic cable of the meeting, alluded to 78 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN in some accounts by Soviets (such as Anatoly He asked me what offer the United States power.
The American army could get out of Gromyko, son of the late foreign minister) with was making, and I told him of the letter that control.’” special access, has been declassified and is availPresident Kennedy had just transmitted to able at the archives of the Russian Foreign MinKhrushchev.
He raised the question of our remov[Khrushchev Remembers, intro., commentary, istry.
It is reprinted in translation below, along ing the missiles from Turkey.
However, I said, year in an appendix to We All Lost the Cold War, President Kennedy had been anxious to remove ***** a study by Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Stein, those missiles from Italy and Turkey for a long whose commentary is also excerpted. period of time.
He to him if he could say at the same time to his I telephoned Ambassador Dobrynin about wished to resolve the problems that confronted us colleagues on the Presidium, “And we have been 7:15 P.M. and asked him to come to the Departin Europe and Southeast Asia.
He wished to move assured that the missiles will be coming out of ment of Justice.
And so, after the ExComm meeting [on told him first that we knew that work was conever, we could make progress on these matters the evening of 27 October 1962], as I’m sure tinuing on the missile bases in Cuba and that in only when the crisis was behind us.
Time was almost all of you know, a small group met in the last few days it had been expedited.
We had only a few more hours—we President Kennedy’s office, and he instructed in the last few hours we had learned that our needed an answer immediately from the Soviet Robert Kennedy—at the suggestion of Secretary reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba had been Union.
Ambassador Dobrynin for referral to Chairman down and the pilot killed.
That for us was a most Khrushchev, but to add orally what was not in the serious turn of events.
Because of the deception of the Soviet the “deal” on the Turkish missiles was part of the Union, our photographic reconnaissance planes Khrushchev’s Description resolution of the crisis.
And here I have a confeswould have to continue to fly over Cuba, and if sion to make to my colleagues on the American the Cubans or Soviets shot at these planes, then The climax came after five or six days, when side, as well as to others who are present.
This would our ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, the editor of Robert Kennedy’s book.
It was, in inevitably lead to further incidents and to escalareported that the President’s brother, Robert fact, a diary of those thirteen days.
And his diary tion of the conflict, the implications of which Kennedy, had come to see him on an unofficial was very explicit that this was part of the deal; but were very grave indeed. visit.
One American side, except for the six of us who had were violating Cuban air space.
I replied that if could see from his eyes that he had not slept for been present at that meeting.
He himself said that he had not been home myself to edit that out of his diaries, and that is still be believing what Khrushchev had said— for six days and nights.
We are under very conversation. serious than the air space of Cuba—it involved severe stress.
In fact we are under pressure from the peoples of both of our countries and, in fact, our military to use force against Cuba.
Probably [Sorensen comments, in Bruce J Allyn, James G. people all over the globe. at this very moment the President is sitting down Blight, and David A Welch, eds., Back to the The Soviet Union had secretly established to write a message to Chairman Khrushchev.
I implores Chairman Khrushchev to accept his ofwas not giving them an ultimatum but a statefer and to take into consideration the peculiarities ***** ment of fact.
President Kennedy had great respect for over Cuba, an irreversible chain of events could the Ambassador’s country and the courage of its occur against his will.
Perhaps his country might feel it necesis appealing directly to Chairman Khrushchev for sary to take retaliatory action; but before that was his help in liquidating this conflict.
The other part of the oral message sion I suggested that since the Jupiters in Turkey different approaches to these problems and it was was proposed by Dean Rusk; that we should tell were coming out in any event, we should inform not likely that we could convince each other.
But Khrushchev that while there could be no deal the Russians of this so that this irrelevant question now the matter is not in these differences, since over the Turkish missiles, the president was dewould not complicate the solution of the missile time is of the essence.
We agreed that Bobby should stressed, “to lay out the current alarming situation Cuban crisis was resolved.
He wants N.S. quickly supported by the rest of us [in addition to after we returned to our offices, I telephoned Khrushchev to know this.
This is the thrust of the Bundy and Rusk, those present included PresiBobby to underline that he should pass this along situation now.” dent Kennedy, McNamara, RFK, George Ball, to Dobrynin only as information, not a public “Because of the plane that was shot down, Roswell Gilpatrick, Llewellyn Thompson, and pledge.
Concerned as we all were with Dobrynin and had already talked with him. give an order to respond with fire if fired upon by the cost of a public bargain struck under Bobby later told me that Dobrynin called this when American reconnaissance planes are flying pressure at the apparent expense of the Turks, and message “very important information.” over Cuba.
But if no one not in the room was to be informed of this ***** we start to fire in response—a chain reaction will additional message.
The structed to make it plain to Dobrynin that the Dobrynin’s Cable to the Soviet Foreign same thing in regard to the essence of the issue of same secrecy must be observed on the other side, Ministry, the missile bases in Cuba.
When the doubtedly respond with the same against us, orders were passed that the Jupiters must come CIPHERED TELEGRAM somewhere in Europe.
A real war will begin, in out, we gave the plausible and accurate—if inwhich millions of Americans and Russians will complete—explanation that the missile crisis had die.
We want to avoid that any way we can, I’m convinced the president once and for all that he Late tonight R Kennedy invited me to come sure that the government of the USSR has the did not want those missiles there.... see him.
Random House, 1988] down while carrying out a reconnaissance flight only among the generals, who are ‘itching for a over Cuba.
The USA government will have to do “In this regard,” R Kennedy said, “the presithis. dent considers that a suitable basis for regulating Even though Soviet ships had turned around, I interrupted R Kennedy and asked him, the entire Cuban conflict might be the letter N.S. time was running out.
We made this very clear to what right American planes had to fly over Cuba Khrushchev sent on October 26 and the letter in Khrushchev.
Khrushchev through the United States Emwere not withdrawn immediately, the crisis would USA have reacted if foreign planes appeared over bassy in Moscow.
In his book Khrushchev Remembers, “We have a resolution of the Organization possible the agreement of the Soviet government Khrushchev states that Robert Kennedy told of American states that gives us the right to such to halt further work on the construction of the Dobrynin that the military might take over. overflights,” R Kennedy quickly replied. missile bases in Cuba and take measures under Khrushchev either genuinely misunderstood or I told him that the Soviet Union, like all international control that would make it imposdeliberately misused Bobby’s statement.
Obvipeace-loving countries, resolutely rejects such a sible to use these weapons.
In exchange the ously there was never any threat of a military “right” or, to be more exact, this kind of true government of the USA is ready, in addition to takeover in this country.
We wondered about lawlessness, when people who don’t like the repealing all measures on the “quarantine,” to Khrushchev’s situation, even whether some Sosocial-political situation in a country try to imgive the assurances that there will not be any viet general or member of the Politburo would put pose their will on it—a small state where the invasion of Cuba and that other countries of the 80 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN Western Hemisphere are ready to give the same ing this question.
Then I told R Kennedy that the very least, Kennedy suggested that he thought assurances—the United States government is certain of president’s thoughts would be brought to the that Soviet retaliation was likely.
I asked R also said that I would contact him as soon as there likely that Kennedy was trying to establish the Kennedy. was a reply.
In this regard, R Kennedy gave me basis for a more cooperative approach to crisis “If that is the only obstacle to achieving the a number of a direct telephone line to the White resolution.
His brother, he made clear, was under regulation I mentioned earlier, then the president House. enormous pressure from a coterie of generals and doesn’t see any unsurmountable difficulties in In the course of the conversation, R Kennedy civilian officials who were “itching for a fight.” resolving this issue,” replied R Kennedy.
Formally the an Embassy adviser on possible ways to regulate president to attack Cuba, as Kennedy explained deployment of missile bases in Turkey was done the Cuban conflict [one-and-a-half lines whited at the beginning of the meeting, had been greatly by a special decision of the NATO Council.
To out] intensified by the destruction of an unarmed announce now a unilateral decision by the presiI should say that during our meeting R American reconnaissance plane.
The president dent of the USA to withdraw missile bases from Kennedy was very upset; in any case, I’ve never did not want to use force, in part because he Turkey—this would damage the entire structure seen him like this before.
True, about twice he recognized the terrible consequences of escalaof NATO and the United States position as the leader of tried to return to the topic of “deception,” (that he tion, and was therefore requesting Soviet assisNATO, where, as the Soviet government knows talked about so persistently during our previous tance to make it unnecessary. very well, there are many arguments.
In short, if meeting), but he did so in passing and without any This interpretation is supported by the such a decision were announced now it would edge to it.
I think that in order to withAfter meeting with me he immediately went Jupiters were political.
For this reason, Kennedy amount of time necessary for the United States government revealed, “besides himself and his brother, only to do this, taking into account the procedures that 27/X-62 A DOBRYNIN 2-3 people know about it in Washington.” exist within the NATO framework.
Princeton Univeragreement between Dobrynin and Kennedy to Kennedy and the Soviet ambassador.
R attempt to defuse as much as possible the hostility Kennedy then warned that his comments about ***** that Kennedy’s request for an answer by the next Turkey are extremely confidential; besides him day was likely to provoke in Moscow.
Khrushchev,” R Kennedy said in concluThe cable testifies to the concern of John and American government realized that.” sion.
Khrushchev Robert Kennedy that military action would trigPrior meetings between Dobrynin and to give him an answer (through the Soviet amger runaway escalation.
Robert Kennedy told Kennedy had sometimes degenerated into shoutbassador and R Kennedy) if possible within the Dobrynin of his government’s determination to ing matches.
On this occasion, Dobrynin indinext day on these thoughts in order to ensure the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, cates, the attorney general kept his emotions in have a business-like, clear answer in principle. and his belief that the Soviet Union “will undoubtcheck and took the ambassador into his confinot to get into a wordy discusedly respond with the same against us, somedence in an attempt to cooperate on the resolution sion, which might drag things out.
This two-pronged strategy sucserious situation, unfortunately, is such that there illogical if the administration was using the threat ceeded where compellence alone might have is very little time to resolve this whole issue. of force to compel the Soviet Union to withdraw failed.
It gave Khrushchev positive incentives to Unfortunately, events are developing too quickly. its missiles from Cuba.
It significantly raised the remove the Soviet missiles and reduced the emoThe request for a reply tomorrow,” stressed R expected cost to the United States of an attack tional cost to him of the withdrawal.
He reKennedy, “is just that—a request, and not an against the missiles, thereby weakening the credsponded as Kennedy and Dobrynin had hoped. ultimatum.
To maintain or the Soviet government will understand him corenhance that credibility, Kennedy would have rectly.” had to discount the probability of Soviet retaliaI noted that it went without saying that the tion to Dobrynin.
That nobody in the government Soviet government would not accept any ultimawas certain of Khrushchev’s reponse makes tums and it was good that the American governKennedy’s statement all the more remarkable. ment realized that.
It is possible that Dobrynin misquoted RobKhrushchev’s appeal in his last letter to the ert Kennedy.
However, the Soviet ambassador president to demonstrate state wisdom in resolvwas a careful and responsible diplomat.
At the C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 81 CASTRO’S SPEECH munity be prepared to go to war to be the Soviet’s sophisticated knowledge of continued from page 1 defend any socialist country, then we military matters.
First, he judged that such a tation, but also provides his reflection on the that he understood the missiles also could be statement would itself have a deterrent efepisode only five years after it occurred. an immediate deterrent to a United States invasion. fect against a United States invasion, by effectively This document is usefully read in conjuncBut here he presented the idea that Cuba committing the Soviet Union to Cuba’s detion with notes taken by the Soviet ambassawould be on the front line of the struggle fense.
Second, publication of the Cubandor to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseev, during between East and West.
Soviet agreement would strengthen Cuba’s meetings immediately after the crisis bePrior to 1962, Cuba had sought admis“moral” defense in the United Nations and tween Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas sion to the Warsaw Pact, but had been rein the forum of international public opinion.
From the very outset it was a appreciate the significance of this speech, it can States as a justification for and prelude capitulation, an erosion of our soveris necessary first to review Cuba’s perspecto an invasion.
Importantly, their fears eignty....9 tive on the Missile Crisis. were reinforced by the development of a major United States covert action, codenamed OpWhile the world breathed a sigh of relief Cuba’s Perspective on the Crisis eration Mongoose, and other American miliwhen Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced tary preparations.
Cuba learned about the Soviet decision Early in his speech, Castro asserted that tains.
But predicted that United States military strikes, and conCuban leaders did want to retain other weapFinally, Cuba perceived it was nothing ceivably an invasion, were likely to occur in onry that the United States was demanding more than a pawn in Soviet calculations. the next 24 to 72 hours (that is, possibly 10the Soviet Union withdraw.
On October 28, the Cuban leader had make broader the list of weapons for evacuIn 1992, the Cuban leader intimated that this articulated five points that he stated should ation.
Castro early 1963, after Khrushchev inadvertently withdrawal from Guantanamo Naval Base. approvingly recalled Mikoyan saying, if they informed Castro that there had been a secret At a minimum he expected that the Soviets added more demands.
Here agreeing to an internationally sponsored insified Soviet records of the Mikoyan-Castro were the seeds of true discontent. spection of the dismantling of the missiles conversations, Mikoyan conveyed The lessons were clear to Castro, and on Cuban soil without first asking Cuba’s Moscow’s decision to withdraw the these were what he attempted to convey to permission. bomber’s, to Castro’s evident fury, in a the Central Committee in 1968.
The meeting began on January 23, and C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 83 was presided over by Raoul Castro, the on the history of Cuban-Soviet relations, the artistic community.
But nobody has invited us.” vance a step further the historical study that 70th anniversary of the October Socialist Then I requested an invitation for the had been jointly launched.
Dobrynin, A Alexeev, O Troyanovsky, dence, the mansion at the Leninskie Gory. continued on page 87 84 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN would have been far more difficult to overchallenge because it claimed to be the model quent months, in speeches critical of the come the tensions with the Soviet Union. for developing socialism in Latin America, Soviet model of socialism and world revoluThese tensions were reaching their peak and the Cuban proletariat was less advanced tion, and supporting Ché Guevara’s Novemin January 1968.
That came three months before a major by the Tricontinental Conference—Cuba arThe Soviet action came after Premier international meeting of revolutionaries in ranged for nearly all of the delegations to be Alexsei Kosygin visited Cuba in July 1967, Havana, the Tricontinental Conference.
Until dominated by non-communist revolutionon his way back to Moscow from a summit then, Soviets believed they had papered over ary movements.
Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink, 224the March closure of small businesses— Crisis,” in James A Nathan, ed., The Cuban Missile 225. proved to be critical for the future direction Crisis Revisited ; 17.
Granma, International Edition , 4 and 11 Laurence Chang and Peter Kornbluh, eds., The Cuban February 1968. of the Cuban revolution.
Soviet Ideological and Strategithat were he a Cuban leader in 1962, he would likely cal Perspectives, 1959-77, trans.
Indeed, Soviet techniSee Allyn, Blight, and Welch, Back to the Brink, 7.
Lévesque, The USSR and the Cuban Revolution, cians were recalled during the spring of McNamara argued, though, that despite Cuba’s reason119-121.
It also included propaganda 2nd Sess., 7 June 1966, 93. and the decision to do so coincided with the operations through an off-shore radio station and eco24.
Kenner and Petras, eds., Fidel Castro Speaks, 233, with which Cuba established its ties to the President Kennedy understood the matter of secrecy in 277.
Politics, School of International Studies, American of the Cuban Armed Forces.
It was then that Raul woke up and said, PALACE OF THE REVOLUTION another blow of that nature, since we were seri“Look, why don’t you dress them up in sailor HAVANA ously concerned—and, in our view, rightly so suits?” , referring to the internaJANUARY 26, 1968 given those circumstances—over the pernicious tional supervisors.
We had States. the withdrawal of the Soviet mechanized infantry problems with the translators and there were These issues were made perfectly clear in brigades stationed in Cuba.
The imperialists must also phrase or other. answering each of the items in Khrushchev’s have known that, but they never declared the Anyway, those deliberations—as well as letter one by one. amount, they limited themselves to speculative some of the others—were characterized by total At that time, we also received Mikoyan’s figures, which revealed their interest in reducing and complete disagreement.
U In fact, anyone who reads Kennedy’s stateinclined toward Cuba, he was Cuba’s friend, and Thant’s visit was the one that was taken down in ments, his demands, will notice that he did not I think he still is a friend of Cuba; I mean, he did shorthand.
Do you caricatures reflecting their mood and their situaC OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 87 tion, in which they depicted the planes flying 6.
He had continued from page 83 out at them, and their planes and guns covered been an official of the Cuban communist party (which with cobwebs.
Blight, Bruce J Allyn, and David A Welch, Cuba On plicants should submit a CV, a statethe anti-aircraft launchers.
It is not clear what lengthy letter Castro mendation; writing samples (particufor protection of those anti-aircraft launchers, but is referring to here, or whether it has been made larly in English) are welcomed, though they could not provide effective protection.
Applicants should have a gave an order to add hundreds of additional antiaircraft launchers to protect those launchers.
There is evidence that plans also were made 1000 Jefferson Drive, S.W. for creating a Nicaraguan and Costa Rican base, but about that.
In that letter I told the Soviet leader there is not clear evidence on whether they were used.
In all their public the majority of the troops were withdrawn from I don’t know in what manner they reported statements Cuban representatives stated that the Cuba.
If the Soviet order to shoot down the plane was given by the had the right to use any kind of weapons for the Union was willing to give us assistance in our Commander-in-Chief of the Soviet troops in Cuba defense of the revolution.
I heard that many years later the first statement said that American missiles made that denied the American Senator’s claim he was decorated for that act. would be withdrawn only from Turkey; in the and said that there was a Soviet military training It is interesting that the former Soviet Amsecond the mentioning of Turkey was dropped. center in Cuba. bassador in Cuba, Alekseev, wrote When I visited the Soviet Union in 1963, At the time of the crisis President Kennedy in his memoirs that I was trying to avoid the Khrushchev read several letters to me.
Trying One more question concerned the public mentioned Italy, but the original letter mentioned to show how informed he was, he said that, statements made by the Soviet leadership and the the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey and Italy. according to his sources, nuclear warheads had coverage of the events in the organs of mass Later I asked the Soviet side to give explanations not yet reached Cuba by the time of the crisis.
Soviet military, the nuclear missiles were ready were Che Gevara and Aragones—who We couldn’t help being disappointed by the for a fight. had to propose that Khrushchev make public the fact that even though the Soviet part of the agreeI don’t know what Khrushchev was striving military agreement between the USSR and Cuba. ment talked only about the missiles in Cuba and for, but it seems to me that his assurances about Publicly the Soviet leaders claimed that there did not mention other types of weapons, particuthe defense of Cuba being his main goal notwithwere no offensive weapons in Cuba.
I cannot take the credit for the resolution of Khrushchev demonstrators during the The documents lend credence to the Novocherkassk riots in south Russia (June the crisis.
Important from the Cuban viewpoint, belongs to Khrushchev who caused that crisis by his stubbornness, and then resolved it.
I did not Nikita Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, former Mikoyan had been the last in the Soviet know what was the real correlation of forces at Soviet Ambassador in Cuba Aleksandr leadership who belonged to the “old guard” that time, how many missiles did Khrushchev Alekseev.
I up in fierce defense of their national soverous about the Cuban revolution and its young, thought that Khrushchev’s actions were too risky.
Now I understand that the actions undernotion, considered dangerous and irrespontaken by Khrushchev were risky, if not to say What both sides felt and understood sible in Moscow, became an excuse comduring the talks was no less important than irresponsible.
However, we understand that at that viet secret talks to resolve the crisis.
Some time, since the Stalin-Tito split and time the Soviet Union did not reach the parity of the Soviet leaders, gathered at the height the Sino-Soviet quarrel , which it has now.
I am not criticizing Khrushchev of the crisis on 27 October 1962 at Novothere was an open conflict of perspectives for pursuing strategic goals, but the choice of the Ogarevo governmental dacha near Moscow, and interests between the USSR and another timing and the means for achieving the goals was may even have feared that the Cubans, like communist regime.
That is why I don’t think reassured by the presence of Russian offichas destroyed us de jure [iuridicheskii; juI have a right to criticize Khrushchev.
The Soviet withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba something about the Cuban crisis,” he said with a smile. ambassador alerted the Soviet leadership under UN inspection.
But in any case, both that Moscow’s actions had endangered Soactions enraged and offended Castro, who 1.
The organization and results of the 1987 Cambridge viet-Cuban friendship.
Americans and Soviets Reexafter the Spanish-American war , when 90 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN the United States “liberated” Cuba from Soviet Union’s help.
Kennedy Administration had argued that his wife of forty years, was dying in the Still another tense moment in the talks Cuba for the United States was analagous to Kremlin hospital.
He learned about her came on November 12 after Khrushchev, Hungary for the USSR—part of its security death during the first, tensest conversation yielding to Kennedy’s pressure, made a new zone.
He defended lifting of the United States naval blockade of Cuba. zone, the United States had not yet managed Khrushchev’s claim that the outcome of the Unlike the missiles, the bombers had been to do the same to the Cuban revolution.
For Mikoyan, tionary movement, particularly in the face of nuclear war.
To win over the furious Castro, this second mission was no less difficult the challenge from Beijing.
Mikoyan pressed Moscow’s messenger was ready to stay in than the previous one.
Castro interrupted the the analogy between Khrushchev’s settleCuba for an indefinite time.
Mikoyan’s concession, he agitatedly cut off his visitor’s the Bolshevik regime at all costs.
Beneath the veneer of ideologiHavana’s determination to blow this hegeBut the Cuban leader and his comrades cal phraseology lay the hard core pragmamony to pieces through a revolutionary ofwere soon infuriated anew when, only mintism of superpower statesmen who had tested fensive. utes later, Mikoyan tried to convince them to the waters of globalism and reached its limCastro and particularly Ché Guevara accept a United Nations inspection of the its.
Argument number one was that the linked the future of the Cuban revolution to dismantling of the strategic missiles based in survival of the Cuban regime in an area the growth of the international revolutionary Cuba—or at least their loading onto Soviet where the correlation of forces was so admovement in Latin America.
Castro, acutely aware the sine qua non for the survival of the The developments especially frustrated Ché, that Khrushchev had accepted the principle Cuban revolution.
But he admitted that the he explained, because, “We are deeply conof a UN inspection without informing him, American proximity to Cuba and the United States vinced in the possibility of seizing power in bought none of it.
Both he and Mikoyan sometimes almost verbatim, between nois—“learned about the fact of deployment knew that this meant factional splits in many Mikoyan’s story and the story later told by of strategic missiles in Cuba, therefore radical groupings in Latin America and a Khrushchev in his memoirs.
The authored now by American and Russian preferred to promote world revolution even conclusions must have been bleak, as he historians, and I hope they will comment on at a risk of sacrificing Soviet power in explained to Castro on November 4.
We could not undertake similar steps capable missiles to Cuba, though most CIA cannot live in shame, but one should not in Norway, nor in England, nor in Japan.
We analysts discounted the likelihood of this allow the enemy to destroy oneself.
Kremcounter-blockade.” tainly erred in conflating the suspicions of lin apparatchiks would repeat this same Mikoyan and Khrushchev (in his letters some United States intelligence officials with litany of prudence time and again, when to Castro before and after the visit) sang the Kennedy’s awareness of the missiles.
Of course, the standard version history of the Cold War. he told Castro.
The Soviets had also covered the badly,” but “in mid-September the and bargaining in late October.
In Mikoyan’s version, possible in Berlin,” adding that the Soviets American blockade of Cuba continued, presented on November 4, the initial source used the Berlin asset in a disinformation Mikoyan warned, “then the Soviet Union of this scoop was not the U-2 flights but West campaign in September-October, to distract would not have enough strength to render German intelligence [BundesAmerican attention from Cuba.
Kennedy, said the discussion on Berlin, but also secret talks that the danger of a pro-Beijing reorientaMikoyan, spoke nothing about Soviet troops on the Soviet strategic buildup in Cuba, until 92 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN after the Congressional elections.
The United States Congress passed the Platt Amendment in March 1901, as an attachment to the Army AppropriaMikoyan related to the Cubans, “Through sumer goods, and weapons.
Khrushchev that he would were shattered, sought to fulfill his “internatees that no “foreign power” would be ever permitted to not aggravate the situation until after the tionalist duty” in other lands, and found gain a foothold on Cuban soil.
Castro referred to this particular clause of the Platt Amendment as a constraint Congressional elections and would not set pretexts to restore the revolutionary dignity on Cuban sovereignty.
No country in the world would accept that kind of amendment in its constitution, because it gives the afterwards would proceed to the solution of who remembered Castro’s outbursts in 1962, right to another country to intervene to establish peace...” the Berlin quesion.
The text of Khrushchev-Kennedy correspondence 1 See Hope M Harrison, “Ulbricht and the Concrete regarding this thorny issue on 6, 11, 12, and 13 Novemto get loud about Berlin.
Soviet-East German Relations and the Berlin Crisis, neously believed that the crux of their policy 1958-1961,” Cold War International History Project 15.
Woodrow and Fidel Castro, 12 November 1962, translation in Wilson International Center for Scholars, May 1993), Gen.
William Y Smith, Did Mikoyan’s mission prevent a Sopassim, quotation on 4.
For illustrations, see Weathersby’s article in the answer to this question.
Mikoyan-Castro talks, November 4 and 5. primarily of the revolutionary “legitimacy” 18.
See,g., the Rusk-Gromyko meeting of 18 October Evidence,” The Journal of American-East Asian Relaof their regime in Latin America.
Castro-Mikoyan conversation, 12 November 1962. who had previously analyzed the origins of the Cuban 20.
Soviet-Cuban relations ended and was transMissile Crisis through the prism of the bipolar confron21.
Castro-Mikoyan conversation, 12 November 1962. formed into a marriage of convenience.
For Khrushchev’s recollections of the crisis, in tation and the dynamics of the balance of strategic had both immediate and long-term conseforces, and who firmly believed that “the factor of the English, see Strobe Talbott, trans. and ed., Khrushchev quences.
Counterintelligence Service or FSK] that are being In all probability, Khrushchev addressed 6.
See Castro to Khrushchev, 26 October 1962, in declassified specifically for this project. these words not so much to Kennedy (who 24.
Mezhdunarodniie otnosheniia, Press. tions in any form on their territory, Soviet 1994), 174.
Quoted by Mikoyan in his meeting with Cuban military and naval personnel had to comply leaders, 5 November 1962. with humiliating procedures of aerial in9.
Khrushchev to Kennedy, 22 November 1962, pubspection imposed on them by the Amerilished in Problems of Communism 42 , cans, something for which they could not 108.
See Sergei Khrushchev, Nikita Khrushchev, 378. forgive Khrushchev even decades later.
Castro was quoted to this effect by Ernesto “Ché” the next three decades, the Soviet economy Guevara during Mikoyan’s meeting with Cuban leadwas burdened with a multi-billion Cuban aid ers on 5 November 1962.
Ellipsis in tion have been retained in some cases where they the fate of the motherland.
Every nerve of the original.] conflict with normal English practice.] people was strained.
There was a feeling that the Concessions on the part of the Soviet Union people were united in their resolve to defend produced a sense of oppressiveness.
Every Cuban was ready to repel the cally our people were not prepared for that.
The pain has appeared, as if we were deprived of not The First Castro-Mikoyan Conversation, whole country was united by a deep hatred of only the missiles, but of the very symbol of 3 November 1962 USA imperialism.
Reports of missile launchers being arrest anyone, because the unity of the people was dismantled and returned to the USSR at first so staggering.
That unity was the result of considseemed to our people to be an insolent lie.
MIKOYAN and FIDEL CASTRO to explain the importance of Soviet aid to Cuba, agreement, were not aware that the missiles still to explain the purity of the principles in the policy belonged to the Soviet side.
They had become accustomed to the Castro, where I [Soviet Ambassador to Cuba patriotic objectives we were pursuing in obtainfact that the Soviet Union gave us weapons and Aleksandr Alekseev] was also present. ing arms to defend the country from aggression. that they became our property.
We said that the strategic weapons were a guaranAnd suddenly came the report of the Ameri3 November 1962 tee of firmness for our defense.
It ership of the Republic of Cuba and our leaderSpeaking of psychological questions, we caused deep confusion.
Ambassador Alekseev has informed us would like to underline that the Cuban people did the way that the issue was structured—the possiabout these differences, and about the speech by understand us.
They understood that we had bility of removing missile armaments from Cuba Fidel Castro on 1 November 1962, in which the received Soviet weapons, that Cuban defense if the USA liquidated its bases in Turkey. latter explained to the Cuban people the position capacities had increased immeasurably.
Thus, I was saying, Fidel Castro continued, that in of the revolutionary government. when Kennedy attempted to frighten us, the Cuthe post-revolutionary years we have carried out The CC CPSU, Mikoyan emphasized, had ban people reacted very resolutely, very patriotimuch ideological work to prepare people for sent me to Cuba to discuss in the most frank way cally.
It is hard to imagine the enthusiasm, the understanding socialist ideas, marxist ideas.
These all the unclear questions with the Cuban combelief in victory with which the Cubans voluntarideas today are deeply rooted.
Judging by the welcome at the airport, the ily enlisted themselves into the army.
The people the policies of the Soviet government, learn from Cuban leaders consider this a useful meeting.
Aware the Soviet people to whom they are deeply thankcame here to speak to you sincerely and openly. of the real solidarity of the Soviet government ful for invaluable help and support.
But at that And now it seems to me that it would be useful if and people, Cubans psychologically felt themdifficult moment our people felt as if they had lost you, comrade Fidel Castro, tell me frankly what selves to be strong.
Only by speakfound its material embodiment, became the banKhrushchev had given orders to dismantle mising frankly is it possible to assure complete conner around which the forces and courage of our sile launchers, that such instructions had been fidence and mutual understanding.
As we agreed people closely united. given to Soviet officers and there was not a word before, after this conversation a meeting will be In observing Soviet strategic arms on their in the message about the consent of the Cuban organized with the secretaries of the National territory, the people of Cuba sensed an enormous government, that report shocked people.
CDR [Committees for the Defense of the Revoresponsibility to the countries of the socialist Cubans were consumed by a sense of disaplution] leadership in order to discuss all the issues camp.
They were conscious that these mighty pointment, confusion and bitterness.
In walking in detail. weapons had to be preserved in the interests of the along the street, driving to armed units, I obIn response Fidel Castro said that the Cuban whole socialist camp.
Mikoyan in Cuba the fact that USA planes were continuously viosion. once again, and to speak with him about queslating our air space, we decided to weaken the Why was that decision made unilaterally, tions that are important for both sides.
AntiIn some 48 hours that feeling of bitterness you, Fidel Castro continued, very frankly.
We aircraft gunners and the soldiers protecting the and pain spread among all the people.
Events profoundly trust the Soviet Union. missile locations were full of enthusiasm, and were rapidly following one another.
The offer to Regarding the questions that caused some ready to defend these at the price of their own withdraw weapons from Cuba under the condidifferences, as we explained it to our people, I lives. tion of liquidating bases in Turkey was advanced would like to say the following.
On 28 October there came the These questions are motivated, first of all, and the psychological tension was growing also. order to dismantle the missiles and the consent to by psychological factors.
For the question of moral spirit of our people had declined sharply. that there was no time for consultations.
Mikoyan diseverything, the basis of really fraternal relations. into Cuban airspace became more frequent, and cussed the issues about which Fidel Castro had We understood that no correspondence can sufwe were asked not to open fire on them.
All of talked, but these explanations were interrupted by fice to explain completely the misunderstanding this generated a strong demoralizing influence. an incoming report about the death of Mikoyan’s of those days.
Therefore the CC CPSU decided The feeling of disappointment, pain and bitterwife.
The transcript of this part of the conversato send me to Cuba in order to explain to our ness that enveloped people could have been used tion will be transmitted with the notes of the next friends the Soviet position and to inform them on by counter-revolutionaries to instigate anti-soconversation. other subjects that may be of interest to them.
Enemies could have profitted know, Mikoyan continued, that if we explain because the legal rules about which we had been 3.
XI.62 ALEKSEEV everything frankly then you, our brothers, will speaking with the people were being forgotten. understand us.
Russian Foreign Ministry archives, obobservation that he, naturally, had no intention to without coordinating it with our government. tained and translated by NHK television, copy put pressure , that his task was to Nobody had the slightest wish to believe it, provided by Philip Brenner; translation by explain our position.
It is cerSince then our people began to address very ***** tainly possible that even after our explanations sensitively the matter of sovereignty.
The blockade organized by the USA 4 November 1962 of Cuba and the USSR and the whole world administration is still in place.
The USA continrevolutionary movement. ues to violate the freedom of the sea.
The Americans seek to determine what MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION very frankly and in detail that the Cuban people weapons we can possess.
Verification is being had not understood everything regarding the most organized.
MIKOYAN with Fidel CASTRO, [Cuban recent actions of the Soviet government.
Comsame direction as it is or was in Morocco, Guinea, President] Oswaldo DORTICOS TORRADO, rade Fidel Castro also spoke on the issues which Ghana, Ceylon and Yemen.
The USA continues to violate Cuban GUEVARA, Emilio ARAGONES and Carlos role of the psychological factor which has special airspace and we must bear it.
Several particularities of consent for inspections has been given without the psychological mold of Cubans have formed asking us.
November 1962 as a result of the historical development of the All of this seemed to our people to be a step country.
MIKOYAN transmitted to the Cuban saying, it is very important to take this into accept inspections, accept the right of the USA to leaders cordial fraternal regards on behalf of the account. determine what kinds of weapons we can use.
A He said that the Central Committee of the CPSU substance of the speech by comrade Fidel Castro drop in moral spirit can be dangerous for the feels admiration and respect toward Cuban leadon 1 November.
Certainly I could not perceive cause of revolution. ers, who from the very beginning of their struggle completely the speech insofar as the American The Soviet Union consolidated itself as a demonstrated courage and fearlessness, confipress frequently distorts the substance of the state a long time ago and it can carry out a flexible dence in revolutionary victory in Cuba, readiness statements made by Cuban leaders.
We are the basis of the American press interpretation I people readily understand their government, trust proud of the victory achieved by the Cuban revounderstood that it was a friendly speech proit wholeheartedly. lution against interventionists on Playa Giron nounced by comrade Fidel Castro underlining the Cuba is a young developing country.
Cuban revolutionargreat significance of friendship between the Sopeople are very impulsive.
The moral factor has ies demonstrated such a potent spirit of resistance viet Union and Cuba, mentioning the broad aid a special significance in our country. that it inspires admiration and proves that the rendered by the Soviet Union to Revolutionary We were afraid that these decisions could Cubans are always ready to fight until victory is Cuba.
He also said that there were some differprovoke a breach in the people’s unity, underachieved.
Cuban leaders have shown great courences in views between us, but those differences mine the prestige of the revolution in the eyes of age, intrepidity, and firmness in dangerous days. had to be discussed on the level of parties and Latin American peoples, in the eyes of the whole The CC CPSU admires the readiness of the Cuban governments, not massive rallies.
We trust Cuban leaders as we of Fidel Castro, testifying sentiments of friend... do ourselves. ship and trust toward our country, were reafIt was very difficult for us to explain the In the course of the Cuban events our party firmed by the welcome reception on my arrival to situation to the people.
If the decisions had been and government were acting having in mind to do Havana.
The very tone of the conversation with taken in another way, it would have been easier. whatever was necessary to make comrade Fidel Castro was imbued with a sense of If a truce were suggested first and then the issues better for Cuba.
When Ambassador Alekseev fellowship and trust. were coordinated, we would have been in a better informed about the opinion of comrade Fidel I’m confident, continued Mikoyan, that the position.
Immediately all there notwithstanding some differences of opinC OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 95 ion.
The American press spreads a lot of conjecconsultations on diplomatic forms of struggle in possibilities for maneuvering, for flexibility in tures regarding the aim of my trip to Cuba.
The Soviet people easily underare writing that I went to Havana allegedly in Comrades, I would like to begin by asking stands similar decisions of its government. order to apply pressure on Cuban leaders, in order you to say, what steps of the Soviet government The mentioned facts represent a danger for to “pacify” them, as have caused misunderstanding and differences, the revolutionary process, for the Cuban revoluMcCloy had stated to the American newspapers. in order to give you the necessary explanations. tion itself.
About my conversation with McCloy I can tell True, yesterday comrade Fidel Castro already Here is the summary of the questions eluciyou in detail afterward, but first of all I would like narrated much about this.
But I would like to ask dated by me in the conversation yesterday with to answer the main questions. both comrade Fidel Castro and all of you to raise comrade Mikoyan.
We didn’t touch on the issue As I have already stated before my departure all those questions that you are interested in. of the assessment of the international situation.
My colleagues are aware of the moment it had appeared that we had no underrade Fidel Castro.
The demand on liquidation of substance of our conversation yesterday, but in standing of preceding steps.
For example, the the United States Guantanamo base is a just and correct order to summarize the questions which are imobjective of placing strategic armaments in Cuba demand.
I had no plans to speak publicly in New portant for us let me repeat them briefly.
We could not York, but when I read in the American press the comrade Mikoyan has already said, recent events understand where is the exit from that complispeculation about the objectives of my trip, I have considerably influenced the moral spirit of cated situation.
By no means were we thinking decided to voice that statement in order to make our people.
They were regarded as a retreat at the that the result could be a withdrawal of strategic my position completely clear.
Using radio, Amerivery moment when every nerve of our country armaments from Cuban territory. can propaganda is trying to embroil Cuba [in had been strained.
Our people is brought up in the Yesterday comrade Mikoyan partly exconflict] with the Soviet Union, is trying to sting spirit of trust in the Soviet Union.
Nevertheless, plained some issues but the conversation was Cubans to the quick.
Because the many people do not understand the linkage beinterrupted by the tragic news of the spouse of enemy can’t behave differently.
But the enemy must be repulsed. liquidation of American bases in Turkey.
We also want to discuss new The Soviet Union gave its consent for inspections problems that arise in front of our two countries. also without sending a notification to the Cuban DORTICOS makes the observation that in It is not a part of my task at all to put pressure on leadership.
It is necessary to take into account the the summary offered by Fidel Castro there have Cuban leaders.
That is an impudent conjecture of special delicacy of our people which has been been generalized all the questions that have caused American propaganda.
Our interests are united. created as a result of several historic developdifferences, but he asks to explain, We are marxist-leninists and we are trying to ments.
We discussed the Americans upon Cuba, played a particular role in offer to make a statement of nonaggression against current situation at the CC CPSU and came to a this regard.
Using the Platt amendment the United Cuba under the condition of removing Soviet decision that there was no complete relaxation of States of America prohibited the Cuban governmissiles from Cuba, though the Cuban governtensions yet. ment from deciding by itself questions of foreign ment had not yet given its view in this regard.
MIKOYAN asks if there are more questhat in essence currently the danger has abated. ing the current crisis there was also an impression tions.
RODRIGUEZ says that his question is A victory was gained regarding prevention representatives, without consultations with the related to that formulated by Dorticos.
The USA imperialists unclear what does the Soviet Union regard as a larger tasks on the diplomatic field.
We must dertook a series of aggressive measures against victory, whether its substance consists in the achieve a victory over the diplomatic tension, the Republic of Cuba.
Systematically they violate Cuban air space and on the part of the USA are ephemeral.
I would like to do whatever is necessary to elevate these violations of the sovereignty of the ensure that you understand us correctly.
MIKOYAN says that he will give the in a hurry and if you don’t object, I’ll stay in Cuba administration. most detailed answer to all the questions raised by as long as necessary to explain all the aspects of There is the question of inspections.
I think, first of all, we must consider inspections are a sore subject for us.
We cannot order to make the Cuban comrades understand us those issues where some differences have aptake that step.
I’ll do my best to help you understand us. it is as if we permit the United States of America long time.
Later, when you bring forward your We must consider all these questions and decide to determine what we can or cannot do in foreign opinions and perhaps ask some other questions, I what can be done jointly to ensure the success of policy.
This deterioration was caused by Cuban leadership. strategic missiles from the Cuban territory.
Appressure on the part of the Americans and large The main condition for the success of this parently you agree that this is the main question. expenses for defensive needs.
In this case the If there is no understanding over this issue, it is the worsening of the situation could be the result Americans would find themselves in a very diffidifficult to comprehend other questions. of the implementation of the plan for cult position.
Our military people said that four Being in Moscow I did not realize that this the economic suffocation of Cuba.
The CC CPSU months were necessary to implement that plan. question would be asked.
Previously it had not discussed the situation in Cuba and decided, withWe foresaw that the delivery of armaments and arisen. out your request—you are very modest and try not Soviet troops to Cuban territory would take a half The fate of the Cuban revolution has always to disturb us by requests—to undertake some of the preparatory period.
Measures were also been important for us, especially beginning from measures in order to strengthen our help to Cuba. thought out in order to prevent the unleashing of the moment when Fidel Castro declared the If before you were receiving part of the weapons global nuclear war.
We decided to work through objective of constructing socialism in Cuba.
Soon credit and only a portion of armaments free of the UN, to mobilize international public opinion, cialist revolution in Latin America should decharge, now we decided to supply you gratis with to do everything in order to avoid a world collivelop and strengthen.
When we received the weapons and partly with military uniforms—100 sion.
We understood that the Americans could news that had defeated the counter-revolutionthousand sets in two years—and equipment.
It appeared to be the most ary landing on Playa Giron it naturally made us saw that the Cuban trade representatives, who dangerous thing if the USA imperialists blockhappy, but to some extent it worried us, too. were participating in the negotiations, were feeladed the supplies of fuel to Cuba.
They could Certainly, it was foolish on the part of the Ameriing themselves somewhat uneasy.
They were abstain from limiting food deliveries to Cuba, cans to organize such an invasion.
Therefore we accepted want to doom the Cuban people to famine, and at aggression against Cuba, that they would not all their proposals in order to frustrate the plan of the same time prevent supplies of weapons and tolerate the further development and strengthenKennedy designed for an internal exfuel to Cuba.
It is difficult for them to plosion in Cuba. own energy resources, can’t survive without fuel. reconcile with the existence of Cuba which is The same thing can be said regarding food Our communications with Cuba are very stretched. constructing socialism in the immediate proximand manufactured goods.
Thereity of their borders. economic situation in Cuba we sent there articles fore transportation to Cuba is very difficult.
Speaking very can’t use our Air Force or Navy forces in case of that the Americans would not give up their atfrankly, we have been giving to you everything a blockade of Cuba.
The first one consisted entered a new stage of relations which nowadays blockade American bases in Turkey in response of an attempt at the economic suffocation of the has a different character.
Indeed, during the first because we have no other exit to the MediterraRepublic of Cuba in order to provoke discontent stage there was some semblance of mutually nean.
We could not undertake such steps neither inside the country, to provoke famine and to beneficial trade.
Currently those supplies are part in Norway, nor in England, nor in Japan.
We do achieve the collapse of the new regime due to of clearly fraternal aid. not have enough possibilities for counter-blockpressure from within, without military intervenI recall, that after his trip to trip to Bulgaria ade.
Khrushchev Berlin. intervention with the participation of told us that while staying in that country he was Our plans did not include creation of our Latinamerican mercenaries and with the support thinking all the time of Cuba, he was worried that base here, on the American continent.
This plan the Americans would organize an intervention in the policy of constructing bases on foreign terrienvisaged invasion as the means to deal the final Cuba with the aid of reactionary governments of tories is not a correct one.
Such a policy was blow and to kill the revolutionary regime, if the Latin America or would carry out a direct aggrescarried out in the time of Stalin.
They do not want to permit the strengthenbase in Germany which was created on the ground the defeat on Playa Giron the American imperiing of Cuba, and the defeat of Cuba, N.S. of our right as conqueror.
Currently our troops in alists proceeded to the execution of those plans.
Khrushchev said to us, would deliver a very Germany are quartered there according to the The victory of the revolution in Cuba is a powerful blow upon the whole world revolutionWarsaw Pact.
Under treaty there was our naval great success of marxist-leninist theory, and a ary movement.
We also had a base in Port Arthur defeat of the Cuban revolution would mean a two American imperialists. in order to defend our eastern borders from Japan. or three times larger defeat of the whole socialist It was at that time when there appeared a plan All these bases were liquidated.
Such responsibility on the Soviet government insofar ertheless there are our troops in Poland in order to a defeat would bear witness to the supremacy of as it contained within it the risk of a war which the ensure communications with our forces in Gerimperialist forces in the entire world.
That would imperialists could unleash against the Soviet many, and Soviet troops are quartered in Hunbe an incredible blow which would change the Union.
But we decided that it was necessary to gary in order to protect us from the side of correlation of forces between the two systems, save Cuba.
We do not need bases in Cuba for the would hamper the development of the internathat plan to us and asked us to think it through very destruction of the United States of America.
We were and seriously in order to make a decision in three days. have long-range missiles which can be used diare considering to be our duty, a duty of commuWe had to think over both the consequences of its rectly from our territory.
The working Cuban revolution, to frustrate the imperialist of its execution, and how to achieve Cuba’s salvaclass of that country is stupefied by capitalist plans. tion without unleashing a nuclear war.
Besides, such a plan would contraSome time ago our comrades informed us decided to entrust our military with elaborating dict our theory.
We can use the long-range that the economic situation in the country their considerations and to discuss it with the missiles only to deliver a retaliatory blow, withC OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 97 out landing troops on USA territory.
Nevertheless, the Americans managed to take a tion of what to do in the created situation we The objective of bringing Soviet troops and photo of the missiles in the firing position. received the communication from comrade Castro, strategic weapons to Cuba consisted only in Kennedy didn’t want to speak about Soviet misit was on Sunday, that an aggression against Cuba strengthening your defense potential.
It was a siles in Cuba until the end of the Congressional would be unleashed in the next 24 hours.
But other sources we were in possession of informarialist play with fire regarding Cuba.
If the two Republican senators [a clear reference to tion that the USA aggression would begin in 10strategic armaments were deployed under condiSens.
Despite the fact that these were sepations of secrecy and if the Americans were not Dirksen of Illinois—ed.] learned about the fact of rate sources, the information corresponded.
Unaware of their presence in Cuba, then it would the strategic missiles placed in Cuba and theretil the moment of the start of the USA aggression have been a powerful means of deterrence.
Had we not specialists informed us that strategic missiles can had no information on how he intended to act. been successful in this regard there would have be reliably camouflaged in the palm forests of The United States of America organized been unleashed a war.
We had to use diplomatic Cuba. maneuvers in the area of Vieques Island [in the means.
We were following very intently the transCaribbean], naming them “Ortsac,”e., Castro, Kennedy was making statements that he had portation of troops and strategic weapons to Cuba. if you read it backwards.
But those maneuvers nothing against the stationing in Cuba of Soviet Those sea shipments were successful in July and could appear to be not an exercise, but a sea cover weapons, even troops, but that placing strategic August.
Considering that the were surprised that Kennedy in his speeches was blockade against Cuba, we didn’t know if the missiles had been discovered and were no longer speaking only about Soviet military specialists, Americans were really carrying out maneuvers or a means of deterrence we decided that for the sake but not Soviet troops.
At the very beginning he were preparing for a direct attack upon Cuba. of saving Cuba it was necessary to give an order really was thinking so.
You agreed with the withdrawal of strategic miselection campaign for himwe received reliable reports of preparations for an siles from Cuba while leaving there all the other self.
We managed to preserve all to solve the question of Berlin in the nearest fact that the Americans had interrupted their the forces and means which are necessary for the future.
This was done in order to distract their maneuvers because of a hurricane.
The maneudefense of the Cuban revolution even without attention away from Cuba.
So, we used a diververs did not resume when the hurricane went strategic missiles which had been a means of sionary maneuver.
In reality we had no intention away but the American combatant ships remained deterrence, but they were discovered and thereof resolving the Berlin question at that time.
We have enough comrades, the question of Berlin is of interest to Khrushchev rebuked Kennedy for declaring a powerful missiles that can be used from our you, I can give you the necessary information. blockade around Cuba.
Khrushchev American attempts to assume the right to detering of Soviet troops in Cuba, the Cubans kept through confidential channels and made a request mine what weapons Cuba can use and what powerful armaments and anti-aircraft missiles, not to aggravate the situation until the end of the armaments it may not possess.
And then the so we consider that he also made a elections to Congress [on 6 November 1962— Americans decided to carry out a direct aggresconcession. ed.], and not to proceed to the Berlin issue.
Wishing The statement of Kennedy about non-agresponded that we could wait until the end of the to free themselves from the threat of a blow from gression against Cuba on the part of the USA and elections , but immediately after them the strategic missiles, they decided to liquidate latinamerican countries also represents a conceswe should proceed to the Berlin issue.
If we take into account these reciprocal Americans learned about the transport of stratetional warhead missiles and immediately after concessions and all other factors, we will see that gic weapons to Cuba they themselves began that land troops on Cuban territory in order to a big victory has been gained.
Both sides were talking liquidate centers of resistance as soon as possible. the Americans made such a statement.
That is about the Berlin crisis, but simultaneously beIt would have been impossible for us in these why we decided that the main objective—salvalieved that at that given moment the essence of circumstances not to repulse the aggression of the tion of Cuba—had been achieved.
This assault would mean an assault upon not be an assault against Cuba.
There would not By mid-September the Americans apparyou and us, as far as in Cuba there were situated be a war.
We are gaining more favorable posiently received data regarding the transport to Soviet troops and strategic missiles.
I nuclear war would be unleashed as a result of Indeed, it was necessary to send the draft of have already spoken about this fact with comrade such a collision.
Certainly we would destroy our decision to Cuba in order to have consultaFidel Castro.
The American intelligence was not America, our country would be strongly damtions with you, to receive your consent and only the first in obtaining that information, it was West aged too, but we have a larger territory.
It would have been done in this German intelligence who gave that information would have been destroyed first.
Fidel Castro informed us that an inevitable agsent planes to the air space of Cuba for aerial The objective of all the measures undergression was expected in 24 hours.
By the mophotography and the ascertainment of the detaken by the Soviet Union was the defense of ment when we received it and were discussing the ployment areas of the strategic missiles.
If we had tried to send you our draft we into vertical position only at night, but to mainblow to the whole socialist camp.
And exactly at would have had to encode the document, transmit tain them in a lying-down position in the daytime. the moment when we were pondering the quesit by radio, decipher it, translate it into Spanish.
Khrushchev wrote to a consultation would not have made sense by that significance but we don’t pay them special imKennedy and simultaneously with my letter an time.
It could happen in such portance, though we will seek their liquidation. answer from Kennedy to Khrushchev arrived. a way, that the answer would be received, but From your statements I see now that the After all, why is Kennedy already speaking about Cuba itself would have ceased to exist, a war Cubans were regarding this demand as if it was the Soviet proposal about dismantling, etc., in his would have been unleashed.
There are USA bases not response of 27 October to Khrushchev’s message moment.
We thought our Cuban friends would only in Turkey, but also in England and other of 26 October, if it was not directly said in the understand us.
Negotiations began at night, after the aware of the direct threat of assault.
At that long-range strategic missiles, aimed at Europe, message from Kennedy.
Consequently, it was moment the main objective consisted of preventcan quickly destroy them. not possible to consider inevitable an attack against ing an attack.
There is a question, on which didn’t know that Khrushchev was writing to decision to act immediately, but without paying we are insufficiently informed.
It seems due attention to the psychological factor, about On 26 October the Soviet government sent to me that on 27 October, at that time, there was which comrade Fidel Castro spoke here.
Kennedy a letter without a word about Turkey. no unavoidable threat of attack.
The principle of Regarding the possibility of a truce at that On 27 October we learned about Turkey from the agreement had already been found.
It seems to moment, mentioned by the Cuban comrades, the broadcasts of Soviet radio.
The American media me that there was available time for consultaAmericans would not take such a step in those expressed some surprise because this problem tions. conditions.
There are a lot of revanchists in the had not been raised in the message of the 26th.
We have ber Kennedy was formally responding as if only burst into Cuba.
There were two letters. transmitted by radio, though there was no direct time and the situation before the crisis.
All the mescrisis the Americans were preparing an intervenletter of 27 October was published.
Now they have committed content of the letter of 27 October covers the everything received from him confidentially were themselves not to attack Cuba.
Certainly, the events also had negative question of Turkey was not raised at the beginthe meetings, I’m aware of everything, but if you consequences, especially as American propaning.
You have all want me to do it, I’ll check all the documents that ganda was trying suit their own ends by using the correspondence on this issue.
If there is such I have with me and tomorrow I’ll complement my some facts and distorting them.
I agree with comrade negative consequences of the recent events. ber, whose text, as it seemed to me, is identical to Mikoyan’s suggestion.
It seemed to me that one letter has not question. concordance of the Cuban government.
To many Cubans it seems that instead of our was exactly our consent that demand for the liquidation of American bases in ensured some truce for a certain time.
Turkey it would be better to put the question of One cannot perceive nihilistically all agreethe liquidation of the base in Guantanamo.
Wasn’t it in point of view of military and practical interests of change.
There Speaking frankly, we were not thinking about ters. are no nuclear weapons at Guantanamo.
On 27 October Kennedy gave without difficulties due to the geographical situsaid that the Russians could raise the question of guarantees not to attack Cuba, if the Soviet govation of the USA and Cuba.
If we speaking about the possibility of such a demand impression is growing that it was in response to were to raise the question of Guantanamo base inside American circles.
It was decided urgently, weapons from Cuban territory in general, that great importance for us.
An agreement to create an control and it was necessary to seek other mea“we want to create confidence among Cubans, international verification commission was sures so that the Americans could be convinced confirming that we are with them and we do not achieved in Geneva during the discusthat it had been done.
He said that they were relieve responsibility for rendering help to the sion of the Indochina issue.
The proposal was aware of dismantling work, but they were afraid Cuban people.” made by representatives of the Soviet Union, that the missiles could be hidden in Cuban forChina, and other countries.
But we are speaking only supported by the leader of the Democratic Repubremoved from Cuban territory.
Such an act would have lic of Vietnam comrade Ho Chi Minh, who was other forms of verification that he had in mind. political rather than military significance.
Currently both Ho Chi Minh McCloy answered that, in their opinion, an aerial were looking for an exit from that situation.
It and the king of Cambodia ask to preserve that inspection could be used for this aim, but that it seems to us that it was possible to create a more international verification commission.
In this was necessary for Cuba to agree to verification difficult atmosphere for the Americans by raiscase there is no question of limiting the sovereign from airspace.
I resolutely said in response that ing such a question as the liquidation of the rights neither of Vietnam nor Cambodia. such a method is out of the question because it Guantanamo base.
If the Americans had fication commission without infringing on their of that issue—we categorically rejected such a accepted such an offer, and they could do so, we sovereign rights. method and stressed our reluctance even to conwould have had to leave Cuba.
We could not Several years ago we proposed [in May vey that proposal to the Cubans. afford it.55—ed.] to the Americans and English to creWe knew that the American planes had been Now I’ll pass to the issue of inspections.
If ate jointly international verification posts on railflying over the territory of Cuba and had carried we had made a statement declining inspections, way junctions, in large ports, and along highways. out air photography.
I told McCloy that on the the Americans would have taken it for our desire In due time we basis of that aerial photography Americans could to swindle them and their intervention would also suggested to organize international verificabe convinced of the fact that work on the dismanhave become a reality.
In answered me that air photography reflected the about is not a broad inspection, but a verification the event of the acceptance of this suggestion, a process of dismantling work, but that was not all, of the sites, known to the Americans due to aerial part of our territory, Poland, and Hungary would because in their view there were delays in disphotography and which have been locations of have been controlled.
The objective condition of voluntary acceptance of the commitit was very important to be sure of the removal of would have been to verify if the missiles had ments, would not have undermined the sovereign the missiles from Cuban territory.
Then they really been dismantled and their embarkation rights of the states. would not have doubts of missiles being hidden in really accomplished; verification of the areas A similar example is the creation of an interthe forests.
He added that the information is where the missiles had been assembled could be national commission in Laos in order to verify needed to be convinced of the missiles’ withcarried out in one day and verification of loadcompliance of the 1962 agreement, in particular, drawal.
It was not a question of any to verify the withdrawal of foreign troops from any secret information, they are worried by the permanent or general inspection.
It was said that Laos and a ban on the introduction of weapons. question of whether the missiles have been withrepresentatives of neutral countries would carry Souvanna Phouma did not object drawn. out a verification only once.
Cuban issues are Vietnam allowed international control, commudiscussing that issue with McCloy, but I was solved by the Cuban leadership only.
But, being nists of India didn’t object to international verifiaware that military consultants, a general and a owners of that kind of weapon, we stated our cation.
Poland agreed to verify the withdrawal of colonel, had been sent from the Soviet Union to consent for verification of dismantling and loadAmerican troops and the troops of Ho Chi Minh.
We believed that after coordinating with And it was done with the consent of comrade Ho hope, the issue will be further examined. you, you would accept this suggestion.
There is another method which I didn’t could not decide it instead of you.
I’m giving you all these examples because mention to the Americans, but I can explain it to We were assuming that it was possible to when we, on the basis of the above mentioned you.
The process of dismantling and loading of give consent to verification by representatives of experience, were thinking about you, we didn’t the strategic weapons can be photographed and neutral countries of the dismantling and withpay due attention to that psychological factor, these documents can be used in order to achieve drawal of the missiles — doing all of this without about which we learned here from comrade Fidel the declared objective. hurting Cuba’s sovereignty.
But in all that looks good in principle can be applied to a is done at a considerable distance from territorial particular cases sovereign governments also perconcrete situation. waters.
Observers examine vessels and give their mit some limitation of their actions, owing to Everything I’m talking about I’m saying not consent for further travel. voluntary agreements.
Now we are not speaking to gain a change of the international stand of On 1 November, during my conversation about those cases when foreign powers impose Cuba, but in order to explain to you the motives with McCloy, I said nothing to the Americans their will over other countries. which guided us.
It is unthinkable that I might try regarding the fact that we were looking for ways I can give examples how our state and other to exercise any pressure. to keep our promise and give the Americans the countries voluntarily limit their actions while During the conversation with McCloy in opportunity to be certain that the dismantling and preserving their sovereign rights.
We are doing that in order not to contradict the territory of foreign embassies.
In this case we said that insofar as Cuba was objecting to verifiyour statement objecting to control on Cuban see a limitation of actions without limitation of cation organized with the help of neutral counterritory.
He prevaricated for a long time soldiers and Soviet troops are only 10 thousand. issue, chiefly, has importance for you.
But seektrying to explain it by the necessity of teaching Regarding the first remark I told him that it was ing to make your situation easier, we agreed to those people English.
He was cunning and evanonsense, because Fidel Castro himself had anRed Cross verification at sea. sive.
We By the way, he said that the U-2 plane had ready to choose the corresponding staff.
But there been shot down over Cuban territory [on 27 available two ships.
On other details of this issue is an impression that a possibility exists to reach October —ed.] by Russian missiles, though antiI lack information.
Comrade Kuznetsov is in an agreement—in the form of a declaration or aircraft launchers, in his opinion, could be opercharge of them. some other form—between Cuba and Central ated by the Cubans.
I neither confirmed, nor It’s still necessary to dwell on the issue American countries pledging not to carry out disputed, this observation of McCloy. concerning U Thant’s plan and verification. subversive work and not to attack each other.
It’s hard to demand anything it was necessary to maneuver on the issues of altitude of 22 thousand meters and the limit of our more from him.
Therefore it’s understandable sympathy, but his situation is not easy at all.
We Union than for Cuba to do so, especially when that in this case the anti-aircraft missiles were have received the “U Thant plan,” of guarantees, American propaganda complicates your possiused. that had been sent to everybody.
Firmness should be comseemed interesting to us and useful for Cuba. bined with flexibility while you carry out a policy.
Nowadays it is a necessary thing for marxistdiscussion with him of this issue.
It is wrong to say that we are more We insist on immediate lifting of the quarCuba, the southern seacoast of the USA and in the liberal than others.
If you want us to finish the withdrawal of Central American countries then attempts of flexibility when it is necessary. strategic missiles from Cuba as soon as possible, preparation for aggression against Cuba would The revolution in Cuba has enormous imI said to McCloy, then give the vessels access to be quickly unmasked.
In this way it will be portance not only for the Cuban people, but for Cuba because there are not enough steamships in possible to suppress rapidly any aggression atthe countries of Latin America and the whole Cuba right now to withdraw the equipment and tempts against Cuba.
It could be done before the official from the point of view of international law.
Therefore it is necessary to use maagreement, in order to accelerate the evacuation. not excluded that a similar agreement can be neuvers, to display flexibility in order to ensure McCloy responded that he was ready to give violated, but it must not happen under normal victory. orders in practice not to carry out examination of conditions.
The verification will be completely This issue is also interesting from another cans and here is why.
If we have a look at the formal, as happened during the encounter of the point of view.
There is the Organization of whole thing retrospectively, the question is being tanker “Bucharest” with American ships.
The Americans try to raised—if it has been a mistake to send strategic question was asked by radio about the character use the OAS as a cover in order not to allow a UN missiles to Cuba and to return them to the Soviet of the cargo and the “Bucharest” without examiinspection.
The CC CPSU considers that there was no nation continued its journey to Cuba.
The strategic missiles have done their stopped the ship, nobody came on its deck. issues are resolved at the UN bypassing the OAS. part.
Cuba found itself at the center of internaI objected to this kind of verification also.
He tional politics and now when their job is done, Then we passed to other issues.
They are the Americans had accepted [UN Secretary GenCastro really has such an opinion. withdrawn.
I reproached them and U Thant told me that representatives of arms in their hands.
There is no other country in made the observation that U Thant was suggestLatin-American countries, to whom he had spoLatin America which is so strong militarily, which ing not to withdraw weapons and to lift the ken, took a favorable view of his plan.
We accepted U Thant’s suggestion what was the USA position and U Thant informed is no direct aggression on the part of the USA, no about verification on the part of the Red Cross. that the Americans had called it an OAS group of Latinamerican countries has the possiIn general it is necessary to note that the issue without outlining their own attitude.
But I bility to overpower Cuba. cargo transportation to Cuba represent an interest managed to clear up this question during the Let us try to understand, of what does our for you, not us.
Steamships are obliged Stevenson said that there was not a “U Thant and now, in November.
Then they admitted their knowledge of the virtually forgotten the Monroe doctrine.
Kennedy Cross verification in order to reduce our losses. plan, but declared that the USA opposes any does not mention it any more and, you know, the Such a verification is better than the American verification procedures on their territory.
This organization does not have any politiMcCloy said they could pledge their word imperialism in Latin America.
Vessels that can be used for that all the camps for mercenary training in Cencans were declaring that they would not tolerate such verification, are not American but neutral tral America had been liquidated or were in the a Marxist regime on the American continent. and Soviet. process of liquidation.
I asked McCloy if it had Now they are committing themselves not to atU Thant suggested two options for verificabeen done in all countries.
They know about the Soviet It was decided to have another meeting in the I would like to say that Kennedy in his letter of 27 military in Cuba, but do not speak of the Monroe Presidential Palace at 14 hours on 5 October, which attracted your attention, formally doctrine.
Cuba found itself in the center of internaAmbassador Alekseev was also present on Khrushchev of 26/X , but in essence tional political events.
The United Nations Orthe Soviet side. he is simultaneously responding to Khrushchev’s ganization is engaged in the Cuban issue.
Khrushchev In the USA there are hysterics, but in their provided by Philip Brenner; translation by and Kennedy except for one confidential messouls many people understand the fairness of the Aleksandr Zaemsky slightly revised.] sage from Kennedy of 25 October, which is not Cuban demands. connected to the issue of dismantling and only In the end, the prestige of the socialist camp ***** accuses us of denying the fact of the construction has strengthened.
It defended peace, though the of ground launchers for special equipment in USA was rapidly sliding down toward war.
Now this framework of settling the issues by peaceful issue is clear to me. means.
I believe it is moved aside received that message we answered it on 26 for several years.
MIKOYAN with Fidel CASTRO, Oswaldo October through confidential channels.
In that It is necessary now to fix that success on the PORTICOS, Raul CASTRO, Ernesto letter there were no concrete proposals yet.
We diplomatic field, so that Cuba—a beacon of GUEVARA and Carlos Rafael RODRIGUEZ were speaking only about the necessity to elimiLatin American revolution—could develop more nate the threat of an assault against Cuba.
The rapidly in every respect and give a decisive 5 November 1962 letter included only the idea of seeking an agreeexample for mobilizing other peoples for struggle. ment.
More the same composition of the Cuban leadership, as of 27 October either.
We came to the conclusion possibilities have been created. on the previous occasion, took place on 5 Novemthat the Americans were actively preparing for an Americans are obliged to take Cuba into ber, at the Presidential palace.
The conversation attack, but were preferring not to disclose their account, to solve issues, regarding Cuba, with lasted 2 hours 30 minutes. plans before world public opinion.
We are not speaking about During the previous meeting F Castro asked order to tie the Americans’ hands, we decided to Russia as such, but as a country of comrade Mikoyan a question which showed his send Kennedy a new letter and publish it in the socialism.
Socialism, which you are also meritodoubts as if we had not given him all the messages press.
He to you, where the demand for the liquidation of international policy.
American propaganda is asked how the statement of Kennedy of 27 Octothe American bases in Turkey was advanced.
We repeating over and over again about a diminishber could be explained, insofar as there was alpublished this letter very quickly, even before the ing of Cuba’s prestige.
Just to the contrary ready a reference to our consent to dismantle American ambassador received its text.
Our Cuba’s prestige has been undoubtedly strengthground launchers for special equipment. objective was to forestall the Americans and ened as a result of recent events.
It was sent on the the Cuban comrades for having tired them out. been given to the Cuban comrades and the open evening of 27 October.
We received it on 28 Joking he adds that the only compensation is that messages are known to them from the media.
Khrushchev of 26 October, F CASTRO asked, if it was possible, to answer that question during consecutive converbut in effect it was the response to the letter of 27 discuss Soviet policy regarding the Berlin issue. sation, that is on 5 November, after looking through October.
Khrushchev made an open radio statement India and China on the issue of conflict between through again, and the motives, which had that the Soviet officers had received orders to India and China.
He can explain our plans in the prompted Kennedy to refer to our consent about dismantle and evacuate the strategic missiles.
As sphere of disarmament, on the ceasing of tests of the dismantling of the missiles, had been deteryou understand, there was no time for consultahydrogen weapons, and answer all other quesmined.
You are aware of the content of all the tions with the Cuban government.
Khrushchev to Kennedy of 27 quickly to Cuba, but we could not wait for an to the firm resolution of the Soviet Union to October.
In those two documents there is the real answer because it would take a lot of time to defend Cuba.
They help to understand correctly basis for the decision announced in the letter of 28 encode, decipher, translate, and transmit them. the policy of the Soviet Union.
So, Kennedy’s letter of 27 October Acting in this way, we were proceeding repeat, an analysis of the USSR position can be meant acceptance of proposals by N.S. from our conviction that the most important obcorrect only with due regard for all the events and Khrushchev of 26 October consisting of his conjective in that situation was to prevent an attack decisions both before and during the crisis. sent to evacuate from Cuba not only strategic against Cuba.
I would like to underline that our We do not doubt that if all the works on the armaments, but all the weapons if the USA stops proposals to dismantle the strategic missiles and assembly of the strategic weapons had been comthreatening Cuba with an attack.
Because the to liquidate the American bases in Turkey had pleted in conditions of secrecy then we would threat on the part of the USA had been the only been advanced before receiving the letter from have received a strong means of deterrence against reason that forced Cuba to arm itself.
In this Kennedy accepted this proposal (we didn’t know for the dismantling of the strategic missiles and way objectives would have been achieved which that he was accepting it), the conditions were their evacuation was given after we had received are pursued both by the Soviet government and created to develop the Soviet proposals and prethe letter from Kennedy of 27 October and the the government of the Republic of Cuba.
Howpare a declaration regarding the agreement of the letter from Fidel Castro.
In our message of 28 ever, we consider that the installation of Soviet parties.
The USA could have been told that the October, as you have noted, the demand for the missiles in Cuba was significant for the interests USSR was ready to dismantle the equipment but liquidation of bases in Turkey was no longer of the whole socialist camp.
Even if we consider would like to discuss it with the Cuban governsuggested.
We did this because we were afraid it to be a military advantage, it was politically and ment.
In our opinion the issue should have been that in spite of our proposal of 27 October the psychologically important in the struggle for the solved in this way instead of giving immediately American imperialists could assault Cuba.
We deterrence of imperialism and the prevention of an order to evacuate the strategic weapons.
Such had nothing else to do but to work on the main its aggressive plans.
Thus, the installation of the a procedure would have lessened international task—to prevent an attack against Cuba, believstrategic missiles in Cuba was carried out not tension and secured the possibility to discuss the ing that our Cuban friends would understand the only in the interests of the defense of Cuba, but of issue with the Americans in more favorable concorrectness of our actions, although the normal the whole socialist camp.
In this way it could have been possible procedure of coordination had not been observed. complete consent. not only to achieve a lessening of international The question was that there were 24 hours We understood perfectly well the signifitension and to discuss the issue in better condileft before an assault against Cuba.
It must be cance of this action and we considered it to be a tions, but also to achieve the signing of a declarataken into consideration that we had only a few correct step. tion. hours at our disposal We also completely agree that war must be It is only a simple analysis of previous and we could not act other than we did.
However you are right is—to prevent an attack against Cuba and to Nowadays it is important for us to know that the procedure of consultations, which is avoid starting a world war.
In what way possible under normal circumstances, was not with these aims pursued by the Soviet Union. shall we seek to achieve our main goals and at the followed.
Misunderstanding arose in connection with same time fight to prevent an aggression and the form of discussion of this issue.
I would like to respond to understand that the circumstances were demandmanage to secure a lasting peace, then we’ll have comrade Mikoyan. ing urgent actions and the situation was abnoran opportunity to better assess the undertaken We have listened with great attention to the mal.
Future results of our information and explanations offered by comconclusion that the discussion of these sharp struggle will demonstrate the importance of rade Mikoyan.
Undoubtedly all those explanaquestions could be carried out in another form. today’s events.
Certainly, only a little bit in this tions are very valuable because they help us to For example, the issue, which we have already struggle depends on us personally. understand better the course of events.
We are discussed here, in regard to my letter in connecWe are very grateful for all the explanations thankful for the desire to explain everything to us, tion with the decision of the Soviet government given to us by comrade Mikoyan, for all the for the efforts undertaken in this regard.
The and the publication of the Soviet government efforts undertaken by him in order to make us arguments, that the strategic missiles after being statement of 28 October.
We take into condiscovered by the enemy practically lost whatrelation to issues mentioned in the messages of 26 sideration the special conditions under which it ever military significance or their significance and 27 October between the Soviet government was necessary to act.
We have no doubts regardbecomes extremely small, also cause no doubts and the USA Administration.
Such a letter [from ing the friendly character of our relations, based among us.
Our respect for the Soviet We are grateful for all these explanations tive—to inform the Soviet government about the Union is unshakeable.
We know that it respects and do understand, that the intentions of the inevitability of an assault against Cuba.
There our sovereignty and is ready to defend us from an Soviet government cannot be assessed only on was not a word about any minor hesitation on our aggression on the part of imperialism.
We clearly declared our resolve to fight. the most important thing now is to determine our developments, especially as the atmosphere is Besides, we didn’t say that we were expecting an joint steps. rapidly changing and new situations are created. invasion.
We wrote that it was possible, but not I would like to assure you, comrade Mikoyan, The totality of adopted decisions, which became so likely.
In our opinion, more probable was an of our complete trust. the basis for supplying strategic weapons and the air attack with the sole aim of destroying the signing of agreement, strategic weapons in Cuba.
It was supSoviet government decision of 28 October had the statement of comrade Fidel Castro.
We have posed to publish that agreement after the installaalready been reflected in the message to Kennedy always been confident of our sincere friendship tion of the strategic missiles and after the elecof 26 October and clearly manifested itself in the which nothing can disrupt.
Stevenson international commissions or representatives of sure that it will produce gladness on the part of wrote that it would be necessary to discuss that foreign powers often operate at sea ports and that the Central Committee. issue.
Immediately I told comrade Kuznetsov that fact does not limit the sovereignty of the host I would like to make a small explanation, this issue was not a subject for discussion.
Such a possibilvery briefly. bombers have low speed and low altitude limits. ity would allow U Thant to consider accomI agree completely with the assessment, Nor can the “Komar” patrol boats operate at great plished the decision to withdraw the strategic made by comrade Fidel Castro of his own letter. distance.
It’s a legitimate defensive. given the opportunity to visit Soviet ships, anquestion raised by him—could we have made In the first Kennedy message [possibly an chored at the ports, to verify the fact of the another decision instead of instrucallusion to Kennedy’s October 22 speech, which armaments’ removal.
From my point of view that tions for dismantling the strategic weapons included a reference to the bombers—ed.] the would not represent any infringement of national But we had been informed that an attack against American administration spoke about the bombsovereignty.
Cuba would begin within the next few hours. ers, later this question fell away.
Now they want Socialist countries, insofar as we are marxistPerhaps it was really intended to deliver a blow to raise again this question.
We have resolutely leninists, have to find a way of securing a unity of first of all against the strategic missile sites, but rejected such a discussion.
Comrade Kuznetsov actions even in those cases when our opinions are it would be followed by a strike against Cuba. received corresponding instructions from Mossomewhat different.
Moreover, I believe, it would We had to act resolutely in order to frustrate the cow.
This is nothing more than attempts to be taken into consideration that there are Soviet plan of attack on Cuba.
We realize that by doing complicate the whole matter in order to create troops on Cuban territory.
Therefore, our coopthis we had to sacrifice the necessity of consultaonce again a tense atmosphere and dangerous eration in the fight against imperialism must be tions with the Cuban government. situation. especially effective.
The issue was the offensive weapare impertinently continuing their attempts to we will inevitably hear at the Security Council ons.
But this implied specialists who operate carried through the UN with the help of U Thant. the opportunity to establish compliance of the strategic missiles.
Khrushchev, then the quarantine them is confirmed by all the letters, by the totality proving the dismantling and evacuation of weapmay be lifted.
Roughly such an appeal was put weapons only. earlier it is done, the more advantageous it will be forth by U Thant during his conversation with for us. me.
I believe FIDEL CASTRO confirms, that his underFor the Americans it is better to postpone the that the solution of this problem will help create standing was just the same. solution of this question.
In this case they have the definite conditions to settle the crisis situation possibility to continue the quarantine and other which had developed in the Caribbean sea.
We would rather help U Thant The Americans would like to delay the soluin his answer to this letter Kennedy does not raise in order to give him a chance to report to the UN tion of this issue.
Dragging it out gives them the the question of removing from Cuba all the that the Soviet side has carried out the dismantling opportunity to prolong the term of the quarantine. weapons.
If such a proposal had been present in and evacuation of offensive weapons from Cuba.
We told the Americans that we would be able to our letter, Kennedy would undoubtedly have We should talk about it. evacuate the weapons in 10 days.
Therefore the opinion, We have resolutely rejected the American a hurry and say that it could take even a month.
It outlined by comrade Fidel Castro regarding this demand for aerial inspection.
Nevertheless, with is advantageous for the USA to preserve tension part, is incorrect.
There is nothing of the kind in the help of air photography the Americans colin this area.
And we are standing for a lessening the letters of 27 and 28 October. lected data that the dismantling of the strategic of tension, in order to solve this question at the I would like to mention, that the Americans weapons had concluded and published that inforSecurity Council.
In our view, it’s difficult for are trying to broaden the list of weapons for mation by themselves.
U Thant could have inthe Security Council to discuss this issue until the evacuation.
Such attempts have already been formed the UN, but he needs evidence, proving end of the USA elections.
UN representaheld tomorrow and so it would be appropriate to part, we gave our consent only to withdraw tives must see how the evacuation is carried out think about its solution.
When I was speaking to and inform U Thant on the results of their obserkeep U Thant on our side.
It seemed to me that he McCloy he told me with a smile that it would be vation mission.
Then the situation will become was very satisfied by his meeting with comrade good if we removed from Cuba the anti-aircraft significantly simpler.
But those are defensive weapons, Security Council where the decisions are taken Americans will seize the opportunity for their not offensive. not only by the USA representatives. benefit.
Half an hour before my departure from New I’m not insisting that you answer this quesYork, those pilferers (now we are speaking about tion right now.
So, if I understand you Stevenson) sent a letter to comrade Kuznetsov, it would be acceptable for you, why, for example, correctly, the question is about verification of saying that they supposedly had forgotten to not give consent for U Thant’s representatives to loading at the Cuban ports as a minimum demand raise questions about some kinds of weapons. verify how the weapons’ loading onto Soviet and the Americans would consider such a control They were referring to the IL-28 bombers and ships is carried out.
I’m afraid tion necessary to declare the verification to be explain to comrade Mikoyan that what I’m sayif we go along such route we can even reach an carried out. ing reflects the decision of the whole Cuban inspection on site, where the strategic missiles people.
The imperialists are not position imperils peace in the whole world, then the point.
The form of loading veriwe would rather consider the Soviet side to be If the imperialists protest we can send them to fication is more suitable for U Thant.
But it’s necessary to take into consideration hurting your sovereignty either, because the veriourselves.
We have the right to that the support of U Thant is very important for fication will be carried out not on your territory, defend our dignity. us, and the imperialists can say what they want. but aboard our ship.
I understand very well the comrade Fidel Castro reflects our common resomissiles with the help of air photography.
But such luteness and we consider that this issue does not manage to come to an agreement over verificaan inspection will undoubtedly have a painful deserve further discussion. tions on ships, then the UN representatives will effect on the moral condition of our people.
Indeed, appetite comes verification has been achieved by the exchange of sharp reaction to my proposal.
What we were with eating, but we will resolutely oppose such a messages.
We rejected inspection, we “As I informed you in the letter of 27 October, we Foreign representatives can be found in any port. didn’t allow surface verification, we won’t perare prepared to reach agreement to enable United It does not have anything to do with aerial or mit control over dismantling.
But in order to Nations representatives to verify the dismantling surface inspection.
I’m saying that not to call into strengthen our position at the UN, the representaof these means.” question your statement, but in order to explain. tives of this organization should be given the Therefore it implies representatives of the Besides the issue we have just finished disfacts.
Otherwise it will be difficult to restrain Security Council for the mission of verification cussing, we were going—according to your prorevanchists at the Security Council.
But if the of dismantling on the site. posal—to talk over a plan of joint actions.
Khrushchev it is said, have such a discussion not now, but at a time verified, then we’ll obtain the lifting of the quarthat consent would obviously be needed on the convenient for you. antine.
That means that N.S. meeting we came to the conclusion that the Soviet the limits settled by the two messages.
If we Khrushchev in his letter of 28 October, is making government understood the reasons for our resomanage to receive support from the UN, then the reference to the message of the 27th.
The necesluteness not to allow a verification of Cuban Americans would go to hell.
We promised to sity of obtaining consent on the part of Cuba is territory.
That resoluteness is a starting-point for allow verification of the evacuation.
But if we do not ready warned in the letter of 27 October, that the them, if we have not come to an agreement on the fulfill our promise, the situation may become permission of the Cuban government is needed. previous issue. considerably complicated.
Perhaps you will disComrade Mikoyan is saying that the imperiThat issue is the most important from Cuba cuss this issue without our presence and at the alists could be sent to hell. now from a political point of view.
The guaransame time consider the possibilities of our further On 23 October I received a very clear letter tees are very problematic.
If you find the opportunity we can where the precise position of the Soviet governare speaking about.
Kennedy’s statement is charnent of their strategy in the struggle against the tomorrow. acterized therein as an unprecedented interferCuban revolution.
The American position is ence into internal affairs, as a violation of internaweaker.
No sovereign state must political point of view and we cannot fulfill this will arrive at the port of loading.
These concepts demand of the USA administration. are 4-5 ships assigned for that purpose.
Then of the letter of 23 October are very precise and they’ll climb on board.
The formula that foreing not the Cuban territory, but only the Soviet this way they will be convinced that we are sees UN observers in Cuba, in the USA, Guateships, vessels are considered to be territory of that fulfilling our promise and will go away.
That is mala and other countries seems to me a more state, whom they belong to.
Moscow did not we come to an agreement regarding this proposal, would affect monstrously the moral spirit of our entrust me to suggest it.
Speaking frankly, I I’ll inform our representative to the UN and then people.
The Americonsidered that insofar as such a verification did we’ll have the opportunity to settle the technique can imperialists are carrying out aerial photogranot regard Cuban territory, but Soviet ships, it and procedure of this work. phy freely and we do not impede them due to the could be accepted.
I was saying that although we I would be able to inform Moscow that we appeal of the Soviet government.
It is necessary understand the Cuban position, the verification agreed to give both U Thant and the UN informato look for some other formula.
MIKOYAN expressed his sympathy in would reveal the disagreements between us on entrusted me neither to impose our opinion, nor regard to the fact that F Castro is feeling under the this question, and that would be disadvantageous pressure you in order to obtain consent for inweather. for both sides. spection of the Cuban territory.
But verification would be rade Mikoyan’s latest proposals regarding verifiinspections in mind.
We must think about the carried out from the Cuban territory. cation of the loading of the strategic missiles on entire complex of measures, both in the sphere of the decks of Soviet ships in Cuban ports.
For that purpose Soviet maintenance of the high moral spirit of our people form of a protocol or a declaration is not so and neutral country ships could be used.
Such a verification in the believe that it is impossible to accept that proas to make possible unity of actions.
There is no doubt that a After we have finished our consideration of comrade Fidel Castro.
However, I have already verification can be carried out on open sea too, the issues which concern us, we could move to a spoken about that.
I think that we will not make but does not bear relation to Cuba. consideration of our tasks in the near future.
We can agree upon believe that after the elections in the USA it will Concerning the proposals about inspections further meetings through Ambassador Alekseev. be possible to make a joint statement of the Soviet in the USA and other countries of the Caribbean government and the government of Cuba or to Sea, this proposals accords with the plans of U Ambassador Alekseev was also present on make separate, but simultaneous statements.
The Cuban government unilaterally will dedraft of the protocol which we will propose to the clare that it opposes any surveillance of its terriAmericans.
I spoke about it with U dismantling and removal of “offensive” weapons.
Thant, since this question seemed interesting to However, we are ready to consider U Thant’s us.
Russian Foreign Ministry archives, proposal about the possibility of inspection or proposal regarding to other countries, they will obtained and translated by NHK television, copy verification on Cuban territory under the condinot allow observers at home.
If you agree with provided by Philip Brenner; translation (by tion of a simultaneous inspection on the territory this point in the draft of the protocol, then it could Aleksandr Zaemsky) has been slightly revised.] of the USA, Guatemala and in other countries of occupy a place in our joint proposals. the Caribbean basin upon the coming into force of On the basis of a conversation with U Thant ***** an agreement on the liquidation of the conflict in I came to the conclusion that a coordinated decthis region.
That is not in our they will call for declarations from each of the “The USA wanted to destroy us physically, competence.
The political side of the issue also has great act in a coordinated manner.
The draft of the document with which you The are other issues of concern to us, but we are familiar is not limited to U Thant’s plan, but Copy would not want to mix them up with the current it would still be possible to revise it.
Mikoyan with Oswaldo Dorticos, Ernesto cludes inspection on ships which are being states like the USA, Cuba, and a range of other Guevara, and loaded—that is my initiative.
I have already told states of Central America, believes it would be Carlos Rafael Rodriquez you that I had no authority to put forth that possible to do this.
It seems This issue of coordinated observation by repreto me that we have made our position clear to you. sentatives of the UN on the territory of the USA, Evening 5 November 1962 We are informing the CC CPSU and the Soviet Cuba, and other countries of Central America government about your position on this issue.
In this case we far as a declaration is concerned, then I don’t see would be starting from a common position.
This York, asked me to find out the opinion of the type of formulation seems to give the USA the Cuban comrades.
Comrade Kuznetsov has been deprived of opporshould strike article 13. tunities to speak with U Thant and the Americans.
This would give us the agrees to allow onto the territory of Cuba confiediting will tie them even more.
So far we have possibility to work out a common position in dential agents of the United Nations Security Council from no other version, but it is possible to think about regard to other articles of the protocol as well. the ranks of representatives of neutral states in it.
The 5th article contains clauses which have a order so that they can attest to the fulfillment of similar nature.
It Cuban protocol , 31 Octothe necessary measures will be taken to stop, both seems to me that in the protocol there is one ber 1962, Russian Foreign Ministry archives.] on the territory of the USA and on the territory of article about an inspection in Cuba.
In view of the information which was account the agreement of the Government of the mercenaries, sending of spies and diversionists.” given by Com.
However, Guatemala will oppose this proAmerican countries is lawful. col , 31 October 1962, posal.
The situation will change, and the USA Russian Foreign Ministry archives.] will refuse its obligations.
It is still possible to do the use of a phrase like “I am sure, that other some serious editing work.
Approximately accept the proposals contained in the document, account the points which we made about the in such a form.
Comrade Carlos Rafael it will be advantageous for us to have a common form.
Even tives of three countries cannot determine the list sary to think up something.
The inspection of countries in which observers from the UN or say that this is an issue for each of these countries. will not be unilateral, it will be multilateral, so it the Security Council should be present.
Let’s take a look at the formulation in Kennedy’s evidently doesn’t bother you.
It is Cuba, and stipulate that other countries can be “I am sure that other countries of the Western possible to specify the list of countries which will included upon the agreement of their governHemisphere will be ready to proceed in a similar be listed in this document.
So, for instance, from the direction of manner.” the USA, Guatemala and others.
It seems to me Guatemala they constantly will be threatening that it makes sense to think over this issue.
It would be possible to ask the Security possible to propose approximately this formulacans will be opponents of such a proposal, since Council to set the list of countries.
We could leave the article without from the countries of the Caribbean, and also the of this issue will have great political significance. changes or note that the countries are to be deteruse of weapons and the territory of these counIt is difficult to say how this will end, but the mined by the Security Council.
It struggle for acceptance of these proposals should that it is important to preserve the reference to U also would make sense to note that the “USA will bring us a victory.
It would be possible necessity of striking articles about inspections of possible to make many editorial changes here. to work out this variant. the dismantled weapons as applied to Cuba.
This variant really is seems to me that it would be necessary to name who intend to undertake aggression against Cuba interesting.
We should use this compromise. are concerned, this inspection would refer to the important point for Cuba.
We are not prepared portunity. tended to part of Florida, not touching, naturally, for this today.
I am trying to evaluate the an inspection of camps in Puerto Rico, on the document, although we are essentially in agreesituation which flows from your positions.
McCloy island of Vieques and in certain other territories, ment with this document and understand how said that he gives his word that the camps will be e., the inspection will touch not the entire terriimportant it is to achieve success.
We can work liquidated, that there will be no preparations for tory of the mentioned countries, but rather those a little bit together, significantly improving the aggression.
This type of declaration has signifiregions where these camps exist. formulation, but it makes sense to do it quicker. cance even in oral form.
In essence we are their promises I think, that it would be useful for that Carlos Rafael Rodriquez is a great specialist in agreement with this document. you, comrades, to think about issues of mutual on these issues.
A more to me, it would be important to organize observasents a big step forward.
Maybe tomorrow [Socareful editing of the document evidently is tion on the territory of Guatemala, the Dominican viet officials] Bazykin and Alekseev will meet necessary in both languages.
Republic, and certain other territories with the with some of you and confer on editorial issues. assistance of the UN representatives.
We istry of Foreign Affairs is waiting for a commuarrange for inspection in the countries of Central will take the initiative, and we will not allow the nication about your attitude towards this docuAmerica.
Kuznetsov also requested a clarifipositive and negative sides of this type of proCouncil can be convened on the 7th or 8th of cation of your position on this issue.
According to my information and bearing changes in article 3 regarding the UN there, in order to mitigate the significance in this will be done on the 6th.
USA’s position in respect to the countries of this region of the OAS and the Organization of Central America.
It will be easier for you our representative at the UN will be able to begin to decide, than for us.
There are protocol issues tion of article 5 bothers me. agree to that or, in your opinion, is that type of a here, and declarations, and procedures.
This would be important for struggle in the UN and the opinions of the memsovereignty of the countries of Central America, us to know in order to work out a joint tactic.
It is ber states. but the governments of those countries are conclear that the USA will figure on the list.
We believe that it is possible tion in Central American countries, while the to act in the following way.
We will try to prepare our USA will be limited only by the declaration.
You thorough revision of the document, and we will variant by tomorrow. could give your answer to my questions not today, try to do it quicker.
It seems to me that it is not be excluded, then in the same way inspections of There is information from Comrade [Carlos possible to limit the declaration about non-agCuban territory will be excluded too.
Lechuga , our new representative at gression to the United States only.
You could thoroughly to put off the convening of the Security Council. wards aggression and provide help to them in consider this issue, and then inform us of your It is possible that his session won’t even be this aggression, while remaining on the sidelines decision. week.
We have to oblige the United States to meetings before convening the Security Council. fulfill Kennedy’s promise.
It would make Besides this, now we are entering a pretty compliRodriguez is entirely right.
It should spell to create even more tension, not only in relation tant thing is in the essence of this issue.
Kennedy out the fulfillment of the obligation which the to the IL-28 bombers, but has also announced on this issue came to meet us.
We demanded that Soviet Union has accepted on itself,e. verificaunlimited airborne surveillence. not only the USA would give its word about nontion of the dismantling and evacuation of the This is dangerous.
I think that the Soviet Turkey—ed.], and second, the open concession. policy had two weak sides.
You, Comrade Dorticos, It seems to me that this bears objective witness to stand the significance of the psychological factor possess trustworthy information.
We told U the fact that we can now expect the decline of the for Cuban conditions.
I already in the recent period had been greatly strengthUSA wanted to destroy us physically, but the said that when we withdraw the strategic missiles ened.
I have expressed my personal opinion, but Soviet Union with Khrushchev’s letter destroyed and present evidence of that fact, we will be able I have spoken entirely sincerely. us legally .” to begin to speak about something else.
But we thought that you the comrades will work on editing the document, to speak sincerely.
We did everything and after lunch we will organize an exchange of to hear insincere speeches. so that Cuba would not be destroyed.
Cuba is a isn’t work dying beautifully. publish a report about every meeting.
It seems to country in which the interests of both camps meet me that there is no point in doing this today, and head on.
To a certain extent you are in general it would make sense for us to come to ever, during the recent events the USA managed right.
You offended our feelings by not consultan agreement about this. to present itself in the eyes of public opinion as a ing us.
But the main danger is in the second weak peace-loving country which was exposing agside of the Soviet policy.
The thing is, you as if DORTICOS agrees with Comrade gression from the USSR, demonstrating courage recognized the right of the USA to violate interMikoyan’s proposal. and achieving the liquidation of the Soviet base in national law.
When we complete the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba as a manifesdifficulties for maintaining the unity of the soevacuation of the missiles, many issues will be tation of aggressive intentions from the Soviet cialist countries.
The USA, by achieving the withdrawal of are cracks in the unity of the socialist camp. withdrawn them, we must maintain a different Soviet missiles from Cuba, in a way received the line.
That issue worries us too. necessary to hold the line; otherwise they will available.
Not only many revolutionaries think We are doing a lot to strengthen our unity, and accuse us of treachery.
After we complete the this way, but also representatives of the Front of with you, comrades, we will always be with you evacuation, we will be able to adamantly oppose People’s Action in Chile and the representatives despite all the difficulties. overflights, the quarantine, verification by the of several democratic movements.
Even in the context of all our It is necessary to get the UN on our side.
Yes, let our enemies die. must achieve more than was promised in decisions made by the Soviet Union were a misWe must live and live.
I am saying this not for discussion’s sake, are convinced of our victory.
They are but so that you, Comrade Mikoyan, would be the same as a defeat.
Compare the situation of a very important in periods when there is no war.
Now, it is as if the right and flexibility. your arrival, Comrade Mikoyan, immediately of Russians to be on this continent also is recogafter the famous decision of the Soviet governnized.
I would like to tell you, ment was made, comrades from the editorial jokingly during a conversation that the presence Comrade Mikoyan, that, sincerely speaking, as a board of the newspaper “Popular” phoned me and of Russian officers calms him consequence of the most recent events an exrequested an interview.
The Cubans could open fire without tremely complicated situation has been created in receive our declaration regarding the situation thinking, he observed.
Many communists who represent which had developed, since the representatives of Of course, there could be objections to this reother Latin American parties, and also revoluthe “third force” were actively opposing Soviet mark, but the psychological aspect is taken into tionary divisions like the Front for People’s Acpolicy.
You know that group, it is deputy Trias. consideration. tion in Chile, are wavering.
They are dismayed I gave an interview, not very long, since though I Sometimes, in order to take two steps forby the actions of the Soviet had been informed about the basic points in the ward, it is necessary to take a step back.
A number of divisions have broken up. speech of Fidel Castro which should have taken in any way teach you, though I am older.
The thing is, we are deeply convinced of in conclusion I observed that the development of request that we resign. the possibility of seizing power in a number of events in the coming days would show the signifiRecently, I read Lenin.
I want to tell you Latin American countries, and practice shows cance of the decisions that had been made. about this not for some sort of an analogy, but as that it is possible not only to seize it, but also to an example of Leninist logic.
The meetings and converpeace treaty was signed, Bukharin was working account practical experience.
Almany Latin American groups believe that in the very great significance.
They helped me to unthough he was repressed, I consider him a good political acts of the Soviet Union during the derstand more deeply the role of the psychologiperson.
He tried, it happens, mistakenly, emorecent events there are contained two serious cal factor for the peoples of these countries. tions had great significance for him.
Rodriguez pointed out the directions of the future which it was stated that the concession in Brest No, I, it seems, gave no grounds.
It is necessary to keep course, it is foolish simply to believe Kennedy, it The comrades accepted the resolution as if reU Thant on our side.
Comrade Fidel asked an is necessary to bind him with obligations. jecting Soviet power itself.
We cannot defend you heroically, rejecting Soviet power. put forth my idea.
I received the possibility to shortcomings of the young. visit you, while others could not do that.
I see that there is no to request the agreement of Canada, the USA to analogy here, but great similarities.
One day before that we said the overflight, and to overcome other difficulties. that there would be no inspections.
There really is no analMikoyan said that he had told McCloy that airCanada without lead planes.
Imagine, Russia at that time borne inspections are inadmissible. had to receive visas.
The delayed giving an answer, the Canadian minister the support of the socialist camp.
Other officials geographic situation is disadvantageous, comelucidate your point of view.
If Cuba cations and not allow the delivery of fuel to I thought that this variant was possible.
We have at our disposal global that, I must say that I thought that I understood the rockets.
Why should revolutionaries present situation we need evaluations which cordie It is necessary to maneuver, develop the rectly reflect the situation.
But Ché is an Argentinean. economy, culture, serve as an example of other feelings.
These are the objective conditions in peoples of the countries of Latin America and Latin America.
Lenin, in a complex In the first day of our conversations Comtalk a little.
I would like to exchange some situation even agreed to the conduct of the conrade Mikoyan spoke about two types of struggle. thoughts with you.
To die I think that in certain conditions the last word be victorious over whom.
I understood how is not permitted, but nor is it permitted to give to after these events a feeling of demoralization important the psychological factor is in Latin the enemy your own destruction.
Every meeting to seek a way out in the art of diplomacy. bourgeoisie lost their faith in the possibility of is very useful for me.
Or, a corresponaffirms his promises only orally, that will be understood the Cubans, but I am afraid that when dent from the newspaper “Oy” interviewed me, equivalent to a defeat.
But if pressure will be I return I will say that I don’t know them, and in what a pleasant young man, also with a pistol.
He applied by the Soviet Union, if Cuba will act fact I will not know them. has to take notes, but he lost his pencil.
If states to the necessary extent, if we insist on the and moral , and also in a military regard.
No, off the reaction with a pistol, the diplomatic art is victory. we want to preserve the base of socialism in Latin necessary too.
You were born as heroes, before a I was very satisfied by the conversation nitely will create a feeling of a defeat. revolutionary situation ripened in Latin America, with comrade Fidel Castro, but today I didn’t but the camp of socialism still has not grown into even know what to say regarding his reaction.
I agree with Carlos Rafael its full capability to come to your assistance.
Comrade Guevara evaluated the past give you ships, weapons, people, fruits and vegfoolishly, but before that I thought for a long events in a pessimistic tone.
For me it has been morally difficult during but I do not agree with him.
The most conspicuous inpable Frog missiles and Il-28 airward incidents.
Manescu (The absence of nuclear weapons accorded then arranged a private meeting with Rusk, with United States intelligence, and the United States by Raymond L Garthoff attended only by an interpreter.
It was the did not pursue the verification offer.) first opportunity after the crisis nearly a year In view of the sensitivity of the matter, In April 1964, the Romanian leadership earlier for the Romanian leadership to apany knowledge of this exchange was very issued a declaration in which it first exproach the United States government at this closely held in Washington, and no doubt in pressed public dissatisfaction with the Warlevel.
So far as is known, the Soviet successor Nicolae Ceausescu, increasingly not been consulted over the Soviet decision leadership did not learn of it—although that distanced themselves from the Pact and to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, and was remains to be determined from the Soviet Moscow’s leadership, although without chalnot therefore a party to the dispute.
All of remain neutral in any conflict generated by archives. this small slice of history has, of course, such actions as the Soviet deployment of I was told about the exchange by Dean been well known.
It has not been known nuclear missiles in Cuba, and sought assurRusk soon after it occurred, and I reconwhy Romania launched itself on that path at ances that in the event of hostilities arising firmed this account of it with him in 1990.
Above all, seemed to me that with the colit has not heretofore been known lapse of the Warsaw Pact, the that even earlier Romania esoverthrow of the Romanian govsentially repudiated its alleernment, and the reunification giance obligations in a secret of Europe, the matter is now approach to the United States safely history, and should begovernment in October 1963, come a footnote to the historical promising neutrality in case of record. the outbreak of war.
This was a It may be instructive, as stunning, unilateral breach of the well as interesting, history.
The vere trials, the two alliances did tensions generated by that crisis hold together throughout the had reverberations throughout Cold War, and with relatively Europe.
But while members of NATO and the tion that it would be allied with the Soviet ons of the superpowers.
Thus, remarkable Warsaw Pact dutifully gave public support Union in such a war. as was the Romanian case, it was the sole to the United States and the Soviet Union, Secretary Rusk in response indicated exception to alliance solidarity—assuming respectively, some did so with considerable that the United States would take into acthe archives or informed officials do not trepidation.
He disRomanian-American relations at that manian soil, and that if the United States closed this episode from the history of the time were minimal.
Nonetheless, when were given assurance that there were none, Cold War in remarks at the January 1993 Romanian Foreign Minister Corneliu that fact would be taken into account in United States CWIHP Moscow Conference on New EviManescu asked to meet with the Secretary of targeting.
When the U-2 was supplied with nuclear-capable Frog-7 and Crisis, those two agreements were supplanted shot down, no one in Moscow was quite sure Scud-B missiles.
The risks posed by “Warsaw Pact’s joint nuclear forces” and Lomsky, in December 1965.26 The treaty accidents would have been especially great were later used for simulated nuclear strikes provided for the permanent stationing of if the local commander had been during Pact exercises, but all nuclear warSoviet nuclear warheads at three sites in given independent authority to order the use heads for the delivery systems remained unwestern Czechoslovakia. of nuclear weapons.
Whenever Warsaw Pact exercises with Poland in early 1967.28 Only a few top regain any semblance of control if local included combat techniques for nuclear warPolish officials were permitted to find out actors “accidentally” resorted to the use of fare (as they routinely did from early 1962 about the document.
Although this docagreements signed with Czechoslovakia, helped ensure that the intra-Warsaw Pact trinal shift made sense from the Soviet perEast Germany, Hungary, and Poland, as debate in the mid-1960s did not bring about spective, it stirred unease among East Eurodiscussed above.
Although East Euof as a “triangular” showdown; its repercusvanished. ropean officials could not have ordered the sions can now be seen to have been at least Although Moscow’s willingness to use of nuclear weapons on their own, they as great for Soviet allies, notably Cuba and share control over the Warsaw Pact’s “joint” might have inadvertently Eastern Europe, as for the Soviet Union nuclear arsenal would have been sharply taken steps in a crisis that would have caused itself. constrained even before October 1962 by NATO governments to believe that a War1.
This statement is based on a perusal of documents the lack of permissive-action links saw Pact nuclear strike was forthcoming from the East German, Czechoslovak, and Polish arand other use-denial mechanisms on Soviet (regardless of what actual Soviet intentions chives.
The 1956 Revolution and Realpolitik (Stanford: nuclear-capable delivery vehicles.
Mikoyana s F Kastro,” 20 November command was a consistent theme in Soviet all, would have had such an important long1962 , both published in Mezhdunarodnaya military planning.
See esp.9. cially in light of the unexpected intervenposed one of the greatest dangers during an 11.
Respublik o voennom sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi tions of any type, whether for the medium-range or the 31.
I am grateful to Khrushchev’s son, Sergei, account was endorsed by General Leonid Garbuz, the 16. for providing me with a copy of the 3,600-page trandeputy commander of Soviet forces in Cuba in 1962, in 32.
The exact contents of Pliev’s telegram on the 26th Centralny Archiwum Wojskowy, Paczka 6, Tom 234.
Makarevskii served for many years under Pliev’s comments by ex-Soviet officials, it suggests that Pliev podgotovka,” Krasnaya zvezda, 3 January 1963, 2-3. command.
Brezhneva,” citations, see Mark Kramer, “Tactical Nuclear Weapstrany,” Krasnaya zvezda, 19 November 1963, 1.
Pravda, 25 September 1965, 2 . ons, Soviet Command Authority, and the Cuban Mis21.
Anatolii available in “Voina ozhidalas’s rassvetom,” Krasnaya komiteta gosudarstv-uchastnikov Varshavskogo Dokuchaev, “100-dnevnyi yadernyi kruiz,” Krasnaya zvezda, 13 May 1993, 2.
Dogovora o druzhbe, sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi zvezda, 6 November 1992, 2.
The rules of engagement are spelled out briefly in pomoshchi,” Krasnaya zvezda, 21 January 1965, 1.
In early 1994, General Anatolii Gribkov claimed 3753, D 1, Korebka 3573.
Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, D.C., orgaKonsul’tativnogo Komiteta gosudarstv-uchastnikov 40.
