And so two new works that add to the general knowledge are well worth reporting.
One is a as being provocatively anti-Soviet,"" Radvanyi unique look at the crisis by a Communist) I writes.
The other is parently told him that according to informaan analytical study by an associate professor 1 tion he had received from private sources at the Kennedy School of Government at \ the Soviet Union was delivering surface-toHarvard. e , surface ballistic missiles to Cuba and that Janos Radvanyi was the Hungarian charge e Soviet military advisers had came to Cuba in Washington at the time (there was no am. not as instructors but as members of Soviet bassador), an affable fellow with whom I had special rocket force units to operate these much contact.
The piained of Soviet unwillingness to disclose book is largely about Hungarian-American any details and had asked Beck whether he relations.
But one chapter on the missile criknew anything more about the whole affair. sis will have far wider interest.
He did so in part because Soviet dipmissile build-up."" , lomats here had told him the uproar was This message apparently was sent in late part of the American pre-election campaign.
Soviet arms shipments But one day he received a copy of a cable to were arriving at that time, though the first Budapest from Hungarian Ambassador medium range missiles did not come until Janos Beck in Havana.
CIA Director John Mcpoint to discount information he had re"", Cone voiced to President Kennedy his suspiceived from the Chinese embassy in Havana p6.4, 1/2TRUE345 UM:0.
CAMOLFt NDefense Department photograph of Soviet missile installations at San Cristobal, Cuba, Oct., 1962. ;dons that the Soviets were preparing to in' offensive missiles, perhaps on the basis of information gathered in Cuba that month by French intelligence agent Philippe De Vesjoli.
However, on Sept. the United ' States Intelligence Board's estimate was that the Soviets would not Introduce offensive missiles into Cuba.
On Oct 18 Radvanyi attended the first of three meetings with Soviet Ambassador Anatolyi F Dobrynin and the heads of all the Communist embassies in Washington. nist diplomats on Oct., this time at the Dobrynin discussed the meeting the previous Soviet embassy, they discussed Walter day between President Kennedy and Soviet Lippmann's column of the previous day sugForeign Minister Andrei Gromyko.
After gesting dismantling of American missiles in dinner at the Czech embassy Dobrynin ""as' Turkey along with the Soviet missiles in sured his audience that recent reports of SoCuba.
Kennedy-Groinyko meeting, ""nothing exadministration to seek out a suitable solutraordinary had happened""; the German sittion.
Dobrynin sought their (Commuuation had been discussed at length along nist diplomats') opinion as to whether they with disarmament.
According to RFK's acca-si count, Adlai Stevenson on the 20th had sugTHE CRISIS became public with the Presgested a swap involving withdrawal of ident's Oct 22 speech.
Next day Dobrynin American missiles from both Turkey and called the diplomats together again, explainItaly and giving up the naval base at Guaning that the purpose was ""to collect informa, tannin° Bay in Cuba.
Dobrynin ""characterized it as serica., ous and offered two reasons for his concern.
AT the meeting on the 26th Dobrynin said First of all, he foresaw a possible American attack on Cuba that would almost surely result in the death of some Soviet military ) he still had no information on how Moscow would meet the quarantine.
Thus by implicasion of Cuba was nearly completed and that tion the Soviet ambassador was admitting American missile bases had aimed all their the presence in Cuba of Soviet mediummissiles toward targets on the island.
Secondly, he feared that go-ahead signal from the President was when Soviet ships reached the announced needed.
Dobrynin ""explained that any defensive Union found itself in a difficult position in weapon could be labeled offensive as well Cuba because its supply lines were too long and dismissed American concern ever a and the American blockade could be very threat from Cuba.
Ruzek he suggested, might have been responsible , remarked grimly that if the Americans infor this unwarranted paranoia.
Everybody / waded, It would definitely trigger a nuclear agreed that the situation was serious and war.
Asked from an American missile attack as from a how Moscow intended to deal with the quarSoviet one.
But, as Radvanyi notes, the peaceful solution was abruptly shattered, Soviet envoy did not disclose that before the Dobrynin now announced that the Soviet party be had met with Attorney General Robert F Kennedy in the third floor of the embassy.
At another gathering of the CommuClose-up photograph of a Soviet ship leaving Cuba on Nov. with canvas-covered missiles on the after deck. cording to Mikoyan, had sent tons of Propaembassy was this very moment burning its ganda material, and Mao Tse-tung had 4 archives.
Shocked at this news I inquired of transmitted to Havana one message after Dobrynin whether he planned to evacuate another assuring the Cubans that the eight the families of Soviet diplomatic personnel. hundred , million Chinese stood firmly beDobrynin replied in the negative. hind them and that the Americans were ""Back once again at the Hungarian legapaper tigers.
Mikoyan reported that while tion I rushed off to Budapest a long sumthe Chinese had done nothing to help demary of my latest meeting with Dobrynin, fend Castro, they had refrained from shelland informed the foreign ministry that Doing Quemoy and Matsu during the days of brynin had confirmed the information that the the crisis.
Mikoyan noted ironically that Americans were militarily prepared to inthey might easily have stepped up pressure vade Cuba.
Mikoyan ex""our missiles wouid have equalized what the plained how he had tried to win Castro's ap.
West likes to call the 'balance of power.' "" proval to the United Nations inspection of c+.9 the missile dismantling process in Cuba, one IN THE second book, ""Essence of Decision"" of the President's terms to which Khruby Graham T Allison, published by Littleshchev had agreed, but which Castro rejected.
The missiles in Cuba ""amounted to a douThey were inspected from the air, the tarpubling of Soviet first-strike capabilities."" lins covering them pulled hack by the Soviet Two other points made by Allison struck sailors on ships taking them home. me.
He concludes that the American warnings ""After dinner,"" recounts Radvanyi, ""Mlagainst installation of the missiles may not koyan continued his briefing by explaining have seemed all that strong to Moscow and that the Cuban situation had been Complihence the Soviets went on.
Peking, acsistant for national security, said publicly that he knew there was ""no present ell.' dence, and I think there is no present likelihood"" of ""a major offensive capability"" being installed in Cuba.
Yet on Sept 28 the United States had taken pictures that Bundy' knew about of crates on the decks of Soviet ships in route to Cuba crates similar to those used to send light bombers to Egypt and Indonesia.
In RFK's account he said he told Dobrynin that ""there could be no quid pro quo or any arrangement made under this kind of .threat or pressure"" but that he also told Dobrynin that ""President Kennedy had been anxious to remove those missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time.
