Dear Dave, ^ Day before yesterday you asked me about the book ""One Hell of a Gamble,"" that Jerry had loaned me and 1 told you it is a fine and an important work , Ho Jerry had said and as re .dine it makes obvious, rhea ycsteivay i Corns to where the UolJil records to which the authors liad access quote Hhruschev as saying exactly ZZ vjhat was J^nsic t£> my contemporaneous analysis and seemin/t’iiad never suggested itself to any of those of the ExCon working on that crisis.
The onitj. mql^r I've added to the .age on which Jerry has a few is the highlighting of what 1th. said.
The Untold Story of the °uba Missile Crisis I add that it bad reached this qnplaysis and had expressed it twice the Wednesday before the solution was formulated and announced.
Those to whom I had expressed it where the WxPost's foreign editor whose mime I recall was 'i’hornbury (l had customers in the Post newsroom and delivered there on Wednesdays ) find Bob iiogers, then manager of tho//ational Symphony and who had been editor of CLICK when I was its Washington correspondent.
I'd loned tliat^ csraroh and tiie records of that and other analyses to Howard Hoflfman for a college thesi3 that lie changed and later made into a book.
X thought it was obvious but I suppose what is obvious is too simple for bigshots with big reputations to maintain and jobs to justify for which there can be nothing simple. x(jve reached this point in the book. is an impor cant and a very worth— while work j5 years after the fact.
II 1 8 2 ONE HELL OF A GAMBLE cussed Biryuzov and Rashidov’s important trip.
Once everyone had arrived, Khrushchev stood up and gave a farewell speech to the delegation.
He revealed that his decision was founded upon an expectation of John Kennedy’s reaction.
Khrushchev believed it very important that the Soviet scheme not be disclosed before November 6, the day of the congressional elections in the United States.
After the election period, he intended to visit the United States to inform Kennedy himself.
Faced with this fail accompli, Kennedy would have no alternative to accepting the missiles.
Later, between November 25 and 27, Khrushchev intended to visit Cuba, where he would sign a treaty with Castro.
On Monday, May 28, the delegation left for Havana on a TU-1 14 transport plane by way of Conakry, Guinea.
Thanks to the security' measures that were taken, Washington did not detect the purpose of this special mission.
In Agatha Christie’s popular mystery Murder on the Orient Express, the detective Hercule Poirot encounters a train full of individuals who had motive and opportunity to kill the wealthy American found dead in his luxury compartment.
Students of the Cuban missile crisis have suggested a series of plausible explanations for Khrushchev’s decision in May 1962 to break with Soviet tradition and station nuclear weapons outside of Eurasia.
Some people have claimed that Khrushchev did this to paper over the USSR’s strategic inferiority by doubling at a stroke the number of Soviet missiles that could hit the United States.
Another explanation, especially popular in the 1980s, was that Khrushchev was genuinely concerned about the likelihood of an American invasion and thought that only a battery of mediumand intermediate-range missiles could deter Kennedy.
It has also been suggested that anger at the American decision to station Jupiter missiles in Turkey provoked the impulsive Khrushchev.
