Even though the Soviets kept tight control of their own media, Naftali said, they understood the difference between American journalists and their own.
In those tense weeks in October 1962, both superpowers paid much attention to the media, but for different reasons.
The Soviets hungered for information on how the administration would respond to the missile challenge.
In the White House, Kennedy and his aides were concerned about managing the news.
In a televised speech to the nation on Oct., Kennedy declared the United States had unmistakable evidence that the Soviets were building offensive missile sites in Cuba.
Kennedy urged Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to eliminate this clandestine, reckless and provocative threat to world peace.
Another account of the crisis, The Kennedy Tapes, provides the text of the secretly recorded discussions between the president and his top advisers.
In addition to discussing options, the White House strategy group planned how to sell the administrations plan to Congress and the media.
The morning after Kennedys speech, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara told the group he had given an off-the-record briefing to reporters the previous evening, and I think we need more than that.
Undersecretary of State George Ball said he had met with columnists James Reston and Stewart Alsop.
The Soviets went to great lengths to make contacts with reporters they had cultivated over the years.
Disturbing news came from Johnny Prokov, a bartender at the National Press Club and emigre from Lithuania who voiced strongly anti-Soviet views.
Naftali and his co-author, Aleksandr Fursenko, a Russian historian, wrote that Prokov overheard one journalist tell another that he was going to fly south to cover the operation to capture Cuba.
Prokov passed that information on to Anatoly Gorsky, correspondent for the Soviet news agency Tass who also was a KGB officer.
However, Naftali and Fursenko wrote, what Prokov overheard was a discussion of a Pentagon list of reporters who would be taken along if the decision was to invade.
It opened Friday after an earlier debut at the National Archives in Washington.
It depicts President John F Kennedy and his advisers in deliberations as the United States and Soviet Union were in a nuclear standoff during 13 days in October 1962.
Listening stations with tapes of Kennedy's National Security Council meetings are the centerpiece.
A recreated fallout shelter and one of the first aerial reconnaissance photos of Soviet missile sites under construction in Cuba are also part of the presentation.
There are also personality studies that the Central Intelligence Agency did on Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
My thenboss, the governor of Minnesota, Chicago-born Elmer L Anderson, a civil defense expert, was ordered to Washington to confer on the emergency if Russian bombs were to rain down.
Hence with him, I was bundled into a military plane and hustled to the White House.
Not unless you understand that it needn't have happened, caused by an earlier JFK botch on April 16, 1961, a landing by 1,500 Cuban exiles trained in the United States at a patch on Cuba's south coast, known as Bahia de Cochinos_the Bay of Pigs.
Kennedy's supposed grace under stress wilte after Fidel Castro's troops struck back and Kennedy canceled air cover, leaving brave warriors high and dry.
More than 1,000 were captured, going to prison, from which many never returned.
Seeking to escape guilt for the most disastrous expedition ever formented by a United States president, Kennedy complained that he had been blindsided by inept advisers.
Informed early, Dean Acheson, President Harry S Truman's secretary of state, asked Kennedy how many troops Castro could muster to repel the invasion.
Douglas Dillon, JFK's Treasury secretary, who was President Dwight D Eisenhower's undersecretary of state, told Kennedy confidentially that rumor of invasion was rife on the streets of Havana.
Once the president has made up his mind, we support him and keep our mouths shut.
The Bay of Pigs was followed two months later by a stammering, incompetent Kennedy performance at a Vienna summit meeting with Nikita Khrushchev on June 3.
It reinforced Khrushchev's impression of JFK as a man of little substance, one easy to cajole.
Reeves writes that the men who sat behind Kennedy at the meeting were shocked at the president's ineptitude.
Khrushchev tied him in a superficial web of communist cant, humiliating JFK by treating him as a callow incompetent.
Further, Kennedy told Reston, ""We have to see what we can do that will restore a feeling in Moscow that we will defend our national interest.
Thus the missile crisis that threatened the world led to the escalation in Vietnam.
On April 16, as the fighting, dying and betrayal raged at the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy was mingling and sipping champagne with White House guests.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Samuel Butler, the presiding partner in the law firm of Cravath, Swain and Moore, where Mr Gilpatric was presiding partner from 1966 until his retirement in 1977 Mr Gilpatric, who was born in Brooklyn, became a partner in the firm in 1940.
His clients included CBS, General Dynamics, Olin and Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp., of which he was chairman from 1975 to 1977.
He was deputy secretary of defense under President John F Kennedy and, briefly, under President Lyndon B Johnson, from 1961 to 1964.
The missile crisis came about after the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to array ballistic missiles in Cuba and began shipping them in July 1962.
By mid-October, the Kennedy administration had learned through U-2 surveillance flights that sites for launching mediumand intermediate-range missiles were being built on the island.
Essentially, the options Kennedy faced were a naval blockade of the island, an air strike or invasion, or a negotiated settlement through the United Nations.
At a National Security Council meeting, McNamara argued for a blockade, and McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser, put the case for an air strike.
And then, Sorensen wrote, ""Gilpatric, who was normally a man of few words in meetings with the president when the defense secretary was present, spoke up.
Robert Kennedy wrote that President Kennedy valued Mr Gilpatric's views because he respected his calm judgment.
Two days later, Soviet vessels taking missiles to Cuba reversed their courses and on Oct.
Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles and tear down the launching sites.
Mr Gilpatric also played active roles in Kennedy's efforts to increase military spending and reorganize the defense establishment.
After working for the State Department in the 1940s and '50s, Rusk was recruited back to Washington in 1961 by President Kennedy, who sought out the ""best and brightest"" of his generation.
Among the others were Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and McGeorge Bundy, assistant for national security.
After Kennedy's assassination, President Lyndon Johnson insisted that Rusk stay on.
He remained until the end of Johnson's administration in 1969, despite criticism over his advocacy of United States involvement in the Vietnam War.
His son Richard was among those who criticized him as an ""architect"" of the war.
But Rusk never apologized for his role in the conflict, which killed 57,000 Americans and 1 million Vietnamese.
Vietnam was one of four major global events Rusk helped preside over as secretary of state.
The others were the botched Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961, the 1962 Cuban missile crisis and the signing of a nuclear nonproliferation treaty with the Soviet Union in 1968.
He was a great American and a great human being,"" said Henry Kissinger, secretary of state under President Nixon.
In 1962, the world held its breath as Kennedy ordered the Soviets to dismantle sites in Cuba where missile were aimed at the United States.
Advancing quickly through the ranks, he was assistant secretary for Far Eastern affairs when the North Koreans invaded South Korea, and he played a part in the United States decision to intervene.
Rusk left the State Department in 1952 to become president of the Rockefeller Foundation, then left Washington for good when he returned to academia in 1969.
Survivors include his wife, Virginia; two sons; a daughter; and six grandchildren.
It was the first time these remarks, originally made during a closed-door academic conference on the 1962 Cuban missile crisis held in Havana in January, had been broadcast in public.
Castro said younger people had been brought into the leadership of the country.
Castro denied the crisis had caused any serious divisions in the government he led.
He rejected views widely held by many Western analysts that Cuba had followed orders from the Soviet Union in supporting revolutionary movements and left-wing governments.
Saying that times had changed, Castro appeared to rule out any future Cuban large-scale military interventions abroad of the kind seen in Angola.
Considering the relatively new nuclear capabilities of both nations, the horrifying prospect of leveled cities, mass casualties and general chaos loomed as what became known as the Cuban missile crisis took place.
How that crisis unfolded in October 1962 was dictated largely by how World War II had ended.
The United States had dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, and conventional wars fought by armies in the field suddenly seemed obsolete.
The fact that a nation's leaders could lay waste to an enemy simply by pushing a button forever altered the way leaders could broker conflicts.
Proxy wars ignited in global hot spots, such as Korea in the early 1950s, as the freedomloving West sought to oppose communist expansion worldwide.
So when Cuba, just 90 miles off the coast of Florida, became the seat of a communist government in 1959, that set off some serious alarm bells in the United States.
The United States attempted to unseat the Cuban government through covert operations such as the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961.
The Soviet Union was helping the Cubans build secret bases for missiles capable of reaching the United States.
Every ""duck-and-cover"" exercise and every air-raid drill seemed like the prelude to a horrifying reality.
Thus began the tensest standoff in modern history, with President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev each attempting to stare down the other.
Kennedy ordered a blockade of Cuba to prevent any more offensive weapons from going in and demanded that the missiles there be dismantled and removed.
Perhaps ""subsided"" would be a more accurate word because from then on, a situation known as mutually assured destruction prevailed between the two global superpowers.
Missile silos were filled with enough nuclear warheads to bury both sides in rubble many times over.
Neither side dared to press that button a first strike certainly would bring enough retaliatory firepower to make the attempt completely foolhardy.
That changed under President Reagan, who wisely stepped up the arms race enough to make it financially unsustainable for the Soviets.
He also conceived of a missile defense that would shoot down any incoming Soviet missiles.
Funding for Reagan's dream continued after he left office, and the Cold War ended.
Today we have the technological capability to protect ourselves from certain missiles fired at United States territory or allies, but the system isn't as comprehensive as what we would need to ensure that the potential missile threat posed by Iran, for example, can be shut down.
In fact, President Obama has undercut missile defense since taking office.
We need a shield that will intercept missiles during all three stages of flight.
It's especially important to pursue a space-based component, which would enable us to shoot down missiles earlier in their flight, when they're moving more slowly.
Fifty years ago, the world stood on the brink and lived to tell the tale.
Let's build the kind of missile defense that will make us impervious to threats and keep World War III at bay.
F Michael Maloof About | Section: WND EXCLUSIVE 1289 Words OpenURL Link The recent seizure of a North Korean freighter carrying Cuban, nuclear-capable SA-2 missile components for refurbishment has resurrected the spectre of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, when another communist nation developed nuclear dealings with America’s island neighbor.
Until now, there has not been extensive military cooperation between Cuba and North Korea.
However, a high-level North Korean delegation recently visited Cuba, possibly resulting in a deal for Cuba to send military equipment to North Korea for refurbishment in exchange for barter payment with some 10,000 tons of sugar that was declared as the cargo.
The missile components, however, were undeclared, resulting in the Panamanian seizure, which reportedly was prompted by a tip of drugs being on board the ship.
Fisher said the shipment was part of a Cuban-North Korean military cooperation effort to upgrade each country’s SA-2s with advanced tracking electronics.
Such an EMP attack would knock out the Eastern United States grid system and all unprotected electronics and automated control systems, which together form the backbone of the technology-based infrastructure of the U.S., according to these sources and recent studies on the financial impact of such an event.
It was an SA-2 that downed an American U-2 on May 1, 1960, while undertaking a high-altitude reconnaissance over the then Soviet Union.
Powers, who was employed by the United States Central Intelligence Agency at the time, was aware that Soviet aircraft were not capable of reaching the altitude at which the U-2 could fly.
The CIA, however, was unaware that the Soviets had developed the SA-2 or its high-altitude capabilities.
Because the Soviet radar system remains in use, the United States and other countries have come up with the ability to jam its radar.
However, the radar has been modified over the years to undertake “countercounter-electronic measures have been fitted to later, post-Soviet models of this radar,” Hardy said.
Pry today is executive director of the Task Force on National and Homeland Security.
In an exclusive interview with WND, Pry pointed out that the ceiling of the SA-2 is up to 35 kilometers, which goes beyond the minimum optimal height for an EMP burst.
The Nation’s missile defense system, Pry said, would not be able to intercept the SA-2 if it were launched from a ship, since the flight time to altitude is so short.
The SA-2 travels at a speed of Mach 3.5, or three times the speed of sound.
In a May 31, 2013, Pry joined former CIA Director R James Woolsey in writing an article for The Wall Street Journal outlining how North Korea could cripple the United States with an EMP attack.
They pointed out that EMP effects could be even “more powerful and more catastrophic by using an Enhanced Radiation Warhead,” they wrote.
A September 2007 study by The Sage Policy Group estimated that the financial cost of an EMP event just from Baltimore, Md., Washington, D.C., to Richmond, VA, would approach $800 billion.
Get “A Nation Forsaken” by Michael Maloof and become part of the solution rather than part of the problem.
Members of the media who would like to interview Michael Maloof about his book “A Nation Forsaken” should contact media@wnd.com.
Therein lie lessons that might well be read in Washington, Baghdad and Pyongyang.
The Soviet Union was deploying nuclear-tipped missiles to Cuba, 90 miles from United States territory.
Today, Iraq is seeking and North Korea has acquired nuclear arms; both also have chemical and biological weapons.
President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba and preparations for air strikes and ground invasion of Cuba.
President Bush has ordered land, sea, and air forces to deploy around the Persian Gulf, and has called 150,000 reserves to active duty.
President Kennedy was not bluffing then, and President Bush is not bluffing now.
The Soviet Union had massive conventional forces poised to invade Western Europe.
Today, Iraq and North Korea appeared to be coordinating their strategy, turning their defiance of the United States into one conflict on two widely separated fronts.
President Bush has tried to shove the dispute with North Korea into the future, but the North Koreans have refused to be ignored and have only increased the belligerence of their diplomacy by diatribe.
Then, as now, the administration in Washington has sought to have its adversary disarm by applying political pressure even as it has prepared for battle.
President Kennedy had the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, make a compelling case to the United Nations Security Council of the imminent threat from the Soviet Union.
President Bush sent Secretary of State Colin Powell to the Security Council to make an only slightly less compelling case against Iraq.
Last week, the dispute with North Korea was headed for the same council.
Then, as now, miscalculation is the most severe threat to resolving the quarrel.
Surely the same can be said of the current confrontation, which is even more complicated than the crisis of 1962.
Prime Minister Tony Blair has followed that precedent with no known deviation.
France allied itself with the United States in 1962; it has joined with Russia to oppose the United States now.
The missile crisis blew up and was over in 13 days; the confrontation with Iraq and North Korea has been brewing for many months.
President Bush has made pre-emptive strikes an option against any potential adversary.
Force Iraq and North Korea to give up their weapons of mass destruction.
But whether his objectives go beyond that is far from clear, notably whether Saddam Hussein of Iraq and Kim Jong-Il of North Korea must go, perhaps to a safe haven in an Arab nation for Saddam or into retirement in Russia or China for Kim, has been left in ambiguity.
In the end, President Kennedy's strategy worked and the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, backed down after President Kennedy gave the Soviets a way out that did not humiliate them.
Chairman Khrushchev, to his credit, came to understand that he had underestimated Americans and thus pulled the missiles out of Cuba.
Today, President Bush is eyeball to eyeball with Saddam Hussein and Kim Jong-Il, but nobody seems to have blinked yet.
How the Cuban missile crisis forced a rendezvous with reality: PHILIP STEPHENS: October 25, 2002 | Financial Times Author: PHILIP STEPHENS Section: COMMENT & ANALYSIS 1069 Words Page: 21 OpenURL Link Forty years on, the Cuban missile crisis can still take us to the edge of our seats.
The cold war is over, the mighty Soviet Union is one of history's closed chapters.
But the story of those 13 days in October when the world peered over the nuclear abyss is as compelling, and as chilling, as it has ever been.
We worry now about keeping the world safe from terrorists and rogue states, about Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein.
The fear in October 1962 was whether there would be anything left to keep safe.
It was little wonder that queues began to form outside church confessionals.
On the screen, Kennedy warned of ""a difficult and dangerous"" effort to face down the Soviets and force the withdrawal from Cuba of their secretly deployed missiles.
United States military strikes against Cuba would be followed by a Soviet seizure of Berlin.
Kennedy installed a tape recorder, preserving for posterity the intense debates within his inner circle.
The passage of time has shown that the world was closer to the brink than even the president realised.
The hawks were unaware that Soviet troops in Cuba were equipped with battlefield nuclear weapons.
The commanders on the ground were authorised to use them against an invading force.
If the nuclear threshold had been breached, the chain reaction would have been unstoppable.
The submarine was trapped on the ocean floor under bombardment from United States depth charges.
The captain, fearing its destruction, decided to take the enemy with it.
I suppose it was to be expected that the present incumbent of the White House would seek to draw parallels between then and now.
Mr Bush suggests that Kennedy's grit in forcing Khrushchev to back down finds a mirror in his own resolve to see off Mr Hussein.
The Cuban crisis did, though, mark a watershed in the world's understanding of nuclear weapons.
For 15 years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, politicians and generals had seen these bombs and missiles as instruments of war.
The atom bomb, even the H-bomb, were ""war-fighting weapons"" that could, and probably would, be used.
The 1950s became an era of deep nuclear shelters, of elaborate civil defence programmes and of children taught to cower under their classroom desks at the sound of the nuclear sirens.
All the while, American generals urged pre-emptive strikes against Moscow or Beijing.
The crisis was followed a year later by the first of many arms control agreements when the then nuclear three signed a first, partial, testban treaty.
This was followed by a panoply of multilateral and bilateral agreements and treaties that eventually froze the balance of terror between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Mutually Assured Destruction codified the essential truth that Kennedy had grasped.
Those who seek to draw lessons for the present from the crisis could do worse than start from here.
The newest nuclear powers have yet to understand this pretty obvious truth.
Pakistan's nuclear arsenal is in effect under the control of that nation's armed forces.
Those who are really concerned about weapons of mass destruction worry a lot more about Pakistan than about Iraq.
Mr Bush, meanwhile, eschews the multilateralism that halted the US-Soviet nuclear arms race and slowed the pace of proliferation.
Sure, the United States remains a signatory to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty; but it has jettisoned its parallel obligations under the comprehensive test-ban treaty.
Other accords have been pushed to one side as relics of the cold war, tearing the fabric of mutual interest in non-proliferation.
For nations in the Middle and Near East it now seems as logical that they should seek to acquire the bomb as it would be illogical for them ever to contemplate using it.
But the crisis revealed the president as a man of judgment, a leader ready to look beyond tomorrow to the day after.
He understood that to avoid war you have to leave your enemy an option other than complete humiliation.
This column appears every Friday philip.stephens@ft.com Co pyrig ht The Financial Time s Ltd.
Costner's ""Thirteen Days"" and the Cuban missile crisis the film portrays.
It was time for a little fresh air, a dose of Cuban street reality, a spontaneous stroll up Old Havana's Obispo Street through the presumed anonymity of the capital of a U.S.-embargoed nation where none of Costner's films had been officially released until this week.
The 46-year-old star signed scraps of paper, posed for a dozen snapshots and basked just a bit in the unexpected warmth.
The film cost more than $70 million and grossed just half that in the United States--although it will probably break even worldwide.
The visit was licensed by the United States Treasury Department as a cultural exchange and officially approved by the Cuban government only a week before.
Ostensibly, Costner said the trip, which couldn't possibly earn him a dime, was merely meant to share his critically acclaimed film, which reconstructs through the eyes of the Kennedy White House the two weeks in 1962 when the United States and Russia came to the brink of nuclear war.
As he walked Obispo Street, Costner spoke passionately about the hundreds of thousands of Cuban exiles in the United States who haven't been home in 40 years.
But he did the same about the vitality and acumen of Castro, the durable Communist whose 1959 revolution drove many of those Cubans away.
Throughout Monday's midnight palace debut, an animated Castro sat a few feet from Costner, frequently passing historic footnotes, anecdotes, corrections and reactions to the actor through a translator seated between them.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin was scheduled to arrive in Havana later in the week for a three-day state visit, Castro said.
The world was at the abyss of thermonuclear war, so close to self-destruction that one could almost hear the countdown, minute by minute.
The missile crisis became an early -and to our great good fortune, successful -example of crisis management.
The United States trumped the Soviets, though not without spending a few green stamps.
We agreed to remove obsolescent Jupiter missiles from Turkey as part of a deal to get Soviet nucleartipped missiles out of Cuba.
The quid pro quo that headed off a nuclear showdown has been known for 20 years.
What has not been known until recently is the extent to which President John F Kennedy managed the crisis.
Thirty-five years ago, there were plenty of people in the White House, in Congress and in the Pentagon who were ready to have it out with the Soviets.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in fact, were urging Kennedy to order air strikes against Soviet intermediate-range missiles already in place in Cuba.
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara talked darkly of a ``full invasion'' of the island.
The tapes show a young, inexperienced president taking charge of his team of seasoned advisers with no ifs, ands or buts -he would make the decisions, alone if necessary.
The United States lost nothing of strategic value in removing its Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The Soviet Union lost its land-based nuclear toehold in the Western Hemisphere.
The year before, he had come off second best in his Vienna summit meeting with Khrushchev.
This time, with the very fate of the world in the balance, it was John Kennedy who triumphed.
Had he possessed a lesser profile in courage, the fires of man-made suns may well have marked his failure.
The statement was written by Dean Rusk, then secretary of state; Robert McNamara, secretary of defense; George W Ball, undersecretary of state; Roswell L Gilpatric, deputy secretary of defense; Theodore Sorensen, presidential counsel; and McGeorge Bundy, adviser on national security affairs.
The Cuban missile crisis, 13 days in October 1962, started when a United States U2 spy plane took photographs of nuclear missiles being installed by the Soviet Union in Cuba.
Kennedy imposed a naval blockade, and then-Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced six days later the missiles would be dismantled.
The statement contends that the crisis ""could and should have been avoided.
But as far as the Cuban crisis is concerned, it was espionage that won the day.
The secrets the Russian Colonel Oleg Penkovsky passed on to the Englishman Greville Wynne were considered ""pure gold"" in intelligence circles and President Kennedy was very soon made aware of them.
Kennedy, in negotiations with Khrushchev, had the upper hand and Khrushchev knew it.
Kennedy's decision to remove his missiles was merely to prevent the Russian premier losing face.
As for the real heroes of the crisis, Wynne received a sentence of eight years, serving one before being exchanged for the Russian spy Gordon Lonsdale.
Penkovsky was shot, although some in intelligence circles believe he was cremated alive.
