Had it succeeded, Operation 'Anadyr' would have established a significant Soviet military base in Cuba, with intermediate-range and medium-range ballistic missiles, nuclear-armed diesel submarines, bombers and over 50,000 Soviet troops.
Instead the United States discovered Soviet plans before the operation could be completed and after a dangerous test of wills, Moscow had to retreat, its tail between its legs.
The Komityet Gosudarstvennoii Bezopasnosti and the Soviet Army's Glavnoe Rasvedyvatel'noe Upravlenie both failed to provide the Kremlin with sufficient warning of President John F Kennedy's intentions toward Cuba in the months preceding October 1962.
When scapegoating began in Moscow following the missile crisis, the intelligence services received a good portion of the blame.
The KGB escaped this investigation but its chief representative in Washington, Aleksandr Feklisov, would soon be removed.
At the height of the Cold War, there was misunderstanding in the West about the role of the secret services, especially the KGB, in Soviet SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 65 policymaking.
There is no denying that the KGB permeated the lives of Soviet citizens, who, even after Khrushchev's secret speech of 1956, had reason to fear the organization.
But as a factor in Soviet foreignpolicymaking the KGB was far less pervasive, and ultimately less influential.
Testimonies from Soviet defectors, especially from those who had served in the intelligence services, often served to confirm these assessments.
A man like Anatoly Golitsyn, who feared retribution after his defection to the United States in 1961, naturally overestimated the importance of the organization that was trying to find him in his exile.
But with the benefit of KGB and Presidium documents, this myth can be punctured.
In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, at the very least, the KGB under Vladimir Semichastny was a secondary factor.
Although not the pivotal player one might have assumed it to be, the Soviet intelligence community nevertheless performed an essential service in informing the Kremlin about the United States and Cuba in 1962.
The activities of Soviet intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis reveal much about the state of Soviet information gathering at the time and the analytical contribution made by the secret services.
THE MECHANICS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY When he was appointed Chairman of the KGB by Nikita Khrushchev in 1961, Vladimir Semichastny knew almost nothing about intelligence gathering and was inclined to refuse the position.
Khrushchev naturally prevailed but added, in a revealing aside, that he expected Semichastny to be his political representative in the organization.
He wanted a tough manager who was loyal to him and not a professional intelligence officer.
The job at the KGB was open because Khrushchev had promoted the loyal and respected Aleksandr Shelepin to the Presidium.
Semichastny was Shelepin's protege, having already preceded him on every rung of the bureaucratic ladder before this new promotion.
Despite this fine pedigree, Semichastny never matched the power of his patron.
Unable to emerge from Shelepin's shadow, even after replacing him at the KGB, Semichastny enjoyed far less influence as Russia's spymaster than his nominal equivalent in the United States, the Director of Central Intelligence.
Consequently, in the Cuban missile crisis the Chairman of the KGB would neither be invited to a Presidium meeting nor have a single face-to-face meeting with Khrushchev.s Nikita Khrushchev was his own intelligence analyst.
Before an intelligence report landed on Khrushchev's desk it had to survive a series of 66 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS challenges.
Every field report went first to the cable section of the First Chief Directorate , the foreign intelligence component of the KGB, where it would be paraphrased and indications of source removed.
If considered of sufficient interest it was sent to the chief of the First Chief Directorate, Aleksandr Sakharovsky, a crusty intelligence professional who would decide whether to forward it to the secretariat of the Chairman of the KGB, Vladimir Semichastny.
Semichastny himself decided whether to pass the report to the Presidium.
On rare occasions a report with policy implications went to Khrushchev alone.
No section of the Directorate wrote intelligence estimates, and what the Russians themselves describe as 'analyses' were more like exercises in information management than statements of what the official mind believed about a certain problem at any given time.
The KGB typically furnished these 'analyses' at the request of the Foreign Ministry, the International Department of the Central Committee, or the Presidium.
The 16th department of the FCD, which prepared them, was the dumping ground for officers whose cover had been blown overseas or who were otherwise considered undesirable for operational duty.
In the early 1960s, the analyses bore the signature of the chief of the service, Feodor Mortin, or the chief of the FCD, Aleksandr Sakharovsky.
Largely compilations of information collected on a topic, these reports lack any overarching argument.
The paragraphs are disjointed and often contradict whatever argument there is in the report's final sentences.
Professional prudence was the principal reason for the inadequacy of Soviet intelligence analysis.
Besides the constraints of Soviet life, KGB analytical work also suffered from a limiting institutional ethos.
Having partly modeled itself on the British foreign intelligence service, MI6, the FCD specialized in collecting secret intelligence and resisted reporting information to the Kremlin that came from open sources.
Occasionally, when there was no SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 67 secret material available at all on a topic of interest to the leadership, the KGB would provide a press summary.
As a result of this grudging use of journalism, KGB analyses did not reflect a synergy of enlightened press comment and secret intelligence.
The details of the reporting tree of Soviet military intelligence, the GRU, in the period of the Cuban missile crisis are less certain.
Certainly, GRU chief Ivan Serov reported either to Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky or to his first deputy and Chief of the General Staff, Marshal Matvei Zakharovsky.
Because Malinovsky had a direct line to Khrushchev, GRU information enjoyed the same level of support in Khrushchev's inner circle as did that of the KGB because of Aleksandr Shelepin's high position.
GRU officials enjoyed the typical and transparent covers of military attaches.
Originally described by US intelligence as 'reclusive', Feklisov and his assistants eventually developed extensive contacts.
From a study of the intelligence available to the Presidium during the missile crisis, it is evident that Feklisov had little success in penetrating the chief power centers in Washington.
He relied to a large extent on the semi-official gossip and speculation that circulated around the United States and foreign press.
With the assistance of Anatoli Gorsky, ostensibly a TASS correspondent who was a member of the National Press Club, Feklisov developed a number of useful journalistic sources.
One network in Washington included, for example, foreign correspondents from some European newspapers.
Good material, sometimes even excellent reports, came from Washington's foreign diplomatic community.
But the Soviets had a much harder time penetrating the US government itself.
There were two agents with regular State Department contacts, and some information from the State Department's German and Venezuelan experts, possibly through these men, flowed to Soviet intelligence.
Occasionally information came from a source friendly with a CIA officer.
The KGB filtered the information from these sources through an interesting interpretive prism.
The KGB's assessments of the American policy system were straightforward, simplistic, but essentially not ideological.
Instead the KGB reported on two tendencies in Washington the hawkish 'position of strength' lobby and an amorphous 'liberal' side and the likelihood that President Kennedy did or did not belong to the more militaristic of the two.
Although Soviet intelligence could not boast of any major sources of American political intelligence in this period that had the dazzle of the Burgess-Blunt Cambridge Ring, it did play a role in shaping, or at least confirming, Khrushchev's understanding of John F Kennedy.
Before the 1960 election, the Kremlin received little from its principal sources of foreign political information, the KGB and the Soviet foreign ministry, that was not readily available in the United States press.
Although the candidate chastised the Republicans for failing to come up with imaginative ways to improve US-Soviet relations, Kennedy seemed to Moscow to be interested only in minor palliatives arms control, for example, instead of disarmament and seemed not to reject out of hand the possibility of reversing the tide of Socialism in Eastern Europe and China.
The Embassy warned that because Kennedy believed in a strategic missile gap between the superpowers, he was unlikely to engage in any meaningful negotiations before he had restored the United States' 'position of strength'.13 Soviet diplomats also made a point of noting the strong anticommunism of his father, Joseph P Kennedy, the former United States Ambassador to Great Britain, who was friendly with the notorious Senator Joseph McCarthy.
Although not explicit, the possibility of old Joe having some nefarious influence over his son was left implied.
Initially the KGB was a little more hopeful for better superpower SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 69 relations if Kennedy were elected.
Adlai Stevenson had twice run unsuccessfully for president against Eisenhower and was associated with a comparatively less belligerent view of the Soviet Union and a commitment to domestic reform, such as civil rights.
But over the 1960 campaign, Kennedy's tough sparring with the Republican candidate Richard Nixon over foreign policy caused a slight shift in the KGB's assessment.
Remarkably, the Bay of Pigs fiasco in April 1961 seemed to confirm for Moscow that Kennedy was no hawk.
In the days and weeks following the event, the KGB received a stream of intelligence that blamed the CIA and other hawkish influences for bullying the President into attacking Cuba.
If left to his own devices, these reports implied, Kennedy would be less aggressive toward Fidel Castro.
In sum, the American President seemed to be the kind of leader with whom Moscow could work; but his pragmatism combined with his relative youth made him vulnerable to the heirs of the John Foster Dulles approach to superpower relations.
Extending beyond the KGB, this understanding of the President would come to influence Nikita Khrushchev's future actions.
Soviet Intelligence Gathering in Latin America In contrast with its limited ability to inform the Kremlin's understanding of the United States, the KGB played a central role in shaping the Kremlin's thinking on Fidel Castro and his regime.
Longtime Soviet intelligence professional Aleksandr Alekseev, who set up shop in Havana in October 1959, became a confidant of the Cuban leader and acted as the principal back channel between Havana and Moscow prior to the Cuban missile crisis.
Before the opening of the Havana KGB station in October 1959, Mexico City had been the central collecting point for information about the Cuban Revolution and its enemies.
Members of the Cuban communist party traveled to Mexico City to report on the transformation of Cuban society under Fidel Castro.
The young KGB officer Nikolai Leonov, who was assigned to the office, was an important link to the communists in Fidel Castro's entourage.
In the late 1950s, when some in the Kremlin sensed the opportunity for an expansion of Soviet influence in Latin America, Alekseev was one of the few area specialists to whom the leadership could turn.
Recalled from the KGB station in Buenos Aires in 1958, Alekseev took over the Latin American division of the Council of Ministers' Committee on Cultural Relations.
The Spanish-speaking Alekseev was quick to apply his expertise and knowledge of Latin American personalities to devising propaganda operations.
In January 1959, Alekseev suggested to his superiors that he might be sent to Cuba as a Soviet observer.
His bosses in the KGB agreed, assigning him a 'special mission' to establish contact with the top levels of the Cuban leadership, but it took over seven months for the Cubans to grant him a visa.
In 1960 and 1961, the deepening Soviet-Cuban political and military relationship led to extensive liaison in intelligence matters.
The Cubans responded positively to Soviet offers of intelligence assistance and a few men were sent from Havana to Soviet intelligence schools in 1960.
The Soviets offered to build a signals intelligence service for the Cubans in the summer of 1960.
Moscow, which was able to read Cuban diplomatic correspondence, assumed that the United States could as well.
Liaison reached an unusual level of intensity following the Bay of Pigs operation.
Chastened by the poor performance of its intelligence services before the US-sponsored attack, Havana restructured its intelligence community, asking Moscow to staff key positions in Cuban intelligence and to accelerate the training of a Cuban intelligence cadre.
In October 1961, Soviet military intelligence officially came to the island at the request of General Sergio del Valle, the chief of staff of the Cuban army.
Soviet Intelligence Gathering Elsewhere Some of the Soviets' more detailed sources on United States policy toward Cuba were in Europe.
In particular Soviet appreciations of Kennedy's policy benefited from excellent sources in the French and Belgian foreign offices.
The KGB was able to provide the Kremlin with verbatim copies of French diplomatic traffic from Moscow and Washington.
Not only did Nikita Khrushchev SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 71 receive copies of cables sent to Paris by the French Ambassador in the United States, Herve Alphand, but he was also given detailed reports on visits to Paris by influential Americans, such as Dean Rusk and even President Kennedy.
From the Belgian foreign ministry, Soviet intelligence acquired reports written by the Belgian mission in Havana on the internal situation in Cuba and on Castro's policy of assisting other Latin American revolutionary groups.
THE MISSILE CRISIS For the purpose of evaluating the performance of Soviet intelligence in 1962, it is useful to divide the Cuban missile crisis into three phases.
Despite a lack of startling sources, the KGB and the GRU exhibited little reluctance in forwarding what in retrospect appears as gossipy or secondrate information to the Kremlin.
Although these reports were not always believed, Khrushchev paid attention to them and the Soviet intelligence community was often tasked to acquire certain kinds of information before the leadership rendered a major policy decision.
January—June 1962 As best as can be concluded, neither Soviet intelligence, nor any particular product of the intelligence community, sparked Khrushchev's decision to deploy ballistic missiles to Cuba.
Instead the May 1962 decision came at the end of five months of discussion involving Nikita Khrushchev and his closest advisors over what new steps should be taken to assist Fidel Castro.
The process was set in train when news reached Moscow of some candid comments that President Kennedy had made in a meeting with Khrushchev's son-in-law Aleksei Adzhubei on 30 January 1962.
Adzhubei's report that Kennedy was impatient with the status quo in Cuba shook the Kremlin and re-opened a debate over Fidel Castro's security that had started at the Cuban leader's instigation in September 1961.
A few months after the Bay of Pigs, Castro had requested a qualitative improvement in Soviet military assistance to his regime.
Khrushchev that I consider the invasion which took place a mistake; however we cannot fail to follow the development of events on Cuba.
You are also not indifferent to events in Finland, for example'.21 If this had been all that Kennedy had said, then the Kremlin might not have reassessed its support for Cuba in February 1962.
According to Adzhubei, this last comment provoked Kennedy to bang his fist on the table.
When they had difficulties in Hungary, they liquidated the conflict in three days.
When they did not like things in Finland, the president of that country goes to visit the Soviet premier in Siberia and all is worked out.
But you, Dulles, have never been capable of doing that'.22 Kennedy's comments not only moved Khrushchev to endorse the shipment of military supplies that Castro had asked for six months earlier, but it provoked the Kremlin to order the KGB to present a new assessment of US intentions in the Caribbean.
In July 1960, the KGB had written that a US invasion of Cuba was unlikely unless the Cubans invaded the United States naval base at Guantanamo or the Soviets themselves attempted to put nuclear missiles on the island.
In the 18 months that followed, which included the transition from the Eisenhower to the Kennedy administration, it appears the KGB had not been asked to reassess this position.
But in the climate of concern that followed the Adzhubei-Kennedy meeting, the Kremlin finally called for a new opinion.
On the basis of available intelligence in March 1962, the KGB could not reach any overarching conclusions about the likelihood of a United States invasion.
SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 73 For months Cuban security had been reporting an increase in counterrevolutionary activity.
Rebel bands had grown in number and were receiving additional supplies of weaponry, food and medicine.
Yet it was not clear that the United States was preparing for a second and bigger paramilitary assault.
Interrogations of captured rebels were turning up evidence of a change in CIA instructions.
The rebels were now expected to emphasize intelligence gathering and sabotage operations, hardly what one would expect on the eve of an attack.
Consequently, the Cuban services assumed that rather than planning a near-term invasion, the United States was instead attempting to create a general crisis on the island by paralyzing the economy.
Evidence from America's European allies shed little light on Washington's objectives regarding Cuba in 1962.
Moscow acquired the report of a NATO committee empaneled in September 1961 to investigate Latin America.
The NATO report outlined European concerns that tension would rise with economic hardship in Latin America.
The Soviets noted that NATO experts feared that the expansion of the Common Market would harm trade between Europe and the Latin American countries.
But there was no indication that the United States was eager to use force to settle the question in 1962.24 In the two countries where the KGB had scored spectacular successes in the 1950s, Great Britain and West Germany, the KGB had to admit to the Kremlin that it could not produce any intelligence material of any value on Cuba or the Latin American question.
The best European indications in this period on Kennedy's Cuban policy came from Soviet intelligence's excellent French sources.
The Soviets received reports on the substance of Charles de Gaulle's conversations with President Kennedy about Cuba.
There was nothing here to help an assessment of Kennedy's feelings toward Cuba in 1962.
It seemed that the young man admitted his unhappiness about the failure at the Bay of Pigs and was looking for European support in isolating Cuba.
De Gaulle and Kennedy agreed that Europe needed to expand economic and cultural ties with Latin America to remove the sense in those countries that the only obvious choices were United States hegemony or communism.
But, once again, there was nothing in this basket of information about United States designs in 1962.
The KGB's spring assessment of Kennedy's immediate plans for Cuba was equivocal because its man in Washington doubted that an American military intervention was on the horizon.
Aleksandr Feklisov believed that Kennedy would have to be provoked to use military force in Cuba.
Before being sent out to the United States to run the KGB's principal station there, Feklisov had overseen the intelligence assessment in 1960 that Eisenhower was unlikely to invade without a Cuban assault on Guantanamo or the creation of a missile base on the island.
Two years later, he still believed this, despite 74 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS the change in administration and the experience of the Bay of Pigs.
In the middle of March 1962, Feklisov reported that Kennedy was unlikely to approve an invasion because a military intervention would undermine the Alliance For Progress, which was Kennedy's preferred weapon to use against the regional appeal of Fidel Castro.
Kennedy knew about the serious food shortages in Cuba and had called for measures that would further aggravate the situation.
But the tone of Feklisov's report suggested that the American President was not overly concerned about Cuba.
Without exception all reported to Feklisov in March 1962 that a United States military intervention in Cuba was unlikely.
This source, whose location was not indicated on the summary prepared for the leadership of the KGB, reported that Kennedy would not risk a military operation before the November congressional elections because of his concern that the Republicans would use it against him.
The source suspected that if the intervention came it would be launched from Central America.
Although secret information had not inspired the Kremlin's anxiety over Cuba in the spring, the fact that neither the KGB nor the GRU could provide any confirmation of Kennedy's warning encouraged Moscow to table the question of future military assistance to Castro until mid-April.
The first was a massive military maneuver launched by the United States armed forces near Cuba.
LANTPHIBEX-62 was the largest Atlantic-Caribbean military exercise ever conducted.
It involved 40,000 men aboard 84 ships, who would participate in two amphibious landings.
The second was a political offensive launched by Fidel Castro against some of the most powerful communists in his entourage.
Although the KGB did not supply any significant information on US activities, the organization played a role in providing the Kremlin with worrisome reports on the state of Cuban-Soviet relations.
Through its contacts in Havana, Soviet intelligence was able to report in late March on the devastation of the positions of some of the top communists in Cuba because of the dismissal of Anibal Escalante.
In response to the loss of one of its closest allies in Havana, the Kremlin ordered the intrepid Aleksandr Alekseev back from Cuba in April 1962.
Aleksandr Shelepin, Semichastny's predecessor, participated in the decision to elevate Alekseev to the position of Soviet Ambassador to Cuba in the SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 75 wake of the Escalante affair.
Khrushchev respected Alekseev's expertise and knew that he was close to Fidel Castro.
The Soviet leader, however, was less interested in Alekseev's ideas as to what should be done in Cuba than he was in using the experienced KGB officer to test his assumptions about what Fidel Castro might accept.
It was in the course of Alekseev's fourweek stay in Moscow that Khrushchev decided to put ballistic missiles on the island.
Moreover, it is quite clear that in its desire to maintain the strictest secrecy surrounding the plan, the Kremlin did not make use of the KGB to collect additional information on Kennedy's tolerance for a Soviet military base in the region.
It was not uncommon for KGB headquarters to send out a general questionnaire to all stations if the Kremlin were suddenly seized with interest in a certain matter.
In January 1961, for example, KGB residents in all of Latin America received a six-part questionnaire reflecting the KGB's ignorance of the new Kennedy administration's policy toward Cuba.
Nothing like this was sent in April or May 1962.31 Instead of trying to track down additional information on Kennedy's possible sensitivity to a Soviet missile base 90 miles off the coast of Florida, Aleksandr Feklisov at the KGB station in Washington spent much of May 1962 devising a covert operation to increase tensions in Franco-American relations.
For Western scholars, it is even more startling that no one in the KGB was asked for a formal assessment of the likely American reaction to the placement of missiles in Cuba.
Since World War II, the United States intelligence community had attempted to provide estimates of the intentions and capabilities of important foreign countries.
While these estimates often evinced the flaws of committee-generated reports, they at least reflected an effort to coordinate and make sense of secret knowledge on a certain policy matter.
In some cases, these reports sought to clarify the murky world of the subjunctive, to illuminate what might happen.
Called 'intelligence estimates' in the Anglo-Saxon intelligence world, these reports were foreign to Soviet experience.
In Moscow, 'what if questions were reserved for the consideration of the Presidium alone.
The most startling proof of how far the KGB was from the events that led to the decision to deploy nuclear missiles in the Caribbean was Khrushchev's apparent inattention in May 1962 to the problem of reconciling the need to keep 'Anadyr' secret with evidence of United States highaltitude reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
As of the spring of 1962, Soviet intelligence was well aware that Washington was regularly sending U-2s over the island.
On at least two occasions Feklisov reported to Moscow that U-2s were scouring the skies above Cuba.
The Soviets took great pains to cover the movement of the missiles from the Ukraine.
The planning 76 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS documents for Operation 'Anadyr' detail the use of physical deception to create the impression that the shipments were intended for Siberia.
Yet there appear not to have been any specific measures taken to confuse the cameras of a U-2 flying over the construction sites on the island.
The role of the GRU in the events preceding the missile decision is harder to determine.
The Kremlin records for the decision do not include anything resembling a Soviet military intelligence assessment of US intentions toward Cuba.
The most relevant intelligence reports seem to have reached Moscow in mid-March.
According to two reports from a well placed source in the United States national security bureaucracy, the huge Soviet nuclear test in August 1961 had deterred the United States from proceeding with plans to launch a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the Soviet Union.
This source, who was considered reliable and whose reports were passed on to the Soviet leadership, reported that between 6 and 12 June 1961, the United States had decided to launch a nuclear strike on the USSR in September 1961.
It was due only to the Soviet announcement of the new series of atomic tests that the United States reversed its decision.
According to the GRU's informant, the tests convinced the United States that the Soviet nuclear arsenal was more powerful than previously assumed.S Soviet military intelligence may have focussed Khrushchev's mind on the perils of remaining strategically inferior to the United States.
That same spring Khrushchev had learned that it would take quite a few years for Moscow to have enough of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces' new SS-7 intercontinental ballistic missiles to match the land-based leg of the American nuclear triad.
But the GRU information, like that from the KGB, neither provoked doubt in Khrushchev's own mind about his assessment of the challenges of the world around him, nor persuaded him to embrace a different set of assumptions.
June 1962-22 October 1962 With the Cuban crisis moving into a more critical phase, Nikita Khrushchev was as usual acting as his own intelligence analyst.
In the summer, political reporting from Washington seemed to reinforce Khrushchev's expectation that Kennedy would ultimately accept the missiles.
SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 77 Leaders of Pentagon doubt that Cuban emigre and Central American detachments, trained by the United States, could successfully fight Castro's well-prepared army.
The leaders of Pentagon believe that an intervention in Cuba could only bring about the overthrow of Castro if specially prepared United States troops would participate in this operation.
John F Kennedy is against the participation of United States troops in military operations vs.
He is afraid that USSR and China would respond with an attack on West Berlin and Southeast Asia, which could bring the United States into a world war.
Although unwilling to involve his intelligence services in his own policymaking, Khrushchev was prepared to use these services to deceive Kennedy.
Since April 1961, a member of the Soviet military intelligence station in Washington, Colonel Georgi Bolshakov, had acted as a special channel between the Kremlin and the President.
In more than 50 meetings with Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Bolshakov conveyed messages authorized by Khrushchev.
In August 1962, the Soviet leader decided to use the unwitting Bolshakov to mask the significance of the shipments to Cuba.
Soviet signals intelligence — generated by means of the interception and decryption of foreign communications provided little warning of the growing crisis.
Unable to break any high-level United States ciphers, the signals intelligence component of the KGB focused on analyzing the volume of US communications traffic.
In the days immediately preceding Kennedy's blockade speech, the Soviets detected unusual activity but could not determine the exact reason for it.
Similarly, the GRU disseminated worrisome but inexact signals of trouble ahead.
As of 21 October, the headquarters of the GRU had received four different reports suggesting that Kennedy was considering some form of military action in the Caribbean.
Noting unusual activity by the United States Air Force, the GRU reported on a convoy of military planes that had left for Puerto Rico.
It also appeared that the number of bombers on duty in the Strategic Air Command had inexplicably increased.
On the high seas, the Soviets detected that the United States Navy had increased its presence in the Caribbean as part of an exercise.
Finally, there were indications that this was only the beginning of some United States military operation.
The Soviet military picked up Robert McNamara's order that senior military officers remain near the Pentagon to participate in a series of intensive meetings.
Berlin and Cuba were both on the agenda for the scheduled Presidium meeting that day, indicating uncertainty over which Cold War volcano might be about to blow.
The KGB detected after the speech that the decision to blockade Cuba had been made by a special group around Kennedy, but its information about the composition of that group was flawed.
Sakharovsky considered the report empty on its own and not worthy of dissemination to the Kremlin.
In some cases, Sakharovsky just threw the report away, such as the one that also arrived in Moscow on 24 October reporting that Gorsky had not been invited to the State Department's press conference for American and foreign correspondents.
While making a late night visit to the Tap Room in the National Press Club, Gorsky was approached by the bartender.
This was the first solid indication that Gorsky had received in the crisis that Kennedy had decided on war, and he rushed back to the Embassy that night to make his report.
Rogers and Donovan had SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 79 been discussing the invasion; but it was Rogers, not Donovan who was on the Pentagon's list to go if the invasion happened.
One journalist, who worked for one of the television networks, had refused the assignment for an unspecified reason; otherwise, the rest were keen to go, though they were well aware of the consequences for themselves, and for the country.
Donovan, who was Washington Bureau Chief, had selected Rogers for the assignment.
It was a mark of the limitations of Soviet intelligence in this crisis that information from Warren Rogers, who was not especially close to any member of the Kennedy administration and who was in fact persona non grata around Robert McNamara — would make its way from the alcoholic haze of the National Press Club to the desk of Nikita Sergeyvich Khrushchev.
Though flimsy, this intelligence resonated with something just picked up by the Soviet military.
While the bartender, Johnny Prokov, was overhearing the two American journalists, the GRU office in the Embassy was eavesdropping on an even more ominous signal.
The military attaches in the Embassy regularly scoured the skies for Pentagon radio signals.
The US military routinely transmitted changes to the Defense Condition status of Americans forces en clair, in an unclassified form.
At 10m., Washington time, on Wednesday, the GRU intercepted an order from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Strategic Air Command placing SAC on a nuclear alert.
In the 15 years of intercepting United States Cold War military messages, the Soviet military intelligence service had never seen anything like this.
In light of these threatening signals, Gorsky and his boss, Feklisov, discussed the urgent need to corroborate the bar story.
Rogers was known to have irregular contact with one of the political officers in the Embassy.
This man, a young second secretary whom Warren Rogers remembers today only as 'Boris something', was called at home and told to find a way to intercept Rogers before late morning.
Boris knew that Rogers usually parked his car in the lot used by many journalists behind the Willard Hotel.
The Embassy decided to have Boris hang around the lot from the crack of dawn to be sure that Rogers was kept under observation.
If the journalist's information was accurate, Moscow would have less than a day to react.
This dramatic spy story led to the writing of dispatches that would command Khrushchev's full attention on 26 October.
Khrushchev had already successfully proposed a diplomatic settlement to the rest of the Presidium.
This he did on 25 October, before the Kremlin received the reports on Warren Rogers and the DefCon 2 alert.
But the new information 80 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS from Washington accelerated Khrushchev's own timetable for making an offer to the White House.
Ironically, at the climax of the crisis a KGB operation had more influence on the actions of the United States government than it did in Moscow.
On 26 October, Aleksandr Feklisov re-established contact with John Scali.
Feklisov and Scali had been meeting infrequently since the end of 1961.
On 6 July 1962, for example, Scali had discussed with Feklisov Secretary of State Rusk's recent trip to Europe.
Despite Feklisov's claim in his memoirs that he met Scali on 23 October, the 6 July meeting appears to have been the last before the two men had their dramatic meeting at the Occidental Restaurant on 26 October.
THE MYSTERY OF THE OCCIDENTAL MEETING A plaque on the wall of the Occidental Restaurant celebrates a lunch meeting 36 years ago that was said to have averted a nuclear war.
A few years after the crisis, Assistant Secretary of State Roger Hilsman and later Scali himselfrevealed the role that the journalist had played at the climax of the Cold War.
Scali sensed the agitation in Feklisov's voice and agreed to meet for a late lunch at the Occidental.
Feklisov alias Fomin had a set of proposals that his government wanted Scali to convey to the White House.
In essence, the Soviets were looking for a diplomatic solution to the crisis, involving a US commitment to lift the blockade and a pledge not to try to invade Cuba in return for the removal of the Soviet missiles.
Scali carried these proposals to Kennedy through his friend Roger Hilsman at the State Department.
There was always something about the traditional story that did not make sense.
In recent years, Scali and Feklisov have contributed to oral histories but have done little to solve this puzzle.
When glasnost' allowed Aleksandr Feklisov to make his first public comments on the case, he shocked Scali and historians by denying that he had suggested anything at the Occidental.
Scali, Feklisov asserted, was the author of the proposal for a diplomatic settlement.
Nevertheless, in an interview conducted only a few months before his death, Scali clung just as resolutely to his own version, and dismissed Feklisov as a liar.
Soviet records are consistent with Feklisov's version of what happened.
There is no record of an instruction from the Presidium to the Foreign Ministry or the KGB on 25 October to seek a diplomatic settlement.
The Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation , the successor to the KGB's FCD, has informed us that it could not find any separate instruction to Feklisov during the crisis.
Feklisov's cable of 26 October, both as it was transmitted and in its disseminated form, also suggests that Feklisov was a passive recipient of an offer from the Kennedy administration.
Had the Presidium tasked the KGB to probe Kennedy, presumably this cable would have been handled more expeditiously.
Nevertheless, despite evidence corroborating the thesis that the Soviets were passive players at the Occidental Restaurant, there is reason to believe that the documents do not tell the full story.
Malin's notes of the 25 October Presidium meeting that Khrushchev suggested a possible diplomatic settlement to his colleagues on that day.
Although not yet ready to act, he prepared his colleagues for ultimately offering to remove the missiles in return for a non-invasion pledge.
The striking similarity between the formula presented by Khrushchev to his colleagues on 25 October and the deal discussed only a few hours later by Scali and the KGB's chief representative in Washington invites speculation about the possibility of a special KGB operation.
One of those who heard Khrushchev make his suggestion on 25 October was Aleksandr Shelepin, former Chairman of the KGB and a Presidium member.
Shelepin remained close to his former protege, Vladimir Semichastny, and it is plausible to imagine that Shelepin leaked the story of the meeting to him.
Semichastny and Feklisov disagree over what happened at the Occidental.
Not surprisingly, Feklisov today is angry at his former boss for suggesting that he has been lying all of these years.
Feklisov has come to believe that the KGB mounted a little deception campaign against him.
When shown the archives' copy of the disseminated form of his famous 26 October dispatch, he pronounced it nonsense.
However, Feklisov's feelings of betrayal lend some credence to the 82 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS possibility that in October 1962 Shelepin and Semichastny schemed to use Feklisov to present Khrushchev with an 'American proposal' that would make retreat less humiliating.
There is no evidence that Scali initiated the proposal at the first meeting of the men on 26 October.
Instead Feklisov's only report of that day came after the second meeting at 7:30m.
Perhaps the two men had a freewheeling discussion in the morning and misunderstood each other.
Scali rushed to see his contact at the State Department, Roger Hilsman, thinking that the stony-faced Feklisov had made a tentative offer.
Meanwhile Feklisov returned to his Embassy not sure of what had actually transpired.
In this case, Scali is the participant who has not told the full story of his role.
The Scali-Feklisov case illustrates how governments in the grip of a crisis can misunderstand each other.
While it is only speculation that the contradiction between the accounts suggests that Scali and Feklisov misunderstood each other on 26 October, it is certain that the United States and the USSR misunderstood what went on between the two men.
In following the course taken by this important telegram, we see that it did not play any role in shaping Khrushchev's letter of 26 October, which proposed a United States guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba as a means of resolving the crisis, or even in influencing the letter of 27 October that demanded the removal of United States intermediate range ballistic missile bases in Turkey.
The fact that this telegram was not given priority treatment strengthens the case against this being a KGB initiative.
The KGB sat on it so long that by the time the Ministry of Foreign Affairs received a copy of the Feklisov cable, Khrushchev had already sent to Kennedy his second letter demanding a missile trade.
We know from a curious instruction that Khrushchev sent Alekseev on 28 October that he eventually learned about the Scali-Feklisov discussions.
In it, Khrushchev asked his ambassador in Havana to inform Fidel Castro about this remarkable source who provided an intriguing suggestion from the Kennedy administration, which unfortunately came too late to influence the course of the crisis.
Khrushchev's purpose in sharing this information with Castro, it seems, was to enlist his support for the diplomatic settlement by indicating Kennedy's sincere interest in finding a peaceful way out of the crisis.
Meanwhile, as Scali and Feklisov may have been confusing each other SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 83 at the Occidental Restaurant, the weight of KGB information pointed toward a United States attack in the near future.
It has been argued that there was a shift in the information Khrushchev received on 27 October that influenced his letter of that day.
An examination of the intelligence available to him that morning refutes this speculation.
It was not the information that changed but Khrushchev's understanding of the crisis.
Khrushchev at the Helm Unfortunately, Nikita Khrushchev did not bequeath a set of tapes of the crisis-era Presidium meetings to historians.
The best we have are the colorful yet often elliptical notes of his amanuensis, Vladimir N Malin.
The Malin notes of the key Kremlin meetings between 22 and 28 October reveal Khrushchev as an avid consumer of information who was having a hard time making up his mind about his adversary.
News of the forthcoming speech by Kennedy filled him with dread that the United States had discovered the missiles and would invade, as Kennedy had indicated he might in a 4 September press statement.
The flimsy information from the National Press Club squared with Khrushchev's fear that Kennedy was going to invade.
Nevertheless, despite these fears, Khrushchev continued to maintain a somewhat contradictory view of the nature of his adversary.
In the depths of his soul, Klirushchev had doubts that Kennedy would actually go through with an attack.
From the very first assessments of the young President, the Soviets distinguished between Kennedy and the Pentagon.
When frustrated by a lack of progress in a area of superpower discussion, Khrushchev would bait Kennedy and his advisors with the taunt that JFK lacked the courage of his convictions.
This inner sense of Kennedy prevailed in Khrushchev's own thinking, without the aid of outside information or counsel.
The picture gleaned from KGB reporting remained bleak on 27 October; but that day Khrushchev on his own decided that he could up the ante for a diplomatic settlement.
Over the concerns of his Kremlin colleagues, Khrushchev proposed the additional demand that the United States remove its Jupiter IRBMs from Turkey as part of the price for Moscow dismantling its Cuban missile sites.
Rather than wasting time in May 1962 dreaming up schemes to drive a wedge between France and the United States, for 84 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS example, Aleksandr Feklisov should have been trolling for information about United States intentions in the fall of 1962.
Aleksandr Alekseev was the only KGB field officer who was briefed on the Cuban initiative.
The failure to integrate intelligence in the policy process was only one reason for the GRU and KGB's secondary role in the missile drama.
Neither organization had sources in the United States that were well placed enough to detect the innermost thinking of the Kennedy administration.
The GRU's Georgi Bolshakov was without a doubt the best placed Soviet intelligence operative in Washington.
But lacking any instructions to ask about Cuba, he spent most of these visits discussing Berlin, Laos and a nuclear test ban.
Unable to provide information of the quality of the American U-2 photographs, which might have turned the thinking of the Soviet leadership around and convinced Khrushchev that he was right to assume Kennedy would not invade Cuba, the Soviet intelligence services provided Khrushchev with sufficient evidence to conclude both that the United States was about to invade Cuba and that Kennedy did not want to invade Cuba.
It was left to Khrushchev himself to decide which of the two scenarios (or perhaps some combination of the two) seemed more likely.
Following the crisis, Soviet intelligence picked up signs that Kennedy was not committed to the non-invasion guarantee.
Khrushchev, however, would choose to ignore this information out of a sense that the crisis had placed him in a position in Moscow where he had to rely on Kennedy to keep his word.
If Kennedy's pledge were insincere, then Khrushchev's critics in Havana and Moscow were right to describe the entire affair as a Soviet defeat.
For Khrushchev's purposes the most useful intelligence came through the KGB's liaison with the Cuban government, which allowed the Kremlin to follow the course of Fidel Castro's slow acceptance of the October settlement.
In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, the most significant missing piece of the puzzle up to now was the thinking of the Kremlin in general, and the inner workings of the mind of Nikita Khrushchev in particular.
Semichastny's name does not appear on any of the routing slips for draft letters or instructions routinely sent by the Presidium to non-members Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko.
This statement is based on analysis of foreign policy files in Folio 3, Lists 65 and 66 at the Archives of the President of the Russian Federation; as well as on analysis of the KGB's spravka files regarding Cuba and the United States.
In most cases, the distribution of field cables is indicated on the summaries in the files.
Distribution seems to have been a matter of discretion for Aleksandr Sakharovsky and Semichastny.
Unlike CIA information cables from this era, which carry a printed distribution list, each KGB spravka appears to have had its own particular distribution.
John Scali recalled the FBI encouraging him to meet regularly with Aleksandr Feklisov, after the latter made the first approach.
The FBI described the KGB resident, whose alias in the United States was 'Aleksandr Fomin', as unusually reclusive.
KGB headquarters tended to downplay the concerns of the Cubans, concluding that the counterrevolution, even with outside assistance, was likely to fail.
The Center sent 86 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS information collected from outside Cuba to Alekseev in Havana that tended to underscore the weakness of the counterrevolution.
Somewhere in Europe, probably France, the KGB had acquired a review of the status of Latin American countries that foresaw a rosy future for Cuba.
In late March, the KGB instructed Alekseev to read it and to pass it on to Castro.
For further discussion, see the discussion by Domingo Amuchastegui in the next essay.
However unbelievable this report may seem, Soviet leaders did receive it, and appear to have assimilated it.
Had it gone one level higher, to DefCon 1, the United States would have been waging a nuclear war.
The first reference found in the KGB archives to Scali — or 'MIN', Scali's code name — is dated 6 July 1962.
Vladimir Semichastny made this claim most recently in a Russian TV documentary on the SOVIET INTELLIGENCE 87 Cuban missile crisis, aired in July 1997.
