The United States learned that the Soviets were building nuclear missile bases on Cuba because the Soviets wanted to close the missile gap.
Even though the Soviet Union promised they would not attempt to place nuclear weapons in Cuba, they put them there anyway in hopes that the United States would not find out until it was too late to do anything about it.
The nuclear bases were very near completion when a United States U-2 spy plane discovered the bases.
That is not a very comforting thought, knowing that we were so close to a nuclear holocaust.
Kennedy was probably cautious about strikes because of the Bay of Pigs invasion which had failed so miserably just a year before.
The Bay of Pigs invasion was an attempt by the United States to remove Castro from office.
The hope was that a general uprising would begin, and Castro would be removed from office by his own people and not by any United States personnel.
What cost the success of the mission was that the United States neglected to provide air cover for the troops.
An advantage that the U.S.S.R. had if we had not found the missile bases in time, would have been the first strike capability.
This does not necessarily mean the ability to strike first, needless to say, any country can do that; It means the ability to strike first and disarm the opponent at the same time.
If the U.S.S.R. had active nuclear missile bases in Cuba, many Americans feared that the Soviets could make an attempt take out our air bases without our even realizing it until it was too late.
In being so close to the United States coast, they could conduct strikes against our B-52 bases virtually undetected by our radar.
Even when we realized they were attacking it would be to late to do anything.
With our ability to counter attack gone, the Soviets could dictate whatever policy it wanted to the U.S., and we would have no choice but to accept their terms.
A country that has first strike capability knows that it can start a war any time it chooses.
On the other hand, a country that knows that they are not capable of first strike, will not be as willing to start a war.
We believed that the placing of Soviet missiles inside of Cuba’s borders would give them this first strike ability.
Understanding the Arms Race, sees the Soviets as a people who tried every option possible to get every advantage that they could.
Khrushchev believed that putting nuclear missiles in Cuba was the most expedient way to close the missile gap with the United States.
In Smoke’s opinion, they were willing to risk WW III in order to obtain first strike capability.
He states that Kennedy’s first choice of action was to let the Air Force use conventional weapons to destroy the bases.
Kennedy quickly and wisely, in Smoke’s opinion and my own, decided to use this option as an absolute last resort.
Kennedy’s first choice of action was a public declaration that the Soviets must remove the missiles from Cuba.
When that plan failed to deter the soviets, he used an alternative plan, which was a naval blockade that prevented any Soviet ships from entering Cuban waters.
In Richard Smoke’s opinion, he made a wise decision in choosing the blockade.
However, it does say that his choice was good because the Soviets then had a way out without humiliating themselves.
Even though the U.S.S.R. had an easy way out, it still hurt Khrushchev in his political life on the home front.
Just exactly when they arrived in Cuba is undetermined, but the outcome could have been far worse than it was.
I believe that even though the International Relations book does not come out and support Kennedy’s decisions; I think it hints that he chose the best option.
Bruginoi feels Kennedy did the right thing in keeping Eisenhower informed at all times.
Therefore Kennedy launched the U-2 spy plane that discovered the nuclear bases.
Brugioni believes Kennedy made all the right decisions, but all the reasons he made those decisions were purely political.
He states that yielding to the Soviets would seriously undermine United States’ credibility.
I believe, along with all the authors mentioned above, that Kennedy did the right thing.
I have found no authors of text that disagree with Kennedy’s decision, and I do not believe that there are very many if any.
Since there were already missiles in Cuba, a strategic attack on Cuba could have been extremely harmful to our nation’s health.
If any one thing had been handled differently, it might have resulted in a nuclear war from which the world might never have survived.
I believe strongly that if there were any mistakes made in the way we handled things, there were a very few.
Their may be some mistakes Kennedy made during this time of crisis, but they are kept very well hidden from all of us.
