You’ll Laugh, You’ll Cry, You’ll Lose Faith in Humanity, and Hopefully You Won’t Get Bored Before the End.
However, while its connotation has always been one of danger, it also denotes a modicum of safety, as those who are away from the “Front” cannot be touched.
This was true back in the days of bullets and bayonets, but bombs have turned this axiom to an illusion.
It is foolish to believe that anyone can be safe when one considers the nuclear afterglow of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, where the true destructive capabilities of the atom were revealed.
For the first time in humanity’s history, people carry the ability to create an Extinction Level Event.
As ability outpaces empathy, man finds himself with enormous power but could be without the wisdom to use it responsibly.
In 1962, Fidel Castro had only been in control of his newly-minted Communist party for about three years.
During this time, he was suspected of creating bonds with Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, which alarmed the United States immensely.
In response to this proximal threat, the United States supported the “Bay of Pigs” invasion and launched Operation Mongoose (a secret program of propaganda, psychological warfare, and sabotage in Cuba), both of which failed miserably.
Castro, fearing usurpation, turned to the Soviets, who allied with the Cubans in exchange for the placement of nuclear weapons on their island.
This maneuver was a response to United States deployment of Thor IRBMs in the UK and Jupiter IRBMs in Italy and Turkey, which put Russia firmly within America’s strike zone.
It was also seen as a possible solution to America’s massive lead in missile quantity.
In August of 1962, covert bases underwent construction in Cuba, weapons were shipped in under various guises, and the Soviets maintained an impenetrable poker face even as the United States grew suspicious of their ruse.
On October 14 of 1962, an American U-2 spy plane captured photographic proof of Soviet missile bases in Cuba.
Political posturing and planning inevitably followed as Kennedy and various staff members (formally called the “Executive Committee of the National Security Council”) contemplated how to proceed.
The Committee discussed several different plans, but the one with the most backing was a full invasion of the country and an overthrow of the government.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously agreed to this scenario, but Kennedy was concerned that it would paint the United States as “trigger-happy cowboys” and that it would give the 5 Soviets an excuse to conquer West Berlin.
After much deliberation, a “quarantine” was put in place around Cuba to block incoming ships that could be carrying weaponry.
The situation reached a stalemate on October 26, as neither country showed signs of backing down and the spectre of Mutually Assured Destruction cast long shadows over both aggressors.
Soviet spy Aleksandr Fomin arranged a meeting with ABC News’ John A Scali.
At the time, it was believed that he was under orders from Moscow, but it has since been determined that he was almost certainly acting of his own accord.
He outlined a possible way to defuse the situation, which would involve the removal of the Soviet missiles under UN supervision in return for the United States announcing that they would promise never to invade Cuba.
JFK and company made some changes to the plan and sent them to the Soviets for approval.
There were a few setbacks and some moments of uncertainty, but both sides eventually agreed to the stipulations of the shaky understanding.
The Russian missiles were removed and the United States announced their promise to never invade Cuba.
They also secretly removed their own missiles from Turkey and Italy a year later, claiming that it was because they were obsolete.
This allowed them to appease the Russians while saving face in the public forum.
The Soviet Union was a paragon of communist ideals, which had been realized in the Russian revolution of the century’s second decade.
On the other end of the spectrum was the heavily-capitalist United States, whose fear of the spread of communism (as outlined in Eisenhower’s “Domino Theory”) reached its apex during the crisis.
What had once been a Soviet-USA World War II era friendship had now soured to rivalry, a rivalry which defined the latter half of the 1900’s.
The bitter echoes of this fallen camaraderie rang loud in 1962, as did the ticking of the atomic clock counting down to midnight.
Both sides could destroy the world several times over, and each of them knew it.
Self-preservation and a sense of global responsibility overcame ideological indignation, and both sides decided to let the world exist for a little while longer.
Famous astronomer Carl Sagan once suggested that the reason humans hadn’t received any communication from alien life was simply that intelligent species are doomed to destroy themselves.
Technological beings, according to this theory, will always overstep their moral strictures and common sense and subsequently end up dead by their own hands.
However, it also serves as a terrifying lesson on man’s self-destructive capabilities.
When it comes to nuclear weapons, all people can do is try to exercise restraint, close their eyes, and pray for silence.
Bryan Smith Throughout Sidney, a small town in British Columbia, memory of the First World War is everywhere.
Given that Sidney contributed nearly a third of its population to fight at the front during the First World War, this recognition is hardly surprising.
Accordingly, Sidney seems an ideal case example through which to investigate the effect of the First World War on a small town in British Columbia; if the war affected any small town in B.C., seemingly that town was Sidney.
Historians are often split into two camps when considering the effects of the war on Canadian towns.
Some argue that the war brought significant change, and thus had a transformative effect on Canadian society and economy.
Others suggest that Canada’s transformation had already begun, and that the war served as a “devastating” disruption to the nation’s growth.
However, by examining Sidney between 1914 and 1919, this paper will demonstrate that the town was neither transformed nor devastated by the war.
Instead, it will be suggested that the war had a formative effect, serving to strengthen and reinforce existing trends while creating new opportunities which were neither radical nor transformative.
After a brief overview of the historiography both of Canada during the Great War and of Sidney, this paper will examine demographic and economic activity, as well as political and social trends, to posit that the First World War contributed to the character of Sidney, but neither transformed nor upset the small town.
Ultimately, this paper will conclude by placing Sidney in a larger picture in order to suggest that the role of the First World War as a turning point in B.C.’s history may need to be revaluated.
In the history of Canada’s Great War, there is considerable polarization.
On one side, some suggest that the First World War transformed and defined Canada as a nation.
P2; David MacKenzie,“Myth, Memory, and the Transformation of Canadian Society,” in Canada and the First World War, ed.
In short, this narrative suggests that the First World War was “Canada’s coming-of-age,” and that it marks the beginning of a new era.
On the other hand, many historians have challenged this view, claiming instead that the narrative of identity and transformation is an “imaginative version” of the war years.
Given the vastness of the country and its many variables, it is not surprising that opposing views have developed.
Additionally, each narrative seeks to define the Great War as a watershed moment in B.C.’s history.
Sequestered in the rural area of North Saanich, about twenty kilometres north of Victoria, Sidney was a relatively new town upon the eve of the First World War.
Established in 1891, Sidney grew rapidly during its first two decades of township.
Immigrants from Britain, France, Eastern Europe, and throughout Canada had begun to settle in the North Saanich district as early as 1857, many having worked in British Columbia’s interior during the Gold Rush years.
While agricultural work was the dominant trade during the 19th Century, between 1895 and 1910 significant industries sprang up throughout Sidney and North Saanich.
The opening of the Victoria and Sidney Railway in 1894 aided industrial growth, and Sidney soon boasted a sawmill, a brickworks, a canning factory, a cigar factory, and more.
Electric Line, was opened between Victoria and Deep Cove to cater to the expanding population in the North Saanich area.
By and large, the First World War has been seen as a disruption to this growth.
Daryl Muralt, a historian of the area, has suggested that the war had a “devastating” effect on the local community.
Yet, as will be discussed, Muralt’s view of Sidney’s war years is perhaps too dramatic.
In fact, for various reasons, a more moderate approach might be taken in order to understand Sidney between 1914 and 1919.
By late 1915, only 60 men from the North Saanich area had left for France.
Moreover, while some were leaving, by 1916 other men were returning from the front, either on leave or having completed their tour of duty.
While this was still a substantial part of the population, their absence does not seem to have radically affected the town economically.
Not following the pal system – which devastated many towns – Sidney’s volunteers were from a wide variety of occupations.
Those in the industrial and agricultural sectors quickly had their positions filled by Chinese labourers who had been pushed out of work during the economic slump of 1913-1914.19 Shops which were privately owned were often closed during the absence of their proprietor; upon his return, they were easily reopened and restocked.
Thus, at least directly, the absence of the soldiers did not radically interrupt nor transform Sidney’s development.
While their loss was felt throughout the community, economically the burden could be absorbed.
Though a large percentage of the work force was absent, Sidney saw industrial growth over the war years.
This was in part a direct result of the war, as the opening of the Canadian Explosives Plant on James Island – just off the coast of Sidney – was an enormous asset to the community.
Much of the industrial growth which occurred between 1914 and 1919, however, was simply a continuation of projects from before the war began.
Sidney Men are Willing to Fight for their King and Country,” SIR, Aug., 1915, 1.
Douglas Horth, for example, returned to Sidney after losing his leg on the front.
Sidney Historical Museum, Sidney, British Columbia; “Large force of Men at Work on Construction of the Plant,” SIR, Aug., 1915, 1; “Local Firm will Employ White Labour in the Future,” SIR, Feb.
Likewise, the introduction of the automobile necessitated infrastructure projects such as paving local thoroughfares.
Meanwhile, both the Sidney Rubber Roofing Company and the Sidney Kelp Manufacturing Plant opened in 1915, independent of the war.
Thus, though the Explosives Plant did contribute to production in Sidney, it only reinforced the existing growth of industry within the town – it did not initiate the trend.
The closure of several major industries during the war years should not be seen as a result of the war.
The V&S Railway, an oft-cited example of the war’s destructive effect on Sidney, had been in financial trouble since well before the war.
By early 1914, the V&S had already racked up a deficit of $25,399 and ridership was down over 40% from the previous year.
Electric and the CNR– the V&S was bound for receivership with or without the war.
The closure of the local Cigar Factory and its subsequent move to Nanaimo was the result of this inadequacy of service from the V&S.30 The Sidney Lumber Mill, on the other hand, shut down in 1913, sending many into unemployment before the war.
In fact, the Mill reopened in 1917 and began production at record setting levels, apparently undisturbed by the war.
The Sidney Brickworks also closed during the war years, but as a result of a mishap in production rather than labour shortage or lack of customers.
However, by 1915 the town seems to have been on an economic upswing in spite of, rather than because of, the war.
Board of Trade will also Petition Railway Company for a Reduction in Fares to Victoria,” SIR, April 6, 1916, 1.
Increased by Four Million Feet Over Last Year; Mill Practically Rebuilt Since May, 1917,” SIR, Feb., 1920, 1.
Realizing this mistake too late, the Brickworks was unable to recuperate the loss, and closed.
A major contributor to this growth was of course the James Island Explosives Plant.
As early as 1915, Sidney’s surrounding areas were used as a training camp for many regiments from the coast before they shipped east.
Pool halls, the Reading Room, cafes, the Berquist Event Hall, and other stores were frequented by these soldiers.
That Sidney could support two brothels during the war years speaks to the economic stability of the town.
On a permanent basis, after the war’s end many new families moved into the North Saanich area as a result of the Federal Soldier Settlement scheme, taking advantage of the inexpensive agricultural property and boosting the town’s numbers greatly.
By 1921, Sidney had roughly 1200 residents, having doubled its population over the past decade.
This population growth should not be seen as unusual, however, as Sidney had been growing at a similar rate for two decades already.
Moreover, its growth rate was on par with Port Alberni and Duncan, similar towns which had also doubled their population over the decade.
As well as industrial growth, Sidney also saw domestic commercial stability and expansion.
Local businesses maintained stable hours and continued to import goods, including goods from Britain.
This stability cannot be credited entirely to the temporary residents, as new and popular goods included mops, electric irons, and fashionable women’s clothes, all unlikely purchases for the soldiers in training.
Local businesses maintained stable advertisement slots in the newspaper, and were able to bring in delicacies and luxuries throughout the year.
The Sidney Restaurant, for example, renovated to double its size, while the local shoe store opened a second branch on James Island.
Electrical shop in 1916 and the creation of several auto-taxi and freight lines.
Bantams, the 321st, the Seaforth Highlanders, the 67th, and the 143rd to name a few.
Pay Parrade Camp Sidney, Sidney BC, 1916, Sidney Museum Archives, P991.33.1.
Turkeys, Geese, Chicken, Beef, Mutton, Veal, Oysters, and Mince Meats for Christmas,” SIR, Dec., 1915, 2.
Electric Open New Office on Beacon Avenue,” SIR, April 27, 1916, 1. 11 complemented by agricultural expansion and increased yields as a result of new farming technologies.
Overall, Sidney experienced slow economic growth between 1914 and 1919, bringing the town out of its pre-war economic downturn.
This growth was aided by the influx of soldiers to the town, but it was not defined by it.
Residents continued to purchase new technologies, buy new products, and support local businesses just as they had before the war, and just as they would after it.
Political and Social Ramifications Alongside population and economic growth, Sidney also grew as a community.
Far from being divisive, the war years saw an expansion in Sidney’s sense of identity.
A large part of this community identity was a direct consequence of the war effort.
New societies, like the Red Cross or the Patriotic Fund, fostered an unprecedented amount of community interaction; weekly meetings, knitting parties, constant correspondence, and nearly weekly fundraisers brought members of the community noticeably closer together over the course of the war.
While fundraisers like local dances or the Red Cross “Sock Days” brought in hundreds of dollars, they also created opportunities for the town to congregate.
As a result, new interest was taken in preservation, beautification, participation, and community action.
Before the war, community organizations, events, and a corresponding local spirit were already developing.
Social clubs, unions, work groups, and ladies organizations were all formed before the beginning of the war, and in many instances existing groups merged with or into war effort societies.
While the war reinforced and perhaps sped this development, it did not transform nor destroy it.
In part, community development in Sidney was fostered by the emergence of local leaders who rose through the war effort.
Given a new degree of prestige or sway, home-front organizers and returned soldiers gained positions of leadership in the community.
Cy Peck and George Pearkes, for example, became leading public figures, and 48 Horth, 14; “An Up-to-Date Machine,” SIR, Sept., 1915, 2.
Saanich Pioneers Society, 1985), 70. 12 were both instrumental in major projects throughout the community for the next half-century.
Besides these well-known names, a number of lesser-known figures also rose to prominence during the war period.
Campbell, and proprietors of key businesses rose to community leadership roles.
These figures had sway with the Sidney Board of Trade, could organize and lead community gatherings easily, and had well-established networks of support.
Many pioneered or led new organizations and societies during and after the war, including the Saanich Fruitgrowers Association, the Mount Newton Lodge, the Saanich Branch Legion, and the Sidney Literary Club.
It should be noted that, at least to a degree, women were also included in these local leadership positions.
To what extent this development of local leaders can be accredited to the war, however, is questionable.
With a growing population, especially within the town center, and with the establishment of several local political and social groups prior to the war – including women’s political groups – community leaders seem to have been slowly on the rise anyway.
An influx of professionals into the town before and during the war – such as a new doctor, a dentist, teachers, and agricultural experts from the nearby Dominion Experimental Farm –appears to have already been contributing to the group of community leaders regardless of the war.
While the war may have reinforced this development, it certainly did not radically alter the social dynamic of the town.
In the midst of these social changes, between 1914-1919, Sidney began to define itself as a community separate from Victoria.
While prior to the war, local headlines included Victoria events and concerns, during the war the focus of the community turned inwards.
Relying on local patronage to weather economic downturn, Sidney businesses made pleas for residents to shop locally.
Additionally, the separation from Victoria seems to have been the result of the new local leaders discussed above.
With strong leadership and a Board of Trade autonomous from Victoria, Sidney residents made efforts to develop infrastructure, improve education, and prevent unemployment.
Elect their Officers,” SIR, March 9, 1916, 1; “Generous Support Given Red Cross Society Linen Shower,” SIR, June 17, 1915, 1; “Subscriptions to Patriotic Aid Fund now being Solicited,” SIR, Dec., 1915, 1.
Elect their Officers,” SIR, March 9, 1916, 1; “Generous Support Given Red Cross Society Linen Shower,” SIR, June 17, 1915, 1.
Greater Attention must be Paid to Making Schools More Attractive,” SIR, March 29, 1917, 3; “Returned Soldiers to be Welcomed,” SIR, Jan., 1917, 2; “Light and Power Accounts can now be Paid in Sidney,” SIR, Sept., 1915, 1; “Sends Delegation on Good Roads,” SIR, Feb., 1917, 1. 13 alleviating the need to travel to Victoria.
Connections to Victoria appear to have been displaced by a deep connection to Britain.
Before the war, a majority of Sidney residents were either firstor second-generation immigrants from Britain; after the war this number increased via the Soldier Settlement scheme.
Sidney in the Bigger Picture By placing so specific a focus on one town, it may be argued, this study does little to suggest that the overwhelming majority of towns throughout Canada did not experience opposite results.
Its proximity to Victoria, variety of resources, and position as a transportation hub doubtless helped sustain the town.
Despite its individual situation, however, Sidney should not be seen as the exception which proves the rule.
While it is clear that Sidney cannot represent every small towns’ experience, it does share some fundamental similarities with many of the towns surrounding it.
With a similar population distribution at the beginning of the war to several towns throughout B.C., Sidney also grew at a similar rate over the decade between 1911-1921 to towns like Duncan, Port Alberni, Mission City, Ladysmith, and Merritt.
Settled at a similar time and organized upon a comparable basis to many British Columbian towns, it is therefore not surprising that the rise of local leaders and prominent community members was also not unique to Sidney, but occurred throughout B.C.68 And, with the spread of technology throughout the province, it is also not surprising that the introduction of the telephone, the automobile, and the expansion of rail lines did not only affect Sidney, but were omnipresent throughout the province.
Sidney’s war experience should therefore not be considered atypical, but as relatable.
Examining Sidney’s history outside the war years, it is clear that the town experienced several transformative changes; the introduction of the Patricia Bay Airport, the opening of the Swartz Bay Ferry terminal, or the closure of the peninsula’s rail lines, for example.
At each of these pivotal points, the community underwent change much more drastic and transformative than any of the changes between 1914 and 1919.70 Yet, the narrative of Sidney’s history still places key importance on the war as a chapter, or dividing line, in the town’s history.
As historian McCalla notes of Canadian history, the war is upheld as a “turning point around which our entire narrative 65 Horth, 11.
Yet, by viewing the war as pivotal in Sidney’s narrative, historians and residents tend to polarize on exactly what effect the war did have.
Perhaps then, a new narrative of Sidney’s history may be constructed, redefining the town’s history according to local-specific transformations and watersheds.
Following the above conclusion that Sidney’s war experience was not unique, perhaps local histories throughout British Columbia, or throughout Canada, need to revaluate their narratives according to locally-specific periods.
Though a long way from France, Sidney made a great contribution to the First World War.
As well as sending soldiers to the front, Sidney residents at home worked tirelessly to bring the war to an end.
However, despite claims that the war devastated or, oppositely, transformed the small town, Sidney remained stable throughout the war years.
Maintaining steady population growth, Sidney’s economy grew slowly throughout the war, and commercial activity increased.
At the same time, the community grew together, and with the assistance of new leaders, began working as a self-sufficient town.
These changes, however, appear to have been only reinforced, not initiated, by the war.
Given Sidney’s relatively stable war years, it may be suggested that the town’s unique location yielded unique results.
However, as Sidney shared a number of commonalities with several B.C. towns, its experience should be considered at least somewhat familiar.
While the Great War undoubtedly had great consequences for Sidney, by considering it a watershed moment perhaps we undervalue other events in Sidney’s history.
Given Sidney’s example, perhaps by redefining the narrative of British Columbian history according to locallyspecific dividing lines, we may discover much more about our past.
Virgin, Victor E History of North and South Saanich Pioneers and District.
Sidney Museum Archives, Binder Stacks, World War One General, P101,1916.
Sidney Museum Archives, Binder Stacks, World War One General, P127, 12 July 1916.
Despite the United States disapproval of French colonialism, it tacitly supported France in the First Indo-China War.
However, by 1954 France could no longer sustain its commitment to a protracted colonial war.
As the United States began to militarily replace France in Vietnam, the composition of Cambodia’s government became increasingly dictated by the globalist, geopolitical, and militarily strategic preferences of the United States During the course of the war the Cambodian monarchy, military, and dissident groups all separately ascended to power primarily through the political, military, and economic circumstances created by United States policy in the region.
The coming to power of these groups was not based on the application of United States democratic statehood inherent in its rhetoric.
Rather, political ascendency was a by-product of United States Cold War globalist and military strategy.
The violence that defined South East Asia for the duration of the Vietnam War ironically came to a crescendo in its wake.
The tragic genocide in Cambodia was a culmination of decades of misled policies of the United States and Cambodian governments, along with the potent nationalism, militarization, and radical ideology that it bread.
In the immediate wake of World War Two, the United States began to pressure European states to decolonise their empires.
Despite previous pledges, these states were often reluctant to fully abandon colonies which were so integral to their political and economic systems.
The form of government and ideology of these nations became inextricably linked with the geopolitical, ideological, and strategic interests of competing world powers in the Cold War context.
The National Security Council stipulated as early as 1949 that containing communism was central to United States policy in the region.
Cambodian nationalism was largely repressed during the course of the First Indo-China War.
Although France granted King Sihanouk nominal independence over Cambodia in the mid 1940s, ultimate power continued to reside with France.
France was indeed intent on holding its colonial possessions, while the United States was more preoccupied with curbing communist expansion than colonization.
This exclusion of various groups within Cambodia was also evident in the 1954 Geneva Convention.
Although the Viet Minh were recognised alongside Vietnam’s government, dissident groups within Cambodia and Laos were ignored.
Thus, the early recognition of Cambodia’s political regime gravitated towards those who could best represent the United States anti-communist policies, rather than those who embodied the legitimate dynamics of Cambodia’s varied political spectrum.
United States policy towards Cambodia was based on a globalist perspective throughout the Cold War.
Rather then taking into account the intricacies of the multiple forms of South East Asian nationalism, successive American administrations perceived these emergent states through an overwhelmingly limited security paradigm.
In explaining the geopolitical importance of IndoChina President Eisenhower explained to a journalist, “You have a row of dominos set up, you knock over the first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly.
The bolstering of authoritarian regimes superseded legitimate democratization.
The relationship between the two states, however, was not quite that simple.
Although Sihanouk was expected to express strict support for his American benefactors, he was certainly still inclined to enhance the independence of Cambodia.
Herein lays the intricacies of Cambodia’s precarious position during the Cold War.
On the one hand, Sihanouk attempted to remain neutral through the non-aligned movement, utilizing both communist and American aid to develop Cambodia’s institutions and counter ancient regional dynamics with neighbouring Thailand, Vietnam, and Laos.
On the other hand, the burgeoning military commitment of the United States in neighbouring South Vietnam, which eventually led to the introduction of American soldiers in 1965, forced Cambodia to react.
Quoted in, Robert McMahon, Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War, , 85.
In formulating Cambodia’s neutral stance, Ben Kiernan observes that Sihanouk’s strategy was “A domestic accommodation, an implicit acknowledgement of the local communists’ important role in the war for Cambodia’s independence and their potential and incentive to disrupt a more pro-western regime.
The Cambodian people, the Khmer, have existed in South East Asia for much longer than the United States.
In this time Cambodia has of course established relationships with its bordering countries.
The globalist perspective of the United States failed to take these ancient relationships into account.
Cambodia was certainly fearful of South Vietnam’s violation of its territorial sovereignty.
In response to frustration over United States coalescence to South Vietnam’s repeated border incursions, Cambodia diplomatically expressed its frustration by officially recognising communist China.
As Clymer observes, Never were the conflicting perspectives of Cambodia and the United States more clearly evident.
The United States viewed Cambodia only as a part of the larger worldwide struggle against the communist menace.
Traditional anti-Vietnamese sentiment was clearly in the ascendant and much more important than an abstract anticommunism.
In other words, although the United States perceived China and communism to be the biggest threat to the future of Indo-China, Cambodia was much more worried about its traditional rivalry with Vietnam.
At the time, the traditional jockeying between these powers seemed much more pressing to Cambodia than abstract communist ideology.
The centrality of Cambodia’s borders to the progression of the Vietnam War and its internal politics also warrants examination.
As South Vietnam and American soldiers waged the counterinsurgency ever closer to the Cambodian border, cross border incursions became commonplace.
As the border was largely unprotected, anti-government forces would use Cambodia’s eastern frontier as a defensive tactic and for logistical support throughout the war.
They had long applied pressure on Sihanouk to fight these communist elements.
However, despite millions of dollars in military aid the Cambodian regime was largely unable to impede the flow of combatants through what became known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
This had indeed determined the way the United States viewed Cambodia throughout the war.
In fact, most Cambodians realized that their economic and institutional needs were secondary to United States primary interest, Vietnam.
As American public support over the direction of the war continued to decline, the U.S increasingly pursued a more aggressive policy towards Cambodia.
Of course, this did not represent a drastic change in its policy towards Cambodia.
In fact, a military solution to Cambodia’s instability was central since the beginning of the war in 1965.
By the time President Nixon had been in office for nearly a year, the total number of bombs unleashed by the U.S. climbed to nearly half a million tons.
In response to Nixon’s inability to use troops in Cambodia he increasingly relied upon bombing communist strongholds.
President Nixon continued to escalate the extent of military involvement in Cambodia to unprecedented levels.
In the late spring of 1970 President Nixon announced the invasion of Cambodia by United States and South Vietnam forces.
Yet the use of military force to solve what had increasingly becoming a civil war in Cambodia would remain the dominant strategy of successive United States administrations.
The bombing and invasion of Cambodia certainly had a profound impact on the stability of its internal political environment.
Yet even Lon Nol was unable to quell the unrest that had been growing since the latter half of the 1960s.
A civil war had been ongoing in the countryside since 1967 with the communist Khmer Rouge gaining considerable ground.
After the United States expanded into Cambodia, the situation worsened exponentially.
Conflict in Cambodia,” 484. 22 the country, coming into contact with increasingly populated areas.
The bombing campaign drove many into the open arms of the Khmer forces.
At this point the United States was less concerned with the internal dynamics of Cambodia than they were with the struggle in Vietnam.
Once again, the United States proved how Cambodian nationalism and statehood was subjugated to its ultimate security strategy in the region.
In the wake of the Vietnam War, the Khmer Rouge toppled the government of Lon Nol and formed a communist government.
Over the course of the war, the United States role in the ascendancy of the Khmer Rouge was certainly central.
It had fuelled civil strife along Cambodia’s border regions through sustained bombing and sponsorship of political repression.
Furthermore, its departure left a power vacuum, with the government of Lon Nol unable to defend itself.
In May 1975 the Mayaguez – an American ship – was captured by the newly formed Khmer government.
It was the United States first encounter in South East Asia since the end of the war.
The U.S. responded with brute force in an attempt to rescue the hostages, despite Khmer claims that they would release them.
It was a show of force and a blatant attempt to redress the failures of Vietnam and underline American credibility in the region.
Tragically, 41 Marines lost their lives in a covert mission to save the 39 hostages.
Adding to the failure of this mission, it was soon uncovered that these hostages had already been released by the Khmer.
The Mayaguez incident is another example of the flawed globalist perspective of the United States during the Cold War.
The United States would continue to choose sides in an attempt to counter Communist Vietnam.
In referring to the Khmer Rouge during a conversation with the Thai Prime Minister in the fall of 1975, Kissinger would state, “You should also tell the Cambodians we will be friends with them.
The United States failed to effectively harness Cambodian nationalism throughout the course of the entire Cold War.
Rather, its policy towards Cambodia was based upon geopolitical and security interests.
The United States interpreted events in Indo-China through a globalist perspective, ignoring the subtle nuances and intricacy of nationalism in the region.
As it became bogged down in the Vietnam War, disregard for Cambodian self determination further dwindled.
The intensification of bombing delegitimized the government and increase support for the Khmer Rouge.
The unspeakably tragic genocide which followed was also met with intransigence.
The United States continued to support groups to balance the regional power of Vietnam.
The harsh contradictions of the United States globalist perspective continued well into the end of the twentieth century.
On the one hand, the Cold War was rooted in the preservation of democracy.
On the other hand, the policies of the United States stifled those very same values it claimed to be fighting for.
Hill and Wang, 1994 Menetrey-Monchau, Cecile “The Mayaguez Incident as an Epilogue to the Vietnam War and its Reflection of the Post-Vietnam Political Equilibrium in South East Asia,” Cold War History, 5.
Dynastic Solidarity, Piety and Political Promotion Isabella Casciola Founding father of one of the Renaissance’s most storied dynasties, Cosimo de’ Medici was an astute statesman who established the framework for continued Medici success.
He was also a prolific patron of the arts and scholarly learning, contributing to the renovation of several churches and convents, as well as establishing the basis of Florence’s first public library.
Indeed, he was Florence’s preeminent private patron of the arts in the first half of the fifteenth century.
He paved the way for future patrons of art by extending his patronage to a variety of art media.
Cosimo did not restrict patronage to a local scale by sponsoring renovations upon solely his neighborhood church, as was the custom for wealthy patrons.
Works that Cosimo sponsored, such as the Dominican monastery of San Marco and the Basilica of San Lorenzo, stand today as testament to his munificence.
But they also provide the modern observer with a framework for understanding the patron himself.
Through close analysis of several works from his oeuvre, Cosimo’s major preoccupations become evident.
Dynastic solidarity is a pervasive theme throughout Cosimo’s sponsored works.
After the rise of the Medici, the periodic collapse of the system “under the pressure of new men families” ceased and did not return.
Given this cycle between popolo and a divided, conflicted elite, it is explicable that Cosimo would be preoccupied with ensuring the continuation of his line.
After all, this was a society that valued familial allegiance to a great extent; so much so that major conflicts could result from perceived slights to one’s family name, resulting in the warring urban feudal factions previously referenced.
Ansell, “Robust Action,” 1278 25 developed a family structure that was highly centralized, yet had few relations among followers.
The Medicis under Cosimo developed a top-down structure with a well-defined leadership and a chain of command.
Cosimo would have been surrounded by an innermost cadre of trusted advisers that would certainly have been family members.
In turn, he and his advisers would maintain communication with the various branches and associates of the family.
Cosimo cultivated associations with various elite families wisely by developing close rapports, often through marriage.
Marriages linked the Medici to other prominent families, such as the Tornabuoni; Cosimo’s son Piero would wed Lucrezia Tornabuoni.
One of Cosimo’s closest advisors was his first cousin, Averardo di Francesco de’ Medici; his three daughters were wed to members of the Salviati, Serristori, and Gianfigliazzi families, thereby cementing an association.
Cosimo himself married Contessina de’ Bardi, a member of the venerable Florentine banking clan.
The Bardi had, along with the Peruzzi in the fourteenth century, extended a large loan to King Edward III of England to finance his endeavors in the Hundred Years’ War, which he had defaulted upon.
In the fifteenth century, the Bardi remained a large and venerable family; Cosimo’s strategic marriage to Contessina was of great importance to the Medici.
It split Bardi consensus, given that “some of sided with the Albizzi,” the oligarchic opponents of the Medici.
Economic connections also drew other Florentine houses toward the Medici; personal loans were extended to the Ginori, Tornabuoni, Cocco-Donati, Guicciardini, and others.
Non-relatives could become established in positions of importance, too; although many of the Medici bank employees were family members, several in key positions were not.
The manager of the Florentine branch was Ilarione de’ Bardi, while the Roman branch was managed by Bartolomeo de’ Bardi.
The party that developed was more centralized and close-knit than those more representative of elites, with an inner cadre and few direct ties between the rank and file.
The source of Cosimo’s philanthropy was the Medici bank; its longterm success was of high priority, and since it “flourished in the continuity between generations, and the loyalty and cooperation between members of the line,” the emphasis he placed on dynastic solidarity becomes understood.
He also sponsored renovations at the Franciscan convent of Bosco ai Frati, in the Mugello, as well as a novices’ chapel at Santa Croce in Florence.
This allowing associate families, like the Diestsalvi-Neroni, Ginori, and Della Stufa an opportunity to exercise patronage within the Medici sphere.
Ansell, “Robust Action,” 1277 14 Kent, Cosimo de’ Medici, 10 15 Niccolo Machiavelli, ed.
Throughout the sacristy are images of John the Evangelist, the patron saint of Cosimo’s father, Giovanni di’ Bicci.
Also prominent are images of Cosmas, Damian, and Lorenzo, patron saints of Cosimo and his brother, Lorenzo.
By displaying these name-saints in a linear order, the genealogical descent of the Medici line from Giovanni di Bicci to his sons can be clearly seen.
Cosimo may have had a twin brother, Damiano, who died shortly after birth.
Cosmas and Damian can be seen on the altarpieces of Bosco ai Frati, San Marco, the Novitate Chapel of Santa Croce, and at the family estate of Cafaggiolo.
After Giovanni’s death and until Lorenzo’s in 1440, the two brothers lived together with their wives and children.
When Cosimo and his sons moved to the new palace, it was only a few doors down the Via Larga.
The interior is airy, with many windows, a courtyard, garden and three loggias, dramatically offsetting the palace’s fortress-like exterior.
In effect, it combined antique and contemporary elements; the bifurcated windows were taken from medieval times, while the loggia, popular in the trecento, had fallen out of favor by the 1440s and 1450s.Simultaneously, its fortress-like appearance and rusticated facade were reminiscent of the Palazzo Vecchio; this could be seen as an appropriation of authority.
Moreover, the palace’s facade was decorated copiously with Medicean symbols, designed to communicate the importance of the occupants.
The Medici palace was intended to house Cosimo along with his close relatives; it would accommodate the patriarch and his wife, along with his sons, their wives, and their children.
Thus, we can see Cosimo’s preoccupation with dynastic solidarity through works he was directly involved in.
His benevolence extended well beyond his own quarter and the church of San Lorenzo to the Mugello and Bosco ai Frati.
Yet he was not restricted to one order, sponsoring renovations at the Dominican convent of San Marco and the Franciscan Badia at Fiesole.
The vast majority of Cosimo’s patronized works were religious in nature.
Cosimo’s motivations for sponsoring religious structures were manifold.
Certainly, the Medici fortune was linked to close ties with the Papacy; in 1433/1434, 63% of the profits from the bank came from papal banking.
Cosimo may have been concerned about usury, the sin of making excessive profits; religious patronage might have been viewed as a way to counteract this.
Patronage was also high-profile way to demonstrate Cosimo’s commitment to religion, for he was pious, often attending the parish church, San Lorenzo.
We cannot view Cosimo’s works as simply acts of self-promotion, or based solely upon powerful religious conviction.
At the Dominican convent of San Marco, Cosimo had a private double cell built for himself; at the time, the reservation of a cell for a private patron’s exclusive use was quite extraordinary.That he would build a private cell for personal contemplation indicative of Cosimo’s piety.
One depicts Christ on the cross, with the words “Mulier ecce filius tuus” coming from his mouth; the dying Christ is consigning his mother to St.
Perhaps this is indicative of a rapport Cosimo felt between himself and Mary; perhaps it reveals that Cosmas, patron saint of Cosimo, is consigned to her care, as she is consigned to John’s.
In any case, it is indicative of Cosimo’s strong religious conviction and of divine intercession.
It was Eugenius who ordered the Silvestrines, a Benedictan order and former occupants of San Marco, to relinquish the property to the Dominicans.
Eugenius suggested that Cosimo spend 10,000 florins on San Marco’s renovation to lift the burden of usury from his conscience.
On his last evening in Florence, Eugenius reconsecrated San Marco to Cosmas and Damian and spent the night in Cosimo’s cell at San Marco.
Eugenius had organized a council in Ferrara in 1438 upon the issue of conciliar reform; it was intended to reunite the Eastern and Western branches of Christendom.
Due to the plague in Ferrara, it was moved in 1439 to Florence; Cosimo was influential in persuading Eugenius to transfer the council.
He argued that the air was purer in Florence and that the city was ideal for both Eastern and Western delegates, being midway between the Mediterranean and the Adriatic.
It was Cosimo’s offer of significant financial support that persuaded the chronically cash-strapped Eugenius that the transfer would be beneficial.
It was Medici funding that kept the council alive; indeed, the Byzantine emperor, John VIII Palaeologus, was housed in the palaces of figures exiled by Cosimo.
It was the ultimate display of Medici power, bolstered by international prestige and apparent religious consecration.
Throughout the period of the 1430s and 1440s, while Cosimo was acquiring civic authority as well as religious through his association with Eugenius, he continued to fund ecclesiastical structures and artworks to consolidate his pious reputation.
On the altarpiece of San Marco, Cosmas and Damian are prominently featured along with the saints Mark and Domenic, namesakes of the convent and the order it belonged to, respectively.
Clear lines can be drawn between the kneeling martyrs and the Virgin and child, who they face.
Cosmas and Damian are also featured upon altarpieces at the Novitate Chapel at Santa Croce, and in the Medicis’ private altarpieces at the palace and country villas, including Cafaggiolo.
At the Franciscan convent of Bosco ai Frati, Cosmas and Damian appear yet again upon an altarpiece by Fra Angelico.
Behind them are citrus trees, referred to at the time as ‘male medica,’ commonly believed to be a cure for illness.
Once again, this is a play on the Medici surname, indicating the family’s role as doctors for civic ill.
Cosimo’s piety can again be witnessed in the public library he founded at San Marco.
Cosimo surrounded himself with learned men of the humanist vein, including Niccolo Niccoli, who became bankrupt by purchasing manuscripts.
Cosimo gave Niccoli unlimited credit at his bank, and upon Niccoli’s death, paid off his debts in exchange for his six hundred manuscripts.
Four hundred texts, almost exclusively religious in nature, were then donated to San Marco; the rest were distributed among friends.
Cosimo consulted Tommaso Parentucelli, who would later succeed Eugenius as Pope Nicholas V, to document what books would be necessary to create a complete collection.
Cosimo then hired the humanist librarian Vespasiano da Bisticci to copy any volumes that could not be purchased.
A team of forty-five was hired, and in twenty-two months, two hundred priceless manuscripts had been copied for public consumption at San Marco.
In a time where Cosimo’s authority was increasing, his patronization of ecclesiastical structures also burgeoned.
Through examination, we can see Cosimo’s indisputable religiosity; his interest in religion was not simply a political facade.
It is this devoutness and search for theological contemplation that prompted him to build a personal cell at San Marco.
His letter to Ficino tells us that, even in his final days, he was preoccupied with spiritual matters.
His religiosity is apparent, but we can also see how Cosimo attempted to convey piety, often through his patron saints being depicted as intercessors or by sponsorship of public religious institutions, like San Marco.
This connection was encouraged by liberal appearances of Cosmas and Damian, as well as other Medici saints, like Laurence and John the Evangelist in Cosimo’s sponsored works.
As such, piety and political machinations could be fulfilled through patronage without apparent contradiction.
One must, however, address the overt political posturing that is oft evident.
Cosimo knew that the key to long-lasting success was a good civic reputation.
When he had been banished in 1433 by oligarchic enemies, fearful of his meteoric rise, he had carefully noted the public’s unfavorable reaction.
In a letter written to his cousin and close advisor, Averardo, he recounts how he had been recalled to Florence from Cafaggiulio; he writes “after some time I was told by order of the Signory to go upstairs, and by the Captain of the Infantry I was put into a room called the Barbaria, and locked in.
Cosimo’s exile was indeed brief, and he made a triumphant return to Florence in 1434; instrumental in his comeback were a pro-Medicean Signoria, elected in September-October of 1434, and Pope Eugenius IV, who mediated with Rinaldo degli Albizzi and the anti-Mediceans.
Eugenius was conscious of the Medici role as papal bankers, as discussed previously.
He was supported during his exile by various ruling families and communes, such as the Baglioni of Perugia, the Bentivogli of Bologna, and particularly Venice, where he was received more as an ambassador than an exile.
Because of this, political self-aggrandizement is an element that is prevalent throughout Cosimo’s patronized works.
In the courtyard of the Medici Palace, itself a dominating manifestation of Medici power, once stood a bronze statue of David by Donatello.
On a high base, it would have been visible from the street when the portal was open.
But David had long been a symbol of republican defense and of the Florentine republic itself, with Donatello’s previous marble version now at the palace of the priors.
By possessing a private statue of David, it could be seen as a transformation of a public emblem into a private one.
Cosimo had Benozzo Gozzoli paint the Procession of the Magi here, which portrays Medici family members integrated among the Magi, on their way to adore the infant Christ and accompanied by important contemporary figures.
The brightly-colored cavalcade wends its way across three walls of the chapel, incorporating Medici from across the generations.
Cosimo’s other sons, Giovanni, and the illegitimate Carlo, are depicted.
Cosimo’s humanist associate and family tutor, Marsilio Ficino, is part of the procession, along with John VIII Paleologus, the Byzantine Emperor, Gozzoli himself, and two political allies, the Lord of Rimini and Galeazzo Sforza, ruler of Milan.
It was, as demonstrated previously, linked with piety through the patronage of ecclesiastical structures.
In these structural features, the perpetuation of Cosimo’s legacy was literally set in stone.
Examining works that Cosimo de’ Medici patronized is a valuable way to gain insight into the major preoccupations of the pater patriae.
It is doubly important when the historical context for his works is considered.
Given that continued Medici success depended on the perpetuation of the line, dynastic solidarity and the formation of a close-knit kin-group would be an important design.
Thus, it is explicable why Cosimo would allow associate families to build chapels within San Lorenzo; it was an opportunity for Medicean families to exercise patronage within Cosimo’s sphere of influence.
Given the pious nature of Florence during the Renaissance, it is also explicable why Cosimo would choose to predominantly patronize ecclesiastical structures.
By portraying the Medici saints Cosmas and Damian as intercessors, Cosimo was able to convey a sense of divine authorization, presenting himself as a tangible intercessor with the papacy.
By expanding the boundaries of acceptable patronage, both geographically and financially, Cosimo emerged as a frontrunner in contemporary political self-advertisement.
Cosimo never forgot the events of 1433-1434, remaining aware that continued Medici success relied on good civic standing and the consolidation of control.
Although his forays into the polity were largely behind the scenes, his political self-aggrandizement was far from subtle, as witnessed in the statue of David and the Procession of the Magi.
He was not above appropriating republican values, such as opposition to tyranny and defense of the fatherland as seen in David, for patriotism and republican pride could be harnessed for political gain.
Mike Lenaghan For a millennia, the mighty rivers of British Columbia sustained and supported vibrant First Nations societies and cultures, providing rich and varied food sources as well as important trade and communication networks.
The arrival of the first European explorers however, marked the beginning of a gradual but dramatic change in perspective, as the river became increasingly viewed not as a source of sustenance, but as a source of power.
Standing on the bank of the Peace River in 1793, Alexander Mackenzie described in his journal the awe inspiring power of the water rushing by.
One hundred years later, with European colonization in full swing, the first small-scale hydroelectric developments began in the province, serving as a symbol of modernity, progress and mankind's triumph over nature.
In the Kootenays, energy demands from a small but thriving mining sector and a growing industrial economy spurred the construction of the Lower Bonnigton Dam in 1897.
Meanwhile in Victoria, electricity generated from damming Goldstream River in 1898 and Jordan River in 1911, provided power to the city's new street car service and expanded urban lighting system.
In relatively short order, hydroelectricity grew from a mere novelty to a mature, reliable power generating technology and a dominant force for development in the province.
The insatiable demand for natural resources generated by the Allied war effort during the Second World War resulted in a sustained economic boom in BC, which continued unabated after the war's end.
As a result, energy demands in the province continued to grow and in response, the province entered into a new era of hydroelectric development on an unprecedented scale.
Harnessing the Power of the Peace and Columbia (Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre, 2010), 21.
Moving men, machines, and materials on the Kitimat Project,” British Columbia History 43, no. : 19. 36 biggest earth-filled dam in the world at the time of its completion.
By the late 1970s, hydroelectricity had dramatically transformed the economy and society of British Columbia, attracting new industries and investors with the promise of cheap and reliable energy,8 and ushering in an era of industrialization and modernity that has shaped the province to this day.
The rising reservoirs it seemed, had raised all boats, with more soon to follow.
In 1980, they requested that the provincial government approve their proposal, which would allow construction on the project to begin.
Despite the relative ease with which previous hydro developments had been pushed forth and approved, the Site C project was eventually shelved in 1993 after more than a decade of political debate.
The death of Site C marked an end to the era of high modernist hydro development in BC that had in such short order, permanently transformed the province.
In its place emerged new economic, social and environmental concerns culminating in a distinct shift of the values within British Columbian society.
In 1984, BC Hydro completed its last major hydroelectric project, the Revelstoke Dam, and began an institutional transformation from construction to administration.
Today, almost two decades after the original 'Site C' project was laid to rest, a 'new and improved' version has been exhumed, dusted off, and placed once more before the people of British Columbia for their approval.
Similarly re-invigorated are the proponents of hydroelectric development who, like their 20th century forbearers, cite the economic and social benefits new dam construction will bring to the province.
While such arguments certainly have merit, they tend to negate or disregard many of the negative impacts of hydro development that ultimately led public rejection of Site C, as well as other major hydro development, during the latter stages of the 20th Century.
Drawing on a wide variety of academic and historical sources, this paper reexamines the negative economic, social and environmental impacts of 20th Century hydro development in British Columbia.
By highlighting the darker side of hydro development, its aim is to create a more informed and enlightened public debate about the future of Site C and similar hydro projects in the province.
Hydro-Economics If hydroelectricity had but one champion in British Columbia, it was Premier William Andrew Cecil Bennett.
A populist politician of immense popularity, Bennett promised British Columbians that he could transform their province into a highly modern, industrialized and urban 7 Earl K Pollon and Shirlee Matheson, This was Our Valley , 174.
Energy Privatization in British Columbia , 54. 37 society, a promise he delivered election after election.
By the mid-1950s, Bennett had become convinced that hydroelectricity, first and foremost, would be the engine for economic growth and social transformation in the province.
The premier's “Two-Rivers Strategy” emerged as the foundation for hydro development during his political career, a plan which artfully capitalized on American energy interests on the Columbia to promote simultaneous hydroelectric development on both the Peace and Columbia Rivers and their tributaries.
As promised, the major hydro developments of the Two Rivers Strategy generated significant economic and social benefits for the province.
New supplies of abundant, reliable and cheap hydroelectricity quickly turned BC into a world leader in mining and metallurgy, particularly in energy intensive processes such as zinc production.
The economic impacts of such hydro projects also brought tremendous change to local communities.
In Hudson Hope for example, the new $300,000 Peace Glen Hotel, built to accommodate BC Hydro employees working on the nearby Peace River project, becoming a symbol of modernity in the once tiny 'backwater' town.
Other small and remote communities experienced similar economic and population booms as a result of labour demands from nearby dam sites, resulting in chaotic expansions in local infrastructure, housing and services.
At the same time, many communities located far from the dam sites experienced unprecedented growth throughout the 1960s as a result of new access to abundant electricity.
Prince George's population for example, more than doubled in size from 13,877 in 1961 to 33,101 in 1971 while elsewhere, whole new settlements like the town of Mackenzie were made possible by access to hydroelectricity.
Clearly, Bennett was delivering on his promise of 'progress', but the road to modernity was not without its potholes.
Sacrificing for the Greater Good Throughout the mid-20th Century, most British Columbians generally supported the province's hydro mega-projects, accepting their negative consequences as necessary sacrifices16.
Indeed the provincial government and BC Hydro relied heavily on the ethos of self-sacrifice and invocations of the 'greater good' in order to justify its hydroelectric agenda and the economic, social and environmental dislocation it produced.
This was particularly the case when hydro developments required the forced eviction of settlers and First Nations located in the reservoir flood zone17.
For the most part, its efforts to shame people in submission were successful; however the province could not eliminate all public resistance.
Modernity, Environment, and Society on the Arrow Lakes,” BC Studies 142/143 : 163.
Meanwhile on the Columbia, many locals accused the government of sacrificing their valleys and livelihoods for the sake of American interests and “thirty pieces of silver” noting that only one of the three Canadian storage dams on the Columbia was fitted with generating capacity.
Despite such outcries however, hydroelectric projects under Bennett are remarkable for their general lack of coherent and sustained public protest, despite the many adverse effects that became apparent as the projects neared and reached completion.
Indeed the government's uncritical optimism towards hydro development throughout much of the 20th century, revealed a sort of religious conviction that belied any serious reflection; just as God created light where before was only darkness, hydroelectricity would create economic opportunity and growth in place of an economic vacuum.
The reality however, is that such projects did not simply create local economies from scratch, rather they completely reconstituted existing economies based on the ideals of progress and modernity espoused by government politicians and bureaucrats.
In other words, hydro development was less about economic progress per se, and more about economic prioritization as determined by a centralized government.
Prior to the construction of the Columbia River dams, the Columbia River Basin was a highly dynamic economic area, with ecologically rich valleys supporting large-scale timber production, recreational and sporting activities, as well as tourism and agriculture.
The Arrow Lakes region for example, was home to a highly productive and diverse agricultural economy that had developed over decades; the tiny hamlet of Renata alone produced a staggering 10% of the province's cherries in 1950.
With the completion of the Arrow Lake Dam, Renata and the entire Arrow Lakes agricultural region was completely destroyed by flooding.
The flooding caused by the hydro-electric development also devastated the forestry sector along the Columbia.
The reservoir created by the Mica damn, for example, severely impacted the region's timber economy.
It reduced annual harvests by 9% due to land-loss and inundating the 117km Big Bend Highway, the primary transportation route used by the local logging industry.
As a result, a new two hundred kilometer transportation route was eventually constructed at great environmental and economic expense, permanently raising operating costs by almost doubling travel time for 18 Ibid., 166.
While some of these economic impacts were offset by the growing economic activity in the industrial and mining sector, not all the promised benefits of dam construction came to be realized.
As authors Nemetz and Toller have argued, even the predicted benefits to tourism turned out to be wishful thinking.
By inundating valuable farming, hunting and fishing habitats, BC's dams effectively curtailed or altogether eliminated the ability of many nearby communities to subsist independently of the wider provincial economy.
Firstly, labour demands at dam sites resulted in large population spikes in local communities, creating a wage-based economic system that competed with less formal preexisting local economies.
Secondly, to meet the needs of these growing populations and the logistical demands of dam construction, public and private infrastructure within local communities was rapidly expanded, along with a host government services.
Thirdly, the government then used these expanded public services to justify increasing tax rates on the public, thereby further projecting its physical presence and social authority in the area.
Initially, these new government services were widely appreciated, however when the dams were completed and communities shrank due to job loss, the tax burden on remaining residents increased, forcing many people to seek permanent wage-based employment.
Ultimately, many local communities grew to resent the added tax burden they were forced to pay as a result of infrastructural and service investments in their area.
For the provincial government however, such developments were part of the success story behind BC's hydro development agenda; by destroying the capacity of remote BC communities for self-reliance through both physical pressure (flooding and migration) and economic pressure , the government effectively forced their assimilation into the wider provincial economic system from which it drew its power and legitimacy.
Remaking Society Maintaining support for hydro development within democracies generally compels governments to spread the economic and social benefits of such projects as widely as possible, while simultaneously isolating the negative human and environmental impacts.
In this way, governments can ensure that the destructive elements of hydro development are borne by communities too small to pose a significant electoral threat to their power.
So while cities like Victoria and Vancouver enjoyed the benefits of hydro development with no strings attached, rural communities located in the shadow of the dams were often subjected to economic dislocation through the literal inundation of traditional local industries such as agriculture and logging.
As destructive as the economic fallout of hydro development could be however, such concerns paled in comparison to the forced evictions many people faced as a result of dam construction.
By the mid-20th Century, both the federal and BC governments had a long history of subjecting First Nations to forced evictionsseen most notably through the imposition of the reserve system.
However, it was not until the era of high modernist hydro development that these practices were systematically employed on a large-scale to the province's non-native population.
In the West Kootenays for example, the completion of the High Arrow Dam (today known as the Keenleyside Dam) raised upstream water levels by 76 ft., creating a reservoir that ultimately inundated fourteen communities as well as some 25,000 acres of arable land upon which the local economy was dependent.
For these 'hydro refugees', such evacuations were tragic and traumatic experiences.
However, for the provincial government, they were viewed not only a necessary sacrifices for the 'greater good', but moreover as perfect opportunities to realize the modern social ideal.
Once the 'primitive and disorganized' original settlements had been evacuated and destroyed, government and BC Hydro officials arrived, ready to rebuild idealic 'modern' communities.
By imposing their plans for a suburban paradise, their aim was not only to reshape the physical structure of communities, but ultimately society itself.
It need not be explained that such impositions from Victoria and Vancouver were not always well-received by the affected communities.
Government efforts to compensate individuals and communities for land lost to flooding were often conducted with disregard for the needs or desires of the individuals who were affected.
Officials tended to appraise soon-to-be-flooded land as precisely that, fixing value based on its inevitable destruction.
As a result, many people felt they has not been adequately compensated for the land they had lost, while others felt no amount of money could account for the emotional loss they had suffered.
In the case of the WAC Bennet Dam, some residents resisted initial government offers and attempted to seek redress through the courts, but the government had time on their side, going ahead with the dam and letting the rising water levels force the issue to an inevitable conclusion.
While only five expropriations were required to obtain the land needed to 26 Windsor and Mcvey, “Annihilation of both place and sense of place,” 152.
Just as the government's hydroelectric projects had served to assimilate remote regions of the province into the wider economic system, so too did they facilitate social assimilation based on an idealized image of a 'proper' and 'modern' society.
In Hudson Hope, a modern new highway was seen, by the government, as more important than the community's history or culture as embodied in its 1930's log church.
Despite the expense and length of these efforts however, two surveys carried out in the region in 1970 and in 1981 found that Arrow Lakes residents viewed the area as less livable than the communities they had been forced to leave behind.
In reality, despite the high modernist social transformation envisioned by Bennett and his peers in Victoria and Vancouver, many rural and remote communities did not want enlightened change or modernity forced upon them.
While 20th century hydro development had tremendous economic and social benefits for many British Columbians, particularly those located far from their source, there were those who suffered tremendous social and economic dislocation as a result of the damming process.
Many people lost their jobs, their heritage, their homes and their very way of life.
For the First Nations unfortunate enough to live in the flood zone, the situation was even worse.
Hydroelectricity as the New Engine of Colonialism Authors Windsor and Mcvey have argued that hydroelectric projects are among the most powerful and potent purveyors of 'topocide' employed throughout human history34.
The impacts of 20th Century hydro development on BC's First Nations clearly illustrates their point.
According to archeological evidence, the Rocky Mountain Trench region of BC, which includes both the Peace and Columbia Rivers and their many tributaries, has sustained human habitation for over 12,000 years.
In this way, the river systems of the Rocky Mountain Trench formed the backbone of First Nations life and culture in the region, a fact not lost on government officials.
Indeed before major hydro development began in the region, the Department of Indian Affairs expressed concern on behalf of the federal government, acknowledging that the flooding of certain areas as a result of dam construction would significantly alter or destroy First Nations' lands and thereby threaten their traditional way of life.
Ultimately however, the federal government dropped its objections and gave a blanket approval for hydro development in BC on the principle that affected First Nations could be adequately compensated for their losses.
As a result, a new phase of colonialism began in British Columbia, in which provincial and private auditors were able to appraise and commodify First Nations 'assets' through the freemarket, thereby providing 'appropriate' financial compensation for their assets destruction.
Since only physical assets such as land and private property had any 'real value' in the modern economy, putting a financial value on the 'First Nations problem' effectively enabled the provincial government to negate the immaterial impacts of hydro development on indigenous communities altogether, passing them off as collateral damage.
The racist rationalization of hydro development is further revealed by the fact that affected First Nation communities’ received a fraction of the compensation given to their non-native counterparts.
In compensation for land flooded by the Kenney Dam for example, Alcan gave non-native settlers in the region roughly $1544 per hectare and paid their costs of relocation while the Cheslatta First Nation received an average of $77.22 per hectare and no assistance in relocating.
The inherent racism with which hydro development occurred in BC was not lost on the province's First Nations people.
It turned out he had recieved something like $2000 in exchange for the destruction of an important part of who he was, and he would completely lose access to his traditional trapping areas because it would be all flooded.
While the commodification of First Nations peoples was in itself an egregious act, worse still was the fact the both the provincial and federal governments made little or no attempt to prepare for, or assist in, First Nations relocation efforts.
Indeed, once the decision to dam was made, it seems local indigenous people were all but forgotten.
In the confused rush for high ground, many people were forced to leave behind their possessions, and had to survive the coming winter in hurriedly constructed makeshift shelters.
The damming of the Peace River by the WAC Bennett Dam also had devastating long-term impacts for the region's First Nations communities.
The Williston Reservoir flooded many traditional hunting grounds, trap lines and berry fields as well as devastated the local animal populations both directly through mass drowning and indirectly through extensive habitat loss.
As a result, the viability of traditional subsistence activities practiced by local First Nations was substantially diminished.
However, perhaps the most striking example of the colonial and racist mentality underpinning 20th century hydro development in BC occurred more than a decade prior to the damming of the Peace, in the shadow of the Kenney Dam built to supply Alcan`s aluminum smelter in Kitimat with an abundant supply of cheap energy.
On April 3rd, 1952, without any forewarning or prior consultation, Department of Indian Affairs officials informed the Cheslatta that they would have to immediately relocate due to imminent flooding.
While white settlers in the region had been notified up to two years in advance that they would be forced to move, the Cheslatta were given five days; on April 8th, the gates on the Kenney Dam were closed, and the area began to flood.
To help speed up the evacuation process, Alcan encouraged the Cheslatta to leave the area immediately, promising to cover the costs of relocation, collect and transport their valuables, and exhume and relocate the community`s historic burial ground.
With the reservoir steadily rising, the Cheslatta had little option but to accept in good faith Alcan`s promises and say a hurried farewell to their traditional homeland.
Ultimately, Alcan failed to honour even one of these promises, and in a matter of days, the history, culture and livelihoods of the Cheslatta were washed away.
The Nechako Reservoir created by the Kenney Dam ultimately forced the Cheslatta to relocate to a new reservation located outside their traditional territory some 48km to the north, where the ecology of the area could not support their traditional lifestyle.
The societal impacts of this forced relocation on the Cheslatta people were tragic.
Severed from their land, culture and history, they were unable to continue in their traditional practices, resulting in individual depression and social despair, culminating in alarmingly high rates of alcohol and drug-related deaths and suicides.
According to authors Windsor and Mcvey, “by 1990, alcohol use amongst 40 Ibid., 111.
First Nations have achieved considerable political success in opposing further hydro developments such as the original Site C Project, and have also won a number of important legal battles seeking redress for their treatment under earlier hydro projects.
In the 1990s, the Tsay Keh Dene Band reached a multi-million dollar settlement with the provincial government and BC Hydro over grievances resulting from the WAC Bennett Dam and the Williston Reservoir.
While similar legal settlements have continued in the first decade of the 21st Century, these historic injustices are far from being resolved.
Even if the courts can settle all related disputes however, it is clear that no level of financial compensation or admission of culpability on the part of government can replace the history, traditions and culture which have been lost.
The same is true of the staggering ecological destruction which occurred throughout British Columbia as a result of 20th century hydro development.
The Environmental Fallout of Hydro Development The environmental destruction caused by 20th Century hydro development in British Columbia cannot be overstated.
The deaths of animals, habitat loss and ecological dislocation all occurred on a grand scale and in high concentrations around dam sites and corresponding flood zones.
Though many of these ecological impacts are inherent consequences of any major hydro development, they increase dramatically in correlation to the size of the project in question.
The WAC Bennett Dam, for example, flooded an area five times the size of Lake Okanagan, and as a result, led ecological destruction on an almost unimaginable scale.
Direct Impacts on Animal Populations The direct and immediate impacts of dam construction on wildlife populations varies considerably depending on the size, scale and timeline of project construction, the specific ecological character of the affected area, and the extent to which ecological impacts were addressed and mitigated through project design.
In general, earlier hydro projects in BC proceeded with little ecological concern or understanding, resulting in greater immediate impacts 44 Ibid., 157.
The Duncan Dam for example, was the first of the Columbia River Treaty dams to be completed in 1967 and was constructed without fish ladders.
This resulted in the decimation of the local salmon run, with up to 2. million fish being obstructed from reaching their spawning ground.
In addition to barring fish migration, dams also tend to collect and withhold enormous amounts of nutrients in their flood zones, thereby depriving downstream ecosystems.
For example, the Libby Dam, located on the on the Kootenai River in Montana, just south of the Canadian border, was found to withhold between 45% and 50% of all phosphorous that would otherwise travel downstream.
To compensate for these impacts, state fisheries managers began to add nutrient supplements downstream in 1992 in order to maintain ecosystem functionality.
These two examples reveal how ecological design and human intervention can mitigate certain environmental impacts from hydro development.
However, the vast majority of environmental damage caused by dams cannot be eliminated.
When a major dam's reservoir begins to flood, the number of animal drownings can be staggering.
Throughout the 20th Century, many BC residents who witnessed such flooding reported seeing countless animals stranded on small high-ground areas by the rapidly rising water levels.
The immensity of the reservoirs combined with the shocking amount of debris which rose to the surface of the water once flooding began, made swimming to safety all but impossible.
Some local residents operated desperate rescue missions, collecting treed animals by boat and delivering them to the safety of the new shoreline.
Pen Powell, a long-time resident and local pilot, recalled flying over the Williston Reservoir as it began to fill and witnessing “a large herd of moose that were trapped on a piece of high ground by floating debris and pulled-over trees.
As a result of this poor effort, many reservoir areas remained clogged by floating debris for years following construction, severely obstructing animal migration, human transportation and recreational usage.
Habitat Loss In addition to mass animal drowning, BC's mega hydro projects also resulted in significant long term habitat destruction for both aquatic and terrestrial species.
Fish spawning habitats located 49 Nemetz and Toller, “Assessing the Impact of Hydro Development,” 12.
The widespread destruction of fish habitats not only affected fish populations, but also bird species which depended upon them for food.
Despite considerable knowledge of how hydro projects would affect local ecosystems however, efforts to mitigate these impacts were an exception to the rule, often made half-heartedly by project planners in an attempt to appease particularly troublesome local interest groups.
For example, when provincial fisheries biologists predicted that construction of the High Arrow Dam would result in the decline of Kokanee, Rainbow and Dolly Trout populations by 70%, and displace large numbers of beaver, muskrat, water fowl and other animals, BC Hydro responded by constructing an artificial spawning site for trout for the benefit of local fishing clubs, while leaving the other affected species to their fate.
In many cases, these delicate ecosystems are then unable to re-establish themselves at the new reservoir shoreline due to irregular fluctuations in water levels.
The result is often a deadened reservoir shoreline characterized by treacherous sinkholes and rotting debris, which can pose a serious danger to animals seeking access to drinking water.
In addition to the impacts of upstream flooding, dams also create significant downstream ecological impacts.
The WAC Bennett Dam on the Peace River withheld so much water from downstream ecosystems in early years, that the PeaceAthabasca Delta and associated marshland areas began to dry up during the late 1960s and 70s.
This aridification resulted in widespread habitat loss and species decline for many animal including migratory water fowl and the endangered wood bison.
The combination and complex interrelation of population decline and habitat loss due to dam construction has led to some of the most dramatic ecological changes in the history of British Columbia.
Despite a greater understanding of, and concern for, environmental issue, much of the ecological destruction caused be large-scale hydro developments is unavoidable.
Generally, net primary production and ecological diversity decrease in the region upstream from a dam site, as highly productive terrestrial and aquatic habitats are destroyed or subjected to high levels of irregular disturbance due flooding and fluctuating water levels.
Low reservoir water levels during dry periods can produce tremendous dust storms that can last for days, resulting in a 55 Loo, “People In The Way,” 184.
Finally, massive new reservoirs can affect local precipitation patterns, resulting in increased fog and humidity.
While it is difficult to fully account for the environmental impacts of 20th Century hydro development in British Columbia, the ecological fallout created by Mica Dam provides some indication of the scale of destruction.
According to Nemetz and Toller, prior the dam's construction, government biologists estimated the project would result in, a loss of 105,000 acres of wildlife habitat, including wetlands, riparian zones, and natural meadows.
It was predicted that this habitat loss would cause reductions in populations of moose , deer , elk (40 per cent), and caribou as well as the displacement of most aquatic animals and waterfowl.
Before the dam was completed in 1973 and flooding began, the wildlife resources of the Mica Basin were estimated at $10. million dollars.
This assessment was reduced by nearly half once the ecological impacts of flooding to the region had been assessed.
Conclusion Despite a concerted effort by successive provincial governments to carry out major hydro developments in remote areas of British Columbia, the tremendous economic, social and ecological destruction created by such projects did eventually make it into mainstream public consciousness.
Overtime, First Nations resistance to such high modernist projects became increasingly organized and influential within public debate and as a result, within government circles.
The growing public concern for the treatment of First Nations peoples eventually altered the legal climate in the province enough that some communities affected by hydro development have since been able to seek legal redress for their experiences.
Meanwhile, the ecological impacts of hydro development helped give rise to the environmental movement in BC, which demanded change in the way such projects were carried out.
By the 1970s, environmental impact assessments had become a fundamental aspect of BC Hydro operations, and the company began to develop ways of mitigating some of the environmental impacts caused by hydro development such as adding fertilizer to make-up for nutrient loss, operating fish hatcheries, recreating spawning grounds, installing fish ladders, and regulating seasonal water levels to ensure salmon eggs remain inundated until hatched.
Perhaps the best 61 Loo, “People In The Way,” 191; Stanley, Voices from Two Rivers, 112.
Ultimately, First Nations and environmental groups were instrumental in bringing about an end to 20th century high modernist hydro developments in the province, culminating in the defeat of the Site C proposal.
Today, with Site C back on the table, it is essential that British Columbian's revisit their collective past, and remember the why they came to oppose this particular project and reject the rational of high modernist development.
By exploring the historical economic, social and ecological fall-out of 20th century hydro development in BC, it is hoped that this paper will help stimulate a critical public debate on the issue.
Afterall, only by studying the past can we be sure to avoid repeated tragedy in our future.
It seems appropriate that it should also be investigated by historians because, although biological death has been the shared fate of every person from the very beginnings our lineage, death is not merely a scientific concept and is, more importantly, a cultural and historical one.
This reality means that the nonphysical sides of death are and always have been influenced by myriad factors such as religion, politics, and time.
Consequently, a group’s habits surrounding death are unique and do not remain static.
One would expect the rate and degree of change to be more dramatic in times of rapid sociopolitical upheaval.
Death in Russia altered significantly under the empire’s last days and the Bolsheviks; however, for various reasons many features persisted, either in tune with their original manifestations -often to the dismay of the government -or as modified versions resulting from official policies and practices.
Because the changes, though significant, were not enough to outweigh these preservations, a revolution in death did not occur.
An investigation of death cannot be undertaken without considering religion’s status in it; this consideration is of remarkable importance when examining alterations in death in Russia from the last days of the monarchy to the end of Bolshevism.
From the time of Russia’s Christianization the Orthodox Church was central, more or less, in Russian death culture as it played an overall central role in life.
During imperial times religion essentially monopolized the sphere of ritualized death.
The major exception to this was the tsar’s funeral where ritual would be focused as much on the dead monarch and political pomp as the proper religious ceremony,2 showing that rigid social hierarchy was not only embedded in life but applied posthumously as well.
Funerary customs, then, were implements blatantly used to reinforce social, economic, and political disparity among the classes.
The more urban of the ordinary Russians adhered, more or less, to familiar religious, largely Russian Orthodox, funerary rites.
Alternatively, the typical peasant death rites, like popular peasant religion in general, blended centuries-old pagan customs with traditional Orthodox ones.
The Church, as an entity, was not highly favoured by the peasants, but they did welcome Orthodox doctrine and, as far as everyday life went, Orthodoxy was a highly incorporated component and a central constituent of funerals.
The key reason self-described devoutly Orthodox peasants maintained pagan rituals was because they believed the pagan ceremonies did not infringe on, but rather fell under, their Orthodox belief set.
The foremost issue of peasant burials, as dictated by Orthodox tradition, was final Judgment Day and the corresponding resurrection of the dead.
The decedent’s body was washed so it could be in good condition for its later resurrection and presentation before God.
Additionally, it was expected that the place of burial, where future resurrection would occur, would be maintained by the family.
The Church forbade cremation because destroying the body blatantly violated the resurrection concept; consequently, everyone was inhumed.
Other aspects of official Orthodox ritual included formal prayer for the deceased’s soul and holding ceremonial feast days not just on the day of the funeral, but also on the ninth, twentieth, and fortieth days after the death.
The funeral itself was held three days following the death and, as mentioned, a final ceremony was held forty days after death.
These correspond to the day of the soul’s withdrawal from earth and the day of the soul’s preliminary judgement, respectively.
Continued prayer was crucial because it could mean the soul’s salvation upon the final reckoning when all souls would be unalterably judged.
This included frequent ordinary prayer as well as observance of the more important religious days, such as Easter, and the anniversaries of deaths.
Tending to the grave’s maintenance and leaving food at the grave were important on these days because although the spirit had departed the earth, it would return intermittently, feeling hungry.
These regular ceremonies benefitted not only the dead but the living, too, as graves functioned as essential places for the living to socially interact with each other and the dead.
A Study of Religion and Atheism in Soviet Russia (Westport, CT: Hyperion Press, 1933), 117.
The soul does not face final judgment on the fortieth day, as final judgment is the universal day of reckoning when the dead are resurrected and given ultimately sentenced to either Heaven or Hell.
The first judgment, on the fortieth day after death, is merely temporary and alterable and long as the world exists, until final Judgment Day.
For example, in one’s dying moments, those present placed a candle in the dying person’s hands, lit the wick, and extinguished the flame immediately following the moment of death.
It was believed that the drifting smoke indicated which way the soul left the body.
In instances where the deceased’s eyes were still open the family placed an object -frequently a coin -over them as the open eyes were believed to be looking for an eternal partner for the soul.
Following the notion that life after death reflected life before death, small sums of money were buried with the body to ensure that the soul would be able to feed itself -as the living family could not feed it for eternity -in the afterlife by buying small plot of land to cultivate as it had done while alive.
People also went to lengths to ensure the deceased did not take them along into death, such as regulating the size of coffins to be just enough room for one body.
They also sought to prevent haunting by taking precautions such as, when moving the body from the home to the graveyard, passing the body not out the door but out the window to disorient the spirit and prevent it from finding its way back in.
Fearing vampirism they would even, albeit rarely, mutilate and dismember a corpse to prevent it from rising again.
Obviously, though they confronted death directly and never discounted the fact of its inevitability, peasants did not take it lightly.
The higher echelons of Russian society, though also mainly performing Orthodox funerals and holding to similar religious beliefs regarding death , had a much more casual approach to the non-ritualized part of death.
Anyone who has read Tolstoy’s novella The Death of Ivan Ilyich should be able to conclude that an aristocratic attitude toward one’s own death involved denial during life and self-pitying despair along with spiritual and existential agony while dying.
Death was simply unacceptable to them, an inconvenient interruption in their cushy, distracting lives and therefore was something to be feared.
Afraid that their own death would be brought by doing so, many aristocrats would avoid use of the word “death,” particularly in writing.
When forced to address their own mortality because of imminent death, it was quite common for the bourgeoisie to seek comfort not only in priests that delivered final rites but also, and sometimes more importantly, from their servants.
These servants, who came from peasant backgrounds and therefore possessed the more accepting view of death, used their attitudes to counsel their masters and help them bravely confront death.
In terms of ceremony and burial, the upper classes held more elaborate, public, and rigidly Orthodox deaths as Church and state were bound together; therefore, the closer one was to the top social tier, the more he or she had to adhere to officially prescribed practices.
The aristocracy, nobility, and clergy had separate cemeteries from the 12 Hecker, Religion and Communism, 16.
These segregated cemeteries, along with seven cost-based funeral ranks, ensured that social hierarchy applied even after death.
New death rites were introduced and expanded with the rise of socialism; this was particularly true in the early 1900s when revolutionary feeling was ever-present and growing.
These funerals did not replace the traditional ones nor did they adopt radically different forms.
They essentially used traditional forms but radically altered the symbolism and language to provide atheistic funerals.
Atheism was a natural tenet of socialism as religion, according to Marx, was merely one of the many fruits of economics, the foundation of social life; those that controlled the economy therefore controlled religion, one of the economy’s social byproducts, and exploited the proletariat with it.
Under socialism religion would supposedly be naturally eradicated because the means of class exploitation were to vanish with classes themselves.
To revolutionaries, then, traditional funerals were seen as wholly inappropriate and needed to be secularized.
These public funerals were a means of mourning for fellow revolutionaries who sacrificed themselves for the cause while being used mainly for public protest.
Because the tsarist government could not censor mourning ceremonies like other public meetings, collective grieving became one of the only admissible types of gathering that allowed for collective revolutionary expression.
Red Funerals used legitimate mourning for fallen comrades as an outlet for propagandizing against the regime.
Blazing red banners brandished slogans that, along with revolutionary funeral hymns, expressed grief and political feeling simultaneously.
One of the most popular of these funeral hymns, “You Fell Victims,”26 clearly highlighted the importance of the cause over grief for the individual.
Symbol and Festival in the Russian Revolution,” in Symbols of Power: The Esthetics of Political Legitimacy in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, ed.
These ceremonies drew considerable attention due to their unfamiliar and highly exposed nature and because of their sheer visual impact.
Hundreds of people dressed in dark coats, carrying bright red banners, walked through the wintry white streets of Moscow or St.
Petersburg -the red against the snow would certainly evoke images of the spilt blood of socialist martyrs.
The older, more traditional family members of the dead, though fairly unsatisfied with Red Funerals and desiring the customary Orthodox ceremony, did generally appreciate the great honour that was being bestowed upon their loved ones.
After Tsar Nicholas II’s abdication in 1917, Red Funerals adopted a new meaning.
Following this they were no longer used purely for protest -monarchical tyranny had fallen after all -but primarily for celebrating the achievements of the cause to date by showing gratitude for the sacrifices of the fallen.
The form was quite similar to older Red Funerals, but the newer ones were grander in scale and powerfully blended lamentation and popular demonstration with military procession, a trifold form previously unused that the Bolsheviks would adopt thereafter for prominent party members.
The first was held for three students of the Military Cyclist Academy on 4 March 1917 who perished during the street fighting the previous month.
The Provisional Government and the Petrograd Soviet were inspired by this Red burial to hold a massive ceremonial funeral.
Deemed “the Burial of the Martyrs”, it was held three weeks after Nicholas’s abdication and represented the first government-sanctioned public commemoration of the February Revolution.
This burial, though it included members of all classes, was clearly by and for the proletariat as it was still Red -the same red banners with the same slogans flew as the workers, virtually the only group stationed in the centre of Petrograd, sang their funeral dirges.
The socialists were conscious that the deaths of their brethren could be potent political tools and never stopped using public funerals and socialist martyrdom as propaganda.
However, while Red Funerals during the Dual Power were celebrations of revolutionary achievements, they were, at least at the national level, simply reassertions of the Bolsheviks’ power following the October Revolution.
Because there was not always a freshly dead hero for the party to extol, annual festivities -mainly those of May Day and the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution -would suffice by commemorating the older dead, almost reiterating past funerals.
Many revolutionaries found this exaltation and elevation of heroes to be entirely inappropriate 27 Merridale, Night of Stone, 108.
It was not only funerals of exemplary socialists that fell under the new Bolshevik program’s jurisdiction but all funerals, at least theoretically.
During the initial disorder of Bolshevik rule the issue of death went virtually unacknowledged; the party simply did could not afford to waste valuable time pondering death while fighting the Great War, facing impending civil war, and trying to manage the highly unstable political and economic environment.
The party had ideas regarding death due to their atheistic nature and adopted death rituals for their own ranks but had no definite intentions for the masses.
The main obstacle to imposing their ideas of death on their people was religion, a subject of considerable debate among party members at the time of the revolution.
Some saw it as necessary to attack the Church and outlaw religious expression outright while others believed religion would gradually disappear as a logical result of classlessness.
It began in January 1918 with the official separation of church and state.
All religions were officially equal and religious practices, including funerals, were allowed so long as such practices were mindful of public peace and the rights of others.
It did not, however, allow any remnants of religious rites in state affairs -the populace was not forced to secularize, at least not yet, but the state was.
Many people did adopt the atheistic line, but these were primarily party members and proletarians; rural dwellers tended to adhere vehemently to their customary religious practices.
A more significant step towards secularization of death was taken in December 1918 with the Decree of the Burials, one aspect of nationalization under War Communism.
The state monopolized the funeral industry, including Church-controlled cemeteries, to secularize it, making it tougher to perform religious rituals.
The Decree was also, by abolishing cost-based funerals and offering free standardized burials to all, a step in establishing egalitarianism.
Hecker argued that in some cases where people did retain traditional religious ceremonies they did so not out of lasting genuine religious feeling, though for most peasants this was certainly true, but rather because of learned tradition -the religious rites were the only ones they knew how to employ.
Others may have abandoned their former religious convictions and cultural customs but refused to perform the new ceremonies because they viewed them as dispassionate and uncaring toward the dead.
The pure logistics of body disposal became an obvious problem for the Bolshevik regime.
Death was pandemic due to world war, civil war, terror, famine, and disease; people were dying on a larger scale than seen before in Russia and bodies kept accumulating in literal heaps at mortuaries and cemetery grounds.
The new bureaucracy was also simply awful at managing death records and body disposal.
The initial response was to instigate the use of mass graves, but this solution was far from perfect.
People willing to dig these morbid pits were scarce, and digging them was a slow and arduous process in the cold winter months when the ground was frozen.
The state’s answer to this was cremation, a less expensive and cleaner method of disposal than inhumation, not to mention it would assist in further undermining the Church.
No crematorium existed in Russia because, under the imperial Orthodox tradition, any proposal to construct one was disregarded out of disgust.
The Bolsheviks’ attempts to build crematoria in Moscow and Petrograd faced many obstacles, such as site selection and technical difficulties, in addition to persisting religious outrage at the idea.
The first crematorium, opened in December 1920, was a converted bathhouse in Petrograd and was meant to dispose of the anonymous dead.
This experiment was a miserable failure -it was a wood-burning crematorium when wood to burn was scarce, making it horribly inefficient.
Not surprisingly, it burned to the ground roughly two months after opening.
A working crematorium did not open until 1927 in Moscow, but the government had discerned long before this that cremation was not the remedy it had hoped.
The New Economic Policy re-privatized the funeral industry, and this helped to overcome some of the problems associated with the former state monopoly and increased the number of religious funerals.
Though religious rites became costly -as only those who provided exclusively secular ceremonies were offered government funding -many overlooked the expense and welcomed the opportunity to openly hold religious ceremonies again.
By the late 1920s only about one-third of burials were free from religious rites; the other two-thirds retained a religious nature.
Despite the Bolsheviks’ attempts at secularization, religious funerals were not largely abandoned until Stalin came to power and vigorously attacked the church and renationalized the funeral 39 Merridale, Night of Stone, 12.
The politics of death were much easier for the Bolsheviks to manage than disposal proved to be.
They were highly adept at using something like a high-ranking official’s natural death for their political purposes and were much more masterful at this than the tsars had been.
Perhaps the most important singular death used as party propaganda was Lenin’s.
The rest of the party feared that his death would prompt political disintegration, forcing the government to confront its largest hurdle since the chaos of civil war.
Lenin, as principal legitimating source of the regime, could not be allowed to vanish, so his legacy would have to suffice in his place.
Though the Cult of Lenin began in 1918 following Fanya Kaplan’s assassination attempt, Lenin’s death in 1924 intensified it exponentially.
It became a mass campaign that used emotion to arouse in the people faithful allegiance to the regime to keep them controlled and willing to accept the remaining party members as Lenin’s appropriate heirs.
With Lenin dead and the party constantly bombarding the public with the glory that was Lenin, nobody could see any fault in his leadership and therefore could not see error in those who claimed to preserve his sublime legacy.
Lenin would have found the cult of worship conferred upon him abhorrent -it was starkly underscored by language and practices evocative of Russian Orthodoxy and severely undermined the communist doctrine of social equality.
The funeral itself and subsequent lying-in-state, arguably the most important displays of the Cult of Lenin, were highly reminiscent of imperial funerals in everything from the massive procession, the the lengthy period for viewing the body, and the idea of a leader that was physically dead but whose legacy continued to care for his people.
Alexander III, the last tsar to perish before the revolution, was embalmed and laid out for the country to see and mourn for three months.
The Bolsheviks, after careful consideration, chose to embalm Lenin, but he was to be perpetually preserved as a constant reminder that he, and therefore the legitimacy of communist rule, survived in his heirs whereas Alexander’s body eventually decayed, giving in to a new tsar’s reign.
The successful embalming and re-embalming of Lenin also helped the regime by proving its scientific prowess to the Soviet Union and the rest of the world.
Lenin’s preserved body, however, defied communism’s anti-religious spirit as it resembled an “uncorrupted” body -one requirement of canonization.
Disallowing Lenin’s body to decompose essentially turned him into a communist saint, and portraying him as an eternal entity turned him into a character redolent of Jesus.
The Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square became a massive shrine 46 Merridale, Night of Stone, 178.
The funeral was not quite as grandiose as imperial funerals, but it managed to establish the fact that social equality, though espoused, was absent in Russia as it had been in the past, reenforced by the tsars’ funerals.
This was not new -previous funerals of higher-ranking officials, which had already used a different form than those of the common dead, and special burial grounds, such as the Kremlin wall, asserted their special status -nor was this very different from the burial practices of the imperial period.
Government-contrived death was also something that the Bolsheviks were much better at than the royals; death by official design was transformed into a much more streamlined process than ever before.
Executions were not random, haphazard or used for only occasional political messages under the Bolsheviks but were rather used consistently for keeping order and were seen as necessary for political stability.
Life was cheap to the Bolsheviks because the cause came first, so it was natural for them to view mass killing of potential opposition -whether real or imagined -as an inevitable measure to be taken for the benefit of the cause.
The tsars had certainly orchestrated death but did so in a fairly disorderly manner, and the extent to which they executed people was much less.
The tsars also chose very particular targets in order to send their political message; the Bolsheviks, on the other hand, in actually keeping with their egalitarian spirit, offered equal-opportunity terror -no groups were exempt from their highly organized executions.
Despite what the Bolsheviks wanted and the changes their revolution brought, death, unlike the many other aspects of Russian culture and society, was not revolutionized.
In the mid-late 1920s, before Stalin ascended to supremacy, death rather closely resembled what it was during the monarchy’s descent -most people maintained religious death rites, state funerals still asserted social disparity, cremation remained on the fringe, and the language of martyrdom and idolatry persisted despite anti-religious ideology.
The most apparent change in death was scale -more people were dying under the Bolsheviks and more bodies piled up, but this does not imply revolution.
The changes that did occur -including those in state-engineered death, which actually retained its more profoundly altered and evolved character through the NEP period -though not revolutionary themselves, did set the foundation for the more radical transformations in death that Stalin’s “Revolution from Above” imposed.
Andrew Farris Of all the weapons in the vast soviet arsenal, nothing was more profitable than Avtomat Kalashnikova model of 1947.
Since the end of the Cold War, the Kalashnikov has become the Russian people's greatest export.
The collapse of the Soviet Union coincided with a flood of Eastern Bloc arms into the world’s conflict zones.
Many of these arms, primarily small arms but also heavy equipment such as tanks and helicopters, simply vanished from East European storehouses, and these arms were not simply exports of Russia.
Arguably playing an even more prominent role in this black market trade was the Ukraine, the country where the man who spoke the lines above acquired all of his AK-47s.
This essay will focus in on the role the Ukraine played in this underground arms smuggling ring.
We will start at the factories and the warehouses in the Ukraine, move to the warzones of Africa, and meet the individuals who move the weapons in between.
This is a tragic tale, one that shines a spotlight on a decade that in the West was widely touted as one of the most peaceful and prosperous in modern history, but in much of the rest of the world, living in the wreckage of the Cold War, was lamented as a time of depression, cynicism, and civil war.
When an independent Ukraine was born in August 1991 it inherited one of the largest and best equipped militaries in the world with virtually inexhaustible stockpiles of tanks, helicopters, artillery pieces, assault rifles, land mines and ammunition.
The first was that because of the sheer size of the Soviet military behind the Iron Curtain, Ukraine was bound to be left with huge military stockpiles.
Through the latter decades of the Cold War the Soviets had maintained conventional armed forces intended to be at parity with the armies of the NATO alliance.
A level of military preparedness this absurdly high was came to dominate the Soviet economy, accounting for somewhere between 17 and 19 per cent of the Union’s GDP in the 1980s.
This investment that translated into an armed forces of four million men, 40,000 tanks and artillery pieces and 10,000 combat aircraft.
Of these forces, a disproportionately high number were stationed in the Ukraine; a result of Soviet grand strategy.
Soviet military doctrine was determined to avoid a rerun of the catastrophe of the summer of 1941 where the bulk of the Red Army’s best divisions, lined up at the shared border with the Third Reich, were encircled and annihilated in a matter of weeks.
To be able to react to an attack and launch counter-offensives, most Soviet troops were stationed in the buffer regions west of the Russian heartland primarily the Ukraine and Belarus but still well back of the border with the Western alliance in East Germany and Czechoslovakia.
They could count on 6,052 tanks, 3,602 artillery pieces, 1,650 combat aircraft, 75 attack helicopters and a large (to put it mildly) supply of small arms.
For our story, it only became important that the troops were stationed in the Ukraine in 1991.
It was then that the debate ignited over what to do with the massive military of the former Soviet Union’s now sovereign states.
Russia being in no position to challenge this demand that was quickly echoed by most of the other republics caved.
When it was set down in a treaty several years later, it was determined that Ukraine got a military 780,000 strong with $89 billion worth of the Union’s military equipment.
At the same time they repatriated the 2,500 nuclear 2 International Institute for Strategic Studies.
Brassey's for International Institute for Strategic Studies,: 1993), 86.
Military Forces in the Soviet Successor States, 10. 62 weapons on Ukrainian soil back to Russia, wanting nothing to do with nuclear weaponry after Chernobyl.
Elaborating these problems will help us answer the question of what conditions could have allowed for the wholesale theft of billions of dollars of state property from the Ukraine.
In the movie Lord of War, the Ukrainian – former Soviet – General Dmitri Orlov sells a seemingly endless stream of military equipment to the freewheeling arms dealer played by Nicholas Cage.
Instances like this, where men entrusted with hugely expensive and deadly equipment blatantly abused their authority, appear to have been commonplace.
First, the military was plunged into administrative chaos following the creation of the new Ukrainian armed forces.
Second, many members of the military were severely disillusioned with the Soviet system and retained little loyalty to the new Ukrainian government.
Finally, the economic catastrophe that engulfed the country in the decade following independence had a knock on effect that left many officers worried about their job security and looking to make a quick buck.
The initial creation of the Ukrainian military command structure actually began a collapse in central authority that was mirrored in most of the post-Soviet republics—though it was particularly acute in Ukraine.
As a result, commanders were left in the dark for lengthy periods about who they were answering to and whether they would even have jobs in the months ahead.
To further complicate matters the language of the Soviet military had been Russian, but the new Ukrainian Armed Forces Command was to work in Ukrainian even though many of the army’s officers could not even speak it.
Given these factors, it is unsurprising that the chain of command decisively broke down.
The claim was denied by the Russian and Ukrainian military authorities.
This was the third incident in which such claims have been made since the break-up of the Soviet Union.
When the Soviet system collapsed there were not many who mourned its passing, least of all in the Ukraine; a referendum on the question of independence was answered positively by 90 per cent of Ukrainian voters.
Before it was banned in August 1991, the CPU could boast four million members.
When it was re-legalized just two years later only 150,000 rejoined – 5 per cent.
Ukrainians had many grievances with the Soviet government, chief among them the mistreatment of Ukrainian troops in the armed forces.
Conscripts in the Soviet Army were never treated well and Ukrainians suffered disproportionately compared to their Russian counterparts.
Many Ukrainian units were put at the forefront of fighting in the Afghan War, or quelling hot spots of rebellion across the Warsaw Pact.
The new free press brought to light the brutal hazing practices, Dedovshchina, that were endemic in the armed forces.
The other burning issue driving Ukrainians away from communism was the government’s handling of the Chernobyl disaster.
Even today the idea of a Ukrainian consciousness has struggled to gain traction in a country that experienced negative growth for nine years following independence.
More than anything else, the primary enabling factor for the illegal arms trade from the Ukraine was the economic collapse.
The end of the Soviet empire dealt a catastrophic blow to an already struggling economy in the Ukraine.
Some former government managers sold off the state’s assets en masse, making private fortunes as the economy crumbled around them.
One observer contrasted this aggressive, plutocratic form of privatization with Western equivalents and coined the term “grabization”.15 The defense industry was hit particularly hard since it employed over a third of the population.
These numbers can however, be deceptive as estimates of the size of the informal sector or black market, which is beyond government regulation and taxation, have ranged as high as two thirds of the total GDP.17 The fact that such a huge portion of the economy went underground, and the lines between legal and illegal business practices were so blurred, undoubtedly made stealing military equipment easier.
The economic collapse meant the country had absolutely no way to pay for the three quarters of a million men and women under arms.
Initially the government intended to maintain armed forces of around 450,000 and began demobilizing the remaining 300,000 troops but it was almost immediately apparent that even this was a preposterously high number given the state of the country’s finances.
The mass demobilizations created more unemployment and gave those who remained in the forces a fatalistic view of their own futures, desperate to find any way to make money; selling their weapons, often times their only assets, was a predictable response.
Today the Ukrainian military conforms more closely to budgetary realities it is only 159,000 strong.
The corresponding weakening of centralized power in Third World states made the 1990s a time of intense civil strife where long simmering ethnic and religious conflicts boiled to the surface.
It is well documented that since 1991 Ukrainian arms have turned up in the hands of rebel groups, tin-pot dictators and everywhere in-between.
Taras Kuzio asserts it is public knowledge that “Ukrainian arms were exported to Iraq, Iran, and South Yemen.
In Asia, they were exported to Sri Lanka, Burma (despite an international embargo in place), China and Pakistan.
The catalogue of wars, civil wars, genocides, rebellions and violent coups is shocking.
Rather than listing them, their extent is better illustrated by the map below.
What we are seeing is the decline of the classic African liberation movement and the proliferation of something else -something wilder, messier, more violent, and harder to wrap our heads around.
But what is spreading across Africa like a viral pandemic is actually just opportunistic, heavily armed banditry.
I've witnessed up close -often way too close -how combat has morphed from soldier vs. soldier (now a rarity in Africa) to soldier vs. civilian.
Most of today's African fighters are not rebels with a cause; they're predators.
These weapons, more than anything the AK-47 assault rifle, gave these men – and often children – many times the destructive power than had previously been possible.
The majority of the almost four million thought to have died in the Second Congo War from 1998 to 2004 are thought to have met their 67 demise at the end of a bullet.
One commentator noted that in the Kenyan town of Kolowa, an AK-47 could be bought for fifteen cows in 1986.
The money for these weapons comes from the rich natural resources of the African continent.
The most notorious and well documented instance of African resources for Ukrainian guns was Sierra Leone’s so-called ‘blood diamonds’, now synonymous with the horrors of West Africa in the last decade of the 20th Century.
In Angola the UNITA rebel movement, though forced into the bush in the country’s interior, could still afford delivery of planeloads of small arms and attack helicopters because the narrow strip of otherwise strategically worthless land they held contained a huge diamond mine.
Though many African countries were subjected to UN-backed arms embargoes, great powers rarely invested in enforcing them.
The many parties in Africa clamoring for guns could rely on shadowy middlemen – the arms dealers – to skirt any restrictions and meet the demands.
Details about Ukraine’s illegal arms trade, beyond what’s been described, are sketchy.
There is no doubt that the Ukraine held thousands of tons in military stockpiles, and many of those weapons have wound up in African conflict zones.
How they get there and who was responsible are much more difficult questions to answer.
Profiling the lives of two suspected arms traffickers Leonid Minin arrested by Italian police in 2000 and Viktor Bout by Thai police in 2008 can help shed some light on the inner workings of this illegal trade in weaponry.
Working as a transporter of oil and timber in a number of countries across Latin America, Africa, and Europe, he was subjected to fraud and money laundering investigations during the early 1990s.
As his import/export ventures around the world multiplied, so too did the white collar criminal investigations.
Suddenly in 1999 Minin’s name shot to the surface of an investigation into arms smuggling when an Antonov-124 transported 68 tons of small arms from Kiev to Liberia, via Burkina Faso.
French intelligence service were looking to find out how Charles Taylor’s rebel group in Liberia, which was supported by the Cote d’Ivoire, was getting its hands on arms despite a UN arms embargo and they set about investigating.
At the time of his arrest he had seven known aliases and five passports.
Among the findings in the hotel room was a sheaf of documents detailing Minin’s dealings in illegal arms, exposing the shady business of arms dealing to the Western press.
They were to be transported by Moscow-based air cargo firm, Aviatrend, an outfit run by former Soviet test pilot and friend of Minin’s Valery Cherny.
The Ukrainian government decried the arrests, claiming the legally issued end-user certificates specified Burkina Faso – a country not under any arms sanctions -as the destination of the deadly cargo.
End user certificates, documents certifying the buyer of military equipment and what they plans to use the equipment for, were, and still are, one of the primary tools used by police authorities to enforce arms embargoes.
Luckily for arms dealers, corrupt governments could sell false end-user certificates for as cheap as $50,000.26 Once the weapons arrive in that country (in this case, Burkina Faso) they can be easily forwarded to embargoed nations.
Despite the protests, Minin was sentenced to two years in prison in 2002.27 Though his arrest was well publicized, I could not find any information regarding his imprisonment and presumably he was released in 2004.
Far more infamous is Viktor Bout, dubbed the ‘merchant of death’ by the human rights groups, government officials and journalists who have been tracking him for over the past 15 years.
Born in the Turkmen city of Dushanbe, Bout served in a military air transport regiment in the Soviet Air Force and acted as an advisor to Soviet client governments in Africa, spending two years in Mozambique.
Some commentators believe that Bout was working for the KGB in Angola when the Soviet Union fell apart in 1991.
After the collapse he bought three huge Antonov cargo planes sitting idle on Eastern European airfields for a measly $120,000 and almost immediately began moving arms.
Bout’s previous experience made him well placed to profit heavily from the rapidly developing business of selling ex-Warsaw Pact arms.
Arms traffickers inherited not only the Soviet Union's cold-war weapons supply but also its fully operational systems of clandestine transport, replete with money channels, people who understood how to use them and, most important, established shipping pipelines -what Robert Gelbard, assistant secretary of state for international narcotics and law enforcement under President Clinton, calls ""the 26 Peter Landesman.
Based in the free trade zone at Sharjah in the UAE, the lax import/export regulations allowed him to easily operate under a veil of secrecy.
As the 1990s wore on it became clear to Western intelligence agencies that Bout was a very big deal in the smuggling of weapons.
Unlike Minin, Bout procured arms from virtually every country once in the Warsaw Pact.
Arms he transported are suspected to have wound up in the majority of the conflict-ridden states depicted in the map above as well as everywhere else.
Oftentimes his planes carried other goods -flowers, frozen chicken, mining equipment, even UN peacekeepers -but that was simply a matter of keeping his planes from ever flying anywhere without a profit-making cargo.
These legitimate flights were often useful as a cover for his illicit and deadly activities.
In the interview he makes numerous veiled and not-so-veiled references to the support his trans-national criminal network received from the Russian government.
Russia has reacted angrily to all American attempts to extradite him to the United States for trial as an assault upon their own sovereignty.
Profiles of these two arms dealers paint pictures of complicated international criminal networks that distort the line between legal and illegal, state and non-state actors.
The difficult question for the Ukraine is the extent of government involvement in these deals.
Warsaw Pact countries left with huge military industrial complexes found weapons were their only real source of foreign hard currency.
If the buyers were under international arms embargoes they could be charged higher prices.
The last inventory was taken in 1992 when the independent Ukrainian military was formed; at that time its assets were valued at $89 billion.
The second inventory took four years, and it was not for lack of effort.
The commission’s head Lieutenant-General Oleksandr Ihnatenko complained bitterly of being blocked by opaque, selfserving bureaucracy and denied access to military installations.
When they finally finished their inventory they concluded $32 billion worth of military equipment had been stolen.
When you consider that in 2001 Ukraine’s total military budget was $550 million, this was not an insignificant sum.
Officially, the government of President Leonid Kuchma declined to comment.
As for the report it was swept under the carpet, and I have been unable to find it or the summary that was published in the Kiev newsletter.
The release of the tapes led to political fallout that helped derail Kuchma’s government and contributed to the Orange Revolution several years later that catapulted reformer Viktor Yushchenko to power in 2004.
Sadly for Ukrainians, Yushchenko’s rule did not lead to the fresh 34 Dave Gilson.
He dissolved his cabinet, many of them holdovers from the Kuchmaera, because of accusations of corruption and illegally dissolved parliament twice.
His approval rating stood at 10 per cent when he lost reelection last year to Viktor Yanukovych, widely seen as Kuchma’s protégé and a strong backer of big business.
To date no further inquiry has been held into illegal arms smuggling or political murders, and not a single conviction on charges of arms trafficking has been brought in the Ukraine in the past 20 years.
This essay has attempted to shine light on a shadowy business where most of those involved would be much happier without the scrutiny.
But the story is not one that should have come as a surprise to anyone familiar with the Ukraine in the 1990s.
Ukraine was turned into a vast military storehouse by Warsaw Pact defensive doctrine, and when she became independent she retained all of the equipment and soldiers on her soil.
When she converted this into a massive national armed forces out of all proportion of her ability to maintain it, the result was predictably chaotic.
The cynicism, economic and psychological depression and plutocratic conversion to capitalism all contributed to the disrespect for government property.
When the rest of the world was clamoring for weapons to settle long simmering conflicts, especially in Africa, the Ukraine was more than happy to oblige with its massive military surpluses.
What she needed, though, were men willing to secrete these weapons out of the post-Soviet bloc.
That is where the gunrunners, men like Leonid Minin and Viktor Bout, came in.
They were able to capitalize on the chaos in the Ukraine as well as the leftover Soviet “tubing” to send shipand plane-loads of arms wherever they were wanted.
Ministry of Defence and the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Russian and Ukrainian officials deny new allegations that nuclear warheads were lost in the 1990s,” WMD Insights, May 2006.
Sex Scandals in a Cold War Michelle Legassicke Political scandals can be understood in Theodore Lowi’s definition, that a scandal is corruption and the breach of virtue being exposed.
In Canadian history, the biggest ‘Sex Scandal’ was the Munsinger affair, an affair which involved an East German and two high level Conservatives, which occurred from 1959-61 but was not publically exposed until 1966.
A few years prior to the affair’s exposure, in 1964, the Presidential elections in the United States were rocked by the same-sex Jenkins scandal.
Both of these scandals threatened national security, as it was perceived in each country.
However, the focus in the Jenkins scandal was on the commitment of homosexual acts, while in Canada with the Munsinger scandal the act of covering up the affair was what transgressed public morality.
Therefore, although these scandals occurred in the same time period, they each became scandals for different reasons, illustrating the different public expectations of morality towards those holding political power in Canada and the United States.
By looking at two similar scandals, the Munsinger affair and the Jenkins scandal, similarities are there, however, more differences can be found in how these scandals were treated, and how they came to affect the political system.
In this way, a procedural scandal will always come after a substantive scandal; however, it is the procedural scandal that lengthens the coverage of a substantive scandal.
In some cases, the procedural scandal can be more controversial than the substantive scandal.
Lowi’s framework of substantive and procedural scandals can be applied to sex scandals in Canada and the United States.
Crucial to the understanding of political sex scandals is taking into consideration contemporary morality.
As such, something that was considered scandalous in the 1920s, would not garner public attention today.
On March 4, 1966 Lucien Cardin, then Justice Minister under the Pearson Government, was facing pressure by John Diefenbaker about whether or not the government was going to hold a public inquiry over the Spencer Scandal, which involved a Vancouver postal worker working as a low level Soviet spy.
This accusation “stunned the House of Commons,” as Cardin had publically revealed a scandal that had only been discussed in close circles in Ottawa.
The Affair involved Gerda Munsinger, an East German that escaped from the eastern zone in the early 1950s.
She arrived in Canada in August 1955, in which a divorce led her to apply under her ex-husbands last name rather than her maiden name Heseler.
Over the next four years, she would work her way up the social ladder, starting at the bottom, where her “path crossed those of figures in Montreal’s underworld” and culminating in her introduction to Pierre Sévigny in August 1959.12 According to Munsinger, she had an affair with both Pierre Sévigny, as well as George Hees then Minister of Trade and Commerce.
However, Munsinger’s relationship with Cabinet Minister Hees did not last very long.
They met at Ottawa’s Chateau Laurier Hotel and the relationship lasted only long enough for Munsinger to procure an invitation to the St.
The affair with Sévigny from September through December was the climax of the affair.
By January 1960 Sévigny had heard that Munsinger was “loose-lipped in reference to him” leading Sévigny to try and remove himself from the situation.
The 1960s were far more tumultuous in the United States than in Canada.
National security was defined broadly in the United States, as were actions that could put national security in jeopardy.
Sexual indiscretion, especially homosexual sexual indiscretion, was easily used as blackmail.
Furthermore, Cold War mentalities led to many who were involved in ‘deviant’ behaviour being associated with communists.
However, in the United States, political scandals affected the individuals involved, but they did not always affect the political party they were associated with.
The Republican campaign “learned of the incident and gave the story to United Press International ”, who were the first to break the News on October 14th it quickly became national news.
The press discovered that Jenkins was found engaging in homosexual activity with a resident of the YMCA.24 When the story broke as a national scandal, it was revealed that Jenkins had a previous arrest for the same offense.
Although the story shamed him and his family, and led to a subsequent emotional breakdown, hospitalization, and his departure from politics, “the revelation had no noticeable effect on the election” which Johnson ended up winning in a landslide victory.
It helped that once the story broke, Johnson who was surprised upon hearing the news distanced himself from Jenkins in hopes of protecting his political 16 Ibid., 93.
Politics & the Ritual of Public Shaming (Toronto: Key Publishing House, 2009), 115.
Sex, Scandal, and Corruption in American Politics from 1702 to the Present , 212.
Furthermore, in one of his first actions on the matter, Johnson asked immediately for Jenkins’ resignation which ended their 25-year working relationship.
The Republicans had hoped that by exposing the story, they could “portray the Johnson administration as “‘soft’ on communism”28 as he had a homosexual working for him, which was believed at the time to be a major security risk as well as a political liability.
The scandal involving Jenkins in the United States was discovered and exposed as a scandal immediately.
Abe Fortas did ask the editors of major papers to hold off until Jenkins had the opportunity to inform his family of the matter and resign, but the UPI thwarted this as they broke the story immediately.
The cover up of the affair would classify the affair as procedural scandal.
However, by hiding the scandal, it made it that much more sensational once it did come into the limelight.
There was also a substantive scandal, the fact that Sévigny and Hees slept with Munsinger, which could possibly jeopardize national security; however the scandalous event was the fact that there had been a possible breach in national security which was not publicized.
The Jenkins scandal did not involve any procedural scandals; it came to light almost immediately after it occurred, and Jenkins did not try to deny the charges.
An such, the Jenkins scandal was entirely a substantive scandal, where the only issue was the actual breaking of the social norm, in this case, committing homosexual acts while in a high political position.
Both of these scandals were equally viewed as national security scandals, albeit for different reasons.
In the case of the Munsinger scandal, the national security issue was that there was the possibility that Munsinger had been a spy, and even though this seemed highly unlikely, she was at the very least involved with many deplorable characters, including organized crime figures she had met in the late 1950s and 1960s.
In the Munsinger scandal, the focus was on Gerda as the national security threat, but the sex was not the primary issue, at least not in the initial investigation.
The affair came to light only because the RCMP were following Gerda after she had used both ministers as references for citizenship when she applied in June 1960.34 This led to suspicion resulting in the surveillance and discovery of the affairs.
The fear by the RCMP that Gerda could know national security information was one of the major issues in the scandal, there 26 Ibid., 129.
Concern with the ‘Sex’ part of the scandal only occurred once the story broke in 1966.
It was the general public, and their interest in the ‘sex scandal’, and their subsequent interest in Gerda that led to the popularization of the sexual nature of the scandal.
The Jenkins scandal focused solely on him, and the fact that he himself was a security threat.
The man he had sex with does not feature prominently in the unfolding of the scandal.
Although Lowi believes that norms might not cross countries, the 1960s provided a space in which external events caused Canada and the United States to have converging social norms.
The United States was just coming to terms with the Cuban missile crisis, which occurred only two years before the Jenkins scandal occurred.
The last thing that Johnson would want would be to seem soft on fighting communism, especially in an election year.
Canada was similarly trying to overcome Diefenbaker’s short falls in the view of Canada’s allies.
Cold war mentality was a key aspect to why the investigation into Munsinger began in the first place.
Both of these scandals broke at a time where the major parties in each respective country had tense relations.
After the 1963 Federal election, “Pearson and Diefenbaker were still at the head of their parties, and so long as the two remained the bitterness that dominated the daily struggle 35 Loftin, “Political Scandals”, 396.
The Descent of Canadian Politics from Macdonald to Chrétien (Toronto: HarperPerennialCanada, 2004), 209.
It was not a surprise to Diefenbaker that the Liberals knew of the affair that had occurred under his stewardship from August 1959 until early 1961.
On the front page of the Monday March 7th Globe and Mail is the first mention of Diefenbaker’s accusations that the liberals were blackmailing him with the affair.
However, the accusations of blackmailing did not receive considerable attention as the Canadian public finally had a sex scandal of their own to follow.
Favreau had approached Fulton, and hinted that the Liberals knew of the affair, and that it would be advisable for the Tories attacks in the House of Commons to stop.
Favreau pointed to this as evidence that the House of Commons blurt was not accidental.
In the case of Johnson, he was facing a staunch anti-communist conservative in an election.
In Johnson’s case, his presidential campaign was not affected, but the scandal ruined the political life of Jenkins.
Diefenbaker and the Progressive Conservatives received a lot of bad press because of the scandal and their handling of the initial affair, affecting the party politically for quite some time.
In Canada, the actual ‘sexual’ act was not seen as breaking any established social norms but rather it was the procedural method of hiding the scandal that broke the established norms that were expected of those in power.
Jenkins’ sexual act was seen as breaking the social norms, in that by committing homosexual acts, he did not have the same moral fiber and therefore could not be trusted in a position of political power.
Although both sex scandals affected in some way the political system, the manner in which they are connected is primarily in their status as national security issues and the fact that political opponents used both scandals as tools.
Otherwise, the substantive and procedural matters of the scandals differ greatly, as do the public norms that they broke.
These examples do show an ability to compare political scandals, at least on a few tangible similarities.
For many reasons, only some of which are discussed here, the Ottoman Empire was being picked apart by European imperial powers.
After the loss of Ottoman territories in the Balkan wars of 1912, the empire was made up of only Turkic and Arabic provinces.
The world changing events of World War One forcibly removed the Arab provinces from the Ottoman Empire, and it remained a solely Turkish state.
In Anatolia the modern nationstate of Turkey would emerge under the nationalist leadership of Mustafa Kemal, known as Ataturk.
For the first time in four hundred years the Arab peoples in Greater Syria and the Arabian Peninsula were separated politically, economically and culturally from Asia Minor.
The conclusion of this division resulted in the creation of European mandates which brought direct European rule to the region of Greater Syria for the first time.
The events of this period led to dramatic changes in the political, ideological and cultural life of the inhabitants of the region.
Intellectuals, urban notables, and rural leaders of varying importance within and outside of Syria had to re-form loyalties and ideologies to protect or further their own interests.
It is these changes and negotiations of identities that would shape Syria during the First World War and the ensuing French mandate.
The dominant ideology in the Ottoman Empire was Ottomanism, the idea that the best way to defend Islam from the encroachment of European Christian powers was to strengthen and support the Ottoman Empire.
Predominantly all of the leading political and religious leaders in the Ottoman Empire adhered to some form of Ottomanism or another prior to the First World War.
After the Young Turk Revolution of 1908 and the overthrow of Sultan ‘Abd al-Hamid II, many leading political figures turned to a new emerging ideology called Arabism that put emphasis on greater decentralisation within the Ottoman Empire in Arab provinces.
However, Arabist leaders got removed from positions of power by the Ottoman authorities, and when the Empire joined the First World War in November 1914, the most prominent positions were held by adherents to the Ottomanist ideology.
When the Ottoman Empire did lose control of the Arab provinces, Ottomanism was no longer valid, and Arabism and Arab nationalism was adopted as the leading political ideology.
Surprisingly, the most successful source of emerging Arab nationalism came from the rural province of the Hejaz, in the form of the Arab revolt led by the Sharif Husayn of the Hashemite family.
In this paper I argue that in the period prior to, during, and after the First World War, identities were reshaped and articulated, particularly among the elite, in the region of Greater Syria to meet immediate political and military needs.
I argue that regional identities clashed with Sharif Husayn and Emir Faysal’s Hashemite version of Arab nationalism and that no notion of panArab identity was agreed upon.
The fluid nature of identities in Syria during this period would lead to the development of a Syrian Arab nationalism, which included many regional and familial loyalties, to combat French colonial rule.
I will begin by examining the relationship between Ottomanism and Arabism and the latter’s dominance as a result of Ottoman defeat in the First World War.
Then I will expand on the Hashemite ideology of Pan-Arabism and the results of the Arab revolt.
Thirdly, Faysal’s Arab Kingdom and how it was unable to gain support from Syrian and Damascene notables will be analysed, showing how Arab Nationalists would eventually take over the leadership from Faysal until the French invasion in July 1920.
Lastly, I will look into the beginning of the French Mandate period and how Syrian national identity had become more solidified as Syrians combated French colonial power.
Ottomanism was expressed along religious lines as the only way to protect Islam from encroaching European powers.
Philip Khoury establishes that the Ottoman reforms in the late 19th century benefited an emerging bureaucratic landowning class who took power in Damascus and other Syrian cities.
The new Young Turk government, known as the Committee of Union and Progress , increased the use of the Turkish language throughout Arab provinces in the empire and Arab political and religious leaders disliked this wave of Turkification.
They blamed the Ottoman government for the weakening of Islam and thought that the strengthening of Arabs would strengthen Islam.
It did imply greater decentralisation away from Istanbul and, after the Young Turk Revolution, an end to policies of Turkification.
In this sense, Arabism prior to World War One cannot be seen as “Arab nationalism” as it worked within the context of the Ottoman Empire.
Its main tenant was that the Turkish government in Istanbul had lost the ability to properly defend Islam and that to reform Islam, further decentralisation of power had to occur.
Instead, Arabism, like Ottomanism, placed Islam and the continuation of an Islamic empire as the center of its concern.
Arabism had been promulgated among the ‘ulama and Arabist notables in urban centres in Syria, but Ottomanism remained the dominant ideology in the Arab provinces of the empire.
This was largely because the CUP sought to replace Arabist notables in Damascus and other Syrian urban centres with Ottomanist notables as they perceived Arabism as a threat to their power.
This led to Syria having predominantly Ottomanist notables in positions of power on the outbreak and during the war.
Although Arabism was unable to achieve its political goals prior to World War One, it would become a necessary ideology after the war because of the failure of the Ottoman state, and therefore Ottomanism, to defend the Arab provinces from European military domination.
During World War One, Syrians remained loyal to the Ottoman Empire and very few Syrian Arabists joined the Hashemite armies until the outcome of the war became evident.
The few active Syrian Arabists or emerging Syrian Arab nationalists that were in Syria fled the region or were imprisoned by the authorities.
They did not have a significant role in the Arab national movement that would occur.
An articulate form of Arab nationalism was promulgated by the Sharif Husayn of the Hejaz when he revolted against the Ottomans.
The fact that the Arab revolt occurred outside of Syria is one of the greatest ironies of the development of Arabism and Arab nationalism in Syria.
However, calling Sharif Husayn’s revolt as an “Arab revolt” is problematic as the choice to revolt was made mostly due to political reasons and the revolt was made up predominantly by Hejazi and Iraqi warriors.
As we will see, the Hashemites would come to spearhead the Arab nationalist movement and the transition from Arabism within an Ottoman framework to Arab nationalism and independence.
The Arab revolt has become aggrandised in the memorisation of Arab nationalism.
However, his framing of the Arab revolt as a purely nationalist movement is misleading and does not reflect the reality of the complicated set of identities and motives that existed on the ground.
Antonius presented the Arab national movement as inevitable, and as the Arab people waiting to overthrow their Ottoman overseers.
Also see C Ernest Dawn, “The Quality of Arab 85 the Hashemite revolt was initially framed along religious lines and did not lead to an upheaval in the Ottoman’s Arab provinces.
As the Sharif and Emir of Mecca, Husayn held one of the most prestigious political and religious positions within the Empire.
Husayn had originally strengthened his position by expressing loyalty to the Sultan and thus was able to beat out rival families and clans with Ottoman support.
He legitimated his post by his ability to control the Bedouin tribes and thus protect the pilgrimage route to Mecca and Medina.
He and his family were fully entrenched in Ottomanism, believing the Sultan and the Empire were the best way to protect and further Islam.
Husayn became at odds with the Turkish authorities in Istanbul and their policies of secularisation, centralisation and Turkification.
At the beginning of the war Husayn was under the threat of losing his position as Emir and Sharif of Mecca by either Turkish or foreign powers.
He was a late comer to Arabism and Arab nationalism, and began negotiating with Arab nationalists from Syria and with British forces fighting the Ottomans.
After preparations were made and the ambiguous Husayn-McMahon correspondence of 1915 was agreed to, Husayn was ready to launch his revolt.
The ideology of the Arab revolt did not articulate Arab independence over Arabism.
The Ottoman government had lost its legitimacy because it could not defend Islam, and Arab independence was not a given.
Therefore, Arabs had to take control of the responsibility of protecting Islam and governing the caliphate.
Arab independence was a by-product of the results of the war, not an inherent objective of the Arab revolt.
The objectives and goals of the revolt were framed along protecting Islam, not realising Arab nationalist aspirations.
They were universalist Caliphal statements specifying the usurpation by the Ottomans of the Caliphate from its rightful holders – not the Arabs, but the holy family of Nationalism,” in Arab Nation, Arab Nationalism, edited by Derek Hopwood and Al-Azmeh, “Nationalism and the Arabs,” in Arab Nation, Arab Nationalism, edited by Derek Hopwood, for more interpretation on Antonius’ work.
The revolt would later take on a pan-Arab ideology, culminating in the creation of the Arab kingdom of Syria under Faysal.
As successful as the Arab revolt was militarily, it did not achieve the results that its adherents and supporters, British military planners in particular, wanted it to.
Even though identities across Syria were being reformed, regional loyalties to families, clans, tribes or cities still dominated the fluid negotiation of identities.
The Arab armies were made up predominately by Hejazi’s and had minimal Syrian and Palestinian membership because the pan-Arab sentiment did not take hold across Greater Syria.
Therefore, writers such as Al-Azmeh and Dawn argue that the Arab Revolt was indeed not an Arab revolt, but a Hashemite revolt.
The decision to revolt was made because of political reasons by the Sharif Husayn and it was legitimated by appealing to Islamic tradition and continuity.
See the first and third chapter of his book for expansion of his argument about origin and ideological nature of the Arab revolt.
However, they were pushed aside by Faysal’s supporters and when Faysal set up a government these Ottomanist notables lost their traditional seats of power.
Emir Faysal came to power because he led the northern Arab armies and because British and commonwealth forces were able to militarily defeat Turkish forces in Syria.
Unfortunately for Faysal’s new government, the Syrians did not want to be ruled by a Hashemite from the Hejaz, which was considered a backwater province of the Arab world.
He faced prejudice from Syrian notables and even nationalist supporters, and had to learn the complexities of Damascene political life.
Faysal’s government was set up on the same premise of how the Ottomans had ruled, and as Sami Zubaida describes it, most Middle Eastern states had been ruled.
Nevertheless, he formed a government consisting of Hejazi and Iraqi members of his Arab army, whom he owed favours to, as well as pre-war Arab nationalists.
As the war turned for the worse for the Ottomans, the Syrian political elite had to change from Ottomanism to Arabism, as Ottomanism was no longer a valid ideology to legitimate political power.
For notables who had integrated with the Turkic ruling class this was a hard turnover to do.
It was exasperated because of the exile or forced removal of Arabist notables prior to and during the war.
These Arabist notables and Arab nationalist intellectuals would have a prominent role in Faysal’s new government, much to the chagrin of the traditional Ottomanist notables.
Faysal gave government positions to his supporters and he had to greatly increase the bureaucracy to create enough posts.
The first king of Syria,” in The Origins of Syrian Nationhood: Histories, pioneers and identity, edited by Adel Bashara , 255.
By and large, Faysal was unable to gain the international backing he would have needed to protect the young Arab state.
This was largely due to French war aims to gain Syria as a prize for its sacrifice during the war and Britain’s withdrawal of support for Faysal.
Nevertheless, he devoted most of his efforts to obtaining British support.
First he approached the Zionists to discuss Jewish immigration in Palestine.
Prior to his arrival in Damascus, Faysal met with Chaim Weizmann, the president of the Zionist delegation in Palestine, on June 4 1918.
The meeting went well and the relationship between the two parties was benevolent, although no actual agreement was made.
Faysal was aware of the strength that the Zionist community had in lobbying the British authorities, and so wished to gain an ally to aid him in acquiring further British support.
They later reached an agreement in January 1919 that agreed to increased Jewish immigration, but the question of allowing a Jewish national homeland was still on the table for negotiation.
While this agreement put Faysal in a positive light to British sympathisers, it knocked his reputation down in Syria.
Indeed, “Faysal had miscalculated the Palestinian reaction” as Palestinians at this time were very aware of the growing Jewish population in Palestine and Zionist plans to create a Jewish state.
The reaction towards the Faysal-Weizmann agreement is understandable considering the emergence of Arab nationalism and its concentration on protecting the traditional role of Islam in Arab speaking provinces.
The result was greater anti-Zionist sentiment and agitation in Syria and Palestine, as well as ruining any credibility Faysal could have had with the British as a result of signing the agreement.
This incident reflected the reality of identities and power on the ground in Greater Syria.
It appears that Faysal’s interpretation of the Arab nation differed from conceptions of the Arab nation held by Syrian and Palestinian nationalists.
In Paris, Faysal was unable to defeat the French diplomatically, and the French coveted his Syrian state.
The French perceived Faysal to be a British puppet, and that Britain would still have influence in the region if Faysal remained in power.
It had exhausted its diplomatic resources and essentially made too many promises to many different parties.
The Syrian Congress, which had been elected earlier in 1919 and first convened on June 6th, was dominated by Arab nationalists.
Most of these nationalists were members of al-Fatat, the Young Arab Society, and part of its front party called the Istiqlal party.
Al-Fatat was an Arab nationalist organisation that had been founded prior to the war in 1909 in Paris.
These Arab nationalists in the Syrian Congress declared Greater Syria, which included Palestine, the Independent Kingdom of Syria on March 8 1920, and Faysal was declared it’s King.
Fearing that the situation could get worse and with British forces out of the region, France prepared to send in an army.
After the conference at San Remo in April 1920, France’s mandate was set up under international law and by mid-July French troops entered Syria.
The only monumental battle, the battle of Maysalun, occurred on July 24th with Faysal’s minister of war, Yusuf al-Azmah, leading a small and ineffective Syrian army against the French.
On the way to Syrian nationalism in the shade of Islam and Arabism,” in The Origins of Syrian Nationhood: Histories, pioneers and identity, edited by Adel Bashara, 136. 90 cultural and religious minorities and played regional elites off of each other to gain loyalty and stability.
The French government was pushed to acquire the Syrian mandate because of politics within France.
Thus the French government was willing to invest time, energy and military might to hold onto Syria despite the fact that it was an economic drain.
The Ottoman Empire and Emir Faysal’s Arab Kingdom were legitimated by their claim to represent and protect Islam and Arabs respectively.
The French had no legitimising claim among the Syrian populace, and regional identities would, to an extent, combine with a new Syrian identity to resist French occupation.
After the French set up control in Syria, they divided the region into different administrative territories.
Lebanon region from Greater Syria and gave preference to the Christian Maronite population, which France had supported during the 19th century.
They continued this policy of divide and conquer in the rest of Syria, favouring the mountainous minorities such as the Maronites, Alawites and Druzes.
They also ruled through the traditional Ottoman notable system, with the notables playing the role of mediator between the ruler and the people.
Ironically, the Alawite and Druze minorities would be staunch resisters to the French mandate.
Led by Shaykh Salih al-‘Ali, the resistance movement was not put down until late 1921.62 Resistance led by Ibrahim Hananu also came from the countryside surrounding Aleppo, which would be known as the Hananu revolt.
However, it was the rural Druze resistance in the southern Hawran region which would lead to the Syrian Revolt of 19251927.64 Once again it was not Syrian nationalists in Damascus that would lead nationalist mobilisation, but it was external factors that would allow for nationalism to be used for political mobilisation.
The revolt would grow, culminating with resistance in the cities, and only after two years of military intervention were the French able to end the revolt.
Although the Syrian revolt was ultimately unsuccessful, it would live on in Syrian nationalist discourse as a nationalist movement for independence.
This removed whatever legitimacy the French might have had in governing Syria and inspired nationalist sentiment.
Nonetheless, the development of Arab consciousness prior to and during the First World War, and the strength of a distinct regional Syrian identity, would expand to create a Syrian national identity during the mandate period.
The shift from Ottomanism to Arabism came slowly as a reaction towards increasing Turkification and Ottoman failures against European powers in protecting and furthering Islam.
Damascene notables and Islamic scholars began to associate themselves with Arabism, but this brought on Ottoman persecution of Arabist politicians.
Therefore, Arab nationalism in Syria was put on hold until the Arab, or Hashemite, revolt of 1916-1918, which led to the creation of the Arab kingdom of Syria under Emir Faysal.
While Faysal espoused a clearly nationalist agenda, and his government was made up predominantly of Arab nationalists, his ideas of pan-Arabism were not accepted in Syria.
Faysal and his Hejazi and Iraqi followers were deemed outsiders and Faysal’s actions, particularly the debacle of the Faysal-Weizmann agreement, proved that his form of Arab national identity, or pan-Arab identity, was not compatible with the strong Syrian regional identities.
Regardless, it was the Arab nationalists who took control of Faysal and his government, and the French quickly acted to end the short lived kingdom.
The multiple different groups within Syria would all resent French colonial rule, and the fluidity of identities would allow them to combat French rule and meld into a loose identification with the Syrian nation.
It is this identification that would be the outcome of this turbulent time in Syrian history, and this Syrian identity would shape modern Syrian nationalism.
On the way to Syrian nationalism in the shade of Islam and Arabism,” in The Origins of Syrian Nationhood: Histories, pioneers and identity, edited by Adel Bashara, 123.
State, Power, and Politics in the Making of the Modern Middle East, 3rd edition.
