The Soviet Union was communist and tried to spread communism around the world.
Under Soviet communism, the government owned everything and people had fewer rights.
The United States and the Soviet Union competed for more power in countries all over the world including in Latin America — leading to a showdown in Cuba.
There were many miscalculations and secret communications and miscommunications.
However, the ﬁnal decisions came mostly from leaders at the White House and at the Kremlin in Moscow.
In April 1962, the U.S had tried to invade Cuba during the Bay of Pigs invasion.
It failed, and did not drive Cuban premier Fidel Castro from power in Cuba.
Afterward, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Castro.
Khrushchev decided to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to stop any future invasion attempt.
Construction began, and the United States soon discovered that Soviet bombers and other weapons were being brought into Cuba.
On September 4, 1962, President Kennedy issued a public warning against these actions.
Five weeks later, on October 14, a United States U–2 spy aircraft ﬂying above Cuba took pictures clearly showing that ballistic nuclear missiles sites were being built.
Send warnings to Cuba President Kennedy had meetings at the White House.
Some of his advisers wanted an air strike to destroy the missile sites, followed by a United States invasion of Cuba.
Other Kennedy advisors wanted just to send warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The president decided to order that Soviet ships would not be allowed to bring weapons to Cuba.
On October 22, Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev demanding that all Soviet weapons be taken out of Cuba.
The president also went on television that evening to inform Americans of the developments in Cuba.
Took a dramatic turn On October 24, Khrushchev answered Kennedy and said that Soviet ships would keep coming to Cuba.
However, on October 24 and 25, some Soviet ships turned back from entering Cuba.
Others were stopped by United States Navy ships and searched, but no weapons were found.
Meanwhile, more U-2 ﬂights over Cuba showed the Soviet missile sites were almost ready.
ABC News correspondent John Scali reported to the White House that a Soviet agent told him that the Soviets would remove their missiles from Cuba if the United States promised not to invade the island.
That night Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message. saying that he was worried about a nuclear war.
Khrushchev wrote, ""Let us not only relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot.
However, the next day, October 27, Khrushchev sent another message, this time demanding that the United States remove United States missiles from Turkey.
That same day, a United States U–2 jet was shot down over Cuba and the pilot was killed.
That night Kennedy decided to ignore the second message from Khrushchev and only respond to the ﬁrst one.
He proposed steps for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba under supervision of the United Nations.
The crisis was over Attorney General Robert Kennedy then met secretly with the Soviet ambassador to the United States.
He said the United States was planning to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
The next morning, October 28, Khrushchev announced that Soviet missiles would be removed from Cuba.
The crisis was over, and United States missiles were removed from Turkey in 1963.
The Cuban missile crisis strengthened Kennedy’s image around the world.
It also led to two other important changes that had an effect on the Cold War.
Second, having been so close to a nuclear war, both superpowers began to talk about reducing the number of nuclear weapons.
Other Kennedy advisers wanted just to send warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
On October 24, Khrushchev answered Kennedy and said that Soviet ships would keep coming to Cuba.
They should never be produced again and all existing weapons should be destroyed.
They are a drastic measure and production of nuclear weapons should be reduced.
He gives an important example of how communication between the United States and the Soviet Union was not clear.
He was an important messenger to the president and conveyed Khrushchev's views on nuclear war.
He was responsible for improving communication between the Soviets and the United States during the crisis.
