Few people under the age of Charles and his family once 65 realize just how close the again moved this time to world came to a full-on nuclear Homestead Air Base in southern war during October 1962.
Even fewer people to all intercepted telephone realize that one of our own communications.
All strategic Coke County citizens, Luis communication was recorded Charles, was right in the middle and transcribed and if of this tense time. important, sent immediately to Luis Charles wasn’t born and the Pentagon.
They were raised in Coke County, but listening to a war in real time moved his family to Bronte in 1974.
Charles joined the Fulgencio Batista seized power as dictator over Cuba in Air Force in 1956 and served as 1952.
The revolution’s leader Fidel Castro became Prime Minister of Cuba and served Airman 1st Class working as a in that capacity until 1976 when his title changed to President.
After his businesses of all sizes were nationalized and state socialist reforms were implemented. discharge in 1960, he moved In April 1961, United States sponsored Cuban exiles unsuccessfully attempted to back to Texas.
Concerned about time, he helped his dad working a United States invasion of Cuba, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, in May 1962, asked on a ranch near Fort Stockton.
Cuban President Fidel Castro if the Soviets could help defend Cuba by In July of 1961, he came to San placing missile installations in Cuba.
Air Force Pilot Richard Heyser flies a U2 spyplane over stopped in to a barber shop in Cuba and takes photos of Russian SS-4 medium-range missilescapable of the old Naylor Hotel for a delivering nuclear warheads within a 1,200 mile radius. haircut, but was refused service President John F Kennedy convenes ExComm, a group of due to his race.
Angered by this senior advisors, to discuss the Soviet missiles and U S. options. treatment, he went straight to More photos of the missile sites are analyzed and show that the recruiting office and joined Cuba also has long-range Soviet SS-5 missiles.
Life began moving at a very ExComm is told that the installation of the SS-4 missiles is rapid pace after this decision. nearly complete.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy keeps a previously He was sent to Missouri for his scheduled meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, but does second round of basic training. not mention the missiles.
Gromyko tells Kennedy that the only help the Soviet Union is giving to Cuba is assistance growing crops and missiles that are only Charles was able to “test out” for defense. on a Spanish course and received a certificate giving him Ex-Comm meets and discusses sending United States ships to Cuba to prevent Soviet ships from reaching the island.
They are careful to call it a a Military Occupational Skill as a Spanish Linguist.
Luis Charles shown in Turkey on the shores of the Sea of Izmit. quarantine since a blockade is considered an act of war.
He was assigned to Morse Code and knew if mistakes were After meeting all day the previous day, Robert Kennedy tells the telephone on his back.
President Kennedy has school on a base near Peabody, made, war for the United States could unbelievable stress, Charles hit been keeping all appointments on his schedule to avoid speculation.
He travels Massachusetts, and given $85 to result. the deck one night and began to Chicago for meetings with/for Mayor Daley, but after the first day announces get there.
He and his wife, As a member of the 18th belly crawling to shelter after he has a cold so that he can return to Washington to deal with the crisis.
Nina, arrived in style in his Airborne and the Army mistaking a blown transformer Attorney and advisor to the president, Ted Sorenson, writes British-made Morris Minor Intelligence Service, Charles was for a bomb.
The car got 31 also one of those who would instructions with Nina that if he Soviets have missiles in Cuba that are pointed at the United States will be an important miles to the gallon and gas was parachute into Cuba if didn’t come home, she needed moment in American history and one of the most frightening speeches a only 31 cents per gallon.
He President Kennedy chose that president ever gives. to get a bus ticket to San Angelo. was in Massachusetts only five route of action.
For the tense Following his discharge in President Kennedy addresses the nation live on television days before he was given only two weeks in October 1962, 1965, Charles brought his family stations across the country to inform Americans that missiles have been 24 hours to report to Fort these men stayed with their discovered in Cuba.
Luis and Nina’s quarantine around Cuba and orders the Soviets to remove the missiles.
He Campbell, Kentucky, to use his aircraft, armed and ready to little family had grown to four warns the United States will retaliate if any Soviet missile is launched from Cuba.
All experience with communication invade Cuba at Kennedy’s with the additions of son Terry United States military forces worldwide ordered to go to DEFCON 3, a heightened equipment.
Charles, as a in November 1962 and daughter state of nuclear alert. revolution and tensions communications specialist, Yvonne in December 1963.
He Soviet ships carrying military equipment to Cuba reverse following the “Bay of Pigs”, would parachute with a portable course as they near the quarantine zone.
Saying that the United States will not intimidate the Soviets, Khrushchev refuses to remove the missiles from Cuba.
He declares the blockade is an act of aggression and accuses Kennedy of putting the world at risk of a nuclear war by ordering the quarantine.
United States forces go to DEFCON 2 the highest alert status short of war.
CIA reports SS-4 missiles are ready to fire and President Kennedy considers invasion of Cuba.
Making no progress with his communications with Khrushchev, Kennedy orders flights over Cuba to be increased from once to twice per day.
Pilots also prepare to begin night flights as the United States monitors the Cuban missiles.
A letter from Khrushchev offers to dismantle sites if U.S. pledges not to invade Cuba.
Concerned that the Soviets may not remove the missiles from Cuba, Ex-Comm begins to discuss plans to invade Cuba to take control of the missiles.
Doing this would most likely result in war. Khrushchev now demands removal of United States missile sites in Turkey.
An American reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba, and a United States invasion force was readied in Florida.
The 35-year-old pilot of the downed plane, Major Rudolf Anderson, is considered the sole United States combat casualty of the Cuban missile crisis.
To make matters more precarious, American pilot Charles Maultsby gets lost flying a mission to Alaska and ends up in Soviet airspace.
An American jet rescues him and leads him back to the United States before the Soviets can shoot his plane down.
Kennedy publicly offers to end blockade and not invade Cuba if Soviets withdraw missiles.
Privately, Kennedy also agrees to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
Khrushchev gives a speech on Radio Moscow and says that he The uniforms Charles wore during his military career.
The missiles will be removed, Cuba will not be invaded, and the crisis comes to an end.
Army Intelligence Service, 18th Airborne, Specialist 5th Class, and Air Force.
