Considering its Place in Cold War History PUBLIC POLICY DEBATE IN THE CLASSROOM Choices for the 21st Century Education Project A program of the Thomas J Watson Jr.
Beginning in 1986, Blight Susan Graseck has led a research effort focused on the Cuban missile crisis using a “critical oral history” approach that brings together the policymakers, the documents, and the Curriculum Developer historians to examine the events at a moment in history.
Hundreds of hours of Andy Blackadar conferences and interviews involving Cuban, Soviet, and American officials have Coordinator of provided Blight with unique insights into U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations and the decisionmaking that took place during the missile crisis of October, 1962.
Considering its Place in Cold War History owes Megan Secatore its content and approach to the work of James G Blight and his colleagues.
Professional Development This curriculum unit also draws on an earlier text published by the Choices for the Coordinator 21st Century Education Project.
C HOICES was established to help citizens think constructively about foreign policy issues, to improve participatory citizenship skills, and to encourage public judgment on policy priorities.
Permission is granted to duplicate and distribute the student text for classroom use with appropriate credit given.
VINCENT AND Bridgetown THE GRENADINES Kingstown GUATEMALA HONDURAS Caribbean Sea GRENADA St.
O CTOBER 16, 1962 O n October 16, 1962, President John F Kennedy was confronted with an earth-shattering revelation: the Soviet Union had placed missiles capable of Khrushchev the previous year in an effort to improve relations between the two nuclear powers but with little success.
Khrushchev, convinced that the Soviet carrying nuclear weapons on the island of Cuba, just Union was an ascendant power and emboldened by ninety miles from the United States. advances in Soviet rocket technology, saw little reaTensions between the Soviet Union and the son for compromise.
For Nonetheless, Khrushchev had promised to do every United States president since Truman, this ideological nothing that might affect the upcoming United States elections. standoff—known as the Cold War—had shaped forFurthermore, he had promised not to place offensive eign and domestic policy.
Now Kennedy wondered what months about Soviet intentions toward West Berlin Khrushchev was doing and how he should respond. and in Southeast Asia, but this was much closer to home.
Kennedy realized that, if launched, these mis“…the Cold War not be won in Latin siles could hit the United States in minutes.
War seemed about to boil over. —President John F Kennedy Cuba presented a thorny problem for the president.
Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, welcomed in the In this unit, you will explore the circumstances United States with open arms just a few years before, had that brought the United States to the brink of nuclear recently aligned himself with the Soviet Union. war in 1962.
To understand this, you will explore the Feelings were running high against Castro and history of United States relations with Cuba—the country to Cuba in the United States.
Many Americans felt that challenge most boldly United States domination of the CaribCastro’s revolution was a rejection of the United States effort bean and Central America.
The reading reviews the to bring American skills and values to the region.
The history of United States involvement in the region from the island had become a flashpoint for United States anxiety about mid-1800s to the early 1940s and focuses on the early the world.
In an attempt to overthrow Castro, Cold War period and Castro’s rise to power.
You then Kennedy had authorized a CIA-sponsored invasion of grapple with the same question President Kennedy Cuba in 1961.
An epilogue reviews U.S.-CuThe president had met with Soviet leader Nikita ban relations since the missile crisis.
John F Kennedy Library United States experts first learned of Soviet missile installations in Cuba by examining this reconnaisance photograph.
The size and strength of the United of Florida to the coast of Venezuela.
Sugar cane became the most profitable crop of the islands, and African slaves were imported to work on huge planStates have cast an enormous shadow over the small tations. states of the region.
The people of the Caribbean and Political independence came very slowly to the Central America have often found themselves swept region.
A successful slave revolt in Haiti defeated the up in the currents of United States history.
French colonial powers in 1804, but for much of the Caribbean, independence was not achieved until the How did the Caribbean and Central America twentieth century.
Their small size and economic coffee, sugar, and other products of the tropics, weakness left them vulnerable to pressures from their American businessmen moved quickly to set up huge larger neighbors, especially the United States. plantations in the Caribbean and Central America.
Many believed that the values of began to worry United States leaders after World War II, the American democracy and individual liberty were United States provided large amounts of foreign aid destined to sweep across the continent and perhaps to support friendly governments in the region. the entire Western Hemisphere.
United States was part of God’s plan to spread the European explorers made their first contact with American experiment in self-government. the New World in the Caribbean and Central America.
Manifest Destiny served as a guiding principle From the beginning, the encounter favored the Euroof United States foreign policy during the Mexican-American peans.
In Central America, the efforts of the Spanish War, which was ignited in 1846 by a dispute over the empire to colonize the region met resistance from a boundary of Texas.
After United States forces captured Mexico well-organized society dominated by Mayan culture.
City the following year, Mexico was forced to give up By 1543, however, the Spanish had imposed control, not only its claims to Texas but also territories that uniting an area from what is today southern Mexico now comprise the American Southwest and Califorto Panama under a single jurisdiction. nia.
The peace settlement with Mexico, however, did In 1823, after the Spanish empire crumbled in not satisfy some in Washington.
Twelve of fifty-two Mexico and South America, the United Provinces of senators ultimately opposed the treaty, arguing that Central America was formed.
The federation disintethe United States should annex all of Mexico. grated by 1838, giving rise to the independent states By the mid-1800s, the present boundaries of the of Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador, and United States had been drawn except for Alaska and Guatemala.
With expansion to the west closed, attention country, broke away from Colombia in 1903.) turned toward the Caribbean and Central America.
In In the Caribbean, Spain overwhelmed the native the years leading up to the Civil War, Southerners populations in the 1500s.
In the next two centuries, the sought to expand the plantation system to Cuba and British, French, and Dutch joined the Spanish in coloNicaragua, and in the process strengthen their posinizing the cluster of islands that stretches from the tip tion against the North.
In 1854, President Franknew revolt began in 1895, American sympathies again lin Pierce expressed the United States desire to obtain Cuba went out to the Cubans fighting for independence. from Spain.
Pierce’s declaration, known as the Ostend Martí returned to Cuba and was killed in battle.
Spanish efforts sonable right to buy Cuba for a fair price or even use to crush the rebellion in 1896 raised the stakes further. force if the offer were refused.
A Spanish army of 200,000 men attacked villages where support for the revolt was strong and herded AN AMERICAN EMPIRE hundreds of thousands of peasants into fortified towns.
The Spanish also burned crops and slaughThe North’s victory in the Civil War put an end tered thousands of farm animals in hopes of to the South’s plans of expansion and spurred on the destroying the roots of the uprising. emergence of the United States as an industrial giant.
The late nineteenth century was also a time of By 1898, the war in Cuba had stalemated.
Spanish held the cities while the Cuban rebels conTheir colonial empires in Asia and Africa required trolled the countryside.
Britain maintained the the United States inflamed the public with details of largest navy during the 1800s, but Germany was rapSpanish brutality.
When the U.S. nations would extend their struggle to the Western battleship Maine exploded mysteriously in Havana Hemisphere. harbor in February 1898, the press rushed to blame the Spanish.
Even though Spain was The Monroe Doctrine had long served as a warnready to accept United States demands, he asked Congress to ing for Europeans to stay out of the Americas.
President James Monroe originally proclaimed it in McKinley’s war goals, however, differed from 1823, the United States depended on Britain to enforce the popular call to intervene on the side of Cuban inthe policy.
McKinley believed that the United States British settlements in Central America and a boundshould take military action to end the conflict and ary dispute between Venezuela and the British colony establish a stable government.
But Congress feared of Guiana raised United States concerns about British plans. that McKinley’s real intent was to make Cuba a perMoreover, the French and Germans were seeking to manent United States possession.
While giving President increase their influence in the Caribbean and Central McKinley the authority to enter the war in 1898, ConAmerica. gress also passed an amendment requiring the United Among the colonial powers of Europe, the States to grant Cuba self-government once the SpanUnited States most resented Spain.
The Spanish-American War lasted only four Cuban attempts to overthrow Spain’s control months and ended with a decisive victory for the attracted widespread support among Americans durUnited States.
As Americans quickly graph lines were built, finances reorganized, schools discovered, governing an empire was much more difopened, sanitation improved, and yellow fever ficult than conquering one.
At the same time, United States officials sought conclusion of the Spanish-American War failed to lay to create a political system that would closely follow the foundation for a peaceful future.
Voting rights were given to had already invested thirty years of their lives into the only 5 percent of Cuba’s population.
Nonetheless, independence movement when United States troops arrived in elections in 1900 produced an assembly that strongly 1898.
Their struggle had united supporters of indefavored immediate independence for Cuba.
As might be McKinley administration now found itself in a quanexpected, Cuban nationalists were deeply disapdary.
White House policymakers wanted to protect pointed when the United States negotiated an end to United States business and security interests in Cuba, but the Spanish rule without their participation.
Many felt American public expected Washington to establish a they had merely traded one colonial power for anstrong democratic government on the island. other.
The United States provided benefits that the CuUnited States concerns about the future of Cuba were ulbans could not have provided for themselves. timately settled but in Washington rather than Cuba.
The United States was also alTheodore Roosevelt set the stage for increased lowed to build a naval base on the southeastern tip of United States involvement during his State of the Union adthe island at Guantanamo Bay.
In what came to be known amendment sparked angry demonstrations and proas the Roosevelt Corollary, he warned that the United tests in Cuba, but the McKinley administration States would act as an “international police power” to insisted that the Platt Amendment was the price Cumaintain stability in the Western Hemisphere. bans would have to pay for ending the United States military Roosevelt soon put his pledge into practice, sending occupation of their island.
In 1901, the amendment United States troops to Cuba in 1906 after supporters of the passed the Cuban assembly by one vote.
By World War I raised new concerns about the se1928, American companies produced 75 percent of curity of the Caribbean and Central America.
Cubans who commander of the United States Marine Corps was convinced had fought in the independence struggle found few that Germany had provoked chaos in Haiti and Santo opportunities in an economy dominated by AmeriDomingo in order to cans and recent immigrants from Spain.
President to resent the alliance between foreign businesses Woodrow Wilson ordered troops into the two counand wealthy Cuban plantation owners.
Originally, United States troops landed in 1910 The American experience in Cuba proved to be to back a proUnited States government.
The force soon grew the first of many United States involvements in the Caribbean to 3,000 soldiers, and the Nicaraguan government inand Central America.
The had steadily grown since the United States had exUnited States committed 6,000 soldiers against a small panded across the continent to the Pacific Ocean in rebel army led by Augusto César Sandino, and eigh1848.
Events during the Spanish-American War had teen United States warplanes conducted history’s first demonstrated the military importance of a canal.
The guerrillas, however, example, the United States cruiser Oregon had taken nearly ten moved too quickly and the terrain proved too difficult weeks to round Cape Horn and join the battle against for the Americans to gain a decisive victory.
Frusthe Spanish navy. trated, the United States withdrew its forces in 1933.
The Panama Canal drew the United States closer Before leaving, the Americans set up the Nicaraguan to the Caribbean and Central America.
The force soon economic and military power increased in the first became the private army of its commander, Anastasio decades of the 1900s, United States leaders began to view the Somoza.
By 1937, Somoza had toppled Nicaragua’s elected leader and installed himself as president.
With control of the National Guard, Somoza intimidated his opponents and built the framework of a family dynasty that ran Nicaragua until 1979.
The American presence in the Caribbean and Central America during the early 1900s was more economic than military.
The United Fruit Company, operating banana plantations throughout the region, President Theodore Roosevelt is depicted as “the world’s constable.” became the largest agricultural enterprise in the world.
Along with its rival, Standard Fruit, the tion of export crops, and created thousands of jobs. company built highways, railroads, ports, and comTransportation and communication improvements munications facilities.
Schools, hospitals, and housing opened up new possibilities for development.
Meanwere constructed for the workers. while, United States officials worked toward establishing American businesses linked the economies of sound financial institutions and effective government. the region to the outside world, boosted the producAt the same time, the United States presence had negative UNITED FRUIT COMPANY The story of the United Fruit Company is intertwined with the history of Central America and the Caribbean.
The company originated in the late 1800s, a time when leaders of the region were seeking to create new economic links with the outside world.
In Costa Rica, the government offered an American businessman, Minor Keith, 800,000 acres to build a railroad from the capital to the Atlantic Ocean.
Keith planted bananas on much of his land and merged with another trading firm to form the United Fruit Company in 1899.
United Fruit constructed railroads and port facilities up and down the Caribbean coast of Central America.
United Fruit soon became known as “The Octopus” for its domination of much of Central America and the Caribbean.
By the 1920s, the company not only controlled the rail system, ports, and communications of the region, but also played an important role in political affairs.
In Honduras, presidents could not be elected without United Fruit support, while in Guatemala the government relied on the company for loans.
During the 1970s, banana-producing countries tried to assert their economic independence.
They complained that exporting countries received only 17 cents of every dollar spent on bananas and demanded a greater share of the profits.
In response, United Brands joined with other exporting giants in threatening to close down their operations.
Countries in the region recognized that they could not afford to lose markets for their products in North America.
The emergence of new industries in the Caribbean and Central America has loosened the economic hold of Chiquita Brands International (the successor of United Brands), but the company remains a powerful force to this day.
American companies in the Caribbean a pound to half a cent pushed millions of Cubans into and Central America meddled in local politics and desperate poverty. relied on the United States military to support their interests.
In Cuba, 60 percent of the property in the countryside How did President Franklin D Roosevelt change belonged to Americans by 1905.
Under duras, an American commanded the army, and the his “Good Neighbor Policy,” Roosevelt repealed the United States dollar was legal currency.
Economic developPlatt Amendment, offered government loans to Latin ment often proved imbalanced and smothered local American countries, and pledged not to intervene in initiative.
The policy withstood a major challenge in railroads connected the plantations to Caribbean ports 1938, when Mexico took over the property of Ameribut did not serve national capitals.
Despite pressure export crops left countries dependent on a single from business interests to send in troops, Roosevelt product.
During the Depression of the 1930s, for exnegotiated a settlement with Mexico that provided ample, a fall in the price of Cuban sugar from 22 cents payment to the oil companies.
The explosion of atomic Soviets remained in Eastern Europe and imposed their rule.
United States leaders feared that the Soviets would attempt to extend communist rule over the entire conbombs over Japan and the conclusion of the war in tinent.
Containing the influence of the Soviet Union 1945 left the United States the most powerful country and the spread of communism became the top prioron earth.
In March 1947, President ever, the United States faced a new challenge from its Truman announced his intent to “support free peoples former ally, the Soviet Union.
Despite their enormous who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed war losses, the Soviets had built up an army of twelve minorities or by outside pressure.” million soldiers to defeat Nazi Germany.
Known as the Truman Doctrine, the policy statement was linked to a request to Congress for military What did Winston Churchill mean by the “Iron aid to Greece and Turkey.
By February 1946, Stalin prewas increasingly viewed as a serious menace. dicted that the conflict between communism and capitalism would lead to a new war.
British Prime Minister Winston The Truman Doctrine rested on two expensive Churchill had warned his United States allies about the Soviet United States commitments.
In April 1948, Congress approved threat even while World War II was raging.
In 1946, the European Recovery Program after lengthy debate. after losing the prime minister’s post, he became more Better known as the Marshall Plan, the program was convinced that Stalin was seeking to divide Europe in an economic aid package that invested $12. billion two.
In March, Churchill presented his concerns to an into the reconstrucAmerican audience in Fulton, Missouri, that included tion of sixteen European states from 1948 to 1952. a sympathetic President Harry Truman.
Although they were invited to participate, the Soviets refused United States assistance and barred their Eastern “From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the AdriEuropean satellites from accepting aid. atic, an iron curtain has descended across the The United States also militarily joined with ten Continent.
Behind that line lie all the capitals of countries of Western Europe and Canada in 1949 to the ancient states of Central and Eastern Euform the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . rope.
Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, BudapBy 1955, NATO had expanded to include thirteen Euest, Belgrade, Bucharest, and Sofia, all these faropean members, including West Germany and mous cities and the populations around them lie Turkey.
United States committed itself to the defense of West—Winston Churchill ern Europe and pledged for the first time in history to maintain a substantial United States troop presence overseas.
By the late 1940s, the tension between the United The United States in 1950 was in many respects States and the Soviet Union at its zenith in global power.
The United States share of the had cast a shadow over international relations.
Newspaper Enterprise Association, Inc. percent of international financial reserves.
The United States produced approximately half of the world’s oil and steel.
And yet, many Americans were deeply worried by the international political climate.
The consensus that emerged around United States Cold War policies was shaped in large part by international events.
In June 1948, the Soviets imposed a blockade on the western part of Berlin to unify the German capital under communism.
With overland traffic cut off by the surrounding Soviet forces, the United States and its allies airlifted 8,000 tons of supplies daily to western Berlin.
The Berlin blockade lasted almost a year until the Soviets backed down.
The next month, Communists led by Mao Zedong won control of mainland China and joined troops in the region had reached 431,000, and over half Moscow in pressing for the spread of communism of the United States military budget was earmarked for defendworldwide.
Meanwhile, American policymakers forces invaded South Korea, drawing the United States hoped to maintain their head start in the arms race.
Under Eisenhower, the doctrine of the idea that the frontier of communism in Eastern “massive retaliation” committed the United States to Europe could be rolled back by force.
President use nuclear weapons to counter a Soviet attack on Dwight D Eisenhower rejected appeals that the Western Europe.
United States respond militarily when the Soviets sent tanks into Hungary in 1956 to crush the independentTHE COLD WAR IN THE WESTERN minded government there.
At United States leaders were also determined to prevent the same time, Eisenhower and his successors becommunism from gaining a foothold in the Western lieved that the United States had no choice but to Hemisphere.
They believed that the establishment of maintain its role as a military superpower. a single communist regime would set off a chain reaction, toppling governments friendly to the United How did Soviet nuclear weapons force the States one after the other.
Without a nuclear mothe United States to be more concerned about stabilnopoly, Truman and Eisenhower bolstered the ity in the Caribbean and Central America than United States presence in Western Europe to deter Soviet agdemocratic reform.
United States conventional, or non-nuclear, forces lustrated in 1947, when the president of Nicaragua, were built up.
For dio broadcasts convinced Arbenz that a huge rebel a few months, President Truman denied Somoza’s force was preparing to invade.
In less than two regime official recognition, but in the end the United months, the CIA campaign forced Arbenz to flee the States resumed close relations with Nicaragua.
Carlos Castillo, an army colonel friendly to Truman administration worried that instability in the the United States, replaced him in 1954. region would open the door to communist revolution.
From Washington’s point of view, the overThat same year, the United States unified the throw of Arbenz had succeeded in removing a Western Hemisphere in a mutual defense treaty potentially troublesome regime.
The agreement, signed in Rio ever, the events of 1954 only deepened the country’s de Janeiro, Brazil, called on the countries of Latin divisions.
In America to come to the aid of a neighbor under attack. the years that followed, large landowners increasingly The Rio Pact was one of Washington’s first steps deturned to the military to crush calls for land reform. signed to enlist Latin America on the United States side in the By the 1960s, paramilitary squads were killing thouCold War.
In 1948, Washington took the lead in formsands of peasants, mostly Indians, in a desperate ing the Organization of American States to attempt to maintain the status quo.
Within Latin further strengthen alliances within the Western HemiAmerica, United States policy received much of the blame for sphere.
The United States also signed military treaties Guatemala’s plight. with ten different countries in the region.
United States worries in the Caribbean and Central America, however, did not end with Arbenz.
Politically, Cuba had been fairly stable since The United States saw another threat to its secuFulgencio Batista seized power from a reform-minded rity in Guatemala.
Washington supported Batista as Jacobo Arbenz had been pursuing an economic reform a strongman who would maintain order on the island program.
His government had confiscated the and not upset United States interests.
Even after Batista’s deunplanted fields of large landowners and had divided feat in elections in 1944, Cuba remained close to the the land among 100,000 peasant families.
At the same time, though, official corFruit Company lost land under the reform and ruption and graft were mounting.
The suffered a setback when Batista staged a coup to take United States grew particularly concerned when Guapower in 1952.
Few Cubans expected the Batista retemala received a shipment of weapons from gime to tolerate democratic change in their country. communist Czechoslovakia in 1954.
Many United States poliAs a result, resentment against the government grew cymakers feared that the Soviets were courting during the 1950s.
Few Americans were aware of Cuba’s political In response, the United States Central Intelligence Agency troubles.
In the United States, Cuba was known best began a secret operation to overthrow the as a glamorous resort.
Cuba exiles were given military training at a base in neighwas associated with casinos, nightclubs, and tropical boring Honduras.
Seeing few alternatives, a handful of opponents to the regime turned to armed struggle.
The son of an impoverished Spanish immigrant who had become a wealthy landowner, Castro attended Cuba’s top schools.
Castro first captured public attention with an almost suicidal attack on an army base in 1953.
He hoped that a dramatic blow against the Batista regime would spark an insurrection throughout Cuba.
The Herblock in The Washington Post.47. assault, however, failed to set off a larger uprising.
Sailing a small yacht from Mexico to Cuba in 1956, Castro and eighty fellow revolutionaries launched another attack against Batista.
Without arms or supplies, the eighteen survivors of the landing straggled into Cuba’s isolated eastern mountains.
But the wealth also brought from the center of power, Castro began his guerrilla problems to Cuba.
By the 1950s, American organized war by attacking outposts of the unpopular Rural crime was firmly established on the island, along with Guard.
Thousands of landless peasants joined the drugs and prostitution. struggle against Batista in 1957 and 1958, especially Economically, Cuba could claim one of the highafter the government forced many villagers into miliest per capita incomes in Latin America.
In reality, tary camps. however, many Cubans could not find full-time emAs Castro’s movement gathered strength in the ployment, especially in the countryside.
Meanwhile, countryside, other opponents of Batista disrupted life many middle-class Cubans depended on expensive in the cities.
Government offices were bombed, power imports from the United States to maintain their lines cut, and trains derailed.
Batista responded with lifestyle, which was far below the standard of their still greater violence and repression against those who American neighbors.
Price inFebruary of that year, Catholic bishops in Cuba called creases in the 1940s had brought prosperity to the for a new government. island, but the ups and downs of the sugar market in the 1950s badly shook the economy.
Facing opposition from Opposition to Batista developed gradually in the almost every direction, Batista had little hope for sur1950s.
On January 1, 1959, he resigned and fled the democratic process when Batista rigged elections in country.
Kennedy also harshly United States and spoke to large enthusiastic crowds criticized Nixon and the Eisenhower administration at United States universities.
Although Castro stated that he for failing to support Cuban “freedom fighters” who was against communism and dictatorship, United States govwanted to return to Cuba and overthrow Castro. ernment officials remained unsure of Castro’s stance However, Kennedy learned after his inauguratowards the Soviet Union.
Nonetheless he was briefed tion as president in January 1961 that the Eisenhower by the CIA about United States perceptions of the Soviet threat administration had planned an operation to overand met with Vice-President Nixon. throw Castro.
Encouraged by their success in Guatemala in 1954, the CIA had trained 1,400 Cuban “The one fact that we can be sure of is that he exiles to invade Cuba, march toward Havana, and has those indefinable qualities which make him start a rebellion against Castro.
Whatever we may think of him, an invasion might cause Khrushchev to react militarhe is going to be a great factor in the developily in Berlin or elsewhere.
Nonetheless, Kennedy ment of Cuba and very possibly in Latin Ameriapproved the invasion, with the provision that U.S. can affairs generally.
The landing at the Bay of —Vice-President Richard M Nixon Pigs on April 17, 1961, was a complete failure and an embarrassment to the Kennedy administration.
By the middle of 1959, the United States no Castro’s forces overwhelmed the invaders within days longer felt unsure of Castro.
His government began taking AmericanKennedy took responsibility for the failure of the owned property in Cuba without compensation.
Nonetheless, his unwillingness suppressed Cubans who were critical of him through to commit United States military forces to the operation exile or by putting them in jail, and he became increasbrought him criticism from staunch anti-communists ingly critical of the United States.
Kennedy also realized that he important to the United States during the Cold War, had not listened to enough advisers nor had he taken Castro’s rhetoric in his speeches seemed to align him enough time to consider the issues carefully. with the Soviet Union.
Cuba increasingly came to be The humiliating failure of the Bay of Pigs nurregarded as a base for communist subversion in the tured a deep dislike for Castro in Kennedy, his United States’ backyard. brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, and his advisers.
They authorized another set of CIA-sponWhat role did Cuba and the Cold War play in the sored operations.
Mongoose, included sabotage and assassination—all Candidates Senator John F Kennedy and Vicedesigned to get rid of Castro.
President Richard M Nixon both tried to show that they would be better able to stand up to the Soviet “The purpose of the program...is to bring about Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
In fact, in their camthe replacement of the Castro regime with one paigns both candidates talked mostly about the Cold more devoted to the true interests of the Cuban War and the competition with the Soviet Union.
For people and more acceptable to the United States example, a traditional subject of domestic politics— in such a manner as to avoid any appearance of increasing economic growth—was discussed in the United States intervention.” terms of the Cold War.
On the other hand, the Bay of Pigs in 1961 and Operation Mongoose conUnited States led the campaign to expel Cuba from the vinced Fidel Castro that the United States would soon Organization of American States and orgamake another, more forceful, attempt to attack Cuba. nized a corps of counter-insurgency specialists to Next time, he assumed, United States troops would lead the help Latin American leaders fight communist guerinvasion.
As a result, Castro believed that he needed rilla movements. to strengthen Cuba’s defenses.
To protect Cuba from By early 1962, the triangle of U.S.-Soviet-Cuban the might of the United States, Castro turned to the relations seemed to be pointing toward confrontation. other superpower, the Soviet Union.
Soviet Premier Castro announced that he was a Marxist-Leninist and Nikita Khrushchev had already threatened to respond that Cuba was a communist state.
After the Bay lutionary government against the United States, he of Pigs, he backed up his commitment to Cuba by suprelied on his Soviet allies to supply Cuba with arms. plying the Cuban military with sophisticated For their part, the Soviets readily built up Castro’s weapons.
They hoped to use Cuba as a staging ground to teach Cuban soldiers the tactics of modern warfare. for extending their influence in the Western Hemisphere.
American policymakers saw the Soviet with the Soviet Union as an affront to the principles presence in Cuba as a threat to United States national security. of both the Rio Pact and the Monroe Doctrine.
PresiPolitical pressure at home was mounting in 1962 for dent Kennedy developed a two-pronged approach to Kennedy to take action against Castro’s revolution pressure the Castro regime.
HAVANA Much of the conflict between the United States and Cuba in the early 1960s took place far from public view, especially after the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
In the United States, President Kennedy approved a secret campaign in the fall of 1961 to overthrow the Castro regime.
Through Operation Mongoose, the CIA and Cuban exiles worked to undermine the Cuban economy and focus popular anger against the Castro government.
Some agents also tried to enlist organized crime leaders in a plot to assassinate Castro.
One failed scheme centered on poison pills, which were smuggled into the kitchen of a hotel cafeteria where Castro often ate.
Other plans featured deadly bacteria imbedded in Castro’s skin-diving suit and cigars, a seashell packed with explosives, and a pen firing poisoned darts.
Rather than striking directly against the United States, Castro jabbed at United States allies in Latin America.
Castro stressed the need for revolution throughout the Western Hemisphere and claimed that the United States was blocking progress in the region.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, Cuba began giving revolutionary movements more active support.
Cuba established a training school for guerrillas and Cuban military advisers.
Arms were sent to aid rebels in Guatemala in hopes of disrupting free elections.
According to Castro, Cuba was only defending its revolution against the United States.
The Soviets had assured the United States that they had no intention of giving the Cubans nuclear missiles.
They pledged that Cuba would receive only non-nuclear weapons to defend the island UNITED from attack.
The Soviet Military build-up in Cuba was concentrated on the northwest corner of the island, ninety miles from the United States.
The Soviet SS-4 missiles in Cuba had a range of over 1,000 miles, putting much of the southeastern United States within striking distance.
The thirteen-day crisis West Berlin and the that began when the reconnaisCrisis sance photos were examined on In 1958, the Soviet October 15 was the most dangerUnion demanded a resoluous confrontation of the Cold War. tion to the divided status of It is known to Americans as “the Berlin.
This prompted United States policy in the Caribbean and hundreds of thousands of Central America so dangerously East Germans to flee to the entangled with U.S.-Soviet relaWest through Berlin.
During the missile criinstalling nuclear missiles in Cuba, and Soviet sectors.) sis, many United States policymakers they were stunned.
They thought sure of Khrushchev or Castro’s inthat the Soviets might demand that the United States leave Berlin in extentions.
In October 1962, Americans did not know the anJupiter Missiles swers to these questions.
At the time of the missile crisis, the Soviet Union had many more Theodore Sorensen, an adtroops and non-nuclear weapons in Europe than the United States and viser to Kennedy, remembers that its NATO allies.
The United States, however, had a greater nuclear cathe president and his inner circle pacity and depended on nuclear weapons to deter the Soviets from simply did not know what attacking United States allies.
By 1962, these only honest answer I have is, ‘I missiles were outmoded and vulnerable to Soviet attack.
Traveling deep underwater, the submarine was very could only speculate about what difficult to destroy.
President Kennedy was especially uncertain of the progress being made on the missile indignant at the secrecy surrounding the Soviet operabases.
Kennedy administration officials recognized that concerned, they were maneuvering in a minefield. members of Congress and the American media would Initially, President Kennedy and his advisers press for a strong United States response. decided to keep their knowledge of the missiles secret from the Soviets and the American public.
In the White House, there was little disagreeThis group was the Executive Committee of the Nament that nuclear missiles in Cuba would pose a grave tional Security Council, or “ExComm.” threat to United States security.
For the first time, American President Kennedy and ExComm met to conterritory would be highly vulnerable to Soviet nuclear sider the options for removing the Soviet missiles attack.
Over the next four days, the discussion whether the missiles should be removed but how. produced three distinct choices for United States action rangPresident Kennedy and his advisers were paring from the purely diplomatic to a full-scale military ticularly concerned about the operational status of the assault.
The original U-2 reconnaissance within ExComm and each was carefully weighed by photos had shown that the missiles and their silos President Kennedy.
John F Kennedy Library President Kennedy leads a session of ExComm during the missile crisis.
We should also work with the Organization of American States to bring pressure on Cuba from other Latin American states.
As a means of resolving the crisis, the United States would be willing to eliminate publicly United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
O PTION 2 —B LOCKADE C UBA The United States Navy should blockade Cuba.
This action would prevent the arrival of Soviet ships carrying materials necessary to make the missiles operational.
A naval blockade represents a combination of diplomatic and military responses, but minimizes the risks to United States military personnel as well as Cubans and Soviets.
The United States will demonstrate its willingness to fight if necessary, but there would still be room for a peaceful solution if the Soviets and Cubans are cooperative.
O PTION 3 —A IRSTRIKE AND I NVADE The United States military should launch an air strike followed by an invasion to destroy the missile sites.
Although such an action would risk American lives and is likely to kill Soviet and Cuban military personnel and Cuban civilians, it is worth the cost to preserve our safety and our credibility as an opponent of the Soviet Union.
Failure to respond to the missile build-up will lead to a loss of confidence in the United States, particularly in Latin America, and provide encouragement to pro-communist forces there.
However, we must not let our anger get the better of us and provoke a series of events that could cost the lives of millions.
Even a limited military response against Cuba could kill Soviet military personnel in Cuba.
We must face the possibility that this could provoke a Soviet response against Berlin or against NATO bases in Turkey.
The United States should pursue purely diplomatic actions through the United Nations in order to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba.
This would allow us to begin to uncover their motives and objectives for this deployment of missiles.
They promised that they would not put nuclear weapons into Cuba, even as they were doing just that.
Because of their rash actions in Cuba and their threats against Berlin, we are in danger of upsetting the delicate nuclear balance.
We are not a nation that is rash, impulsive, or indifferent to the safety of the human race.
We have enjoyed the luxury of not having Soviet missiles on our borders.
As a means of resolving this crisis, we must be willing to eliminate our Jupiter missiles in Turkey on the Soviet border in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The United States will never accept the blackmail and intimidation of the Soviet Union.
Yet, given the tremendous consequences, it is only sane that we first attempt to negotiate a solution to this serious problem.
History will not be kind to a nation that is blamed for firing the first shot that unleashes a nuclear exchange and brings unfathomable destruction to the earth.
Rather, this is a battle that we can win in the court of public opinion.
Military action by the United States could lead to a nuclear exchange with the Soviet Union and grave damage to the United States.
Diplomacy and communication hold the most promise for resolving an international issue of this magnitude.
The United States must be willing to trade publicly missile bases in Turkey in exchange for the removal of the missiles in Cuba.
Diplomatic efforts would help build world opinion on the side of the United States in the United Nations and the Organization of American States.
Diplomacy gives the United States time to assess the situation, gather information, and build coalitions with other nations.
The OAS could constitute itself as an organ of consultation promptly, although maybe it may take 2 or 3 days to get instructions from governments and things of that sort.
I think perhaps the Canadian ambassador would be the best, the better channel to get to Castro, get him apart privately and tell him that this is no longer support for Cuba, that Cuba is being victimized here, and that the Soviets are preparing Cuba for destruction, or betrayal.
Statement to ExComm by Secretary of State Dean Rusk “I think we’ll be facing a situation that could well lead to general war.
The objective therefore is their elimination by whatever means may be necessary.
No one can guarantee that this can be achieved by diplomatic action, but it seems to me essential that this channel should be tested out before military action is employed.
If our decision is firm I can see no danger in communication with Khrushchev privately, worded in such a way that he realized that we mean business.
The Soviet Union has misled us privately and publicly about their intentions in Cuba.
We must be prepared for any eventuality, including that they would be used against us or used to pressure us to withdraw from Berlin.
If we tolerate the presence of these missiles in Cuba our credibility and courage will be questioned around the world.
We will use force if necessary, but a blockade could allow us to pursue a solution with the Soviets that does not back them into a corner.
Our military experts cannot tell us for sure how many or if any missiles in Cuba are operational.
They also say that they cannot guarantee the destruction of all of the missiles if we launch an air strike.
If a surprise air strike cannot eliminate the risk of a missile launch from Cuba against the United States, then it is too dangerous to undertake such an action.
A naval blockade would prevent the arrival of Soviet ships carrying more missiles or materials necessary to make the missiles operational.
A naval blockade represents a combination of diplomatic and military responses, but without the danger that would be caused by an immediate United States attack.
On the other hand, an unannounced United States attack against Cuba holds the disadvantage of losing the moral high ground for the United States.
We tried Japanese officials as war criminals for their sneak attack on Pearl Harbor.
A sneak attack on Cuba would discredit us in the eyes of the world today and for generations to come.
The United States still maintains a significant edge in nuclear weapons over the Soviet Union even with these weapons so close to our shores.
Our overwhelming nuclear superiority will deter any Soviet action against the United States.
The United States must demonstrate its willingness to fight if necessary, but a blockade allows room and time for a peaceful solution if the Soviets and Cubans are cooperative.
The consequences and risks of a military attack on the missiles in Cuba are impossible to predict.
A surprise military attack erodes United States moral standing around the world.
Using diplomacy could take months or years, allowing more missiles to be brought to and assembled in Cuba.
Accepting Soviet missile on Cuban territory erodes United States standing around the world as a bul wark against the Soviet Union.
The Soviet missiles in Cuba do not actually change the strategic balance.
The United States still has an overwhelming edge in nuclear weapons over the Soviet Union.
A blockade is a prudent and flexible step that would allow the United States to move to military action without being accused of having conducted a “Pearl Harbor”-style attack.
Diplomatic action alone, without a blockade would allow the Soviet Union to continue to assemble missiles in Cuba.
A blockade of Cuba would prevent the Soviet Union from delivering more missiles and weapons to Cuba.
It is a prudent first step demonstrating United States resolve against Soviet expansionism.
Well, first place, we carry out open surveillance, so we know what they’re doing. all times.
Twenty-four hours a day from now and forever, in a sense, indefinitely.
I call it an ultimatum associated with these two actions, a statement to the world, particularly to Khrushchev, that we have located offensives.
If there is ever any indication that they’re to be launched against this country, we will respond not only against Cuba, but we will respond directly against the Soviet Union with a full nuclear strike.
It is my strongly held view that we cannot launch a surprise attack against Cuba without destroying our moral position and alienating our friends and allies.
The communists are threatening our security and way of life all around the world.
Now they have the audacity to place nuclear missiles just ninety miles from our shores.
The United States must act decisively and with force to remove this threat and to preserve our credibility with our political allies and neutral countries.
United States Air Force bombers should immediately launch an air strike to destroy the missile sites to prevent them from becoming operational.
Because there is no guarantee that all of the missile sites would be destroyed in such a strike, a full-scale invasion of Cuba will need to follow.
Negotiations would give the Soviets the ability to make or to propose compromises and would not halt the deployment.
While such military actions would risk American lives and kill Soviet and Cuban military personnel and Cuban civilians, it is worth the cost to preserve our safety and our credibility as an opponent of the Soviet Union.
Failure to respond definitively to the missile build-up will lead to a loss of confidence in the United States and provide encouragement to pro-communist forces, particularly in Latin America.
Such an invasion could accomplish not only the removal of the missiles but also the end of the Castro regime.
The Soviet Union is testing the resolve of the United States by placing missiles our strategic backyard.
Failure to react here means we will face more challenges around the world from the Soviets.
History has taught us what comes from appeasing tyrants—war, suffering, and more aggression by the tyrants.
The Soviet Union has backed down when faced with strong action by the United States.
Soviet missiles in Cuba are an immediate threat to the security of the United States and must be dealt with by whatever means are necessary.
The United States military can successfully neutralize the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The Soviet Union will not respond militarily elsewhere in the world to United States military action against Cuba.
A military strike against Cuba signals that the United States is not prepared to bargain bases in Cuba for positions in Berlin and elsewhere.
Eliminating the missiles with force protects the United States position in the Western Hemisphere by demonstrating our will to fight to protect national interests.
Military action against the missiles and Cuba would eliminate a military threat to the United States.
If we allow the offensive capabilities presently in Cuba to remain there, I am convinced that sooner or later and probably sooner we will lose all Latin America to Communism because all credibility of our willingness to effectively resist Soviet military power will have been removed in the eyes of the Latins.
We can also expect similar reactions elsewhere, for instance in Iran, Thailand, and Pakistan.
Statement to President Kennedy by General Maxwell Taylor, Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff “I think we all would be unanimous in saying that really our strength in Berlin, our strength any place in the world, is the credibility of our response under certain conditions.
Statement to President Kennedy by General Curtis Lemay, Air Force Chief of Staff “I’d emphasize, a little strongly perhaps, that we don’t have any choice except direct military action.
If we do this blockade that’s proposed, the first thing that’s going to happen is your missiles are going to disappear into the woods, particularly your mobile ones.
Now, as for the Berlin situation, I don’t share your view that if we knock off Cuba, they’re going to knock off Berlin.
Statement to President Kennedy by General Earle Wheeler, Army Chief of Staff “The lowest-risk course of action it would take in protecting the people of the United States against a possible strike on us is to go ahead with a surprise air strike, the blockade, and an invasion, because these series of actions progressively will give us increasing assurance that we really have gone after the offensive capability of the Cuban/Soviet corner.
Many Americans simply held their breath and The president decided to use the word “quarantine” hoped that the world would not be consumed in a instead of the word “blockade” because in internanuclear holocaust. tional law a blockade was considered to be an act of war.
This option allowed the president to steer a “Can you imagine not seeing another Christmas, middle course between ExComm’s varied options.
We’re just too young to die.” nounced in a televised speech to the American public —A Massachusetts schoolgirl that the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
He then informed the nation of his decision to enforce a quarantine of Cuba until the missiles were What was the Soviet Union’s reaction to removed.
For several hours, there was no warned that “many months of sacrifice and self-disresponse.
Soviet diplomats in the United States were cipline lie ahead, months in which both our patience especially baffled.
Like most Americans, they first and our will will be tested.” learned of the Soviet missile build-up in Cuba through Kennedy’s speech.
In Moscow, Khrushchev’s first reHow did the American public react to President action was anger.
Khrushchev maintained that the American public into supporting the quarantine demissiles in Cuba, regardless of their type, were meant cision of their president.
Others feared also warned the United States that military aggression toward Cuba might lead to nuclear war.
The U.S. ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, denounced the introduction of missiles in Cuba in a speech to the UN Security Council.
Stevenson called for a UN vote to condemn the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba, but the Soviet ambassador to the UN vetoed Stevenson’s proposal.
Although reactions varied, the effects of missiles were placed in Cuba infuriated the crisis influenced the lives of many and found expression in popuLatin American governments.
One reaction can be found in the words of the well-known Latin American leaders also feared Cusinger Bob Dylan.
Dylan wrote the song “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna ban support of communist guerrilla Fall” during the missile crisis. movements in their own countries.
Every line in it is actuWhat military steps did the United ally the start of a whole song.
Americans feared that war, possibly —Bob Dylan nuclear war, was probable.
The U.S. naval quarantine went into effect OctoBelow is the third stanza from Dylan’s “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall.” ber 24.
On October Heard the sound of a clown who cried in the alley, 25, at least a dozen Soviet ships en route And it’s a hard, and it’s a hard, it’s a hard, it’s a hard, to Cuba turned back, but preparations at And it’s a hard rain’s a-gonna fall.” the missile sites on the island accelerated.
DEFCON DEFCON, or Defense Condition, refers to the United States state of readiness for nuclear war.
The DEFCON scale runs from five, for peace-time conditions, to zero, for a nuclear attack.
On October 24, 1962, the Strategic Air Command was placed on DEFCON 2 for the first and only time in history.
One hundred and eighty-three bombers were dispatched to thirty-three airfields.
Additional bombers were placed on alert on runways throughout the United States.
Ninety United States nuclear missiles were placed at a heightened state of readiness.
Meanwhile, ExComm received reports After hours of analyzing and discussing the two that the missiles in Cuba were about to become operaletters, Kennedy and his advisers decided to respond tional. only to the first letter and to ignore the second one.
If the the evening of October 27, the president offered to Soviets refused to back down, the United States would “give assurances against the invasion of Cuba” and to be faced with the options to allow the missiles to re“remove promptly” the quarantine measures that main in Cuba, launch an air strike, or to invade the were in effect.
To make matters more difficult, there was no missiles to be removed from Cuba under international assurance that the Soviets exercised complete control observation and supervision.
No one manded safeguards to ensure that such weapons in Washington knew for sure if nuclear warheads had would not be placed in Cuba again. reached Cuba, but United States leaders had no choice but to That same evening, President Kennedy sent his assume that they were on the island.
With these presbrother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to meet sures bearing down on ExComm, the possibility of with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
During removing United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exthe course of his meeting, Robert Kennedy warned change for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Ambassador Dobrynin that events were spiraling out Cuba was reconsidered.
Unless the Soviets agreed to remove the a plan recognized that it should not be seen as a pubmissiles, Kennedy stated, the president would order lic trade.
I was not giving Two letters written by Khrushchev to Kennedy them an ultimatum but a statement of fact.
The first letter, reshould understand that if they did not remove ceived October 26, was an emotional appeal those bases, we would remove them.
President apparently composed by Khrushchev himself, calling Kennedy had great respect for the Ambassador’s on Kennedy to avoid the catastrophe of nuclear war. country and the courage of its people.
This letter took a much more hardline only a few more hours—we needed an answer position, insisting that the United States remove its immediately from the Soviet Union.
I said we nuclear missiles from Turkey in return for a withmust have it the next day.” drawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy found —Attorney General Robert F Kennedy the demands contained in the second letter unacceptable for two reasons.
First, Turkey was not willing to Robert Kennedy also revealed to Dobrynin that have the Jupiter missiles removed.
Turkey and other the United States missiles in Turkey were outmoded and that United States allies on the Mediterranean counted on United States methe United States had already made plans before the dium-range nuclear missiles to deter an attack by the crisis to remove them.
United States preparations for an air strike The next day, Premier Khrushchev chose to deagainst the missile sites and an invasion of Cuba infuse the confrontation.
Over 100,000 battle-ready troops had quickly as possible to President Kennedy, Khrushchev massed in Florida to await the president’s orders. ordered that a message be broadcast by radio.
Radio No one was sure what Khrushchev’s reaction Moscow announced that the Soviet Union was orderwould be to a United States invasion of Cuba.
Would Khrushing the dismantling and removal of the missiles in chev retaliate against United States forces in West Berlin, or exchange for United States guarantees of Cuban sovereignty.
He had not been consulted the Russians an inch beyond what is necessary.” because Moscow believed that he would not endorse —President John F Kennedy the U.S.-Soviet agreement.
In addition, he naval base at Guantanamo to Cuba, and end the onreceived a cable from Castro.
The Cuban leader exgoing United States economic blockade of Cuba. pressed his belief that the United States would invade While Moscow, Washington, and the rest of the his island in the coming days and called on Khrushworld breathed easier after October 28, Castro kept chev to launch nuclear missiles at the United States in Cuba on a war footing.
Castro was connaissance flights during the negotiations. vinced that the United States would not honor its In the end, Castro saw the arrangement that repledge not to invade Cuba.
He had believed all along solved the missile crisis as a threat to Cuba’s security. that the Soviet missiles were needed to deter United States inKhrushchev had not only agreed to withdraw the tervention and defend the Cuban revolution. missiles, but also to remove a squadron of Soviet In the weeks following the resolution of the misbombers from the island. sile crisis, Soviet diplomats pressed Castro to accept the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement.
Castro, how“We believe that besides having salvaged world ever, would not permit United States specialists to come to peace and having prevented nuclear war, we Cuba to verify the removal of the missiles, and he acshould also have salvaged peace for Cuba, a peace cused the Soviets of abandoning Cuba in the face of that included a halt to the economic blockade, United States aggression.
Verification had to take place in inturning over the naval base at Guantanamo, and ternational waters.
The Soviet-Cuban talks dragged an end to all attacks on Cuba.” on until November 19 before Castro reluctantly gave —Cuban official Jorge Risquet his assent to other aspects of the agreement.
President Kennedy said he believed that used in Vietnam and in other cases.” there was a 30 to 50 percent chance that the missile —Georgy Shakhnazarov, an aide to former crisis would lead to a nuclear war.
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev In order to avoid a nuclear exchange, Khrushchev turned his back on his Cuban ally and came to terms with his Cold War rival.
By doing so, the Soviet Kennedy focused on building on the opening in leader risked both his ties with Cuba and his country’s SovietUnited States relations created by the Cuban Missile reputation as a global superpower.
The ideological conflict would continue, but After the missile crisis, a hotline was established both Khrushchev and Kennedy worked to diminish to ease communication between United States and Soviet leadthe tensions between the two nations. ers in times of crisis.
The arrangement featured teletype machines installed in both the Kremlin and “If we cannot now end our differences, at least the White House.
The hotline was reportedly used we can help make the world safe for diversity. dozens of times.
The risk of a misunderstanding reFor, in the final analysis, our most basic comsulting in deadly conflict was reduced. mon link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet.
The missile crisis also impressed on the minds We all breathe the same air.
We all cherish our of Kennedy and Khrushchev the dangers of making children’s future.
Having come so fident and unafraid, we labor on—not toward a close to the unthinkable horror of a nuclear war, strategy of annihilation, but toward a strategy leaders on both sides recognized the need to emof peace.” bark on a new path to prevent nuclear confrontation —President Kennedy, in the future.
By the time of Union, key participants in the 1962 crisis from the the missile crisis, Soviet nuclear capability was still far United States, the former Soviet Union, and Cuba met behind United States capability.
United States intelligence in 1962 estion several occasions to review the events.
Moreover, the Soviets had no subnuclear missiles in Cuba as well as Castro’s motives marine-launched missiles and were at a seven-to-one for accepting them. disadvantage in long-range bombers.
Because we were actually subject to a posshared Castro’s conviction that the United States sible attack of American missile forces, and aviawould use force to snuff out communism in Cuba. tion forces, and we had nothing with which to They believed that nuclear weapons would be a powrespond.” erful deterrent to a United States invasion of the island. —Sergei N Khrushchev, son of However, Khrushchev also hoped to address the Premier Nikita Khrushchev imbalance of nuclear forces between the superpowers.
In 1962, the United States could claim a decisive edge Khrushchev believed that placing the missiles in over the Soviet Union both in sheer numbers of Cuba would address the nuclear imbalance.
The misnuclear warheads (which contains the explosive desiles would be within striking distance of many major vice) and in the number of missiles.
In addimissiles based on land, long-range bombers loaded tion, they could be used as bargaining chips to with nuclear weapons, and submarine-launched misnegotiate a withdrawal of United States nuclear forces from siles.
In addition to nuclear forces based in the United Turkey and other NATO countries, or as leverage to States, more than one hundred United States missiles in Turkey pressure the United States to abandon West Berlin. could reach the Soviet Union, as could shorter-range The next phase of Khrushchev’s plans in Cuba called missiles stationed in other NATO countries. for the installation of intermediate-range missiles that In contrast, the Soviets’ ability to strike United States tercould reach almost every corner of the United States. ritory was limited.
In the late 1950s, Khrushchev In recent years, most United States officials and scholars boasted that the Soviets were on the verge of overtakclose to the crisis have agreed that correcting the ing the United States in nuclear missile technology. nuclear imbalance was Khrushchev’s primary motive Concern about a “missile gap” created anxiety in the for placing missiles in Cuba.
Under Presidents Dwight Eisenhower and John Former Soviet officials and scholars have conKennedy, additional funding went toward strengthfirmed that Khrushchev felt Soviet missiles in Cuba ening the country’s nuclear capability.
United States policymakers came to realize that many of missiles in Turkey.
Newly eign missiles at our doorstep.” discovered evidence suggests that their fears were jus—Aleksandr Alekseyev, Soviet Ambassador to tified.
According to the head of operational planning Cuba during the crisis for the Soviet General Staff in 1962, General Anatoly Gribkov, nuclear warheads had indeed reached Cuba Aleksandr Alekseyev, Soviet ambassador to in the weeks before the missile crisis erupted in the inCuba during the crisis, suggests that Khrushchev simternational arena.
Although the While understanding Soviet motives in the criUnited States mainland was beyond the range of the missiles, sis is crucial, the Cuban viewpoint is equally they could have been used with devastating results important.
Castro knew that accepting Soviet missiles against American troops invading Cuba.
Yet, meeting in Havana, Gribkov said that the missiles Castro unhesitatingly welcomed the missiles, not only could have been launched by the Soviet commander because he thought they would deter a United States attack of in Cuba without authorization from Moscow.
No one should believe that a United States force noting, first of all, that this assured an improvecould have been attacked by tactical nuclear ment in the socialist camp’s defense capabilities, warheads without responding with nuclear and that if the socialist camp was prepared to warheads.
In run a risk on Cuba’s behalf, then Cuba should utter disaster.” also assume its share of the risks.” —Former Secretary of Defense —Cuban Official Jorge Risquet Robert S McNamara In Castro’s mind, accepting the missiles was Kennedy, who had been under considerable proof that Cuba was willing to position itself on the pressure from the military and members of Congress front line of the Cold War.
Castro may have even been to invade Cuba, had feared an invasion could provoke flattered by Khrushchev’s offer to make Cuba the first a nuclear response.
Gribkov’s revelation proved his communist country, other than the Soviet Union, in worries were well-founded. which Soviet nuclear missiles would be deployed.
United States officials today are unrivaled as the strongest nation in the world.
There seemed to be few limits to United States power in the early 1960s.
Heightening tensions further, Castro unthe former Soviet Union have evolved, but the reladertook a bold foreign policy which clashed with U.S. tionship between the United States and Castro’s Cuba efforts to contain communism remains frozen in time.
Since the Cuban Missile CriCastro held up Cuba’s communist system as a sis, U.S.-Cuban relations have been filled with model for other developing countries, claiming that confrontation and disagreement.
The combination of Cuba was on the path to offering its citizens a decent Castro’s continued defiance of the United States standard of living and equal opportunity.
An angered United States government continued a strict United States citizens greeted the resolution of the Cuban economic embargo against Cuba and worked to isoMissile Crisis with a sigh of relief.
The United States late Castro’s government in the international arena. had stood up to communism; war had been avoided.
For its part, Cuba loudly condemned what Castro There was even the possibility of better relations with viewed as United States imperialism. the Soviet Union.
Looking toward the future, most Cuba’s aggressive foreign policy even strained Americans felt confident that their country remained its relationship with the Soviet Union.
From the perspective of the Soviets, Castro was a potentially A billboard in dangerous upstart Cuba illustrates who needlessly the warm relations provoked the anbetween Fidel ger of the United Castro and Soviet leader States.
The Soviets warned Castro to governments in Latin America and other regions defollow their lead and cut back oil shipments to Cuba feat communist rebels, the United States formed an in 1968 to make their point. elite counterinsurgency corps, known as the Green BeThe United States had its own reasons to be uprets.
Castro had turned one of his lieutenants, units throughout the hemisphere to combat well-orErnesto Che Guevara, loose to foment revolution in ganized guerrilla units and also trained police forces Bolivia.
Castro had also shipped arms to guerrillas to control urban riots and prevent sabotage. seeking to overthrow democratic governments in The ongoing conflict between the United States Venezuela and Costa Rica.
To counter forces supported by the Castro to bolster democracy and social reform in Latin government, the United States often found itself on America.
Kennedy also created the Peace Corps By the end of the 1960s, many of the early hopes to allow thousands of young Americas to participate of the Cuban revolution had waned.
Other countries in projects designed to improve everyday life in Latin in Latin America did not follow Cuba’s example.
United States maintained an economic embargo against Cuba, and the revolution’s radical economic How did Cold War security concerns affect the experiments led to confusion and shortages.
Castro understood that Cuba could not afford to President Kennedy also beefed up the United States mililose Soviet aid.
CASTRO AND HUMAN RIGHTS After coming to power, Fidel Castro imprisoned thousands of Cubans who had opposed him in a bitter political struggle.
Like many of those imprisoned in the early 1960s, Jorge Valls was jailed before Castro’s revolution for actively opposing the rule of Fulgencio Batista.
Valls was then imprisoned under Castro’s regime in 1964 after continuing the struggle for democratic rights in his country.
This was always extremely scarce and was administered by the chief of the galley.
It was generally four cups apiece, and that was what we had to drink, bathe, and perhaps wash some underwear.
It was better not to look at your plate because it might come with small grubs, worms or cockroaches.
If someone found a cockroach or other unusual object floating in his dinner, he would say, “This is protein,” and either eat it or throw it away.
We, the prisoners, were not defeated in spirit, and in many ways we represented a threat to the regime.
There were so many of us that every family in Cuba had some kind of connection to someone in prison.
Our numbers grew by the thousands, and soon the population of political prisoners, more than any battalion or political party, was the intellectual and political equivalent of the country’s capital.
Meanwhile, the Cuban-American community the 1970s, Cuba had received billions of dollars in aid of more than one million people, centered in South from Moscow.
Soviet oil shipments shielded Cuba Florida, was becoming more aggressive in its efforts from the energy price hikes that began in 1973. to force Castro out of power.
At the On balance, the Reagan administration’s antisame time, Cuba and the Soviet Union worked tocommunist offensive in the region had reasserted U.S. gether to promote communism in the third world. strength, leaving Castro in a lonely position.
United States policies had contributed to the cycle of violence The election of Ronald Reagan in 1980 marked and poverty in the region. a new direction for the United States in the world.
President Reagan placed anticommunism at the heart How did the collapse of the Soviet Union affect of his foreign policy.
Reagan’s pledge to stop communist expanof Cuba’s trade was with the Soviet Union.
The Cusion led to several clashes with the Castro government bans relied on the Soviets for oil and grain, while over its policies in Grenada, Nicaragua, and El Salvaexporting mostly sugar, nickel, and citrus fruits.
Sodor. viet trade subsidies supplied Cuba with at least $3 At the close of the 1980s, the contest between the billion in annual assistance, amounting to approxiUnited States and Cuba clearly favored Washington. mately one-quarter of Moscow’s total foreign aid Cuban allies in Grenada had been swept away, and spending.
Castro was also stung by the fall of commuthe guerrilla movement in El Salvador had failed to nist leaders in Eastern Europe.
Elections had replaced the government of important economic and military allies for Cuba.
As Cuba’s trade links with the former Soviet block unraveled, Cuban imports fell by more than 75 percent.
Oil imports dropped by more than half, leaving much of Cuba’s agricultural economy without fuel.
He clamped down on political opposition and tightened his grip on the national economy.
One million bicycles were imported from China to provide an alternative to the fuel-starved Jeff MacNelly in the Chicago Tribune.
Castro pledged to fight depend on over one billion dollars per year from in defense of the Cuban revolution and warned his friends and family in the United States.
Nonetheless, people to prepare for a United States assault on the island.
Castro continues to angrily reject United States calls for demoThe desperate economic situation forced Castro cratic reforms in Cuba. to find new trading partners.
Cuban citiThe difficult economic situation has forced Caszens themselves found ways to make the best of a bad tro to appeal to Cuban nationalism (and anger toward economic situation.
Castro’s government also legalthe United States) rather than communist or socialist ized some kinds of self-employment, decriminalized ideals to rally support for his government.
For exdollar possession, and allowed private markets to ample, Castro used the Elian Gonzalez case to boost exist.
Most state farms began to organize into cooperahis regime’s sagging popularity.
Castro now argues that his reforms are designed boy picked up off the coast of Florida in 1999 after his not to transform but rather to save socialism. mother died while fleeing Cuba for the United States, became the center of an international custody battle.
Castro turned the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 tightened the economic battle into a nationalist cause, mobilizing tens of thouembargo against Castro’s government by penalizing sands to march in the streets.
Meanwhile, thousands foreign subsidiaries of American firms that trade with of Cuban-Americans rallied and demonstrated in supCuba.
The Helms-Burton Act of 1996 was designed to port of Elian staying in the United States.
Castro put further pressure on the Castro government by continued to try to rally nationalist fervor after Elian’s punishing any nation that traded with or invested in return to Cuba but without the same success.
The United States State Department has not fully impleCONCLUSION mented the Helms-Burton Act because of the adverse effect it would have on our relationships with other While the Cold War with the Soviet Union is countries.
Even so, the United States has paid a dipover, it still casts a shadow over U.S.-Cuban relations. lomatic and economic price for its hard line toward Castro seems determined to hold onto power; the Cuba.
In 1994, more than one hundred countries in the United States remains determined to see him go.
How UN voted to condemn the United States embargo against Cuba. long the standoff between the two nations will endure The embargo has prevented United States companies from takis unclear, although as long as Castro remains in ing advantage of trade and investment opportunities power change seems unlikely.
Nonetheless, while in Cuba—opportunities that have been seized by Capassions remain high in Havana and in the United nadian, Mexican, and European firms.
We consider this declaration of the government of the United States and Kennedy’s speech of October 22 to be an exceptional intervention in the affairs of the Republic of Cuba, a violation of the norms of international law and of the fundamental rules that govern relations between states and a blatant act of provocation against the Soviet Union.
The Republic of Cuba has the same rights as any other sovereign state to defend its country and to choose its allies according to its wishes.
We reject the Northamerican government’s shameless demands to control the shipment of weapons to Cuba and its aspirations to determine the type of weapons that the Republic of Cuba may possess.
The United States government knows perfectly well that no sovereign state would allow interference in its relations with other states and that it would not present accounts on measures taken to strengthen the defense of its country.
Responding to Kennedy’s speech, the Soviet Government has issued a statement in which it expresses the most determined protest against the piratical actions of the Northamerican government and qualifies these actions as perfidious and aggressive against sovereign states, stating its decision to fight actively against such actions.
We have instructed our representative on the Security Council to present urgently the question of violation, by the U.S., of the norms of international law and the Charter of the United Nations Organization and to emit a determined protest against the aggressive and perfidious actions of Northamerican imperialism.
Because of the situation that has arisen we have instructed the Soviet military representatives stationed in Cuba on the need to take the necessary measures and to be at full readiness.
We are sure that the actions undertaken by the Northamerican imperialists in trying to take away the legitimate right of the Republic of Cuba to strengthen its defensive capacity and to defend the motherland will provoke the angry protest of all peace-loving peoples and will provoke the mobilization of great masses to defend the just cause of Revolutionary Cuba.
We send you, comrade Castro, and all your comrades in arms, our warm greetings and express our firm certainty that the aggressive plans of Northamerican imperialism will suffer defeat.
Greenwich time October 24, 1962, to interdict, subject to the instructions herein contained, the delivery of offensive weapons and associated material to Cuba.
Surface-to-surface missiles; bomber aircraft; bombs, air-to-surface rockets and guided missiles; warheads for any of the above weapons; mechanical or electronic equipment to support or operate the above items; and any other classes of material hereafter designated by the Secretary of Defense for the purpose of effectuating this Proclamation.
To enforce this order, the Secretary of Defense shall take appropriate measures to prevent the delivery of prohibited material to Cuba, employing the land, sea, and air forces of the United States in operation with any forces that may be made available by other American States.
The Secretary of Defense may make such regulations and issue such directives as he deems necessary to ensure the effectiveness of this order, including the designation, within a reasonable distance of Cuba, of prohibited or restricted zones and or prescribed routes.
Any vessel or craft which may be proceeding toward Cuba may be intercepted and may be directed to identify itself, its cargo, equipment and stores and its ports of call, to stop, to lie to, to submit to visit and search, or to proceed as directed.
Any vessel or craft which fails or refuses to respond to or comply with directions shall be subject to being taken into custody.
Any vessel or craft which it is believed is en route to Cuba and may be carrying prohibited material or may itself constitute such material shall, wherever possible, be directed to proceed to another destination of its own choice and shall be taken into custody if it fails or refuses to obey such directions.
All vessels or craft taken into custody shall be sent into a port of the United States for appropriate disposition.
In carrying out this order, force shall not be used except in case of failure or refusal to comply with directions, or with regulations or directives of the Secretary of Defense issued hereunder, after reasonable efforts have been made to communicate them to the vessel or craft, or in case of self-defense.
This would require a large force and is the most repugnant form of aggression, which might restrain them.
You can be sure that we will resist with determination, whatever the case.
The Cuban people’s morale is extremely high and the people will confront aggression heroically.
If the second variant takes place and the imperialists invade Cuba with the aim of occupying it, the dangers of their aggressive policy are so great that after such an invasion the Soviet Union must never allow circumstances in which the imperialists could carry out a nuclear first strike against it.
I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists’ aggressiveness makes them extremely dangerous, and that if they manage to carry out an invasion of Cuba—a brutal act in violation of universal and moral law—then that would be the moment to eliminate this danger forever, in an act of the most legitimate self-defense.
This opinion is shaped by observing the development of their aggressive policy.
The imperialists, without regard for world opinion and against laws and principles, have blockaded the seas, violated our air-space, and are preparing to invade, while at the same time blocking any possibility of negotiation, even though they understand the gravity of the problem.
You have been, and are, a tireless defender of peace, and I understand that these moments, when the results of your superhuman efforts are so seriously threatened, must be bitter for you.
We will maintain our hopes for saving the peace until the last moment, and we are ready to contribute to this in any way we can.
But, at the same time, we are serene and ready to confront a situation which we see as very real and imminent.
I convey to you the infinite gratitude and recognition of the Cuban people to the Soviet people, who have been so generous and fraternal, along with our profound gratitude and admiration to you personally.
We wish you success with the enormous task and great responsibilities which are in your hands.
From your letter I got the feeling that you have some understanding of the situation which has developed, and sense of responsibility.
Consequently, I would judge that, apparently, a continuation of an exchange of opinions at such a distance, even in the form of secret letters, will hardly add anything to that which one side has already said to the other.
We have always regarded war as a calamity, and not as a game nor as a means of the attainment of definite goals, nor, all the more, as a goal in itself.
I see, Mr President, that you too are not devoid of a sense of anxiety for the fate of the world, of understanding, and of what war entails.
But you well know that the very least which you would receive in reply would be that you would experience the same consequences as those which you sent us.
These are all transient things, but if indeed war should break out, then it would not be in our power to stop it, for such is the logic of war.
In the name of the Soviet Government and the Soviet people, I assure you that your conclusions regarding offensive weapons on Cuba are groundless.
It is apparent from what you have written me that our conceptions are different on this score, or rather, we have different estimates of these or those military means.
Indeed, in reality, the same forms of weapons can have different interpretations.
But if one concentrates artillery, and adds to it the necessary number of troops, then the same cannons do become an offensive means, because they prepare and clear the war for infantry to attack.
Has something so new appeared in military strategy that one can think that it is possible to attack thus, I say precisely attack, and not destroy, since barbarians, people who have lost their sense, destroy.
You repeated it to me several times, pointing out that not everybody occupying a high position would acknowledge his mistakes as you had done.
Moreover, the preservation of world peace should be our joint concern, since if, under contemporary conditions, war should break out, it would be a war not only between the reciprocal claims, but a worldwide cruel and destructive war.
At one time, our people itself had a revolution, when Russia was still a backward country.
We know how difficult it is to accomplish a revolution and how difficult it is to reconstruct a country on new foundations.
It is also not a secret to anyone that the threat of armed attack, aggression, has constantly hung, and continues to hang over Cuba.
If assurances were given by the President and government of the United States that the United States itself would not participate in an attack on Cuba and would restrain others from actions of this sort, if you would recall you fleet, this would immediately change everything.
When one accumulates them, this damages the economy, and if one put them to use, then they destroy people on both sides.
Consequently, I expressed gratitude to Mr Bertrand Russell, too, who manifests alarm and concern for the fate of the world, and I readily responded to the appeal of the Acting Secretary General of the UN, U Thant.
There, Mr President, are my thoughts, which, if you agreed with them, could put an end to that tense situation which is disturbing all peoples.
This reasonable step on your part persuades me that you are showing solicitude for the preservation of peace, and I note this with satisfaction.
I have already said that the only concern of our people and government and myself personally as chairman of the Council of Ministers is to develop our country and have it hold a worthy place among people of the world in economic competition, advance of culture and arts, and the rise in people’s living standards.
This is the loftiest and most necessary field for competition which will only benefit both the winner and loser, because this benefit is peace and an increase in the facilities by means of which man lives and obtains pleasure.
In your statement, you said that the main aim lies not only in reaching agreement and adopting measures to avert contact of our ships, and, consequently, a deepening of the crisis, which because of this contact can spark off the fire of military conflict after which any talks would be superfluous because other forces and other laws would begin to operate—the laws of war.
The main thing is to normalize and stabilize the situation in the world between states and between people.
I understand your concern for the security of the United States, Mr President, because this is the first duty of the president.
You have been worried over our assisting Cuba with arms designed to strengthen its defensive potential—precisely defensive potential—because Cuba, no matter what weapons it had, could not compare with you since these are different dimensions, the more so given up-to-date means of extermination.
Our purpose has been and is to help Cuba, and no one can challenge the humanity of our motives aimed at allowing Cuba to live peacefully and develop as its people desire.
You want to relieve your country from danger and this is understandable.
You say that it worries you because it lies at a distance of ninety miles across the sea from the shores of the United States.
You have stationed devastating rocket weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey literally right next to us.
It is good, Mr President, that you agreed for our representatives to meet and begin talks, apparently with the participation of United Nations Acting Secretary General U Thant.
I think that one could rapidly eliminate the conflict and normalize the situation.
Then people would heave a sigh of relief, considering that the statesmen who bear the responsibility have sober minds, an awareness of their responsibility, and an ability to solve complicated problems and not allow matters to slide to the disaster of war.
We agree to remove those weapons from Cuba which you regard as offensive weapons.
We agree to do this and to state this commitment in the United Nations.
Your representatives will make a statement to the effect that the United States, on its part, bearing in mind the anxiety and concern of the Soviet state, will evacuate its analogous weapons from Turkey.
Let us reach an understanding on what time you and we need to put this into effect.
After this, representatives of the UN Security Council could control on-the-spot the fulfillment of these commitments.
Of course, it is necessary that the Governments of Cuba and Turkey would allow these representatives to come to their countries and check fulfillment of this commitment, which each side undertakes.
Apparently, it would be better if these representatives enjoyed the trust of the Security Council and ours—the United States and the Soviet Union—as well as of Turkey and Cuba.
I think that it will not be difficult to find such people who enjoy the trust and respect of all interested sides.
It will declare that the United States will respect the integrity of the frontiers of Cuba, its sovereignty, undertakes not to intervene in its domestic affairs, not to invade and not to make its territory available as place d’armes for the invasion of Cuba, and also will restrain those who would think of launching an aggression against Cuba either from U.S. territory or from the territory of other states bordering on Cuba.
Of course, for this we would have to reach agreement with you and to arrange for some deadline.
Let us agree to give some time, but not to delay, two or three weeks, not more than a month.
The weapons on Cuba, that you have mentioned and which, as you say, alarm you, are in the hands of Soviet officers.
Therefore any accidental use of them whatsoever to the detriment of the United States of America is excluded.
These means are stationed in Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government and only in defensive aims.
Therefore, if there is no invasion of Cuba, or an attack on the Soviet Union, or other of our allies then, of course, these means do not threaten anyone and will not threaten.
If you would also appoint your men and give them appropriate instructions, this problem could be solved soon.
Because the entire world is now agitated and expects reasonable actions from us.
The greatest pleasure for all the people would be an announcement on our agreement, on nipping in the bud the conflict that has arisen.
The problem of tests could be solved simultaneously, not linking one with the other, because they are different problems.
However, it is important to reach an understanding to both these problems in order to make a good gift to the people, to let them rejoice in the news that a nuclear test ban agreement has also been reached and thus there will be no further contamination of the atmosphere.
All this, possibly, would serve as a good impetus to searching for mutually acceptable agreements on other disputed issues, too, on which there is an exchange of opinion between us.
These problems have not yet been solved, but they wait for an urgent solution which would clear the international atmosphere.
I am confident that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would be prepared to do likewise.
The effect of such a settlement on easing world tensions would enable us to work toward a more general arrangement regarding “other armaments,” as proposed in your second letter which you made public.
The continuation of this threat, or a prolonging of this discussion concerning Cuba by linking these problems to the broader questions of European and world security, would surely lead to an intensified situation on the Cuban crisis and a grave risk to the peace of the world.
For this reason I hope we can quickly agree along the lines outlined in this letter and in your letter of October 26th.
The threat of invasion of Cuba and all other schemes for creating tension over China are designed to strike the Cuban people with a sense of insecurity, intimidate them, and prevent them from peacefully building their new life.
The Soviet Government decided to render assistance to Cuba with means of defense against aggression—only with means for defense purposes.
I regard with respect and trust the statement you made in your message of 27 October 1962 that there would be no attack, no invasion of Cuba, and not only on the part of the United States, but also on the part of other nations of the Western Hemisphere, as you said in your same message.
It is for this reason that we instructed our officers—these means as I had already informed you earlier are in the hands of the Soviet officers—to take appropriate measures to discontinue construction of aforementioned facilities, to dismantle them, and to return them to the Soviet Union.
As I had informed you in the letter of 27 October, we are prepared to reach agreement to enable UN representatives to verify the dismantling of these means.
Cessation of the economic blockade and of all the measures of commercial and economic pressure being carried out by the United States against our country throughout the world.
Cessation of all subversive activities, of the dropping and landing of weapons and explosives by air and sea, of the organization of invasions by mercenaries, and of the infiltration of spies and saboteurs—all of which activities are being carried on from the territory of the United States and certain accomplice countries.
Cessation of the piratical attacks being carried out from bases in the United States and Puerto Rico.
Cessation of all violations of our air space and territorial waters by United States aircraft and warships.
Withdrawal of the naval base of Guantanamo and return of the Cuban territory occupied by the United States.
We understand that for you certain difficulties may have emerged as a consequence of the promises we made to the United States to withdraw the missile bases from Cuba in exchange for their promise to abandon their plans to invade Cuba and to prevent their allies in the Western Hemisphere from doing so, to end their so-called “quarantine”—their blockade of Cuba.
This commitment has led to an end to the conflict in the Caribbean, a conflict which implied, as you can well understand, a superpower confrontation and its transformation into a world war where the missiles and thermonuclear weapons would have been used.
But we, politicians and heads of state, are the people’s leaders and the people do not know everything.
If, by giving in to popular sentiment, we had allowed ourselves to be swept up by the more inflamed sectors of the populace, and if we had refused to reach a reasonable agreement with the government of the USA, war would have probably broken out, resulting in millions of deaths.
Those who survived would have blamed the leaders for not having taken the measures that would have avoided this war of extermination.
The prevention of war and of an attack on Cuba did not depend only on the measures taken by our governments, but also on the analysis and examination of the enemy’s actions near your territory.
Some people say that we did not consult sufficiently with each other before taking the decision of which you know.
In fact, we consider that consultations did take place, dear Comrade Fidel Castro, since we received your cables, one more alarming than the other, and finally your cable of October 27 where you said that you were almost certain that an attack against Cuba was imminent.
Having received this very alarming cable from you, and knowing of your courage, we believed the alert to be totally justified.
But if we had carried on with our consultations in such conditions, knowing that the bellicose and unbridled militarists of the United States wanted to seize the occasion to attack Cuba, we would have been wasting our time and the strike could have taken place.
We think that the presence of our strategic missiles in Cuba has polarized the attention of the imperialists.
They were afraid that they would be used, which is why they risked wanting to eliminate them either by bombing them or by invading Cuba.
And we must recognize that they had the capability to put them out of action.
In your cable of October 27 you proposed that we be the first to carry out a nuclear strike against the enemy’s territory.
It would not be a simple strike, but the start of a thermonuclear world war.
Dear Comrade Fidel Castro, I find your proposal to be wrong, even though I understand your reasons.
We have lived through a very grave moment, a global thermonuclear war could have broken out.
Of course the United States would have suffered enormous losses, but the Soviet Union and the whole socialist bloc would have also suffered greatly.
It is even difficult to say how things would have ended for the Cuban people.
Without a doubt the Cuban people would have fought courageously but, also without a doubt, the Cuban people would have perished heroically.
We struggle against imperialism, not in order to die, but to draw on all of our potential, to lose as little as possible, and later to win more, so as to be a victor and make communism triumph.
The measures which we have adopted have allowed us to reach the goal which we had set when we decided to send the missiles to Cuba.
We believe that we must take advantage of all the possibilities to defend Cuba, to strengthen its independence and sovereignty, to thwart military aggression, and to prevent a global thermonuclear war in the present stage.
The United States has also made concessions, it has committed itself publicly, before the whole world, not to attack Cuba.
Therefore, if we compare a United States attack and thermonuclear war on the one hand, and on the other hand the commitments made, the reciprocal concessions, the guarantee of the inviolability of the Republic of Cuba, and the prevention of a world war, then I think that the conclusion is clear.
According to you, we were consulted before you took the decision to withdraw the strategic missiles.
You justify this statement by referring to the alarming news coming out of Cuba and to my last cable of October 27.
I do not know what information you received; I am responding only to the message I sent on the night of the 26th, and which you received on the 27th.
What we did in the face of events, Comrade Khrushchev, was to prepare ourselves and be ready to fight.
When, according to us, the imperialist attack was imminent, I thought it appropriate to reveal this to you and to alert both the Soviet government and the Soviet command since there were Soviet forces determined to fight with us in defending the Republic of Cuba against an external aggression, which we could not have stopped but against which we could have resisted.
I told you that the morale of our people was very high and that we would resist aggression heroically.
At the end of my message I told you that we would wait for the events calmly.
Danger could not impress us because we had seen it hover over our country for a long time, in a way, we were used to it.
The Soviets who where with us know how admirable the stance of our people during the crisis has been, and of the great fraternity that has developed between men of our two peoples in these decisive hours.
Many Cubans and Soviets, who were ready to die in maximum dignity, shed tears when they learned of the surprising decision, unexpected and almost unconditional, to withdraw the weapons.
You perhaps do not know of the extent to which the Cuban people were ready to fulfill their duty towards their Motherland and toward humanity.
No, Comrade Khrushchev, rarely in history—I can even say never—has any people run such a danger, never has a people been so ready to fight and die with such a universal sense of duty.
We knew, don’t think that we didn’t, that we would have been exterminated, as you insinuate in your letter, in the case of thermonuclear war.
That would, nevertheless, not have prompted us to ask you to withdraw the missiles, to ask you to concede.
That, precisely, was a possibility, since the imperialists were blocking every solution and their demands, in our opinion, were unacceptable to the USSR and to Cuba.
Those means really had the purpose of defending the sovereignty of Cuba and therefore after your assurance they lost their purpose.
We hope and we would like to believe—I spoke of that publicly too, as you know—that you will adhere to the commitments which you have taken, as strictly as we do with regard to our commitments.
We, Mr President, have already fulfilled our commitments concerning the removal of our missiles and IL-28 planes from Cuba and we did it even ahead of time.
It is obvious that fulfillment by you of your commitments cannot be as clearly demonstrated as it was done by us since your commitments are of a longterm nature.
But it is important to fulfill them and to do everything so that no doubts are sown from the very start that they will not be fulfilled.
We believe that the guarantees for non-invasion of Cuba given by you will be maintained and not only in the period of your stay in the White House, that, to use an expression, goes without saying.
We believe that you will be able to receive a mandate at the next election too, that is that you will be the United States President for six years, which would appeal to us.
At our times, six years in world politics is a long period of time and during that period we could create good conditions for peaceful coexistence on earth and this would be highly appreciated by the peoples of our countries as well as by all other peoples.
Therefore, Mr President, I would like to express a wish that you follow the right way, as we do, in appraising the situation.
Now it is of special importance to provide for the possibility of an exchange of opinion through confidential channels which you and I have set up and which we use.
This is needed in order that all the peoples be sure that tension in the Caribbean is a matter of yesterday and that now normal conditions have been really created in the world.
And for this it is necessary to fix the assumed commitments in the documents of both sides and register them with the United Nations.
You refer to the importance of my statements on an invasion of Cuba and of our intention to fulfill them, so that no doubts are sown from the start.
I have already stated my position publicly in my press conference on November 20th, and I am glad that this statement appears to have your understanding; we have never wanted to be driven by the acts of others into war in Cuba.
The other side of the coin, however, is that we do need to have adequate assurances that all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and are not reintroduced, and that Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts against any of the nations of the Western Hemisphere.
As I understand you, you feel confident that Cuba will not in fact engage in such aggressive acts, and of course I already have your own assurance about the offensive weapons.
This Choices curriculum unit makes the exciting results of Blight’s research accessible for high school students.
This answer suggested the third question to Blight and its answer as well.
Blight’s attempt to answer his own question began his fifteen-year-long examination of the missile crisis.
The starting point for Blight was the behavior of President Kennedy during those tense days of October 1962.
The principle of the “rational actor” underlying nuclear deterrence theory suggested that President Kennedy should have acted to destroy the Soviet missiles—with the United States military edge he could have easily done just this.
Beginning in 1987, Blight and his colleagues held the first of five conferences on the Cuban missile crisis.
Blight’s critical oral history method brings together three basic components.
Subsequently he added counterparts from the former Soviet Union and from Cuba.
Fidel Castro hosted and participated extensively in the final conference in Havana.
These people were selected for their thorough knowledge of the missile crisis.
Their primary role was to challenge the memory of the policymakers, applying a high level of academic rigor to the proceedings.
Scholars involved in the missile crisis conferences included Graham Allison, Thomas Biersteker, Alexander George, P Terrance Hopmann, Ernest May, Richard Neustadt, Thomas Schelling, and David Welch.
Many of the documents on the American side of the conflict have been recently declassified.
The opening of the Soviet archives after the fall of the Soviet Union has added another important perspective to the documentary records of the crisis.
Blight saw that while the scholars and the documents helped to keep the former policymakers honest, the policymakers could explain the importance of documents to the scholars.
Blight also discovered that crossexamination by former adversaries became an important element of each conference.
Out of these often heady discussions came important and provocative new information—much of it can be found in this curriculum unit.
Scholars realized that the idea that everything useful about the Cuban missile crisis was already known was absolutely wrong.
Blight has also used critical oral history to cast new light on other important moments in United States history including the Bay of Pigs Invasion and the Vietnam War.
Classroom sets (15 or more student texts) may be ordered at $7 per copy.
Using an innovative approach to student-centered instruction, Choices units develop critical thinking and civic judgment—essential ingredients of responsible citizenship.
Each Choices unit provides students with a thorough introduction to the topic under consideration.
Students gain an understanding of the historical background and the status of current issues.
With this foundation, students are prepared to thoughtfully consider a variety of perspectives on public policy.
Each Choices unit is built around a framework of alternative policy options that challenges students to consider multiple perspectives and to think critically about the issue at hand.
Students are best able to understand and analyze the options through a cooperative learning/role-play activity.
In groups, students explore their assigned options and plan short presentations.
The setting of the role-play may be a congressional hearing, meeting of the National Security Council, or an election campaign forum.
Student groups defend their policy options and, in turn, are challenged with questions from their classmates.
The ensuing debate demands analysis and evaluation of the many conflicting values, interests, and priorities reflected in the options.
Armed with fresh insights from the role-play and debate, students are challenged to articulate original, coherent policy options that reflect their own values, priorities, and goals as individuals and citizens.
Students’ views can be expressed in letters to Congress or the White House, editorials for the school or community newspaper, persuasive speeches, or visual presentations.
Choices curricula are informed by current educational research about how students learn best.
Studies have consistently demonstrated that students of all abilities learn best when they are actively engaged with the material rather than listening passively to a lecture.
Studentcentered instructional activities motivate students and develop higher-order thinking skills.
However, some high school educators find the transition from lecture format to student-centered instruction difficult.
Lecture is often viewed as the most efficient way to cover the required material.
Choices curricula offer teachers a flexible resource for covering course material while actively engaging students and developing skills in critical thinking, persuasive writing, and informed citizenship.
The instructional activities that are central to Choices units can be valuable components in any teacher’s repertoire of effective teaching strategies.
Each Choices unit includes student readings, a framework of policy options, suggested lesson plans, and resources for structuring cooperative learning, role-plays, and simulations.
Opportunities abound for students to contribute their individual talents to the group presentations in the form of political cartoons, slogans, posters, or characterizations.
These cooperative learning lessons invite students to take pride in their own contributions and the group product, enhancing students’ self-esteem and confidence as learners.
Choices units offer students with diverse abilities and learning styles the opportunity to contribute, collaborate, and achieve.
This Choices curriculum unit makes the exciting results of Blight’s research accessible for high school John Forasté students.
Sergei Khrushchev, son of Nikita Khrushchev, participated in the conferences.
From the Monroe Doctrine to Cold War containment, from the Big Stick and Dollar Diplomacy to the Good Neighbor Policy and the Alliance for Progress, the countries of the Caribbean and Central America have felt the full weight of their colossal neighbor to the north.
Of all the countries in the region, Cuba has been the scene of many of our nation’s most riveting foreign policy dramas.
United States expansion overseas can trace its beginnings to the explosion of the Maine and Teddy Roosevelt’s charge up San Juan Hill.
Considering its Place in Cold War History probes the complex, often troubled, relationship between the United States and Cuba, and examines the crisis that brought the world to the brink of war.
An opening optional lesson introduces students to important milestones in our country’s relationship with Cuba and places it in the context of United States involvement in the Caribbean and Central America.
On the second and third days students delve deeper into the missile crisis through a simulation set in October 1962 in which students assume the role of advocates of three options faced by the Kennedy administration.
The fourth day contains an exercise that explores the Cuban point of view about the crisis.
An optional lesson examines the role of the letters exchanged between Nikita Khrushchev and John F Kennedy during the crisis.
An additional optional lesson is available on the worldwide web and provides insight into the U.S., Soviet, Cuban, and UN points of view through a simulated diplomatic exercise.
Finally, on the fifth day, students examine U.S.-Cuban relations since the missile crisis.
Each section of background reading is accompanied by two distinct study guides.
The standard study guide is designed to help students harvest the information provided in the background readings in preparation for tackling analysis and synthesis within classroom activities.
The advanced study guide requires the student to tackle analysis and synthesis prior to class activities.
This provides additional information on key concepts of particular importance.
They are designed for traditional class periods of approximately fifty minutes.
We hope that these suggestions help you in tailoring the unit to fit the needs of your classroom.
Considering its Place in Cold War History might fit into your curriculum.
The crisis affords a glimpse into the decisionincreasingly became a region of superpower conmaking process at the highest levels of United frontation.
The stratemerged as an international flashpoint and an egies, goals, and fears driving the foreign policies object of often almost obsessive concern for many of the superpowers clearly emerge from the United States policymakers.
Scholars and policymakers continue to Place in Cold War History offers students a broader study the crisis for insight into how the presence understanding of the international consequences of nuclear weapons has reshaped the nature of inof the Cold War and the challenges facing what ternational conflict and heightened the pressures was once known as the third world. of national leadership.
The history of Latin American Imperialism: The United States victory in the America, especially the Caribbean and Central Spanish-American War at the turn of the century America, has been inextricably intertwined with transformed the United States into an imperialthe history of the United States.
The acquisition of Puerto Rico, control cal system initially served as a model, and later over Cuba, and the subsequent opening of the as a yardstick, for the republics of Latin America.
Panama Canal created a new set of interests for Economically, the region has been bound to the United States foreign policy.
Proponents of naval might United States in the twentieth century by trade pressed for an expansion of the United States fleet. and investment ties.
The foreign policies of Latin American businesses strengthened their presAmerican countries have been largely circumence in the Caribbean Basin.
Even in the cultural anti-imperialist forces warned that the United sphere, United States influence has trickled down into the States was destined to acquire the worst features daily lives of Latin Americans.
Considering its Place in Cold War History prosile Crisis: Considering its Place in Cold War History vides an introduction to the complex, allows students to assess how our country’s exmultifaceted relationship between the two leadperience with imperialism in the Caribbean Basin ing cultures of the Western Hemisphere. shaped the United States role in the world in the twentieth century.
Forming Small Groups—Divide the class into groups of three to four students.
Manifest Destiny Panama Canal Spanish-American War Roosevelt Corollary United Fruit Company Platt Amendment Monroe Doctrine Good Neighbor Policy 2.
Student Presentations—Instruct the groups to use the background reading, as well as their textbooks and other information sources, to prepare two-to-three minute presentations on their topics.
After students have completed their preparations, call on group spokespersons to make their presentations to the class.
Making Connections—Ask students to focus on drawing connections among the eight topics under consideration.
Require students to summarize the main points from the presentation of each group.
List two reasons the United States took an interest in the Caribbean and Central America.
List four territories acquired by the United States at the end of the Spanish-American War.
United Fruit Company became known as “The Octopus” for its_________________ of much of ___________________ and the Caribbean.
You should prepare a two-to-three minute presentation on your topic for the class.
Your presentation should explain how your topic is connected to the overall role of the United States in the Caribbean and Central America.
Forming Small Groups—Divide the class into groups of four or five students.
Assign to each group the role of the United States, Cuba, or the Soviet Union.
Emphasize that students should respond to the questions from the perspective of their assigned country in early October 1962.
Clarifying Positions—After the groups have answered the discussion questions, ask them to share their responses with the entire class.
Preparing for the Roleplay—In order to save time, form student groups before beginning Day Two.
There should be a student group for each of the three options; another group should represent President Kennedy.
During the class period on Day Two, students will be preparing for the Day Three simulation.
Students should read “October 1962: The Moment of Decision” and “Options in Brief” in the student text as well as their assigned option.
The group representing President Kennedy should read all three options in full.
You should complete this worksheet from the perspective of your assigned country.
Explain why Cuba strengthened its ties with the Soviet Union after the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The struggle with the_____________, known as the ___________ War, caused the United States to be more concerned about _________________ in the Caribbean and Central America than about ______________ reform.
List two reasons why the United Fruit Company was upset with Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz.
List two reasons why the United States government was concerned about Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz.
List five characteristics of life in Cuba during the government of Fulgencio Batista.
List two reasons that Fidel Castro had for believing the United States would invade Cuba.
Political pressure at home was mounting in _________ for Kennedy to __________ ________ against ___________ revolution and the threat of _______________ in Latin America.
Planning for Group Work—In order to save time in the classroom, form student groups before beginning Day Two.
During the class period, students will be preparing for the Day Three simulation.
Remind them to incorporate the background reading into their presentations and questions. 2a.
Inform students that each option group will be called upon in Day Three to present the case for its assigned option to the president.
Note that the option groups should begin by assigning each member a role.
Ask the option groups to design a poster or a political cartoon illustrating the best case for their options. 2b.
President Kennedy—The remainder of the class will represent the role of President Kennedy.
While the option groups are preparing their presentations, students playing the role of the president should develop cross-examination questions for Day Three.
Remind these students that they are expected to turn in their questions at the end of the simulation.
In smaller classes, other teachers or administrators may be invited to play the role of President Kennedy.
Your assignment is to persuade President Kennedy and other ExComm members that your option should be the basis for the United States response to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Each member of your group will take a specific role and participate in the presentation.
Your job is to explain the option of your group to the president in a three-to-five minute presentation.
In making your presentation, you will receive help from other members of your group.
Keep in mind, though, that you are expected to take the lead in organizing your group.
Carefully read your option and review the background reading to build a strong case for your option.
Your job is to explain why your option best addresses the security challenges facing the United States in Cuba.
Carefully read your option and then review the background reading and your option.
Make sure that your area of expertise is reflected in the presentation of your group.
Your job is to explain why your option best serves the interests of the United States in its relationship with the Soviet Union.
Your job is to explain how the lessons of history justify the position of your option.
Making Your Case After your preparations are completed, your group will deliver a three-to-five minute presentation to the president and other members of ExComm.
Notes may be used, but each group member should speak clearly and convincingly.
During the presentations, you should try to identify the weak points of the other options.
After all of the groups have presented their options, members of ExComm will ask you crossexamination questions.
Any member of your group may respond during the cross-examination period.
As you know, the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba is the most serious crisis of the Cold War to date.
These presentations will introduce you to three distinct approaches towards the United States response to these missiles.
The decision faced by the president is a serious one and of vital importance to the safety of the nation.
Your Assignment While the three option groups are organizing their presentations, each of you should prepare two questions regarding each of the options.
After their presentations are completed, your teacher will call on you and your fellow committee members to ask questions.
The “Evaluation Form” you will receive is designed for you to record your impressions of the option.
After this activity is concluded, you may be called upon to explain your evaluation of the option.
Setting the Stage—Organize the room so that the three option groups face a row of desks reserved for the group representing President Kennedy.
Instruct members of that group to fill out the first part of their “Evaluation Form” during the course of the period.
Managing the Simulation—Explain that the simulation will begin with threeto-five minute presentations by each option group.
Guiding Discussion—Following the presentations, invite members of the group representing President Kennedy to ask cross-examination questions.
Make sure that each member of this group has an opportunity to ask at least one question.
The questions should be evenly distributed among all three option groups.
If time permits, encourage members of the option groups to challenge the positions of the other groups, and invite comments from the regional representatives.
Reviewing the Letters—Ask students to compare the styles of the two Khrushchev letters.
Note that the first letter has a more personal, emotional tone, as well as a style that is often rambling and disjointed.
In contrast, Khrushchev states his case much more directly and succinctly in the second letter.
Call on students to identify the most meaningful paragraphs of the letters.
Most important are paragraphs 16, 22, and 25 in the October 26 letter, and paragraphs 6, 7, 10, 12, and 13 in the October 27 letter.
Student Responses—How do students weigh the relative strengths and weaknesses of the United States and the Soviet Union at the time of the missile crisis.
Remind students that most ExComm members did not believe Khrushchev would accept Kennedy’s proposal.
Ask students to assume Khrushchev’s perspective in considering Kennedy’s response.
After the Quarantine—Ask students to identify the crucial junctures after the United States decided to impose a blockade.
Which aspects of the five-point agreement that Castro had pushed for eventually came about.
After students complete the exercise “Understanding/Exploring the Cuban Point of View,” ask some to share their letter to President Kennedy to the class.
New Revelations— Invite students to identify the important discoveries made by historians since the end of the Cold War.
Ask each of the option groups how this new knowledge might have affected their presentation to the president.
The missile crisis and the fear of nuclear war had a profound effect on American popular culture.
Bob Dylan’s song ”A Hard Rains A-Gonna Fall” and others captured the mood in popular music.
The first letter arrived in Washington the evening of October 26, 1962.
Before Kennedy and his advisers had time to respond, a second letter arrived the morning of October 27.
Fidel Castro never wrote President Kennedy a letter during the missile crisis.
However, for this assignment, you are to imagine yourself in Castro’s shoes and write to President Kennedy.
You will be evaluated on your ability to make a compelling case—incorporating what you know about the history of Cuba, the history of U.S-Cuban relations, and Castro’s political philosophy.
Dear President Kennedy, I would like to explain to you the reasons, as I see them, for the current difficulties between the United States and Cuba.
On October 20, President Kennedy decided on a _________________ —or _______________— of Cuba by the United States Navy to prevent further shipments of ___________________ supplies to the island.
What two organizations did the United States turn to in response to the missiles in Cuba.
List two military steps the United States took in response to the missiles in Cuba.
In 1962, the United States knew for sure that there were nuclear warheads in Cuba.
The United States knew for sure that the Soviets exercised complete control over the missile sites in Cuba.
List two points that Robert F Kennedy made to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Reviewing Significant Events— Ask students to identify the significant events in U.S.-Cuban relations since the end of the missile crisis.
Following the defeat of Hitler in 1945, Soviet-U.S. relations began to deteriorate.
A form of socialism that for adopted a policy of containing the spread of much of the twentieth century was in Soviet communism around the world, which led competition with capitalism.
In their 1848 book, to, among other things, United States involvement in the Communist Manifesto, Karl Marx and Friedrich Vietnam.
During this period, both the Soviet Engels outlined a form of scientific socialism in Union and the United States devoted vast which the workers of the world would unite resources to their military but never engaged in against capitalist exploitation.
Because twentieth century, the Soviet leader Vladimir both the Soviet Union and the United States had Lenin adapted and added to Marx’s ideas.
Castro nuclear weapons and were in competition attempted to impose a Marxist-Leninist system around the world, nearly every foreign policy on Cuba. decision was intricately examined for its potential impact on U.S.-Soviet relations.
A strong devotion and loyalty to Cold War in the early 1990s forced policymakers the interest of one’s country and people.
Strong to struggle to define a new guiding purpose for nationalist feelings were behind the United States decision their foreign policy. to go to war with Spain and behind the revolution in Cuba.
The policy of extending the rule of a nation over foreign countries as well as Socialism: Socialism is a political and economic acquiring colonies and dependencies.
At the end system in which resources, property, and income of the nineteenth century, supporters of United States are distributed subject to social control rather imperialism used several different arguments to than individual or market forces. advocate their point of view.
The freedom of a state to govern stressed the importance of naval power for the itself without outside interference.
Castro United States’ physical and economic security. objected to UN inspections of the missile sites on This meant that the United States would need to the grounds that this would violate Cuban acquire and maintain naval bases around the sovereignty. globe.
The institutions and organizations of nations and people in which only the fittest government.
Students should read “October 1962: The Moment of Decision” and the Options in Brief in the background reading Day 2: Assign each student one of the three options, and allow a few minutes for students to familiarize themselves with the mindsets of the options.
Call on students to evaluate the benefits and trade-offs of their assigned options.
Yet with careful preparation, guidance, and practice significant gains can be made quickly.
No single recipe guarantees success with cooperative learning or the Choices approach in every classroom.
That would be impossible, since each classroom differs in its organization and size, and its unique collection of personalities and needs.
The suggested ingredients that follow have been drawn from educational research on student-centered instruction and, more important, from the experiences of teachers who have used Choices curricula successfully in their classrooms.
Educators who have questions about using Choices curricula in their classrooms are encouraged to contact the Choices Education Project in writing, or by calling 8633155.
The Choices staff includes experienced classroom teachers who will be pleased to speak with you.
The key to successful cooperative group work is having a group assignment that is complex enough to require the participation of all group members.
Planning the size and composition of working groups in advance is crucial to the successful use of Choices curricula.
Research indicates that the ideal size for a cooperative learning group is four or five students.
This is certainly the ideal size for group assignments in Choices units.
When using Choices units in larger classes, the size of option groups may be expanded to six or seven students.
However, it is important to keep in mind that whenever the number of students in a group is increased, the number of roles and expected outcomes must also be expanded.
A strength of cooperative learning is that it creates opportunities for students to work together in new combinations on challenging tasks.
Cooperative learning not only requires the academic skills of reading, writing, and critical thinking, but the interpersonal skills of communication, negotiation, and problem-solving.
In most cases, this style of instruction and learning is most effective when students are assigned to groups by the teacher rather than being allowed to work with their friends.
While random group selection can be effective, in most classes successful group composition requires that the teacher consider the personalities, strengths, and needs of the students.
Groups comprised of students with diverse strengths, talents, and needs are ideal.
For example, artistic students might be assigned to different groups to share their talents and perspectives, while less verbal students could be placed in groups with more outgoing students to help draw them into the lesson.
Whenever possible, teachers should try to prevent one student from dominating a group.
Explaining the instructions, roles, and ground rules for cooperative learning helps prevent this.
Teachers may choose to group aggressive students with each other, leaving room in other groups for less assertive students to emerge as leaders.
Finally, even though the negotiation of roles among the students in a group can be a valuable part of the cooperative learning experience, teachers might choose to assign certain roles, such as group spokesperson, in order to encourage leadership from more reticent students and to keep more aggressive students from dominating.
Students may initially complain about being assigned to groups that do not include their closest friends.
We have found that, at the conclusion of the assignment, they will usually express satisfaction with their assigned partners, recognize that they got more accomplished, and sometimes even acknowledge the start of new friendships.
The additional time involved in planning group size and composition will pay off when students are actively engaged, debating, and thinking critically.
These should be given to students in writing and reviewed with the class.
Afterwards, as questions arise within groups, students should refer to the written instructions and attempt to answer each other’s questions before asking for the teacher’s assistance.
Especially when cooperative learning is a new experience, students benefit from the establishment of ground rules that are explained before groups are formed.
Ground rules must be kept simple, and should be designed to keep students involved and on task.
Posting these rules in a prominent place in the classroom can be very effective.
Everybody has a role Nobody dominates Everybody participates Nobody interrupts These rules can be enforced by appointing one student to serve as the group manager.
The teacher can make it clear that one of the group manager’s responsibilities is to enforce the ground rules as the group explores its assigned option and prepares its presentation.
The group manager might also be required to make sure that members of the group stay on task and attempt to solve problems before asking for the teacher’s assistance.
Ground rules that are clear and used consistently can, over time, become an integral component of the classroom, facilitating learning and keeping students on task.
At the heart of the Choices approach is the role-play simulation in which students advocate different options, question each other, and debate.
Just as thoughtful preparation is necessary to set the stage for cooperative group learning, careful planning for the presentations and debate can increase the effectiveness of the simulation.
A minimum of 45 to 50 minutes is necessary for the presentations and debate.
Hence, if only one class period is available, student groups must be ready as soon as class begins.
Teachers who have been able to schedule a double period or extend the length of class to one hour report that the extra time is beneficial.
When necessary, the role-play simulation can be run over two days, but this disrupts the momentum of the debate.
The best strategy for managing the role-play is to establish and enforce strict time limits, such as five minutes for each option presentation, ten minutes for questions and challenges, and the final five minutes of class for wrapping up the debate.
It is crucial to make students aware of strict time limits as they prepare their presentations.
During the debate and debriefing, it is important to highlight the role of values in the options.
Students should be instructed to identify the core values and priorities underlying the different options.
The “Expressing Key Values” worksheet is designed to help students incorporate the values into their group presentations.
Moving Beyond the Options As a culminating activity of a Choices unit, students are expected to articulate their own views of the issue under consideration.
An effective way to move beyond the options debate to creating individual options is to have students consider which values in the options framework they hold most dear.
Typically, students will hold several of these values simultaneously and will need to prioritize them to reach a considered judgment about the issue at hand.
These values should be reflected in their own options and should shape the goals and policies they advocate.
In larger classes, additional roles, such as those of newspaper reporter or member of a special interest group, can be assigned to increase student participation in the simulation.
With larger option groups, additional tasks might be to create a poster, political cartoon, or public service announcement that represents the viewpoint of an option.
In smaller classes, the teacher can serve as the moderator of the debate, and administrators, parents, or faculty can be invited to play the roles of congressional leaders.
Research suggests that it is counterproductive to give students individual grades on cooperative group assignments.
A significant part of the assignment given to the group is to cooperate in achieving a common goal, as opposed to looking out for individual interests.
Telling students in advance that the group will receive one grade often motivates group members to hold each other accountable.
It may be useful to note that in addition to the cooperative group assignments, students complete individual assignments as well in every Choices unit.
The “Assessment Guide for Oral Presentations” on the following page is designed to help teachers evaluate group presentations.
Having students complete self-evaluations is an extremely effective way to make them think about their own learning.
Self-evaluations can take many forms and are useful in a variety of circumstances.
They are particularly helpful in getting students to think constructively about group collaboration.
In developing a self-evaluation tool for students, teachers need to pose clear and direct questions to students.
Two key benefits of student self-evaluation are that it involves students in the assessment process, and that it provides teachers with valuable insights into the contributions of individual students and the dynamics of different groups.
These insights can help teachers to organize groups for future cooperative assignments.
The most important outcomes of a Choices unit are the original options developed and articulated by each student.
These will differ significantly from one another, as students identify different values and priorities that shape their viewpoints.
These options cannot be graded as right or wrong, but should be evaluated on clarity of expression, logic, and thoroughness.
In a formal evaluation of the Choices approach, it was demonstrated that students using Choices learned the factual information presented as well as or better than students who were taught in a more traditional lecture-discussion format.
However, the larger benefits of the Choices approach were evident when students using Choices demonstrated significantly higher ability to think critically, analyze multiple perspectives, and articulate original viewpoints, compared to students who did not use this approach.
Teachers should hold students accountable for learning historical information, concepts, and current events presented in Choices units.
However, a simple multiple-choice examination will not allow students to demonstrate the critical thinking and communication skills developed through the Choices unit.
If teachers choose to test students, they may wish to explore new models of test design that require students to do more than recognize correct answers.
The presentation reflected 5 4 3 2 1 analysis of the issues under consideration 3.
The group incorporated 5 4 3 2 1 relevant sections of the background reading into its presentation 5.
The group’s presenters spoke 5 4 3 2 1 clearly, maintained eye contact, and made an effort to hold the attention of their audience 6.
The presentation incorporated 5 4 3 2 1 contributions from all the members of the group Individual Assessment 1.
The student was well-prepared 5 4 3 2 1 to meet his or her responsibilities 3.
For $15, you add 7% for shipping and handling ______ receive a reproducible student text and a teacher’s resource book.
