House of Representativesfrom Massachusetts's 11th district In officeJanuary 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953 Preceded by James Michael Curley Succeeded by Thomas P O'Neill, Jr.
After military service as commander of the Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 and Motor Torpedo Boat PT-59 during World War II in the South Pacific, Kennedy represented Massachusetts's 11th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953 as a Democrat.
Thereafter, he served in the United States Senate from 1953 until 1960.
Kennedy defeated then Vice President and Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the 1960 United States presidential election.
He was the youngest elected to the office, at the age of 43, the second-youngest President , and the first president to have been born in the 20th Century.
Kennedy is the only Catholic and the first Irish American president, and is the only president to have won a Pulitzer Prize.
Lee Harvey Oswald was charged with the crime but was shot and killed two days later by Jack Ruby before any trial.
The FBI, the Warren Commission, and the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Oswald was the assassin, with the HSCA allowing for the probability of conspiracy based on disputed acoustic evidence.
Today, Kennedy continues to rank highly in public opinion ratings of former United States presidents.
Contents 1 Early life and education 2 Military service 3 Congressional career 3.
Funeral 7 Administration, Cabinet and judicial appointments 1961–1963 7.
Memorials 11 Coat of arms 12 Media 13 In other media/popular culture 14 See also 15 Footnotes 16 References 17 External links Early life and education John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born at 83 Beals Street in Brookline, Massachusetts on Tuesday, May 29, 1917, at 3:00 pm, the second son of Joseph P Kennedy, Sr., and Rose Fitzgerald; Rose, in turn, was the eldest child of John ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, a prominent Boston political figure who was the city's mayor and a three-term member of Congress.
Kennedy lived in Brookline for ten years and attended Edward Devotion School, Noble and Greenough Lower School, and the Dexter School, through 4th grade.
Kennedy spent summers with his family at their home in Hyannisport, Massachusetts, and Christmas and Easter holidays with his family at their winter home in Palm Beach, Florida.
For the 5th through 7th grade, Kennedy attended Riverdale Country School, a private school for boys.
For 8th grade in September 1930, the 13-year old Kennedy attended Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut.
In late April 1931, he had appendicitis requiring an appendectomy, after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home.
In September 1931, Kennedy was sent to The Choate School in Wallingford, Connecticut, for his 9th through 12th grade years.
His older brother Joe Jr., was already at Choate, two years ahead of him, a football star and leading student in the school.
Jack spent his first years at Choate in his brother's shadow, and compensated for this with rebellious behavior that attracted a coterie.
Their most notorious stunt was to explode a toilet seat with a powerful firecracker.
The defiant Jack Kennedy took the cue and named his group ""The Muckers Club"", which included roommate and friend Kirk LeMoyne ""Lem"" Billings.
While at Choate, Kennedy was beset by health problems, culminating in 1934 with his emergency hospitalization at Yale New Haven Hospital.
In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota and diagnosed with colitis.
In September 1935, he made his first trip abroad, with his parents and sister Kathleen, to London, with the intent of studying at the London School of Economics as his older brother Joe had done.
He was then hospitalized for two months of observation for possible leukemia at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston.
He convalesced further at the Kennedy winter home in Palm Beach, then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand on a 40,000-acre cattle ranch outside Benson, Arizona.
He tried out for the football, golf, and swim teams and earned a spot on the varsity swim team.
In July 1937, Kennedy sailed to France, with his convertible on board, and spent ten weeks driving through Europe with Billings.
In June 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas with his father and brother Joe to work with his father, Roosevelt's United States Ambassador to the Court of St.
In 1939, Kennedy toured Europe, the Soviet Union, the Balkans, and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis.
He then went to Czechoslovakia and Germany before returning to London on September 1, 1939, the day Germany invaded Poland.
On September 3, 1939, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdom's declaration of war on Germany.
In 1940, Kennedy completed his thesis, ""Appeasement in Munich,"" about British participation in the Munich Agreement.
He initially intended his thesis to be private, but his father encouraged him to publish it.
He graduated cum laude from Harvard with a degree in international affairs in 1940, and his thesis was published that year as a book entitled Why England Slept, and became a bestseller.
Kennedy enrolled and audited classes at the Stanford Graduate School of Business.
In early 1941, he helped his father complete the writing of a memoir of his three years as an American ambassador and then traveled throughout South America.
Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 Kennedy was an ensign serving in the office of the Secretary of the Navy when the attack on Pearl Harbor occurred.
He then attended the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps and Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Training Center, was assigned duty in Panama and later in the Pacific theater where he earned the rank of lieutenant, commanding a patrol torpedo boat.
Kennedy on his navy patrol boat, the PT-109 On August 2, 1943, Kennedy's boat, PT-109, along with PT-162 and PT-169, were ordered to continue nighttime patrol near New Georgia in the Solomon Islands, when it was rammed by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri.
Kennedy stated, ""There's nothing in the book about a situation like this.
Kennedy, despite re-injury to his back in the collision, towed a badly burned crewman through the water with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth.
He towed the wounded man to the island and later to a second island from where his crew was subsequently rescued.
Unmindful of personal danger, Lieutenant Kennedy unhesitatingly braved the difficulties and hazards of darkness to direct rescue operations, swimming many hours to secure aid and food after he had succeeded in getting his crew ashore.
His outstanding courage, endurance and leadership contributed to the saving of several lives and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.
In October 1943, Kennedy took command of a PT boat converted into a gun boat, PT-59, which in November took part in a Marine rescue on Choiseul Island.
Kennedy was honorably discharged in early 1945, just prior to Japan's surrender.
Kennedy's other decorations in World War II included the Purple Heart, American Defense Service Medal, American Campaign Medal, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal with three bronze service stars, and the World War II Victory Medal.
Congressional career House of Representatives In 1946, United States Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strong Democratic 10th Congressional district in Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston.
Kennedy ran for the seat, beating his Republican opponent by a large margin; this, despite not having previously included politics in his career planning.
Senate In 1952, he defeated incumbent Republican Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. for the United States Senate.
The following year he was married to wife Jacqueline.Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the following two years, was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites, and was often absent from the Senate.
During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage, a book about United States Senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs, and which received the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957.
Rumors that this work was co-authored by his close adviser and speechwriter, Ted Sorensen, were confirmed in Sorensen's 2008 autobiography.At the 1956 Democratic National Convention, Kennedy was nominated for Vice President, for the presidential nominee Adlai Stevenson, but finished second in that balloting to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee.
Kennedy received national exposure from that episode; his father thought it just as well that his son lost, due to the political debility of his Catholicism, and the strength of the Eisenhower ticket.
One of the matters demanding Kennedy's attention in the Senate was President Eisenhower's bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957 Kennedy cast a procedural vote on this which was considered by some as an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill.
Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin, but Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure.
Many civil rights advocates at the time criticized that vote as one which would weaken the act.
A final compromise bill, which Kennedy supported, was passed in September 1957.
In 1958, Kennedy was re-elected to a second term in the Senate, defeating his Republican opponent, Boston lawyer Vincent J Celeste, by a wide margin.
Senator Joseph McCarthy was a friend of the Kennedy family; Joseph Kennedy, Sr. was a leading McCarthy supporter, Robert F Kennedy worked for McCarthy's subcommittee, and McCarthy dated Patricia Kennedy.
In 1954, when the Senate voted to censure McCarthy, Kennedy had drafted, but not delivered, a speech supporting the censure, but was in the hospital.
Though absent, he could have participated procedurally by ""pairing"" his vote against that of another senator, but did not do so.
United States presidential election, 1960 On January 2, 1960, Kennedy initiated his campaign for President in the Democratic primary election, where he faced challenges from Senator Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota and Senator Wayne Morse of Oregon.
Kennedy defeated Humphrey in Wisconsin and West Virginia, Morse in Maryland and Oregon, as well as token opposition in New Hampshire, Indiana, and Nebraska.
Kennedy made a point of visiting a coal mine in West Virginia; most miners and others in that predominantly conservative, Protestant state were quite wary of Kennedy's Roman Catholicism.
But the New Frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises—it is a set of challenges.
John and Jackie Kennedy campaigning in Appleton, Wisconsin, March 1960 With Humphrey and Morse eliminated, Kennedy's main opponent at the Los Angeles convention was Senator Lyndon B Johnson of Texas.
Kennedy overcame this formal challenge as well as informal ones from Adlai Stevenson, the Democratic nominee in 1952 and 1956, Stuart Symington, as well as several favorite sons, and on July 13 the Democratic convention nominated Kennedy as its candidate.
Kennedy asked Johnson to be his Vice Presidential candidate, despite opposition from many liberal delegates and Kennedy's own staff, including brother Robert.
He needed Johnson's strength in the South to win what was considered likely to be the closest election since 1916.
Major issues included how to get the economy moving again, Kennedy's Roman Catholicism, Cuba, and whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the United States To address fears that his being Catholic would impact his decision-making, he famously told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12, 1960, ""I am not the Catholic candidate for President.
In September and October, Kennedy appeared with Republican candidate Richard Nixon, then Vice President, in the first televised United States presidential debates in United States history.
During these programs, Nixon, with a sore injured leg and his ""five o'clock shadow"", looked tense, uncomfortable, and perspiring, while Kennedy, choosing to avail himself of makeup services, appeared relaxed, leading the huge television audience to favor Kennedy as the winner.
Radio listeners either thought Nixon had won or that the debates were a draw.
The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history—the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role in politics.
After the first debate Kennedy's campaign gained momentum and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls.
On Tuesday, November 8, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the twentieth century.
Another 14 electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement; they voted for Senator Harry F Byrd of Virginia.
John F Kennedy's Inaugural Address See also: Timeline of the presidency of John F Kennedy John F Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th President at noon on January 20, 1961.
Kennedy brought to the White House a stark contrast in organization compared to the decision making structure of the former general, Eisenhower; and he wasted no time in dismantling it.
Kennedy preferred the organizational structure of a wheel, with all the spokes leading to the president.
He was ready and willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment, and did a monumental job of selecting his cabinet and other appointments, some experienced and some not.
There were a couple instances where the president got ahead of himself, as when he announced in a cabinet meeting, without prior notice, that Edward Lansdale would be Ambassador to South Vietnam, a decision which Secretary of State Rusk later had Kennedy alter.
There was also the rapid appointment of Harris Wofford who was summoned and arrived at the White House for swearing in, without knowing the position he was to assume.Kennedy further demonstrated his decision making agility with Congress and his staff.
Much to the chagrin of his economic advisors who wanted him to reduce taxes, he quickly agreed to a balanced budget pledge when this was needed in exchange for votes to expand the membership of the House Rules Committee in order to give the Democrats a majority in setting the legislative agenda.
The president insisted on a focus upon immediate and specific issues facing the administration, and quickly voiced his impatience with ponderings of deeper meanings.
Foreign policy Foreign trips of John F Kennedy during his presidency President Kennedy's foreign policy was dominated by American-Soviet confrontations, manifested by proxy contests in the early stage of the Cold War.
On the way to the summit was a stop in Paris in June to meet Charles de Gaulle, whose advice to Kennedy was to expect and ignore the abrasive style of Khrushchev.
The French Prime Minister was nationalistic, and disdainful of the United States' presumed influence in Europe, in his talks with Kennedy.
Nevertheless de Gaulle was quite impressed with the young president and family.
On June 4, 1961 the president met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meetings angry and disappointed that he had allowed the Premier to bully him, despite warnings received.
Khrushchev for his part was impressed with the president's intelligence but thought him weak.
Kennedy did succeed in conveying the bottom line to Khrushchev on the most sensitive issue before them, a proposed treaty between Moscow and East Berlin.
He made it clear that any such treaty which interfered with U.S access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war.
Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup with NATO allies as the appropriate response.
The following month, the U.S.S.R. and East Berlin officials began blocking any further passage of East Berliners into West Berlin, erecting barbed wire fences across the city, which were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall.
Kennedy's initial reaction was to ignore this, as long as free access from West to East Berlin continued.
This course was altered when it was learned that the West Berliners had lost confidence in the defense of their position by the United States.
Johnson, along with a host of other military personnel, in convoy through West Germany, including Soviet armed checkpoints, to demonstrate the continued commitment of the United States to West Berlin.John F Kennedy gave a speech at Saint Anselm College on May 5, 1960, regarding America's conduct in the emerging Cold War.
Bay of Pigs Invasion Prior to Kennedy's election to the presidency, the Eisenhower Administration created a plan to overthrow the Fidel Castro regime in Cuba.
Central to the plan, led by the Central Intelligence Agency with help from the United States Military, but with no covert help from the United States, was the arming of a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of anti-Castro Cuban exiles U.S.-trained Cuban insurgents, led by CIA paramilitary officers were to invade Cuba and instigate an uprising among the Cuban people in hopes of removing Castro from power.
On April 17, 1961, Kennedy ordered the previously planned invasion of Cuba to proceed.
In what is known as the ""Bay of Pigs Invasion"", 1,500 U.S.-trained Cubans, called ""Brigade 2506,"" returned to the island in the hope of deposing Castro.
In keeping with prior plans, no United States air support was provided.
As CIA director Allen Dulles latter stated, they thought that once the troops were on the ground any action required for success would be authorized by the president to prevent failure.
By April 19, 1961, the Cuban government had captured or killed the invading exiles, and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors.
After twenty months, Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for $53 million worth of food and medicine.
Furthermore, the incident made Castro wary of the United States and led him to believe that another invasion would occur.
According to biographer Richard Reeves, Kennedy primarily focused on the political repercussions of the plan rather than the military considerations; when it failed, he was convinced the plan was a set up to make him look bad.
Late in 1961 the White House formed the ""Special Group "", headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale, Sec.
The group's objective, to overthrow Castro via espionage, sabotage and other covert tactics, was never pursued.
The deployment of these missiles had come to the attention of the intelligence community when Soviet shipments to Cuba began and a debate had ensued in the National Security Council as to whether the intended use of the weapons was offensive or defensive.
The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16, 1962, and a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and thus posed an immediate nuclear threat.
The United States would as well appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the hemisphere.
There was as well some reaction from the international community that the assault plan was an overreaction in light of United States missiles placed in Turkey by Eisenhower.
There also could be no assurance from the Council that the assault would be 100% effective.
In concurrence with a majority vote of the NSC, Kennedy decided on a naval quarantine, and on October 22 dispatched a message of this to Khrushchev and announced the decision on T.V.The United States Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24.
The Organization of American States surprisingly gave unanimous support to the removal of the missiles.
The president exchanged two sets of letters with Khrushchev to no avail.
UN Secretary General U Thant requested both parties reverse their decisions and allow a cooling off period.
After one Soviet-flagged ship was stopped and boarded, on October 28 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile sites subject to UN inspections.
The United States publicly promised never to invade Cuba and privately agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey, which were at that time obsolete and had been supplanted by missile-equipped United States Navy Polaris subs.
This crisis had brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point known before or since.
The crisis improved the image of American willpower and the president's credibility.
Kennedy and Latin America Arguing that ""those who make peaceful revolution impossible, will make violent revolution inevitable,"" Kennedy sought to contain communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress, which sent aid to troubled countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region.
He worked closely with Governor of Puerto Rico Luis Muñoz Marín for the development of the Alliance of Progress, as well as developments in the autonomy of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
When the president took office the Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, has begun putting into place assassination plots in Cuba against Castro and in the Dominican Republic against Rafael Trujillo.
Kennedy instructed the CIA privately that any such planning must include plausible deniability by the United States His public position was in opposition.
In June 1961 the Dominican Republic's leader was assassinated; in the days following the event, Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction by the nation, and Robert Kennedy, substituting for his brother who was in France, and who saw an opportunity for the U.S., called him ""a gutless bastard"" to his face.
As one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy asked Congress to create the Peace Corps.
Through this program, Americans volunteer to help underdeveloped nations in areas such as education, farming, health care, and construction.
The authorization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 the following year.
In March 1961, Kennedy voiced a change in policy from supporting a ""free"" Laos to a ""neutral"" Laos, indicating privately that Vietnam, and not Laos, should be deemed America's tripwire for communism's spread in the area.
Johnson assured Diem of more aid in molding a fighting force that could resist the Communists.
Kennedy announced a change of policy from support to partnership with Diem in defeat of communism in South Vietnam.Kennedy initially followed Eisenhower's lead, by using limited military action to fight the Communist forces led by Ho Chi Minh.
Kennedy continued policies providing political, economic, and military support for the South Vietnamese government.
Kennedy increased the number of helicopters, military advisors and undeclared United States Special Forces in the area, but he was still reluctant to order a full scale deployment of troops.
By July 1963, Kennedy faced a crisis in Vietnam; despite increased United States support, the South Vietnamese military was only marginally effective against pro-Communist Viet Cong forces.
On August 21, just as the new United States Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge arrived, Ngo Dinh Diem, and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu ordered South Vietnam forces, funded and trained by the CIA, into the temples to quell buddhist demonstrations.
Lodge was instructed to try to get Diem and Nhu to step-down and out of the country.
Washington would no longer tolerate Nhu's actions and Lodge was ordered to pressure Diem to remove his brother.
Lodge replied to this contradictory cable, saying that the only workable option was to get the South Vietnam generals to overthrow Diem and Nhu, as originally planned.
Krulak said the military fight against the communists was progressing and being won, while Mendenhall related that the country was civilly being lost to any United States influence.
The president was unaware the two men were at such odds they did not speak on the return flight.In October 1963, the president appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and Gen.
Maxwell D Taylor to a Vietnam mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy.
In meetings with McNamara, Taylor and Lodge, Diem again refused to agree to governing measures insisted upon by the U.S., helping to dispel McNamara's previous optimism as to Diem.
Nguyen Ngoc Tho , who in detailed terms obliterated Taylor's information that the military was succeeding in the countryside.
The final report also portrayed military progress, an increasingly unpopular Diem-led government, not vulnerable to a coup, albeit possible internal assassination.In late October, intelligence wires again reported a coup of the Diem government was afoot.
The source, Duong Van Minh a/k/a ""Big Minh"" wanted to know the position of the United States Kennedy's instructions to Lodge were to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination, but to ensure deniability by the United States Later that month as the coup became imminent, Kennedy ordered all cables routed through him, and a policy of ""control and cut out"" was initiated to insure presidential control of United States responses, while cutting him out of the paper trail.
On November 1, 1963, South Vietnamese generals, led by ""Big Minh"", overthrew the Diem government, arresting and then killing Diem and his brother Nhu.
Kennedy was shocked by the deaths and to find out afterwards that Minh had asked the CIA field office to secure safe passage out of the country for Diem and Nhu, but was told 24 hours was needed to get a plane.
Minh responded that he could not hold them that long and thus handed them a death sentence.
Initially after news of the coup, there was renewed confidence in America and in South Vietnam, that now the war might truly be won.McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas.
It reiterated United States resolve to fight communism in Vietnam, with both military and economic aid at a higher level, including operations in Laos and Cambodia.
Historians disagree on whether Vietnam would have escalated to the point it did, had Kennedy survived and been re-elected in 1964.
Fueling the debate are statements made by Kennedy and Johnson's Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara in the film, ""The Fog of War"", that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling out of Vietnam after the 1964 election.
The film also contains a tape recording of Lyndon Johnson stating that Kennedy was planning to withdraw, a position Johnson states he strongly disapproved.
United States involvement in the region escalated until Lyndon Johnson, his successor, directly deployed regular United States military forces for fighting the Vietnam War.
I speak of peace, therefore, as the necessary rational end of rational men...world peace, like community peace, does not require that each man love his neighbor it requires only that they live together in mutual tolerance...our problems are man-made therefore they can be solved by man.
The president also made two announcements that the Soviets had expressed a desire to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty and that the U.S had postponed planned atmospheric tests.
JFK's Ich bin ein Berliner speech In 1963, Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability, due to Soviet aggression to the east, de Gaulle's French nationalism to the west, and the impending retirement of German Chancellor Adenauer.
On June 26, 1963, Kennedy visited West Berlin and gave a public speech reiterating American commitment to Germany and criticizing communism; he was met with an ecstatic response from a massive audience.
Israel Kennedy encountered problems with the Israeli government regarding the production of nuclear weapons in Dimona.
Ben-Gurion repeated previous reassurances that Dimona was being developed for peaceful purposes, and Israel firmly resisted American pressure to open its nuclear facilities to International Atomic Energy Agency inspections.
According to Seymour Hersh, the Israelis set up false control rooms to show American inspectors.
The State Department argued that if Israel wanted arms, it should in return accept international supervision of its nuclear program.
Kennedy had tried to control the arms being sold and given to Israel because the Israelis would not sign the IAEA compacts for the Dimona nuclear site, would not fully admit its purpose and continued to insist it was for peaceful energy purposes.
In early March 1965, the director of the State Department's Office of Near Eastern Affairs, Rodger P Davies, had come to the conclusion that Israel was developing nuclear weapons.
He reported that the target date for acquisition of a nuclear capability by Israel was 1968-69.
A science attache at the embassy in Tel Aviv concluded that parts of the Dimona facility had been ""purposely mothballed"" to mislead American scientists during their visit.
On May 1, 1968, Undersecretary of State Katzenbach told President Johnson that Dimona was producing enough plutonium to produce two bombs a year.
Attempts to write Israeli adherence to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty into contracts for the supply of United States weapons continued throughout 1968.
Iraq In 1963, the Kennedy administration backed a coup against the government of Iraq headed by General Abdel Karim Kassem, who five years earlier had deposed the Western-allied Iraqi monarchy.
In a Ba'athist coup, the government used lists of suspected Communists and other leftists provided by the CIA, to systematically murder untold numbers of Iraq's educated elite—killings in which Saddam Hussein himself is said to have participated.
The victims included hundreds of doctors, teachers, technicians, lawyers, other professionals, military and political figures.
American and UK oil and other interests, including Mobil, Bechtel, and British Petroleum, were conducting business in Iraq.
The Ireland Funds President Kennedy in motorcade in the Republic of Ireland on June 27, 1963 On the occasion of his visit to the Republic of Ireland in 1963, President Kennedy joined with Irish President Éamon de Valera to form The American Irish Foundation.
The mission of this organization was to foster connections between Americans of Irish descent and the country of their ancestry.
Kennedy furthered these connections of cultural solidarity by accepting a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland.
Kennedy had near-legendary status in Ireland, due to his ancestral ties to the country.
Irish citizens who were alive in 1963 often have very strong memories of Kennedy's momentous visit.
On December 22, 2006, the Irish Department of Justice released declassified police documents that indicated that Kennedy was the subject of three death threats during this visit.
Though these threats were determined to be hoaxes, security was heightened.
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Troubled by the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear weapons proliferation, Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed on the desirability of negotiating a nuclear test ban treaty, originally conceived in Adlai Stevenson's 1956 presidential campaign.
In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but Khrushchev began testing nuclear weapons that September and Kennedy responded by conducting tests 5 days later.
Nevertheless, the greater nuclear strength of the United States was of little value as long as the U.S.S.R. perceived themselves to be at parity.In July 1963 the stage was set for negotiations, and Kennedy sent Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets.
The introductory sessions began with Khrushchev, who then delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko.
It quickly became clear that the stated objective of a comprehensive test ban would not reach fruition, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets for inspections to verify compliance.
Ultimately, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty, which prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground; the United States Senate ratified this and Kennedy signed it into law in October 1963.
France was quick to declare that it was free to further develop and test its nuclear defenses.
It ambitiously promised federal funding for education, medical care for the elderly, economic aid to rural regions, and government intervention to halt the recession.
Few of Kennedy's major programs passed Congress during his lifetime, although, under his successor Johnson, Congress did vote them through in 1964–65.
Economy Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and encourage growth of the economy.
Kennedy presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962, and his first budget in 1961 led to the country's first non-war, non-recession deficit.
The economy, which had been through two recessions in three years and was in one when Kennedy took office, accelerated notably during his brief presidency.
Despite low inflation and interest rates, GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2% during the Eisenhower presidency , and had declined by 1% during Eisenhower's last twelve months in office.
The economy turned around and prospered during the Kennedy administration.
This rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until around 1966, and has yet to be repeated for such a sustained period of time.
There were nevertheless some painful moments, as in the stock market, which had steadily declined since Kennedy's election, and which dropped a full 10% shortly after the administration's action on the steel industry in 1962.
The major steel companies announced in April 1962 a 3.5% price increase within a day of each other.
The president took personal charge of a campaign against the industry, assigning to each cabinet member a statement regarding the effects of the price increase on their area.
Robert took the position that the steel executives had illegally colluded in doing this.
There was genuine concern about the inflationary effects of the price increase.
Yale law professor Charles Reich wrote in The New Republic his opinion that the administration had violated civil liberties by calling a grand jury to indict United States Steel for collusion so quickly.
Nevertheless, the administration's Bureau of Budget reported the price increase would have resulted in a net gain for GDP as well as a net budget surplus.Kennedy had little knowledge of the agricultural sector of the economy, and farmers were definitely not on his list of priorities, at least in his 1960 campaign.
Federal and military death penalty As President, Kennedy oversaw the last pre-Furman federal execution, and, as of 2008, the last military execution.
Governor of Iowa Harold Hughes, a death penalty opponent, personally contacted Kennedy to request clemency for Victor Feguer, who was sentenced to death by a federal court in Iowa, but Kennedy turned down the request and Feguer was executed on March 15, 1963.
Kennedy commuted a death sentence imposed by military court on seaman Jimmie Henderson on February 12, 1962, changing the penalty to life in prison.On March 22, 1962, Kennedy signed into law HR5143 , abolishing the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder in the District of Columbia, the only remaining jurisdiction in the United States with a mandatory death sentence for first degree murder, replacing it with life imprisonment with parole if the jury could not decide between life imprisonment and the death penalty, or if the jury chose life imprisonment by a unanimous vote.
The death penalty in the District of Columbia has not been applied since 1957, and has now been abolished.
Civil rights The turbulent end of state-sanctioned racial discrimination was one of the most pressing domestic issues of the 1960s.
The United States Supreme Court had ruled in 1954 in Brown Board of Education that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional.
Many schools, especially in southern states, did not obey the Supreme Court's decision.
Segregation had also been prohibited by the Court at other public facilities but continued nonetheless.
He also was more concerned with other issues early in his presidency,g. the ""Bay of Pigs"" fiasco and Southeast Asia.
As a result, many civil rights leaders viewed Kennedy as lukewarm, especially concerning the Freedom Riders who organized an integrated public transportation effort in the south, and who were repeatedly met with violence by whites, including law enforcement both federal and state.
Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders as an alternative to using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents.
Campus Riots left two dead and dozens injured, but Meredith did finally enroll in his first class.
Brother Robert and Ted Sorenson pressed Kennedy to take more initiative on the legislative front.
Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama National Guard, which had just been federalized by order of the President, and which had hours earlier been under Wallace's command.
That evening Kennedy gave his famous civil rights address on national television and radio, launching his initiative for civil rights legislation to provide equal access to public schools and other facilities, and greater protection of voting rights.
The day ended with the murder of a N.A.A.C.P. leader, Medgar Evers, at his home in Mississippi.
As the president had predicted, the day after his T.V. speech, and in reaction to it, House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two year signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia had been defeated, primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans.Kennedy signed the executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women on December 14, 1961.
The Commission statistics revealed that women were also experiencing discrimination; their final report documenting legal and cultural barriers was issued in October 1963.
Earlier, on June 10, 1963, Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963, a federal law amending the Fair Labor Standards Act, aimed at abolishing wage disparity based on sex.Over a hundred thousand, predominantly African Americans, gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963.
Kennedy feared the March would have a negative effect on the prospects for the civil rights bills in Congress, and declined an invitation to speak.
To ensure a peaceful demonstration, the organizers and the president personally edited speeches which were inflammatory and agreed the March would be held on a Wednesday and would be over at 4:00 pm Thousands of troops were placed on standby.
The March was considered a ""triumph of managed protest"", and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred.
Afterwards, the March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with Kennedy and photos were taken.
Kennedy felt the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill.Nevertheless, the struggle was far from over.
Three weeks later, a bomb exploded on a Sunday at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham; at the end of the day six children had died in the explosion and aftermath.
As a result of this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of the president.
Kennedy called the congressional leaders to the White House and by the following day the original bill, without the additions, had enough votes to get it out of the House committee.
Civil liberties In 1963, FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, who hated civil-rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. and viewed him as an upstart troublemaker, presented the Kennedy Administration with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists.
Concerned that the allegations, if made public, would derail the Administration's civil rights initiatives, Robert Kennedy and the president both warned King to discontinue the suspect associations.
After the associations continued, Robert Kennedy felt compelled to issue a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization.
Although Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones ""on a trial basis, for a month or so"", Hoover extended the clearance so his men were ""unshackled"" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.
Immigration John F Kennedy initially proposed an overhaul of American immigration policy that later was to become the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, sponsored by Kennedy's brother Senator Edward Kennedy.
It dramatically shifted the source of immigration from Northern and Western European countries towards immigration from Latin America and Asia and shifted the emphasis of selection of immigrants towards facilitating family reunification.
Kennedy wanted to dismantle the selection of immigrants based on country of origin and saw this as an extension of his civil rights policies.
The Apollo program was conceived early in 1960, during the Eisenhower administration, as a follow-up to America's Mercury program.
While NASA went ahead with planning for Apollo, funding for the program was far from certain given Eisenhower's ambivalent attitude to manned spaceflight.
Early in his presidency, Kennedy was considering plans to dismantle the Apollo program due to its cost, but postponed any decision out of deference to his vice president whom he had appointed chairman of the United States Space Council and who strongly supported NASA due to its new Manned Spacecraft Center in Texas.
In his January 1961 State of the Union address, Kennedy had suggested international cooperation in space.
Sergei Khrushchev said Kennedy approached his father, Nikita, twice about a ""joint venture"" in space exploration—in June 1961 and autumn 1963.
On the first occasion, the Soviet Union was ahead of America in many aspects of space technology.
On April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space, reinforcing American fears about being left behind in a technological competition with the Soviet Union.
Kennedy was eager for the United States to take the lead in the Space Race for strategic reasons.
Because otherwise we shouldn't be spending this kind of money, because I'm not that interested in space.
But...we’ve spent fantastic expenditures, we’ve wrecked our budget on all these other domestic programs, and the only justification for it, in my opinion, to do it in the pell-mell fashion is because we hope to beat them and demonstrate that starting behind, as we did by a couple of years, by God, we passed them.
On the second approach to Khrushchev, the Ukrainian was persuaded that cost-sharing was beneficial and that American space technology was forging ahead.
The United States had launched a geosynchronous satellite in July 1962 and Kennedy had asked Congress to approve more than $25 billion for the Apollo program.
In September 1963, during a speech before the United Nations, Kennedy again proposed a joint lunar program to the Soviet Union.
Kennedy's death only a little more than a month later essentially made the proposal irrelevant.
On July 20, 1969, almost six years after his death, Apollo's goal was realized when Americans landed on the Moon.
Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to intervene and halt the project but he declined citing a critical need for flood control.
He did express concern for the plight of the Seneca, and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to help mitigate their displacement.
He was shot once in the upper back and was killed with a final shot to the head.
Only 46, President Kennedy died younger than any United States president to date.
He denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy, but was killed by Jack Ruby on November 24, before he could be indicted or tried.
Ruby successfully appealed his conviction and death sentence but became ill and died of cancer on January 3, 1967, while the date for his new trial was being set.President Johnson created the Warren Commission—chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren—to investigate the assassination, which concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin.
The assassination proved to be an important moment in United States history because of its impact on the nation and the ensuing political repercussions.
State funeral of John F Kennedy A Requiem Mass was held for Kennedy at the Cathedral of St.
Afterwards, John F Kennedy's body was buried in a small plot, , in Arlington National Cemetery.
Over a period of 3 years, , an estimated 16 million people had visited his grave.
On March 14, 1967, Kennedy's body was moved to a permanent burial plot and memorial at the Cemetery.
The funeral was officiated by Father John J Cavanaugh.The honor guard at JFK`s graveside was the 37th Cadet Class of the Irish Army.
JFK was greatly impressed by the Irish Cadets on his last official visit to the Republic of Ireland, so much so that Jackie Kennedy requested the Irish Army to be the honor guard at the funeral.Kennedy's wife, Jacqueline and their two deceased minor children were buried with him later.
In August 2009, his brother, Senator Edward M Kennedy, was also buried near his two brothers.
Kennedy and William Howard Taft are the only two United States Presidents buried at Arlington.
Kennedy family The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port in 1963 John Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Bouvier, when he was a congressman.
Kennedy and his wife were younger in comparison to the presidents and first ladies that preceded them, and both were popular in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians, influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of numerous photo spreads in popular magazines.
Although Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television, Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of the medium.
Jacqueline brought new art and furniture to the White House, and directed its restoration.
They invited a range of artists, writers and intellectuals to rounds of White House dinners, raising the profile of the arts in America.
The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States, having produced a President, three senators, and multiple other Representatives, both on the federal and state level.
John Kennedy's father, Joseph P Kennedy, was a prominent American businessman and political figure, serving in multiple roles, including Ambassador to the United Kingdom, from 1938 to 1940.
Jacqueline Kennedy in Fort Worth, Texas, November 22, 1963 Outside on the White House lawn, the Kennedys established a swimming pool and tree house, while Caroline attended a preschool along with 10 other children inside the home.
Vaughn Meader's First Family comedy album—an album parodying the President, First Lady, their family and administration—sold about four million copies.
On May 19, 1962, Marilyn Monroe sang ""Happy Birthday, Mr President"" at a large party in Madison Square Garden, celebrating Kennedy's upcoming forty-fifth birthday.
The charisma of Kennedy and his family led to the figurative designation of ""Camelot"" for his administration, credited by his wife to his affection for the contemporary Broadway musical of the same name.Behind the glamorous facade, the Kennedys also experienced many personal tragedies.
One of the fundamental aspects of the Kennedy family is a tragic strain which has run through the family, as a result of the violent and untimely deaths of many of its members.
John's eldest brother, Joseph P Kennedy, Jr., died in World War II, at the age of 29.
It was Joe Jr. who was originally to carry the family's hopes for the Presidency.
Then both John himself, and his brother Robert died as a result of assassinations.
Edward had brushes with death, the first in a plane crash and the second as a result of a car accident, known as the Chappaquiddick incident.
Edward died at age 77, on August 25, 2009, from the effects of a malignant brain tumor.
Years after Kennedy's death, it was revealed that in September 1947, at age 30, and while in his first term in Congress, he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addison's disease, a rare endocrine disorder.
In 1966, his White House doctor, Janet Travell, revealed that Kennedy also had hypothyroidism.
He also suffered from chronic and severe back pain, for which he had surgery and was written up in the AMA's Archives of Surgery.
Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by no less than three doctors, one of whom was unknown to the other two, as his mode of treatment was for the most severe bouts of pain.
There was often disagreement among his doctors, as in late 1961, over the proper balance of medication and exercise, with the president preferring the former as he was short on time and desired immediate relief.
Details of these and other medical problems were not publicly disclosed during Kennedy's lifetime.Caroline Bouvier Kennedy was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family.
John F Kennedy, Jr. was born in 1960, just a few weeks after his father was elected.
John died in 1999, when the small plane he was piloting crashed en route to Martha's Vineyard, killing him, his wife, Carolyn Bessette, and his sister-in-law.In October 1951, during his third term as Massachusetts's 11th district congressman, the then 34-year-old Kennedy embarked on a seven-week Asian trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel with his then 25-year-old brother Robert and his then 27-year-old sister Patricia.
Because of their eight-year separation in age, the two brothers had previously seen little of each other.
This 25,000-mile trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends, in addition to being brothers.
Robert was campaign manager for Kennedy's successful 1952 Senate campaign and later, his successful 1960 presidential campaign.
The two brothers worked closely together from 1957 to 1959 on the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor and Management Field, when Robert was its chief counsel.
Marilyn Monroe,Gunilla von Post,Judith Campbell,Mary Pinchot Meyer and Mimi Beardsley Alford.
There was some medical opinion that the drugs the president required for Addison's had the side effect of increasing virility.
Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters.
Kennedy came in third in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the twentieth century.
Ancestors The Kennedy family originally came from Dunganstown, County Wexford.
In 1848, Patrick Kennedy left his farm and boarded a ship in New Ross bound for Liverpool on his way to Boston.
Patrick Kennedy came to Boston, took a job as a migrant worker, and died within eight or nine years, of cholera.
Mary Ann Fitzgerald {{{31}}} Legacy Five cents John Kennedy JFK memorial issue of 1964 Television became the primary source by which people were kept informed of events surrounding John F Kennedy's assassination.
Newspapers were kept as souvenirs rather than sources of updated information.
In this sense it was the first major ""TV news event"" of its kind, the TV coverage uniting the nation, interpreting what went on and creating memories of this space in time.
All three major United States television networks suspended their regular schedules and switched to all-news coverage from November 22 through November 25, 1963, being on the air for 70 hours, making it the longest uninterrupted news event on American TV until 9/11.
Kennedy's state funeral procession and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald were all broadcast live in America and in other places around the world.
The assassination had an effect on many people, not only in the United States but around the world.
Many vividly remember where they were when first learning of the news that Kennedy was assassinated, as with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941 before it and the September 11 attacks after it.
Many people have also spoken of the shocking news, compounded by the pall of uncertainty about the identity of the assassin, the possible instigators and the causes of the killing as an end to innocence, and in retrospect it has been coalesced with other changes of the tumultuous decade of the 1960s, especially the Vietnam War.
Michael D Healy, the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam, spoke at Arlington Cemetery.
Later, a wreath in the form of the Green Beret would be placed on the grave, continuing a tradition that began the day of his funeral when a sergeant in charge of a detail of Special Forces men guarding the grave placed his beret on the coffin.
Kennedy's continuation of Presidents Harry S Truman and Dwight D Eisenhower's policies of giving economic and military aid to the Vietnam War preceded President Johnson's escalation of the conflict.
This contributed to a decade of national difficulties and disappointment on the political landscape.
Many of Kennedy's speeches are considered iconic; and despite his relatively short term in office and lack of major legislative changes coming to fruition during his term, Americans regularly vote him as one of the best presidents, in the same league as Abraham Lincoln, George Washington, and Franklin D Roosevelt.
Some excerpts of Kennedy's inaugural address are engraved on a plaque at his grave at Arlington.
It was named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that calls upon all people of goodwill to secure peace among all nations.
President Kennedy is the only president to have predeceased both his mother and father.
His grandmother, Mary Josephine Hannon Fitzgerald, died in 1964, just over eight months after his assassination.
Throughout the English-speaking world, the given name Kennedy has sometimes been used in honour of President Kennedy, as well his brother Robert.
Memorials to John F Kennedy Coat of arms In 1961, Kennedy was presented with a grant of arms for all the descendants of Patrick Kennedy from the Chief Herald of Ireland.
The design of the arms strongly alludes to symbols in the coats of arms of the O'Kennedys of Ormonde and the Fitzgeralds of Desmond, from whom the family is believed to be descended.
The crest is an armored hand holding four arrows between two olive branches, elements taken from the coat of arms of the United States of America and also symbolic of Kennedy and his brothers.
Kennedy received a signet ring engraved with his arms for his 44th birthday as a gift from his wife, and the arms were incorporated into the seal of the USS John F Kennedy.
Following his assassination, Kennedy was honored by the Canadian government by having a mountain, Mount Kennedy, named for him, which his brother, Robert Kennedy, climbed in 1965 to plant a banner of the arms at the summit.
Play media Newsreel footage of the inauguration ceremony and speeches In other media/popular culture Kennedy features prominently in popular culture.
His assassination was the subject of the Oliver Stone film JFK, and footage of him appears in the Robert Zemeckis film Forrest Gump.
During his lifetime Kennedy was the focal point of a Superman comicbook, Superman's Mission for President Kennedy.
See also Biography United States Navy Abraham Zapruder, photographer of the primary film of assassination, the Zapruder film.
Depending on which assessment Kennedy accepted there had been zero or modest progress in countering the increase in communist aggression in return for an expanded United States involvement.
Planes and the Presidents: Flight II, hosted and narrated by Charlton Heston.
AP White House Correspondent Frank Cormier said that 5/6 of the population was on the street when Kennedy gave that famous phrase.
Senator John F Kennedy, Immigration and Naturalization Laws, Hyannis Inn Motel, Hyannis, MA"". americanpresidency.org.
Retrieved October 31, 2010. that Kennedy had married previously have been soundly disproven.
Reeves states that Ben Bradlee, then at Newsweek, inspected FBI files on it, and confirmed the falsehood.
John F Kennedy in WW II, 40th Anniversary Edition Douglass, James W., JFK and the Unspeakable: Why He Died and Why it Matters , positive assessment Dunnigan, James & Nofi, Albert.
Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958–1964 Garrow, David J The FBI and Martin Luther King Giglio, James.
The Presidency of John F Kennedy , standard scholarly overview of policies Goldzwig, Steven R and Dionisopoulos, George N., eds.
The Public Address of John F Kennedy, text and analysis of key speeches Hamilton, Nigel.
Five Presidents in the Pacific Theater of World War II Karnow, Stanley.
The Presidential Portfolio Kunz, Diane B The Diplomacy of the Crucial Decade: American Foreign Relations during the 1960s Lynch, Grayston L Decision for Disaster Betrayal at the Bay of Pigs Maier, Thomas.
America's Emerald Kings McNamara, Robert S ""Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the Vietnam Tragedy"" Manchester, William.
November 20-November 25 Newman, John M., JFK and Vietnam: Deception, Intrigue, and the Struggle for Power O'Brien, Michael.
A Life of John F Kennedy hostile assessment of his character Sabato, Larry J The Kennedy Half-Century: The Lasting Legacy of John F Kennedy Salt, Jermey.
Articles related to John F Kennedy Political offices Preceded byDwight D Eisenhower President of the United StatesJanuary 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963 Succeeded byLyndon B Johnson United States Senate Preceded byHenry Cabot Lodge, Jr.
House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 11th congressional districtJanuary 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953 Succeeded byThomas P O'Neill, Jr.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy Caroline Kennedy Edwin Schlossberg John F Kennedy Jr.
Carolyn Bessette-Kennedy Patrick Bouvier KennedyEunice Kennedy Shriver Bobby Shriver Maria Shriver Arnold Schwarzenegger Timothy Shriver Mark Shriver Anthony ShriverPatricia Kennedy Lawford Christopher LawfordRobert F Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy Townsend Joseph P Kennedy II Robert F Kennedy, Jr.
Cheryl Hines David A Kennedy Courtney Kennedy Hill Michael LeMoyne Kennedy Kerry Kennedy Andrew Cuomo Christopher G Kennedy Max Kennedy Douglas Harriman Kennedy Rory KennedyJean Kennedy Smith William Kennedy SmithTed Kennedy Kara Kennedy Edward M Kennedy, Jr.
Willard Wirtz Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Abraham A Ribicoff Anthony J Celebrezze Template:Time Persons of the Year 1951–1975Template:National Football Foundation Gold Medal WinnersPersondata NAME Kennedy, John Fitzgerald ALTERNATIVE NAMES Kennedy, Jack SHORT DESCRIPTION 35th President of the United States DATE OF BIRTH May 29, 1917 PLACE OF BIRTH Brookline, Massachusetts, United States of America DATE OF DEATH November 22, 1963 PLACE OF DEATH Dallas, Texas, United States of America This page uses content from the English language Wikipedia.
