NEW LIGHT ON THE RELEASE OF JOSYF SLIPYJ BY KARIM SCHELKENS* The author, drawing on original documentation from several archives, examines the February 1963 release of Josyf Slipyj, the Ukrainian Greek Catholic archbishop, by the Soviet government.
The Second Vatican Council and the process of aggiornamento set major changes in motion for the Church.
Unless otherwise indicated, English translations of quotations in this article are the author’s.
The first and second volumes set the church historical background for this study.
The extraordinary capacity of John XXIII’s humane and conciliatory attitude became most tangible in his remarkable encyclical letter, Pacem in Terris, of April 11, 1963.
The encyclical was promulgated at a time when anticommunist sentiments were a strong presence within the gatherings of “his” ecumenical council; it is a document that can be seen as a worthy testament to the pope’s peacekeeping efforts.
This article will tend—once again—to confirm the pivotal role of John XXIII, but will by no means describe the full scope of his geopolitical impact.A detailed analysis of the way in which the Vatican repositioned itself within the overall context of the cold war also falls outside the scope of this article.
On the Russian Orthodox Church under communist rule, see Dimitri Vladimirovich Pospielovsky, The Russian Church under the Soviet Regime 1917–1982, 2 vols.
Thenmonsignor Johannes Willebrands, secretary of the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity.
Photo courtesy of the Cardinal Willebrands Archives Foundation, Utrecht, the Netherlands. memories of the casualties of World War II, political tensions reached a fearful climax in the Cuba crisis.
In that context, the interaction of protagonists such as United States Catholic president John F Kennedy,6 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, and Pope John XXIII, who all contributed to Slipyj’s release from exile, should be acknowledged as a surprising act of confidence and goodwill from all sides.
In the period discussed in this article Cousins met with Khrushchev, Kennedy, and John XXIII and maintained contacts among these leaders.
Many other accounts appear to have been based largely upon Cousins’s book.
The intention here is not to offer a simple repetition or a synthetic overview of the existing literature; rather, a reassessment of this event will be presented from a church historiographer’s perspective.
In addition, the often underestimated, if not unknown, role played by individuals such as Félix A Morlion, O.P., and Johannes Willebrands will be highlighted.
In this account, details of the contacts between Vatican officials and politicians on both sides of the ideological divide, as they took place in the days before and after Slipyj’s release from Moscow, will be presented.
The same is to be said for several studies briefly discussing Slipyj’s release in Vatican II in Moscow, 1959–1965, ed.
On Willebrands’s biography, see Karim Schelkens, Johannes Gerardus Maria Willebrands, in Bio-bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon, 31 (Nordhausen, forthcoming), highlighting the importance and characteristics of Willebrands’s diplomatic skills amid tensions.
These items were delivered to Suenens through the mediation of Curtis Roosevelt (grandson of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt) and Morlion, with permission from Monsignor Igino Cardinale, chief of protocol at the Vatican Secretariat of State.
Suenens at Vatican II,” in The Belgian Contribution to the Second Vatican Council, ed.
Moreover, this study will benefit from recent publications that feature other relevant sources.
Given the distinctive nature of Slipyj’s personal situation,10 some background information is necessary about the position of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in the post–World War II era, the rise of Roman Catholic ecumenism in the same period, and the clash between the Ukrainian diaspora hierarchy and the Russian observers during the first weeks of the Second Vatican Council.
Within this complex setting, a detailed reconstruction of the timeline of Slipyj’s release will be offered.
Ukrainian Greek Catholicism after World War II To understand the difficulties surrounding the release of Slipyj from Soviet incarceration, it is necessary to look at the origins of his exile.
These are to be understood within the context of the bipolar political situation characterizing the post–World War II era.
When Andrej Sheptytsky, the Lviv metropolitan for the UGCC, passed away in November 1944 his territory in Western Ukraine had already become part of the Soviet empire.
This situation had begun with the occupation and annexation of Galicia in September 1939, yet during the war the communist occupier’s primary concerns had not been in the religious field, thereby providing a relative amount of freedom for the Ukrainian Greek Catholics who had been in communion with the Holy See since the Union of Brest in 1595–96.12 Moreover, the repu10 For more detailed biographical information on Slipyj, see Ivan Choma,“La vita e le opere del card.
Sheptytsky had established four Ukrainian exarchates in October 1939, and two months later he secretly ordained Slipyj—then the rector of the Greek Catholic Theological Academy in Lviv—as bishop.
On April 11, 1945, the Ukrainian Catholic bishops, including Slipyj, were arrested.
Most of them were accused of collaboration with Nazi rule and sentenced to forced labor and exile.These draconic measures prompted a strong reaction from Pius XII, expressed in his encyclical Orientales Omnes of December 23, 1945.14 In it, the Vatican did not only condemn communism but also openly and specifically attacked Moscow Patriarch Alexis.
The pope stated later:“Sed res ipsae atque eventus facile declarant in suaque luce ponunt quaenam fuerit ac sit harum saevitiarum causa.
Even when religious liberty was included in the USSR’s constitution, it was merely a formal liberty, for in reality, the Greek Catholic Church had no real right to existence.
In reaction, the Vatican under Pius XII repeatedly rebuked communism17 and sharply criticized the Russian Orthodox Church, which had become subject to state government.
Although the Kremlin had a somewhat less restrictive attitude—due to the de-Stalinization of the USSR to which Khrushchev’s February 25, 1956,“Secret Speech” contributed—the end of that decade was marked by new repressions of Ukrainian Catholics as well as other religious minorities.
The Secretariat for Christian Unity Simultaneous with the Vatican’s presentation of itself as an anticommunist stronghold in the decades before the Second Vatican Council, the establishment of new ecumenical contacts on an international level facilitated attitudes quite different from the one found in the 1928 encyclical Mortalium Animos.
Although ecumenical initiatives were not lacking before and during World War II,20 it was mostly thereafter that a Roman Catholic awareness and engagement in the ecumenical movement was seen.
One year after the establishment of the World Council for Churches in Amsterdam in 1948—led by Dutchman Willem Adolf Visser ’t Hooft—Pope Pius XII published an Instructio de Motione Oecumenica on December 20, 1949.21 A year later Willebrands established the Catholic Conference 16 The documents on this mock synod of 1946 were published by Patriarch Pimen, L’vovskij tserkovnyi sobor.
The Catholic Conference for Ecumenical Questions was engaged not only with the WCC but also with individual members of other religions, including those behind the Iron Curtain.
Most relevant in this context were the contacts between the Russian Orthodox Church and other denominations.
As a result, and a fortiori after the second WCC assembly at Evanston in 1954, an ongoing process of correspondence was set up between Geneva and Moscow, resulting in a meeting on August 8–10, 1958, in Utrecht.
These initial contacts between Eastern and Western Church representatives proved to be crucial, even when no Roman Catholic participants were present and even when the Soviet regime controlled every move made by the Russian Orthodox Church on the international scene.The Utrecht talks revealed the internal complexity of the Russian Orthodox Church and its attitude to the West, as well as its willingness to engage in further communication.
It also is striking that the Russian delegates at the Utrecht meeting inquired about the relationship between the WCC and the Roman Catholic Church, and that both the 1949 Instruction and the activities of the Catholic Conference and Istina were discussed.
The “Confidential Report” reads:“The delegates of the Church in Russia asked about the relationship of the WCC with the Catholic Church.
Watson, Père Couturier, and the WCC’s Commission on Faith and Order, but the idea is the same.
As a result of the Utrecht talks, the Russian Orthodox Church decided to join the WCC in April 1961,26 and this would be confirmed and accepted during the WCC conference in New Delhi.
Meanwhile, matters had undergone a thorough transformation at the Vatican.
On October 28, 1958, John XXIII was elected pope, and on January 25, 1959, he convoked an ecumenical council.
This decision would have far-reaching consequences for both the development of Catholic ecumenism and the relationship among the Vatican, the Kremlin, and the Moscow Patriarchate.The Rhodes incident had made it painfully clear that the Vatican urgently needed an “official address” for ecumenical affairs.
Now, within the context of conciliar preparations, the June 5, 1960, motu proprio Superno Dei Nutu announced the establishment of ten preconciliar commissions and three secretariats that included a Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity with Cardinal Augustin Bea28 as its first president and Willebrands as secretary.
Given the SPCU’s mandate to invite “ There were some difficulties with the Roman Catholic Church concerning the persecution of Protestant minorities in Catholic countries.
This note mentions the fact that two delegates from the Moscow Patriarchate had come to Geneva in June 1959 to study the WCC organization, as well as arrange a December visit by Visser ’t Hooft to Moscow.
From the Security of the Fortress to the Lure of the Quest,” in Alberigo and Komonchak, History of Vatican II, 2:1–54.
The latter arose from the SPCU’s invitation to Moscow to send official observers to the Second Vatican Council, which Moscow had initially rejected.
Although at the WCC’s 1962 Paris meeting Boris Nikodim, the metropolitan of Leningrad and Minsk, spoke in favor of sending WCC observers, the issue of Russian Orthodox observers at the Second Vatican Council turned out to be far more complex, because of the difficult bilateral relationships between various Orthodox Patriarchates.
On that occasion, on August 13,Willebrands, present in Paris, had private talks with Visser ’t Hooft; Nikodim; and archpriest Vitali Borovoj, a professor at Leningrad Ecclesiastical Academy.
During these conversations he learned that establishing further contacts was not impossible, but would require his presence in Moscow as a condition for obtaining cooperation from the Russian Orthodox Church.
Willebrands discussed briefly the fate of the Catholic Church under Soviet rule with Nikodim,34 then asked Bea for permission to undertake the journey.
In his report on the meeting he underlines the important role of Nikodim in obtaining a positive reaction to the SPCU’s invitation for sending WCC observers to the Council.
KDC,Archives Willebrands, 68:“Rapport du P Hamer, Comité central du Conseil Oecuménique des Églises,” Paris,August 24, 1962.
Kurojedov, the new president of the Soviet Government Council for Church Affairs, had taken a very negative stance toward John XXIII’s initiative to convoke the Council.
This had resulted in the publication of the anonymous article Non possumus in the June 1960 issue of Zˇurnal Moskovskoj Patriarchii—the periodical of the Moscow Patriarchate.
First, the Russian government had to grant permission to Catholic bishops in Russian territory to participate in the Council.
He kept complete records of the conversations he held there from September 27 to October 2, 1962.36 On this occasion, the main discussion topic was the practical organization of the Council, including the role of the observers.
Also, the Russians pointed out that the Council should avoid an explicit connection of communist atheism with specific nations.
Bea proceeds:“Data questa assicurazione ufficiale e autorevole si può continuare di trattare la questione degli Osservatori.
Rev.ma vada per questo scopo anche a Mosca, come ha visitato altri Patriarcati.
Cela n’est pas vrai, mais nous demandons de comprendre notre situation.
Concernant la position des évêques catholiques en Russie, l’archevêque Nicodème a entendu des rumeurs que certains Vicaires apostoliques en Russie ont demandé un visa pour aller au Concile.
Nikodim articulated the central issue with powerful clarity.To understand the reaction of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic hierarchy to the SPCU’s invitation to the Moscow Patriarchate, a look at the preparation in Rome for the Council is necessary.
Cold War in Rome In the Council’s preparation phase, the bishops’ vota were collected and organized into a manageable list of topics.
From summer 1960 onward the preconciliar commissions were active in Rome, which included several UGCC representatives.
Noteworthy is the conversation between Maxim Hermaniuk, C.Ss.R., the Ukrainian metropolitan of Winnipeg , and John XXIII at Castel Gandolfo on September 30, 1961.
Upon entering the Holy Father greeted me in Bulgarian—kak su—“how are you”, offering me the courtesy of using a Slavic language.
The invitation, in some form (to show a solidarity of faith in one God against atheistic communism), to the representatives of all who profess one God on the occasion of the Ecumenical Council.
The invitation, in some form, of Orthodox and Protestants to this Council.
The persecution of the Church in Ukraine and the martyrdom of our nation, especially the great Metropolitan J Slipyj.
The Holy Father confirmed, concerning the first two points, that this is very complex and is in the stage of study.
Maxim Hermaniuk, C.Ss.R., Ukrainian metropolitan of Winnipeg, at the Second Vatican Council.
Members of the Ukrainian diaspora episcopate were hoping that the Council would address the suppression of the Greek Catholic churches in the Soviet Union.
On the eve of the Council’s solemn opening session, fifteen members of the Ukrainian diaspora hierarchy gathered in Rome to set a public agenda.
Several steps were initiated at that meeting such as the preparation of a brochure and a letter to the Council Fathers informing them of the situation of Catholic martyrs of the UGCC and Slipyj; a plan to publish an article on the imprisonment of Slipyj; and an intention to ask Cardinal Gustavo Testa41 to appoint a procurator for Slipyj.
The diary will be published as The Council Diaries of Maxim Hermaniuk, C.Ss.R., Metropolitan of Winnipeg, 1960–1965, annot.
Borovoj, who had attended the Utrecht and Paris meetings and also frequently visited the WCC headquarters at Geneva as a delegate for his church; and Vladimir Kotliarov, vice-superior of the Russian Religious Mission at Jerusalem.
They arrived in Rome on October 12 , and action was swiftly taken by the Ukrainian diaspora bishops.
Hornjak on the issue of the ratification of the text of a common letter of our Ukrainian Bishops to all the Fathers of the Council regarding ”the observers” of the Russian Orthodox Church at the Council.
I was entrusted with preparing an outline of our lines of thought, and Most Rev.
Afterwards we will determine when that letter is to be given to the Fathers of the Council.
As Nikodim had predicted, the Ukrainian diaspora bishops were deeply shocked by the presence of Russian Orthodox observers, given that many of their own bishops were still in exile or imprisoned.
Maximos IV from Antioch, the Patriarch of Armenia and the Maronite Patriarch.
Among those present there were also—one knows not why and what for—the ‘observers’ of the Russian Orthodox Church—Vitali Borovoj and Vladimir Kotliarov.
This is a real misfortune for the Council and for all its manifestations.
Russian Orthodox Church and the Soviet government were presented as a single entity, making clear that the Council should denounce both rather than invite “communist representatives” to Rome.At this point, the Ukrainian hierarchy felt deserted by the Vatican administration, and the Ukrainian hierarchs felt that they needed to respond to the patronizing attitude of Vatican diplomats, who considered the UGCC only as a small Eastern entity.
Their initiative was hardly welcomed by the SPCU.46 On October 25, Willebrands and Bea were aware of the intention of the Ukrainian bishops to publicly protest the presence of the Russian observers at the Second Vatican Council, and both informed Monsignor Igino Cardinale, chief of protocol at the Secretariat of State of the Holy See.
Cardinale, in turn, made a note on the matter for Cardinal Amleto Cicognani, secretary of state for the Holy See.
He, too, felt the risk that the Vatican diplomats would opt for a modus vivendi with the Soviet Union, rather than for a clear support of the Ukrainian martyrs.
John XXIII personally asked Bea to prevent such an action by the Ukrainian bishops, and on October 27 Bea met with Ukrainian Metropolitan Ambrosij Senysyn—responsible for the United States Ukrainian diaspora—to inform him that the pope wished the Ukrainian bishops to refrain from action against the Russian observers.Also, Bea explained that the SPCU had invited the Russian delegates on its own initiative and not by order of the Holy See.
These factors contribute to the extremely complex background against which the negotiations leading to Slipyj’s release must be understood.
From Andover to Rome When it came to the Vatican’s attitude toward communism John XXIII showed an astoundingly open and humanist attitude from the earliest period of his pontificate.
This is illustrated by a remarkable peacekeeping initiative from the pope’s side.
First was the possibility of establishing an “international university” Council.
Cardinal Bea informs me that he has learned from a reliable source, that the Ukrainian bishops are planning to make public objections against the presence of Russian observers, with Msgr.
It is needed to prevent such action from happening and the cardinal orders me to contact Msgr.
Second, Morlion and John XXIII talked about the need for a series of books to explain to nonbelievers, including those under communist rule, the new and more pastoral approach of the Catholic Church.
The pope intended that these six books would be issued after events at the Vatican.
With John XXIII’s approval Morlion contacted Harper and Brothers in search of a writer who could advise him on his project.
Cousins and Morlion quickly became friends, and this friendship would have significant ecclesiastical and political implications.
This time, through the mediation of Cousins, Morlion observed talks that took place on the eve of American congressional elections amid the mounting tensions of the Cuba crisis.
Morlion then telephoned Cardinale, who stated that such a plan was underway and that Kennedy would be kept informed.
On that day Morlion twice telephoned the Vatican, making the case for Cousins as a possible link between the Vatican and the Kremlin.
The result of these communications is indicated by Cardinale, who made clear that the pope was interested in receiving Cousins.
Then, on October 25, 1962, John XXIII delivered a speech on the radio that asked all parties to avoid nuclear warfare and casualties.
In the course of the next days both Khrushchev and Kennedy gave proof of restraint.
He is a rather unique case in having obtained special personal confidence of Nikita Khrushchev as proved by certain questions asked him which cannot be explained as ordinary moves of dissimulation.
This has been favored by his books and actions for peace which have been linked by Khrushchev and his friends, to organizations as SANE which are not under his control.
He is widely known as a humanist who is not identified with any particular creed and owes no allegiance to any church.
He is seen by Nikita Khrushchev and his friends as a typical leader of a new peace loving generation, which in a certain sense can be expected to owe primary allegiance to the human family and the cause of peace.
At the time the United States did not have a formal diplomatic relationship with the Holy See.
Morlion’s three-hour talk with these men would prove quite important, as he solicited and obtained permission for Cousins to travel to Moscow and meet with Khrushchev55 after a visit to the Vatican.
In other words, Morlion had managed to send Cousins to Moscow with a specifically religious agenda.
On October 29 Morlion had another transatlantic phone conversation with Cardinale regarding the possibility of a visit by Cousins to the Vatican, which was planned sometime between December 8 and 13.56 In the days thereafter, Washington was informed of this private initiative,57 and in late November Cousins received a phone call from Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to the United States, who indicated that Cousins could meet with Khrushchev on December 14.
As a result, a broader triangular structure of private contacts was established among Washington, Rome, and Moscow based on the personal contacts established by Cousins and Morlion.
The presence of Russian Orthodox observers at the Second Vatican Council stirred controversy, but could have been expected, given John XXIII’s overall approach to outreach.Without the knowledge of members of the Ukrainian episcopate, contacts had been evolving between the Vatican and the Kremlin since 1961.
Such contacts were largely separate from the SPCU’s ecumenical endeavors, but were equally important.
It was highly symbolic that in late November 1961, John XXIII addressed a personal letter to Khrushchev,58 who in March 1958 had become premier of the Soviet Union.
On October 29, Morlion had a second conversation with the Russian delegates and handed them a note he had prepared for Khrushchev that described the intentions of John XXIII and the upcoming book project on the new Vatican policies.
Il sogno di un tempo nuovo, ed.Andrea Riccardi and Augusto D’Angelo , 393.
For a start, the Ukrainian bishops at the Council, who noted the turn taken in Cardinale’s press conference, decided to continue their course of action.
Later, Hermaniuk would comment on this in an interview with the Ukrainian Weekly, July 26, 1987, 4, stating that “s chairman of the Ukrainian Catholic delegation I and the other 14 signed a joint letter calling for goodwill in releasing Slipyj.
Up until that point, the issue was too sensitive for any of the bishops to want to handle.
So we printed in the daily newspaper, II Giornale d’Italia on November 22, 1962.
That day all of the bishops attending Vatican II learned first-hand that we had no official voice.
The Ukrainians had clearly not realized that their action was hardly appreciated by the pope, given John XXIII’s efforts in diplomacy geared toward obtaining Slipyj’s release.
Kozyrev, the USSR ambassador to Italy, and Amintore Fanfani, the Roman Catholic prime minister of Italy.
After these conversations, Kozyrev believed an improved Holy See-Soviet Union relationship was on the horizon,66 although this would later prove to be a somewhat premature expectation.
From Rome to Moscow On December 12, after Morlion and Cousins had cleared their trip to Rome with Washington, they traveled to Rome and held conversations with Cardinals Cicognani and Bea, Monsignor Angelo Dell’Acqua, and Cardinale.
The non-Catholic Cousins—who did not meet with John XXIII due to the pope’s illness—was now acting as an unofficial intermediary for the pope on this trip to the Kremlin and was preparing for his talk with Khrushchev.
Certains évêques ukrainiens se sont désolidarisés de cette déclaration.
Mais le Secrétariat a jugé bon, d’accord avec la Secrétairerie d’État, de faire un communiqué de presse.
In Moscow, he wanted to raise the topic of Metropolitan J Slipyj, but His Eminence Card.
During his talk with Bea—who had been fully informed about the state of church affairs in Moscow by Willebrands only three weeks before67 and about the attitude of the Ukrainian hierarchy only a week before—the topic of Catholic suppression under Soviet rule was broached.
For many years he said, members of the religious community had been imprisoned inside the Soviet Union.
It would be a most favorable augurgy if at least one of them could be released.Would there be any particular person he had in mind, I asked.
The Holy Father would like the Archbishop to live out those few years in peace at some seminary, where he would be among his own.There is no intention to exploit the Archbishop’s release for propaganda purposes.
On December 14, Cousins flew from Rome to Moscow for a long conversation with Khrushchev.
This sixteen-page report by Cousins offers a full report of the dialogue.An English version was sent to Kennedy, and an Italian version was sent to John XXIII, Cardinale, Dell’Acqua,Tisserant, and Bea.
Cousins’s report mentions that Khrushchev was well aware of Willebrands’s first Moscow visit just before the Cuba crisis.
Here Khrushchev used about fifteen minutes to explain thoroughly the case of Bishop Slipyj, whom he had known; he had followed this case personally, from 1940, when he was President of the Cabinet of Ukraine.
He gave a detailed history of the religious events in Ukraine, expounding thoroughly the political questions around the figure of Slipyj’s predecessor, His Excellency Bishop Prince Sheptytsky.
Later, Khrushchev says that “I do not know where bishop Slipyj is now, nor whether he is alive or not; but I shall deal with the matter and have his case examined,” which seems to recognize the potential for enormous scandal should Slipyj be released.
But Cousins pressed further, stating that the Vatican would promise that it would not exploit any publicity, whereupon Khrushchev stated that “I will have the case examined, and I do not exclude a release, provided there are guarantees that nobody will make a political case out of it.
Regarding Sheptytsky, Khrushchev indicated that “it was not possible to go back to the situation that had existed under the Czar, when the priests were his gendarmes.
I would like to have improved relationships with the Vatican but this is not the way to do it.
There, the tumultuous first period of the Second Vatican Council had come to a close, and an overall new direction shaping Roman Catholicism was gradually evolving.
In Rome Cousins met with Morlion, Dell’Acqua, Cardinale, and Bea, plus the dean of cardinals, Eugène Tisserant.
To these men he reported on his conversation at the Kremlin and again noted Bea’s vivid interest in the possibility of religious amelioration and the request for the release of Slipyj.
On the basis of his own report he had a lengthy conversation with John XXIII in which both the pope’s diplomatic sensitivity and personal desire for world peace on a humanitarian basis were clear.
Pope John has profound convictions about the issue of war and peace in our time.War can no longer be considered a purely political question.The effects of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons on man, on the human germplasm, on the natural environment, on hundreds of millions of people outside the nuclear nations, and on generations to come—these effects clearly make the issue of war and peace a profound spiritual one.
But the Holy Father has no desire to create any embarrassment for the President or to undertake any initiatives that are unacceptable to the President or to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers.
I was grateful for the opportunity to report to you personally concerning my visit with Mr Khrushchev, from whom I sought assurances of enlarged religious freedom inside the Soviet Union.
He recognizes your desire to do everything possible to keep the differences now separating the nations from becoming the combustible material of a nuclear war.
He welcomes the establishment of unofficial and confidential contacts or communications.
He will give consideration to your request that Holy Literature be made increasingly available, with respect to both publication and distribution.
Cousins concluded that, like Vatican policy, Soviet policy at the summit was in transition, with Khrushchev searching for a workable relation to the West.Thus, a basic agreement among the three parties was moving toward fruition.
First, the pope allowed for the offices of the Vatican to be made available for the purpose of averting or abating geopolitical crisis.
Seemingly, the Vatican was even willing to engage in actual mediation between political powers.Thus, the Vatican was emerging as a fully accredited subject in international politics, maintaining its “third way” between Washington and Moscow.
Second, the absence of nuclear conflict, described in terms of peaceful coexistence or competitive coexistence, was to be maintained through mutual respect for the conditions that make this possible.
Third, beyond the negative condition of absence of nuclear conflict, the possibility emerged for positive action.
Such positive action was to be rooted in a broad “humanistic consensus” designed to foster the full development of human resources and capacities on the planet.This perspective could be shared by all parties involved.
However, reducing the fate of Slipyj to a simple result of grand diplomacy among major political players does not reflect the full picture.
February 2–4, 1963 Although there is no proof that Willebrands and Cousins met in the last months of 1962, both had been key players behind the scenes in Slipyj’s release.
Both had interacted with major figures behind the Iron Curtain and were therefore well aware that any type of accusation of political bias against the Vatican or the Council must be avoided.
Moreover, both were skilled in diplomatic encounters within their domain—Cousins in cultural and political milieux, Willebrands in ecumenical venues.
In addition, both knew of the pope’s personal longing79 for the liberation of Slipyj; in Willebrands’s case, it had become clear that John XXIII had asked his old friend Testa to contact the Russian observers at the Council in view of a possible release.
Now, after Cousins’s return to the United States, a period of calm set in.
In early January 1963 Soviet government officials discussed a report by Borovoj on the Second Vatican Council and invited him to elaborate on it.
As you know, any betterment of the human situation in this world—whatever the country involved—is of importance to the United States.
The national interest and the human interest come together in our fundamental objectives as a nation.
See the confidential note in KDC, Archives Willebrands, “Contacts avec les autorités du Patriarcat de Moscou,” in which a conversation is mentioned in view of Slipyj’s liberation among Testa, Bea,Willebrands, Borovoj, and Kotliarov.
It was clear that the pope was highly respected inside the Kremlin, as had become evident during the December 14 CousinsKhrushchev talk.
Also, it indicated a kind of benevolence toward the West and a more open stance toward ecumenical engagement, given the personal risk that Borovoj was taking to obtain the release of the Ukrainian archbishop.
Meanwhile, in Vatican circles, Monsignor Pietro Pavan was preparing an encyclical letter, which would be promulgated on April 11 under the title of Pacem in Terris.
This encyclical, to be presented by Suenens at the headquarters of the United Nations in May 1963, would prove to be a worthy and lasting testimony of John XXIII’s endeavors to safeguard world peace and for Vatican diplomats meant the official opening up of a “third way” between Washington and Moscow.
In that regard the encyclical remains a milestone that inaugurated a long process of the Catholic Church’s dealings with the communist world.
At the lunch Cousins and Morlion were informed of Khrushchev’s decision to release Slipyj from his Siberian exile without further conditions and without a new trial.
From that moment on the news spread quickly, and by January 25 Kozyrev had informed Fanfani of Slipyj’s release.
On that same day, Cardinale and Dell’Acqua met with Willebrands88 from the SPCU—in the absence of Bea, who was in Copenhagen—and commissioned Willebrands to meet with Kozyrev that evening to have the news officially confirmed.
Their conversation dealt mainly with practical issues regarding Slipyj’s release and his journey from Moscow to Rome.
On the preparation of this encyclical, see also Turbanti, Un concilio per il mondo moderno, 227.
Kozyrev,” January 25, 1963, 1:“Pour ce cas, tu devrais prendre contact avec le citoyen italien, avec lequel j’ai parlé de cette affaire.
Kozyrev,” January 25, 1963, 1:“Je lui ai dit que le Saint Siège avait reçu des nouvelles que l’archevêque Josyf Slipyj serait mis en liberté sans conditions.
In these matters the central issue was the avoidance of press sensationalism, as the actions of the Ukrainian episcopate were still fresh in memory.
The same sense of diplomacy surfaced when Willebrands expressed a need to visit the Moscow Patriarchate during his trip to ensure that inadvertent offense was not given.
Kozyrev’s wish to improve the relationship between the Holy See and the Soviet Union also was evident.
When I said “No”, he was a little disappointed and said:“I thought there was something else you needed to tell me again.
The Ambassador responded:“In my opinion, the time has come to discuss the details.
In the subsequent days Willebrands would prepare for his second journey to Moscow, with departure scheduled for February 1, 1963.
Two days before, John XXIII had a personal message delivered to him, as well as the gift of a rosary for Slipyj.
As for Slipyj’s release, it appeared that the Soviets thought it crucial that it was not to be considered a rehabilitation.
It was emphasized that, even though a new trial would not be held and conditions were not attached to the 90 KDC, Archives Willebrands, “Conversation avec S Exc.
Je sais qu’il y a eu des contacts au sujet d’une telle possibilité en principe, mais je ne connais pas les détails.
Si possono dare a Mr Willebrands almeno una ventina di medaglie d’argento del Concilio.
On Friday, February 1, 1963, Willebrands arrived in Moscow and was met by Borovoj, who escorted him to the Hotel Metropol.
The next morning, he met with Vladimir A Kurojedov—the president of the Soviet Council for Ecclesiastical Affairs who in 1960 had been vehemently against Russian participation in the Second Vatican Council—as well as with Peter Makkarsev from the Soviet Council for External Affairs.
After mutual congratulations,Willebrands explained that, once they reached Rome, Slipyj would spend some time at the Greek Catholic Abbey of Grottaferrata; during this period the Vatican would distribute a brief and sober press statement.
Willebrands made clear that the SPCU’s intentions lay primarily in the field of reuniting Christianity as well as developing improved relationships with other religions96 and secular entities and organizations.
Il s’agit ici d’une question de première importance, notamment la position de votre église dans l’Union soviétique.
In the afternoon of that day Willebrands paid his visit to the Moscow Patriarchate’s Office for External Relationships, where he had a short conversation with the Estonian bishop Alexis of Tallin, and the day after he visited the monastery at Zagorsk for a meeting with Archimandrite Pimen and the rector of the Moscow Ecclesiastical Academy.
Of greater interest is the fact that on the early morning of that day Willebrands met with Slipyj at the Hotel Moskva.
I told him that I understood deeply his desire to see his church and his family again, but I could not determine the possibility of such a journey.
In a second meeting that evening the same wish was expressed again, with Slipyj making clear that this was a question of conscience, and the issue recurred until Willebrands,on the morning of February 4,presented Slipyj with a schedule for the journey outlined by Testa and Dell’Acqua, making clear that Slipyj was expected to come to Rome.
By that time, Slipyj had decided to ship his luggage to Lviv and stay with Willebrands, but he also was considering how he should respond to the Russian accusation that he had simply acted to save his own life and liberty.
And to this question he replied that, in this case, he would not hesitate to go to Rome.1 In the afternoon, Slipyj clandestinely ordained Basil Velychskovsky as bishop,102 thereby strengthening the underground episcopate in Ukraine under Soviet rule.
That evening, Slipyj and Willebrands took the train to Vienna, where Papal Nuncio Opilio Rossi received them on February 6, 1963.103 From Austria they traveled to Rome.
On February 10 Slipyj arrived at Grottaferrata, where “for the first time in seventeen years he fully celebrated the high Slavic rite.
Two days later his diary recorded the following:“Today I received a very nice letter from the Apostolic Delegate in Ottawa, His Eminence Sebastiano Baggio, on the occasion of the liberation of our dear Metropolitan Josyf Slipyj.
That was an extraordinarily nice gesture from the side of a personal representative of the Vicar of Christ.
Next, Morlion states that “before creating the sensational news that Soviet Russia has asked and obtained diplomatic relations the Holy See must be able to prove that it has guarantees that stalinist terror and totalitarianism are irreversibly suppressed.
In this report constant tension is evident between Bea, who insists on preparatory unofficial contacts, and Kozyrev, who hopes for the immediate establishment of official diplomatic relations.
A week later, on February 15, Willebrands met with Kozyrev to inform him of the events during his Moscow trip.
During that meeting Kozyrev made it quite clear that “si le Vatican désire des relations avec l’Union soviétique—et je crois bien que cela serait utile—on ne peut pas poser des conditions.
Freedom outside the school, of family meetings in which children are given supplementary spiritual instruction in the tradition of their great nation and full loyalty to the rightful authorities.
Freedom of expression for organs (similar to the one permitted for the Russian Orthodox Church) on which different religious and spiritual tendencies can develop, holy literature can be disseminated and commented.
Freedom of charitable action, particularly in the use of savings and individuals and of enterprises for the help to the underprivileged in undeveloped nations.
It was clear that the road toward official relations between Rome and Moscow would not be an easy one.
Yet it was significant that John XXIII granted an audience on March 7 to Alexei Adjubei, son-in-law of Khrushchev,109 who was attending the presentation of the International Balzan Peace Prize to the pope on March 10.
We are hopeful that, by establishing contact with one another and by a policy of negotiation, nations will come to a better recognition of the natural ties that bind them together as men.We are hopeful, too, that they will come to a fairer realization of one of the cardinal duties deriving from our common nature: namely, that love, not fear, must dominate the relationships between individuals and between nations.
John’s decision to receive Adhzubei and to accept the prize was highly controversial in Italian right-wing circles and received much negative press attention.As a result, for a planned meeting between Bea and Adhzubei, Bea did not attend, but sent Willebrands in his stead.
At this meeting, Willebrands clearly and openly addressed the problematic issue of the UGCC under suppression.
Meselis, mais il n’est pas normal de n’avoir qu’un seul évêque dans ce pays catholique.
En Ukraine notre église, qui autrefois comptait cinq millions de membres, officiellement n’existe plus.
