The Saudi-Iranian Rivalry and the Future of Middle East Security This monograph reviews the outlook of the Middle Eastern countries, including Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Egypt, Kuwait, Bahrain, Yemen, Libya, Lebanon, Israel, and Syria.
Of these, Iran and Saudi Arabia are becoming the two behemoth forces in the Middle East.
While Saudi Arabia has most control over Gulf-area Arab states and is a close ally with the United States, Iran’s closest Arab allies are Syria and the Palestinian territories that support Hamas and Hezbollah.
The author presents several conclusions and recommendations for the United States policymakers to consider, emphasizing strategic interests as a way to bolster peaceful negotiations with Middle Eastern states, rather than persistent conflict over reform and democracy.
The authors explore this issue from the Russian perspective to analyze and examine the legal status of various activities in cyberspace, including what constitutes a hostile activity.
The authors adequately present each side of the argument and confirm that to date an agreement on this expanding field of conflict has not yet been met.
Within the conclusion section, the authors present implications for United States policy makers to consider; including taking a closer observation of how Russia defines cyber warfare and information weapons.
After United States policymakers have determined Russian’s interpretations, they may be better equipped to strategizing their defense.
Students participating in cybersecurity and foreign policy programs may be interested in this text.
Additionally, students pursuing a law degree may find this text informative for international law classes.
Political scientists, diplomats, international law attorneys, intelligence community teams, and military strategists should keep this text on their bookshelf for referral for guidance about complex negotiations.
Joint Contexts and Global Escalation Implications This unclassified monograph examines past and present joint and Army cyberspace military operations, as well as how these operations may fit into the complex and dynamic sphere of international deterrence and escalation.
It provides information about the founding and responsibilities of the military units that comprise the United States Cyber Command for offensive and defensive initiatives with network operations for protection of the United States Department of Defense global information grid.
Primarily, these operations were developed to provide a deterrence to a nuclear threat, prior to the 21st century.
Now these defenses are used to influence national response across the intelligence community and law enforcement as a method for deterrence and escalation to possibly reduce risk.
Military science and cyberspace or cybersecurity students may be interested in this text.
Additionally, United States military personnel, United States international community, law enforcement, and historians may find this book useful in their operations.
The United States Army War College, Strategic Studies Institute recently has published a few very timely monographs with a primary focus on United States national security, public policy and international relations topics.
The Strategic Studies Institute conducts strategic research and analysis to support the United States Army War College curricula, provides direct analysis for Army and Department of Defense leadership, and serves as a bridge to the wider strategic community.
SSI is composed of civilian research professors, uniformed military officers, and a professional support staff.
In addition to its organic resources, SSI has a web of partnerships with strategic analysts around the world, including the foremost thinkers in the field of security and military strategy.
In most years, about half of SSI’s publications are written by these external partners.
The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and IAEA have had frequent mention in the mainstream news media recently due to ongoing nuclear weapon development discussions with Iran, as well as increased tensions with the Soviet Union.
This book reviews the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty agreements that the United States has with many countries from an historical perspective.
Although a bit technical in nature, this work does include an array of essays by different contributors that analyze different articles of the Nuclear Nonproliferation treaty and provide their insights to the reader.
One area that was very beneficial to me is that this work defines the responsibilities of the International Atomic Emergency Agency and their practices for safeguarding nuclear programs, including coverage of nuclear program inspections.
This book also contains insights about nuclear weapons treaties with other countries that are already in place with the USA and provides some background to those treaties.
Additionally, this text explores how treaty agreements work, mentioning “Articles” within the treaty that often pertain to terms of conditions that each country should abide.
Many political scientists, historians, and diplomats may be familiar with this process, but many American citizens who are not routinely involved in negotiations with these diplomatic matters might benefit.
Also high school students may be interested in this material to stay on top of current events for their global studies classes.
This monograph focuses on the making of nuclear fuel– a process that is expensive and complex.
The first section of this book features “Nuclear Proliferation Matters,” which covers the argument that nuclear weapons proliferation is more likely to occur with the spread of civilian nuclear technology and that such nuclear proliferation constitutes a threat to international security—certainly if there is nuclear weapons use, but even if there is not.
The volume’s second section, “Nuclear Power, Nuclear Weapons—Clarifying the Links,” makes the case that civilian nuclear power programs actually afford a major leg up for any nation seeking development of a nuclear weapons option.
Each chapter within this text has a different contributor to the point of view, but the overall themes are maintained.
Plus, some chapters include an analysis of specific Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty Articles which are helpful to make their discussion points understood.
Some of the contributors’ discussions indicate that the past historical events worked well in policy, but the implementations and enforcements of the policies seemed to be more troublesome.
Additionally, within each section, historical events relating to these discussions are presented to the reader to point out a sense of initiatives that will be needed to strengthen the monitoring for greater security.
This guide helped me to better understand the intense negotiations that the United States foreign diplomats and ambassadors in foreign countries must engage in with our allies and other countries to achieve the end result of greater global security.
This monograph provides the historical perspective that began with fear around the time of World War II and continued through the 1950s to 1960s regarding Russia’s expansion of their missile defense and nuclear weapons programs.
Russian Flag During the late 1990s, the United States became aware that Russia had started to sell some of its missile defense weapons to rogue states within the Middle East.
These countries created another possible harm to the United States, rather than a direct attack from Russia.
As a result, the United States began implementing missile warhead interceptors as part of their long-term defense plan.
The primary focus within the pages of this book is about America’s expansion plan to build missile defense sites in select European and Asian countries to aid in our national defense strategy and Russia’s adversarial challenges to this United States strategic plot.
The authors have included primary source excerpts from actual conversations and speeches between world leaders that add to each of their points of discussion throughout this work.
Again, the United States Army War College’s Strategic Studies Institute has released a title with historical perspectives that can shed insights into today’s current events concerning United States and Russia missile defense program relations.
Undergraduate and graduate political science classes with a focus on comparative politics and U.S.-Russian relations may have interest in this book as a supplemental reading text or reference for research.
July 13, 2011 Guest Blogger Matthew Brentzel takes a look at the capabilities of United States Weapons of Mass Destruction response teams.
Every so often, I look back on those horrific atrocities committed on September 11, 2001.
I remember being in middle school, where the teachers were reluctant to inform us of what was going on.
I also remember the news stories questioning the capability of our country to deal with such a catastrophe.
Although we are surrounded by fear and uncertainty in trying times, we can always find relief by looking towards the brave men and women that put their lives on the line for the good of our country.
I’ve heard stories from my grandparents about Pearl Harbor and the impact it had on history.
We can all agree that these events were truly awful, but we must also accept the fact that we live in troubled times and events like these may be minor compared to the crises that could occur.
Four WMD Crises that could Transform United States Security, by the Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction takes a stab at discussing this heated topic in a serious but effective manner.
Perhaps most of us are more inclined to worry about preventing these events rather than preparing to respond to them, but there are times when prevention is not enough and response is necessary.
While reading this book, at first I was taken aback by its willingness to accept the possible losses in one of the scenarios, but this approach enlightens the reader by stressing the high importance of applying appropriate countermeasures.
This clear, concise report delves into four different crisis simulations in detail, including preventative measures and how we can be ready to counter such events.
It also goes on to discuss the policy implications of each of these crises for the United States as a whole.
In addition, although at first I was reluctant to believe it, this book helped me realize that we will be able to move on as a nation even though the events it describes could severely alter our future.
