In 1962, Soviet Union decided to convert Cuba into a Russian base as it provided USSR diplomatic and financial aid both.
The United States became aware of it and ordered American warships to intercept to Soviet Union to remove missiles to avoid full scale nuclear war.
Origins and public release The document was presented by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara on 13 March 1962 as a preliminary submission for planning purposes.
The Joint Chiefs recommended that both the covert and overt aspects of any such operation be assigned to them.
April 17, 1961 – April 20, 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion/Periods On April 17, 1961, 1,400 Cuban exiles launched what became a botched invasion at the Bay of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba.
In 1959, Fidel Castro came to power in an armed revolt that overthrew Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.
Cuba was an ally of the Soviet Union and received diplomatic and financial aid from it.
Components of Brigade 2506 landed at the Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961 and were defeated within 2 days by Cuban armed forces under the direct command of Castro.
The failed invasion strengthened the position of Castro’s administration, which proceeded to openly proclaim its intention to adopt socialism and pursue closer ties with the Soviet Union.
It also led to a reassessment of Cuba policy by the Kennedy administration.
Despite substantial popular support for Castro, many Cubans did not agree with his revolution and left for exile.
The Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 was doomed to fail even before the first shot was fired.
He did so because he felt the United States could not appear to be behind the invasion.
The invasion was financed and directed by the United States government.
Some critics thought that the United States had not been aggressive enough in its support of the Bay of Pigs invasion and had left an impression of irresolution, while others later questioned United States misjudgment of the Cubans’ fighting prowess.
The incident was crucial to the development of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962.
