Just a year later, the United States noticed a large influx of weapons being transported from the Soviet Union to Cuba.
Based on aerial surveillance, Washington realized these were nuclear missiles, capable of reaching much of United States territory.
President Kennedy addressed the nation on October 22 as the world feared it was on the brink of a nuclear war.
We should have asked ourselves more seriously what the Russians were doing, and what Khrushchev would do when the basic notion that they were way ahead of us in the missile field was officially reversed by us , and Khrushchev was confronted with the issue of what to do about it in order not to lose all his momentum.
I think others who were working this problem and myself should have been more thoughtful about it.
But there was a military relationship between the Soviets and the Cubans, which we tracked very carefully.
I can’t remember when we got the first reports that they were sending some medium-range bombers, IL-28s , to Cuba, which we didn’t think were that much of a problem, but were demonstrative.
We had fighters and were able to watch them pretty carefully through reconnaissance and other intelligence techniques.
But Cuba was becoming more and more of a Soviet military position, not just ideological and political.
Actually, there was a lot of friction between the Soviets and Castro on a whole variety of grounds.
Then the Russians started transferring some surface-to-air defense missiles to Cuba.
That was a qualitative move, a change of the type of military equipment that had been going there.
They flew reconnaissance flights down our East Coast to Cuba, outside our territorial limits, and we watched.
Then in the summer of ’62, there were beginning reports and rumors and questions about whether they were moving something more than fairly modest numbers of mid-range bombers, but possibly missiles.
There were people who theorized that the Soviets weren’t going to send SA-2s to Cuba unless they had something very important to protect.
They speculated whether there was more military stuff going in there, including missiles.
The first indications…as always, disputes about how to interpret them…began to come in the late summer of 1962.
They thought the pattern of how air defense missiles were deployed resembled what the Soviets did in places where they had offensive missiles.
This is what was always said about Stalin, although by now Khrushchev had pretty much disabused people of that general theory — that the Russians were always cautious and precisely judged the risk factors in what they were doing.
Already in the Middle East, their arms relationships with the Egyptians and the Syrians had gotten them close to potential conflicts there.
They had been quite aggressive in handling our aircraft operations around their periphery.
And in Berlin they had been quite provocative on a very sensitive issue for us; and then the excursion into Cuba, and into the Congo, for that matter, and other things.
There was some question whether Khrushchev really was in the Stalin mold of great caution.
I’m not even so sure how cautious Stalin should be viewed as having been.
So there were debates about whether the Soviets would do such a thing as put offensive missiles into Cuba, and would take the risks and chances right at the doorstep of the United States But there were people who were worried how we would react if something like this came to light.
He was, I think, for the Soviets a very productive source, maybe a confusing source, of American thoughts and preferences and ideas that he reported back directly to Khrushchev.
I’m sure it was kind of a difficult time all around, for the Soviets to determine what was going on here with Kennedy, and for us in determining what was going on in the Soviet Union.
People were reluctant to accept the notion that the Soviets would do something like putting missiles in Cuba.
Then, of course, the intelligence community was confronted with indisputable evidence and made the judgments that it did before these missiles became operational, and before all of them had been shipped into Cuba.
Their identification was based on intelligence that showed footprints in Cuba identical to those that they were watching inside the Soviet Union for this type of missile.
This was the core of Kremlinology — to see what the situation in the leadership was.
During Stalin’s time, people tracked potential splits and divisions in the Politburo, and so on.
After Stalin’s death, this became a fine art as well as science because there wasn’t this prestigious, tough, old fighter at the top, but the next generation of successors, who came in right at the start in 1953.
Malenkov wasn’t shot, but he was exiled, basically, and demoted; Khrushchev worked his way to the top; Beria, the chief cop, was executed.
There was a lot of turmoil in the leadership before Khrushchev began to sort of stabilize his position.
The questions of who’s on top and who’s against whom were very much a matter of constant concern.
We weren’t so sure when this problem developed in Cuba, and a lot of study has been done since.
Of course, anything that leaked out of the Politburo in the end always showed a substantial majority, if not unanimity.
I think those reports didn’t really get in deep enough, because our intelligence was good, but not so good that you could really penetrate in the depths of it.
By the time of the Cuban missile crisis, Khrushchev appeared to us as something of an adventurer — somebody who wanted to be sure that everybody realized that the Soviet Union was a great power, and a global power, as we’d say now.
Soviets said, even Foreign Minister Gromyko would say, “There’s no problem anywhere in the world which can be settled without the Soviet Union,” and so on.
That is, they felt that Khrushchev wanted to threaten us with missiles in order to make clear to us that we couldn’t escalate a conflict over Berlin without a risk of serious damage from several directions to our homeland.
My feeling at the time was that he was trying to make up for the ground that he lost after bluffing with his strategic missile advances, starting in 1957, and having been discovered as a bluffer.
We announced this to him in the Gilpatrick speech, but we announced it in other ways as well.
He needed something to tide him over so that he wouldn’t have to pour additional resources into what had now become a real race in the offensive area.
I thought that was a more weighty reason for his going into Cuba than trying to break the logjam in Berlin.
In fact, I…gave an extemporaneous talk at Johns Hopkins in which I suggested rather boldly that the eventual collapse of the Soviet Union, not quite 30 years later, was foreshadowed in Khrushchev’s getting the Soviet Union into a major and continuing arms race with the United States, which economically bankrupted them.
As I have said, theorizing about Khrushchev’s motives and intentions went on throughout the crisis.
But once the offensive missile deployments in Cuba were established without doubt by our intelligence, we went into crisis mode.
INR obviously didn’t make policy – despite the inclinations of its Director, Roger Hilsman, to help out in this respect – but we concentrated our analytical products on the growing information flow and on assessments of probable Soviet responses to the several United States actions that were being considered.
We were also under siege from the press, which in those days had virtually complete access to the State Department building.
The prominent diplomatic correspondents who smelled a rat held their fire when requested, but still tried to gather information for later use.
Ironically, Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko was in the United States for the annual UN General Assembly meeting, and he was meeting with both the President and Secretary of State Rusk about the usual agenda.
We heard that on Cuba, he assured each of them that all Soviet activities regarding Cuba were defensive.
From what trickled down to our level, we wondered, and wrote in a brief analysis, how much and indeed whether Gromyko knew what was going on in Cuba.
Once Kennedy had spoken, we analysts in INR looked for Soviet reactions, public and private.
As Kennedy’s speech had made clear, the United States was imposing a “quarantine” around Cuba.
Before Stevenson’s main address, Hilsman took me along to an Oval Office meeting where the text was being mulled over.
I was struck by how much time and effort, from the President on down, was being devoted to precise wording and even to the rhythm of the speech.
Whenever someone came up with an especially felicitous phrase, there was praise by the President and then by “Mac” Bundy, speechwriter Ted Sorenson, and court historian Arthur Schlesinger.
Somewhere in the back row, there was an NSC staffer who cautioned the drafters about accuracy and a legal expert who made sure that no threats were uttered that might contravene international law.
Stevenson eventually got full TV coverage of his UN presentation, including especially his dramatic clash with Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin.
The”Trollope Ploy“ – Responding to Khrushchev’s private letter I hunt-and-pecked away at my typewriter as I tried to figure out and write a report on the pattern of Soviet behavior.
In particular I was trying to figure out when the first encounter between the United States Navy and a Soviet missile-carrying vessel would occur.
But as the week following Kennedy‘s speech drew to a close, my memos began to sense a pattern of Soviet second thoughts.
Soviet ships challenged by United States destroyers were turning around.
After a few nights sleeping on a cot in my office, I went home for the weekend, having written a short memo analyzing Khrushchev’s hard-nosed public letter to Kennedy.
I rushed back to the office, and was told that Bobby Kennedy had already urged the President to ignore the public letter and to respond to the private one.
This, of course, was not our call to make, but as I recall, the memo we wrote concluded that the private letter was indeed the more valid message.
We did what we could to feed judgments about Soviet intentions to John McCloy, who headed the post-crisis haggling with Mikoyan, his Soviet counterpart.
My colleagues and I could then begin to devote time to reflecting on what had happened, what it meant for the future, and why the pre-crisis National Intelligence Estimate had on balance concluded that Khrushchev wouldn’t run the risks which he ended up running.
It wasn’t really much of an arms control treaty, since underground tests continued.
There was some feeling that perhaps Khrushchev was trying to cool the frictions with the United States a bit, after suffering the setback of the missile crisis and basically having to give up on his efforts to create a separate regime in Berlin via the free city proposal.
Not long afterwards, Kennedy was assassinated, and there was some worry in Moscow because the man who was caught had lived in Russia.
View All A Moment in United States Diplomatic History Military Cold War Russia/Soviet Union Articles.
Liz DeeOctober 13, 2015A Moment in United States Diplomatic History, Cold War, Military, Russia/Soviet UnionPermalink ADST Follow 5,054 4,556 Capturing, preserving, and sharing the experiences of America's diplomats.
The Saur Revolution led to the Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan in late 1979.
