They can learn the facts of this period, but the feelings associated with the experience are beyond the scope of social science.
Such feelings should be part of teaching and learning about international studies.
Instructors can present history and politics, but without an emotional sense of empathy, students will never fully understand the subtle complexity of international affairs.
They must be able to view the world from different perspectives, participating in the values, feelings, and perceptions of others.
This study describes a computer simulation that allows students to participate in the emotional affect of the Cold War, developing a sense of empathy with decision makers.
A conclusion introduces a means by which instructors can replicate the simulation experience.
They understand a different kind of dangerFthe risk of terrorism and the fear of attack against a building or city that could kill thousands.
The concept of millions dying from a thermonuclear war over the course of a few days is a concept they may grasp intellectually, but the emotive feelings associated with such a disaster are illusive.
This potential catastrophe was unique to the Cold War era, crystallized in the events of October 1962, 13 days when the world stood on the brink of disaster.
Between a one in three and even chance of nuclear war was the retrospective description used by Robert F Kennedy, and those who lived through this event remember the feelings of helplessness and despair.
Today’s students can learn about the history, strategy, and diplomacy of this crisis, but the feelings associated with the danger of the Cold War seem lost to the shadows of time.
Such feelings should be an important part of teaching and learning international studies.
Instructors can present the facts of political science, diplomatic history, law, strategy, and economics, but without a sense of emotional empathy for others, students will never fully understand the subtle complexity of international relations.
They must be able to view the world from different perspectives, participating in ‘‘the values, feelings, and perceptions of another’’ , in order to learn more completely the spirit of an earlier time or different cultural setting.
Including affective, emotional elements in our understanding of international relations is important, for it encourages humanistic discernment, supplementing the analytical, quantitative basis of our discipline. r 2007 International Studies Association.
Whether simple or complex, these simulations seem to have a useful effect on teaching and learning as reported by the instructors who use them.
For example, Shellman and Turan agree with Brown and King and Kuzma and Haney about their usefulness.
These conclusions and many others like them are based on several different types of evaluations.
These types of evaluations and others like them provide evidence that simulations have a positive effect on teaching and learning.
Evaluative studies suffer from two fundamental problems in their methodology, limiting their usefulness in assessing the pedagogy of simulations.
First, few studies use a control group with which the simulation participants can be compared.
Ideally, a class should be divided into two parts; one participating in the simulation, and the other uninvolved.
They would have the same instructor and reading assignments with only the simulation as the independent variable.
Alternately, in larger universities, two sections of the same course might be used in a study that could choose one section as a control group and the other as an experimental group.
This type of research design could present difficulties in an academic setting where the control group might feel left out of the excitement and enjoyment of the simulation.
For studies to achieve a higher level of methodological reliability, however, some type of control is essential.
One group of students who have participated in a simulation responds to a written or oral debriefing, and perhaps fills out pre and postsimulation surveys.
Educators need to duplicate such studies in different institutions, at different times, with different types of students, lending greater confidence to their findings.
One class was the experimental group who participated in the simulation.
They were upper-division students, juniors, and a few seniors, who read material about the crisis and spent three class periods discussing it before beginning the simulation.
They were lower division, introductory students, mainly sophomores, who read different material about the crisis and also spent three class periods discussing it.
In addition to the simulation experience itself, there were two asymmetries between the control and experimental groupsFa difference in the content of their reading and in their level of academic experience.
Ideally, both groups would be at the same academic level, reading the same material at the same time, but this was not possible, due to a limited number of courses and students at the institution where the study took place.
The study relied on comparing individuals who had already enrolled in the two classes.
Randomization would have strengthened the study, but this is not always possible in an educational setting where research must accommodate the academic mission and class schedules of institutions.
While this is notable, it should not negate the usefulness of the control group for two reasons.
Thus, both groups were exposed to written material and discussions about the crisis.
Second, the difference in age and experience between sophomores in the control group and mostly juniors in the experiential group could be a contaminating factor.
However, it should not be so great a difference to abrogate the potential benefit of a control group, strengthening the reliability of the findings.
Even in clinical trials involving medical research, the control and experimental groups are never identical.
On the American team, the roles included President Kennedy, the vice president, attorney general, secretary of state, under secretary of state, deputy under secretary of state for political affairs, secretary of defense, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, director of the central intelligence agency, assistant secretary of defense, national security advisor, ambassador at large, director of the United States information agency, a presidential assistant, and a political advisor.
The Cuban team was smaller but had enough roles to permit small group deliberation.
As part of their simulation experience, they wrote a brief paper described as a ‘‘subjective rather than objective effort’’ at research.
They were instructed that the paper should not be a neutral, balanced report.
Rather, students should present the paper from their simulated countries’ perspective, using sources from the state they are simulating as well as historical news reports and academic, scholarly work.
Students were also instructed to present the paper in an innovative manner, attempting to achieve a degree of empathy with the simulated state.
For example, writing a state of the world address by a head of government, a briefing by a foreign minister, messages from an ambassador abroad, or a secret report on military preparedness by a security advisor can help students better adopt the role they are simulating and feel what it is like to be a decision maker in their simulated state.
Heads of states wrote about the historical context of the crisis, their countries’ goals, and the dangers the crisis posed.
Advisors wrote about their role in the government, their values, and the ideal outcome of the crisis from their institutional perspectives.
After this preparation, students received a scenario presenting a listing of historical events immediately before the crisis.
The events were written in language reflecting the ideology and values of each involved country.
The plan is one of several assassination plots against the Cuban leader devised by the United States government between 1960 and 1962.
A multiservice United States military exercise designed to test contingency planning for Cuba begins.
Another military exercise in the Caribbean is planned for sometime in the spring or summer.
Soviet and Cuban sources conclude that the series of military exercises is additional evidence of United States intentions to invade Cuba.
They are trying to present the case as though rocket bases of the Soviet Union are being set up or are already established in Cuba.
A Soviet special envoy arrives in Cuba with a delegation to meet with Fidel Castro and his brother Raul, the Cuban Minister of Defense.
Expressing their concern over the possibility of a new United States invasion of Cuba, the Soviet officials state that the Soviet Union is prepared to assist Cuba in fortifying its defenses, even to the extent of deploying nuclear missiles on Cuban soil.
June 13, 1961: General Maxwell Taylor submits a report on United States limited war programs following the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Taylor calls for the creation of a new program of action against Cuba, possibly using the full range of political, military, economic, and psychological tactics.
The United States Intelligence Board states that some intelligence indicates the possible ongoing deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba.
The scenario followed historical events up to the launch of the United States U-2 ‘‘reconnaissance’’ or ‘‘spy’’ plane that discovered the missiles.
Instead of photographing the missiles, however, the aircraft crashed in Cuba, and the pilot became a prisoner of Cuban authorities.
This meant that the American team could not be certain that the missiles had been deployed in Cuba.
It also provided a possible diversion for the United States, raising a possible necessity for recovering the pilot and aircraft, thus eclipsing the more pressing need for preventing missile deployment.
The pilot-prisoner also gave the Cubans (and potentially the Soviets) an immediate issue about which they could negotiate with the United States.
The simulation is set in the fall of 1962, and all actual world events occurring immediately before October 11, 1962, are taken into account at the onset of play.
However, once the simulation begins, activities that occurred after October 11, 1962, are no longer relevant.
The teams are expected to enact successfully the foreign policy goals presented by the heads of state in their papers.
Advisors deliberate the issues, making recommendations, but the heads of state have final authority for policy decisions.
A simulation director serves as a referee, responsible for interpreting game rules, determining whether nonroutine moves may be permitted, judging outcomes, sometimes introducing additional facts into the simulation, and generally assuring that the game runs smoothly.
The heads of state then meet with their advisors at a prearranged location during class time to discuss their strategy.
Having received recommendations from their advisory groups, the heads of state may issue instructions for negotiation, give assignments to team members, obtain reports from advisors after negotiations, and ultimately prepare move forms.
Copies of the move forms are posted on the web site (or bulletin board if there are technical problems) at a specific time on the day following the advisory group’s meeting.
This simulation involved four moves, with the last set of move forms presented in class as part of a debriefing process.
Students in a lower-division class constituted the control group for this simulation.
They read the book Essence of Decision and devoted three class sessions to decision making during the crisis.
Both the control and the experimental groups were given quantitative pretest questionnaires at the beginning of the course and posttest questionnaires at the end of the simulation.
In addition, the experimental group was given qualitative preand postsimulation questionnaires asking the following: As you consider your perceptions about the Cold War, write some adjectives that describe your feelings.
The experimental group’s data suggest a trend indicating changed feelings toward the Cold War after students’ participation in the simulation.
In three categories of paired adjectives, there is a trend in which subjects viewed the Cold War differently after their experience with the simulation.
It is also possible that the changes are an artifact of the small sample size.
It is likely, however, that the simulation itself, a lively, engaging, and dramatic experience, is the explanatory factor.
Qualitative explanations and descriptions of these attitudes in the questionnaires support the quantitative data.
Before the simulation, students described their feelings about the Cold War using adjectives such as distrust, deception, deceit, disbelief, competition, hostility, intrigue, confusion, uncertainty, and resentment.
After the simulation, they used words like fearful, scary, life threatening, unpredictable, dangerous, paranoid, anxious, worrisome, stressful, tense, and risky.
I would have been ‘‘suspicious of those around me and of those in charge.
Conclusion These quantitative and qualitative responses suggest that students have a better appreciation about the risk, danger, and fear associated with the Cold War as a result of participating in this simulation.
Despite the methodological issues described above, the introduction of a control group provides a somewhat greater level of confidence in the quantitative findings, and the qualitative responses support the statistical data.
Replication of this study and others would help lend greater reliability to findings about the effect of simulations on teaching and learning.
Additionally, the site presents a contemporary Middle East simulation that involves universities, faculty, and students in Egypt, Lebanon, Israel, Morocco, and the United States.
Instructors can join this simulation during the scheduled times or create their own version using the template on the site.
A third deals with international legal adjudication that has been useful in the teaching of international law.
The Integration of Research Studies on the Use of Simulation as an Instructional Strategy.
A Review of Scholarship on Assessing Experimental Learning Effectiveness.
Teaching Students about the Fuzziness of World Politics and International Law.
Simulations and Experiential Learning in the International Relations Classroom.
Newsletter for the Active Learning in International Affairs Section of the International Studies Association 4 : 1.
MCINTOSH, D The Uses and Limits of the Model United Nations in an International Relations Classroom.
In Simulation and Gaming across Disciplines and Cultures, edited by D Crookall and K Arai.
An Examination of Exercises on Peacekeeping Operations and Foreign Policy Decision Making.
Reflections on Middle East Conflict from Jewish, Muslim, and Christian Perspectives.
Teaching Collective Action in International Relations and Organization.
