The first missile crisis t a p w r actually extracts from it, together with an 87-page ""sanitized"" transcript-was released last year by the Kennedy Library.
Internatioml Security, Summer 1985 0162-2889/85/0164-40$02.50/1 0 1985 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The passage Schlesinger alludes to was introduced by Robert Kennedy raising the issue of an invasion, and in fact practically every time he spoke in the course of these October 16 meetings, his comments seemed to point in that dire~tion.
In particular, McNamara‘s view was the basis for his belief that the missiles posed not a “military problem’’ but simply a “domestic, political problem’’-and this assumption lay at the heart of his thinking about what should be done.I6 These are all fairly narrow points.
Myths are easy enough to deflate, and some of the hyperbole lavished on this episode-”this combination of toughness and restraint, of will, nerve and wisdom, so brilliantly controlled, so matchlessly ~alibrated”’~-is almost embarrassing to read in the light of the evidence.
Uhm, first, uh, that we, uh, stimulate the GAS’ procedure immediately for prompt action to make it quite clear that the entire hemisphere considers that the KOPact has been violated what acts should in, under the terms of the Rio Pact.
I think it would be important to use the, uh, consider, uh, calling in General Ei~enhower,~ giving him a full briefing before a public announcement is made as to the situation and the action which you might determine upon.
Mr President, there are a number of unknowns in this situation I want to comment upon, and, in relation to them, I would like to outline vely briefly some possible military alternatives and ask General Taylor to expand upon them.
Their Tuss statement of September 12, which the experts, I think, attribute very strongly to Khrushchev himself, is all mixed up on this point.
Uh, the questions will be whether, which, what I would describe a5 number two, which would be a general air strike.
McNamara: But the third course of action is any one of these variants of military action directed against Cuba, starting with an air attack against the missiles.
Documenfution 283I This is the very, very rough plan that the Chiefs have outlined, and it is their judgment that that is the type of air attack that should be carried out.
The political advantages are, are v e y strong, it seems to me, of the small strike.
October 26, 1962, 1O:OO AM Secretary Rusk summarized political actions now under way.
Ambassador Stevenson said the aim of the longer term talks would be the withdrawal from this hemisphere of the strategic missiles and the dismantlement of existing sites.
The President instructed the Defense Department to place the night reconnaissance planes on the alert and to prepare a public announcement of the mission in order that a final decision to he taken this afternoon could be promptly implemented.
The President left the meeting at this point with Mr Sorensen.I3 There ensued a discussion of how to handle the discrepancy between the Khrushchev private letter and the Russian offer made public in the Soviet statement.
October 27, 1962, 4:OO PM Secretary McNamara reported on today's daylight reconnaissance mission.
The President left the room to talk to General NorstadI6on the KY-9 secure telephone to Paris.
