Cold War Liberation The Soviet Union and the Collapse of the Portuguese Empire in Africa, 1961-1975 Natalia Telepneva THE UNIVERSITY of NORTH CAROLINA PRESS COLD WAR LIBERATION THE NEW COLD WAR HISTORY Odd Arne Westad, editor This series focuses on new interpretations of the Cold War era made possible by the opening of Soviet, East European, Chinese, and other archives.
A complete list of books published in The New Cold War History is available at www.uncpress.org.
Cold War liberation : the Soviet Union and the collapse of the Portuguese empire in Africa, 1961-1975 / Natalia Telepneva.
LCCN 2021052598 | ISBN 9781469665856 | ISBN 9781469665863 | 1sBN 9781469665870 Subjects: LCsH: Revolutionaries—Angola.
To the loving memory of my grandfather, Moisei Slutskii S H The Sustainable History Monograph Pilot M P Opening Up the Past, Publishing for the Future This book is published as part of the Sustainable History Monograph Pilot.
I am grateful to Arne Westad, who has been a consistent champion of this project, giving the much-needed encouragement and important feedback over the years.
He has pushed me to see the bigger picture and his own work has provided a source of inspiration.
This book started as a project, which focused primarily on the Cold War and high politics, but it has evolved in other directions, partly under the influence of the very talented people I have collaborated with over the past years.
In particular, I would like to thank David Anderson for encouraging me to think about African politics and Kristin Roth-Ey for inspiring me to conduct oral history interviews.
Vladimir Shubin has been extremely helpful, providing important contacts, advice and support over the years.
He has been an insightful critic, urging me to question assumptions as well as filling the gaps on some of the key protagonists in this story.
The generous British Academy Postdoctoral Fellowship grant provided the crucial basis for conducting research for this book.
I have learnt a great deal about East-Central Europe whilst working on the edited volume “Warsaw Intervention in the Third World” with Philip Muehlenbeck, as well as through discussions with colleagues on the “Socialism Goes Global” project.
In Portugal, I have greatly benefited from participating in the “Amilcar Cabral project” and from discussions and support from Juliao Soares Sousa, José Neves, Aurora Almada e Santos, and Catarina Laranjeiro.
Rui Lopes has been a wonderful critic and a great friend, whose enthusiasm for this work was uplifting in what was a long journey.
I am deeply indebted to Vladislav Zubok, Artemy Kalinovsky, Jeremy Friedman, Alexander Hill, Eric Burton, Mustafah Dhada, Nathaniel Powell, and Allen Isaacman, who read and gave useful feedback on earlier drafts and xiii xiv Acknowledgments chapters from the book.
My cousin Andrei Frolov gave extremely useful advice on certain military aspects of this story, spending long hours looking at old photos and explaining to me the technical specifications of Soviet weaponry.
I also want to thank George Roberts, James Brennan, Radoslav Yordanovy, Alessandro Iandolo, William Minter, Yusuf Adam, Nick Rutter, Irina Filatova, Elizabeth Banks, Corina Mavrodin, Hans-Georg and Iona Schleicher, Helder Fonseca, Sergei Radchenko, and Iva Cabral for sharing tips on sources and expertise.
Iam grateful to the archivists, especially at the Russian State Archive for Contemporary History and the Archive of Foreign Policy of the Russian Federation in Moscow, and the Security Services Archive in Prague who offered good advice and helped in processing requests for sources.
In Maputo, I want to thank Clinarete Munguambe and Carlos Jorge Siliya at Centro de Pesquisa da Histéria da Luta de Libertagao Nacional for helping me getting around and introducing me to ex-combatants.
In Cape Verde, Tatiana Neves at the Fundacao Amilcar Cabral provided contact details, while Saidu Banguru and Dominika Swolkien gave crucial logistical assistance and made me feel welcome during my trip to Praia and Mindelo.
My research trip to Guinea-Bissau would have been a very different experience without the enthusiastic support from Sana Baldé and information on ex-guerrillas received from Quentino Napoleon dos Reis at Museu Militar da Luta de Libertagao Nacional and Joao Paulo Pinto Cé and Papis Sadjo Turé at Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas.
Joana Sousa and Liam Carney translated oral histories from Kriol to English and Kim Friedlander helped improve the readability of the manuscript.
A very special thanks goes to the men and women who agreed to be interviewed for this book.
Due to the nature of this project, I could not spend any significant length of time in the countries I visited.
They thus had to take a chance on me, a person who waltzed in without much introduction, and trust me enough to share their stories.
I was particularly impressed with the generosity of Vasilii Solodovnikov who, at the age of ninety-seven years old when I met him, not only agreed to an interview, but also offered to work with his personal Acknowledgments xv papers, sharing his meals in the process.
I was sad to learn about his death in 2018, and that he would not see the book.
The final year of writing this book coincided with the Covid-19 pandemic.
Meanwhile, my friends have provided me with warm companionship, and a much-needed space not to talk about the book during rare moments of relaxation.
I am particular grateful to Natalia Lapotko, Adela Gjorgjioska, Bosiljka Kozomara, Daria Aitmatova, Vladimir Dobrenko, Elizaveta Tikheeva, Irina Maslenkova and Oleg Goriunov for being there for me when I need them.
None of this would have been possible without the love and support of my family.
Hussain Mehdi has been a true comrade-in-arms, taking over daily chores, offering psychological counselling and last-minute proofreading.
I want to thank my father Evgenii who translated documents from Czech and Polish and my mother Irina whose unconditional love sustains me.
They will forgive me for devoting this book to the memory of my grandfather, Moisei Slutskii.
A devoted husband, father, grandfather and a talented scientist, he weathered the ups and downs of Russia’s turbulent 20th century with his integrity and passion for life intact.
His deep-seated belief in the equality of all men and women irrespective of their gender, race, and ethnicity was what inspired me to write this book in the first place.
Thus, I have omitted soft signs, apostrophes, and diacritical marks throughout the text.
Xxi COLD WAR LIBERATION Introduction We are approaching Luanda, but nobody is at the airport.
In front of me, I see an Angolan soldier standing ten to fifteen feet away.
I can’t reach him because he will open fire and riddle me with bullets.
He stares at me menacingly, and I assume that he doesn’t know Portuguese.
I was rescued by the chief of airport security, an Angolan who knew me well.
Then we were accompanied to our hotel.’ — Boris Putilin HIS IS HOW BORIS PUTILIN recalls arriving at Angola’s capital, Luanda, on November 11, 1975.
The MPLA had been fighting for control over Luanda in the run-up to Angola’s independence on November 11.
The previous day, celebrations in the capital had begun with a symbolic torchlight procession to commemorate the beginning of a popular uprising against Portuguese colonial rule in Luanda on February 4, 1961.
Putilin flew to Luanda to attend the inauguration of the MPLA’s leader, Agostinho Neto, as the first president of independent Angola.
After landing in Luanda, they were escorted to a hotel and then to city hall for the ceremony.
Putilin 2 Introduction recalled that Afanasenko was the first foreign dignitary to address the crowds from the balcony of city hall.
Standing next to Neto, he read out a short greeting from the Soviet government to the cheering crowds.
The Portuguese Empire in Africa began to crumble after a group of military officers overthrew the Portuguese dictatorship in a military coup in Lisbon on April 25, 1974.
The new government also moved swiftly to negotiate independence for the Portuguese colonies in Africa.
The PAIGC and FRELIMO had dominated the military struggle against Portuguese colonial rule in Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique, respectively, and thus transitions to independence were relatively smooth.
The situation was markedly different in Angola, where the collapse of the Portuguese dictatorship intensified a power struggle between the MPLA and rival nationalist movements that had gained support from Zaire (today the Democratic Republic of the Congo), the Republic of South Africa, and the United States.
As independence approached, the MPLA’s rivals launched an assault on Luanda.
Armed with Soviet weapons and backed by a contingent of the Cuban Special Forces, the MPLA managed to retain control of the capital.
This book argues that Soviet policy toward anticolonial movements in the Portuguese colonies was primarily shaped by the interactions between the Soviet middle-level bureaucratic elite—that is, men and women like Boris Putilin—and African revolutionaries.
Their contacts began in the 1950s when the Soviet Union first attempted to win over the “hearts and minds” of Third World elites.
This assistance was managed by a small group of Soviet bureaucrats and military officials.
This book explores the evolution of Introduction 3 the relationship between the Soviet elite and African revolutionaries to explain the Soviet role in the collapse of the Portuguese Empire in Africa.
As such, the book makes three major contributions to the new histories of the Cold War.
First, the book establishes the importance of African agency in the process that led to the collapse of the Portuguese Empire.
Second, it highlights the role of ideology and the contribution of the Soviet bureaucratic and military elite in the conduct of foreign policy.
Finally, it provides a fresh interpretation of Soviet involvement in Angola in 1974-75, substantially revising existing scholarly accounts.
Power, Agency, and African Diplomacy during the Cold War The most popular conception of the Cold War, the conflict that pitted the Soviet Union against the United States after 1945, invites a binary understanding of power in international society.
Since both the United States and the Soviet Union were the only “superpowers” during the Cold War, power, by implication, must have resided solely with the two giants.
The end of the Cold War led to a substantial rethinking of the definition and geographic context of the conflict.
In one trend, scholars have shifted their attention to examining the agency of what Tony Smith has called “junior members in the international system” and their role in “expanding, intensifying, and prolonging” the titanic struggle.
The final dissolution of European empires coincided with the onset of the Cold War.
By the mid-1960s, most European powers had given up de jure control of their colonies in Africa.
Portuguese rule in Africa was widely considered a relic of the past, yet Portugal managed to hold onto its colonies until the 1970s amidst armed opposition from the liberation movements.
Portugal was a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and controlled the Azores archipelago, which hosted a crucial military base in the middle of the Atlantic.
Portugal’s prime minister, Anténio de Oliveira Salazar, skillfully used access to the Azores as a bargaining chip to resist Western pressure for decolonization.
By the mid-1960s, however, Portugal came into violent conflict with anticolonial movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau, all of 4 Introduction which demanded independence.
In each case, military support for armed struggle was available mainly from socialist countries.
Portugal’s delayed decolonization thus embedded struggles against colonial rule within the international context of the Cold War.
The first generation of African studies scholars had little to say about the liberation movements’ international alliances.
Their primary task was to revive the history of resistance to colonialism, but these accounts often confirmed metanarratives drawn up by African elites to legitimize their nationalist projects.
The extent to which the Soviet Union was able to influence the African National Congress in its struggle against the apartheid regime in South Africa has in particular attracted significant controversy.
Studying nationalist movements in Portuguese-speaking Africa is no less important than examining English-speaking movements for numerous reasons.
First, they were engaged in guerrilla campaigns against the Portuguese through the 1960s and 1970s, in contrast to the ANC, which had limited opportunities to engage in active combat at that time.
Second, they were led by influential African leaders who were inspired by Marxist thought.
By looking at the international connections of the liberation movements in the Portuguese colonies, we can better understand why certain elites would come to dominate political life in Lusophone Africa after independence.
This book highlights the agency of African anticolonial nationalists in the Cold War.
Nationalist activism in the Portuguese colonies took off in the aftermath of World War IL, and the first organizations campaigning against Portuguese rule were set up in the 1950s, mainly among émigré communities in neighboring states.
Initially, there were many groups with competing agendas Introduction 5 and strategies for liberation.
As the Portuguese stepped up their repression of nationalist activism in the late 1950s, it became clear that whichever group could successfully mobilize resources for armed struggle would be able to capture the “national liberation” movement title.
Specifically, this book looks at a set of African intellectuals from the Portuguese colonies, many of whom grew active in anticolonial nationalist movements while studying in Portugal in the 1950s and would come to dominate the liberation movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau.
It explains how these African intellectuals managed to obtain assistance in the aftermath of the Angolan uprising in 1961 and details the varied diplomatic strategies they employed to obtain military support from the Soviet Union and other socialist countries.
The narrative follows the cast of characters into 1975, as it reexamines how the MPLA leadership drew the Soviets into increasingly deeper commitments in Angola in 1974-75.
For better or worse, the Africans in this story were agents of their own liberation.
Ideology, Foreign Policy, and the Soviet Bureaucratic and Military Elite The role of ideology on both sides of the Cold War divide has attracted substantial attention among historians and observers alike.
This book follows in the path of scholars who have highlighted ideology as the key motivating factor in Soviet foreign policy.
Instead of 6 Introduction judging my cast of characters on the basis of a strict set of dogmatic beliefs, I prefer to define ideology as a particular lens through which individuals processed and understood events around them.
To the Soviets, the lens was the ideology of Marxism-Leninism, which entailed a particular reading of human history and progress.
Some of them were international journalists and members of the Soviet academe.
These were also officers of intelligence services, the KGB and the GRU, who were often responsible for the practical implementation of policy.
The importance of this bureaucratic elite is not new to students of Soviet foreign policy.
Studying the bureaucratic and military elite has broad implications for our understanding of Soviet policy in Africa.
This book argues that the Soviet “interventionism” in Africa during the 1970s was deeply rooted in the prior decade.
Rather than a product of strategic parity with the United States, the roots of Soviet involvement in Africa stretched back to the bureaucratic changes that took place under Nikita Khrushchey, the first secretary of the CC CPSU who succeeded Joseph Stalin in 1953.
While Stalin prioritized relations with the West after World War II, Khrushchev began to pursue a much more active policy in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, expanding the bureaucratic and foreign policy apparatus in the process.
The primary party organ empowered to forge policy toward the liberation movements in the 1950s was the CC CPSU International Department.
Responsible for providing support to international communist and anticolonial movements worldwide, the International Department staff and notably its Africa section forged personal relationships with Introduction 7 African revolutionaries, which often proved instrumental in determining policy choices.
They often served as liaisons with African revolutionaries, aiding allies in their struggles with local rivals, gathering information and producing analyses for decision-makers in Moscow.
The book reveals that the Soviet military believed that limited hit-and-run guerrilla tactics were no substitute for large-scale military operations against the Portuguese.
Therefore, they often advocated the expansion of military operations and supplied African revolutionaries with increasingly “advanced” Soviet weapons.
Such interactions contributed to what I call the “militarization” of Soviet interactions with A frican allies, which was in itself a product of frustrated hopes for rapid revolutionary transformation throughout the continent and the rise of African militaries as political actors in their own right.
Prior to the second half of the 1970s, the Soviet Union often lacked hard power in sub-Saharan Africa, especially compared to Western powers with a history of presence on the continent.
This book uncovers the clandestine relationships that the Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence officers forged with African revolutionaries as a way to level the playing field.
By reconstructing these secret contacts, I show that Africans often used them for personal advantage.
The study of the Soviet bureaucratic and military elite also helps explain how ideology functioned in practice.
Ideological affinity was essential to develop trust on a personal level between African anticolonial nationalists and the Soviet bureaucrats, spies, journalists, and diplomats who supported them.
African nationalists from the Portuguese colonies like Angolan Mario de Andrade, Cape Verdean Amilcar Cabral, and Mozambican Marcelino dos Santos were well-known in leftist European circles.
Their ideological “credentials” helped forge their initial contacts with the Soviets and allowed them to receive the first aid packages for their organizations.
Meanwhile, the Soviets were highly skeptical of FRELIMO’s first president, Eduardo Mondlane, because of his United States education and high-profile contacts in Washington.
Ideological affinity also meant that the Soviets continued to support the MPLA, even though relations with its president, 8 Introduction Agostinho Neto, were often conflictual.
In each of these cases, ideology was the prism through which Soviet officials looked at their allies as the 1960s transitioned into the 1970s.
Relations with the African countries never topped the agenda of the Soviet leadership, who were primarily preoccupied with relations with the United States, Western Europe, Eastern European allies and China.
Thus, Soviet middle level bureaucrats often played particularly important roles in shaping relations with African allies.
The Soviet Union and the Internationalization of the Angolan Civil War, 1974-1975 Soviet involvement on the side of the MPLA in the Angolan Civil War has captivated scholars since the 1970s.
In line with the general trend, the end of the Cold War led scholars to re-emphasize ideology.
These studies have offered broad interpretations but do not focus on Angola in much detail.
Westad has depicted the Soviets’ relatively limited and reluctant delivery of arms to the MPLA before switching gears to support the Cuban operation once South Africa intervened in autumn 1975.
Introduction 9 This book offers a revised assessment of Soviet policy in Angola within the broader context of developments in Portugal after the coup that overthrew the dictatorship on April 25, 1974.
It reinforces the role of ideology in how the Soviets perceived events in Portugal as closely interlinked with events in the colonies.
It reveals how Agostinho Neto and the MPLA leveraged his close relationship with military officers in Portugal to seek support from the Soviet Union amid increasingly violent competition with his rivals in 1974.
The book provides details of the Soviet logistical operation to supply the MPLA with weapons and resolves the debate about the timing of Cuban involvement in Angola.
The new narrative also reconstructs the role of Soviet liaisons, “men on the ground” who were fundamental in shaping perceptions of the changing situation in Angola.
It shows how pressure from these actors anda broader ideological framework shaped Soviet decision-making on Angola.
Organization, Sources, and Limitations The book is divided into seven chapters.
African nationalists from the Portuguese colonies and Soviet bureaucratic and military elites.
Chapter 1 shows how Nikita Khrushchev’s turn to the Third World in the 1950s gave rise to a new stratum of Soviet military and bureaucratic elite with vested interests in developing relations with newly independent African nations.
Chapter 2 outlines the key tenets of Portuguese colonialism and recounts the rise of African nationalism, focusing on the life stories of key protagonists—Amilcar Cabral, Mario de Andrade, Agostinho Neto, and Viriato da Cruz.
Chapter 3 centers on the 1961 Angolan uprising as the key moment when the two groups forged their first alliances.
Specifically, it explains why the Soviets and Czechoslovaks provided their first assistance packages to the nationalists from Lusophone Africa in 1961 and the long-term implications of these decisions.
Chapters 4, 5, and 6 discuss how the MPLA, FRELIMO, and the PAIGC tried to dominate their respective nationalist movements and the limits of their endeavors.
Chapter 4 examines the politics of liberation movements in exile in the context of the Sino-Soviet split.
It illustrates how African revolutionaries used diplomacy to obtain support from their African host states and international 10 Introduction patrons and tackle local rivals.
Chapter 5 concentrates on guerrilla strategy and the role of Soviet military assistance in the context of the “militarization” of the Cold War in Africa.
It traces discussions over guerrilla warfare strategies and how these conversations shaped relations between African revolutionaries and their international patrons.
Chapter 6 follows the evolution of anticolonial campaigns in the 1970s, placing them in the context of superpower détente.
It argues that détente had a minimal impact on Soviet policy in Africa.
Chapter 7 reveals Soviet views of revolution in Portugal and the decolonization process, especially in Angola.
Finally, the conclusion discusses the broader implications of Soviet involvement in Portuguese colonies within the Cold War context.
This book is based on extensive research in Russian and Eastern European archives.
When I first began studying this topic almost ten years ago, access to Russian sources was minimal.
I had to consult archives in the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, Poland, and Germany to construct a partial picture of what had transpired.
In a significant development, the Russian State Archive of Contemporary History has declassified thousands of documents pertaining to Soviet foreign relations.
The declassification has not been completed, as many files remain unavailable.
Further, there is still no access to the records of the Soviet intelligence services.
I have tried to fill the gaps with information acquired through memoirs and interviews with key protagonists in the story.
Readers will notice that the amount of detail is particularly rich when it comes to the PAIGC and the context of anticolonial campaigns in Guinea-Bissau.
This is because I was able to conduct extensive interviews with dozens of former participants in Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde.
A similar opportunity did not present itself in Angola, mainly for practical reasons.
The book is fundamentally a study of the USSR’s foreign policy in Africa, written mainly from the perspectives of the Introduction 11 Soviets and their African interlocutors.
With the exception of military training in the Soviet Union, it does not generally address the perspectives of the rank-and-file members of the liberation movements.
When I started to conduct interviews with some rank-and-file members, I realized that the material was too rich to fit into one book.
I also recognized that these perspectives would distract from the main focus of the book, which is a history of relations between the Soviets and the African elites who came to dominate liberation movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau.
I have thus made an explicit choice to focus on the perspectives of those who occupied positions of leadership in the liberation movements because they were the ones who communicated with international patrons.
Thus, their strategies shaped relationships with the Soviets and Moscow’s view of the anticolonial movements as a whole.
Also, for reasons of space, I have decided to limit the discussions of East German, Bulgarian, Czechoslovak, and Polish support for the liberation movements in Lusophone Africa except when they are directly relevant to the main story.
Cold War Liberation is, therefore, a starting point in the journey toward understanding the true extent of the Soviet impact on liberation struggles in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau.
Telling the story of Soviet relations with liberation movements in the Portuguese colonies brings to the fore some understudied aspects of the Cold War while offering a new perspective on such much-debated events as the 1974-75 Angolan Crisis.
The anticolonial wars in the Portuguese colonies shaped the Soviet Cold War in Africa in ways that have not yet been appreciated.
The story told here offers insights into the Soviet decision-making process and the people involved in it.
It also provides a comprehensive overview of the diplomacy of the African liberation movements and helps explain their durability as the often-dominant political forces in modern-day Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau.
What follows is the story of fourteen years of colonial wars, the African nationalists who would come to dominate the campaigns against Portuguese rule, their supporters and rivals, and the international environment in which they operated.
Before going any further, we need to look at the inception of Soviet policy in Africa and the mezhdunarodniki who came to occupy important roles as “mediators of liberation” in this story.
According to the German philosophers Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, humankind developed in stages.
These took the form ofa series of revolutions in the modes of production, starting from tribal society and eventually reaching capitalism in the nineteenth century.
Thus, the principle of proletarian internationalism became a fundamental means of achieving the goal of international revolution.
Marx and Engels, however, did not provide a blueprint for waging revolutionary struggles, and many debates emerged about how to carry this out in practical terms.
One dispute centered on how to square the goal of socialist revolution with demands for national self&determination in the largely agrarian and multiethnic empires of the nineteenth century.
In Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism , Lenin postulated that imperialism led to a division of the world into “oppressor” and “oppressed” nations, competition, and, inevitably, war—World War I In Lenin’s eyes, the movement for national liberation was imperialism’s weakest link and was, therefore, an accelerating force on the road to socialism and world peace.
Even though nationalist movements in “oppressed nations” were bourgeois—the 12 Mediators of Liberation 13 majority of colonial subjects were peasants—selfdetermination was a necessary stage in the inevitable merging of nations.
After coming to power in Russia in October 1917, Lenin and the Bolsheviks believed that a worldwide socialist revolution was both imminent and essential for the survival of the first workers’ state.
In 1919, the Bolsheviks institutionalized their revolutionary agenda by establishing the Third International , an organization dedicated to spreading socialist revolution.
The Comintern embraced anti-colonial and anti-imperialist agenda, and established policy on the “Negro Question,” as issues related to the liberation of men and women in Africa and the Diaspora were referred to at that time.
However, by 1934, the Comintern had scaled back its commitment to anti-colonial agenda in the face of the threat from Nazi Germany.
The zigzags in Comintern’s support for the anti-colonial cause, including only lukewarm defense of Ethiopia in the face of Italian aggression in 1935, and finally Soviet non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany in 1939 left many anti-colonial activists deeply disappointed in the Comintern.
The Stalinist purges during the Great Terror decimated the organization, which was formally dissolved in 1943.
This chapter charts the revival of Soviet interest in Africa under Stalin’s successor, Nikita Khrushchev.
Khrushchev’s time in office between 1953 and 1964 coincided with the quickening pace of decolonization in Africa.
By the mid-1960s, the European colonial powers—Britain, France, and Belgium—had given up control of empire either via “negotiated exits” after pressure from the colonized subjects or as a result of prolonged military campaigns, such as in Algeria.
The first summit meeting of leaders from Asia and A frica in Bandung, Indonesia, in April 1955, heralded the advent of the “Third World,” a political project, a “third way” in world politics which was to unite countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, bound by common experience of foreign domination.
Khrushchev saw these developments as opportunities for the Soviet Union to gain new allies in Asia, Africa and Latin America, but also to revive Soviet socialism in line with revolutionary ideals, which coincided with his agenda on de-Stalinization.
The men and women who carried out Khrushchev’s new policy in the Third World were primarily members of the Soviet bureaucratic and military elite— cadres in the various departments of the CC CPSU apparatus diplomats, journalists, and intelligence officers.
Coming from different backgrounds and with distinct personal experiences, they would become what I call “mediators of liberation” between African anticolonial nationalists and the top Soviet decision-makers.
This chapter examines Khrushchev’s view of Soviet aims in Africa in the context of his broader foreign policy goals.
It also provides an overview of the key Soviet institutions and paints the profiles of several key figures who became involved in supporting anticolonial movements in the Portuguese colonies in the 1960s and 1970s.
Nikita Khrushchev and the Cold War in Africa Nikita Khrushchev seemed an unlikely candidate to succeed Joseph Stalin in 1953.
From a party boss in the Donbas region in Ukraine, by the early 1930s, he was transferred to Moscow and made responsible for overseeing the construction of the Moscow-Volga Canal and the Moscow metro system.
Although a talented organizer and a shrewd politician, Khrushchev had no foreign policy experience and little formal education, especially in contrast to more experienced colleagues.
Stalin’s successors all agreed there should be a relaxation of tensions with the West, but debates raged as to how rapprochement could be squared with maintaining the stability of the Eastern Bloc.
In response to an economic crisis in East Germany, in 1953, the Politburo proclaimed a “New Course” for Eastern Europe to reverse some of the Mediators of Liberation 15 Stalin era’s most heavy-handed policies, such as collectivization.
They even contemplated the prospect of a unified Germany in exchange for a pan-European security arrangement that would, in essence, end the Cold War in Europe.
However, Khrushchev was unwilling to jeopardize socialism in East Germany.
In response to West Germany joining NATO, Khrushchev backed the formation of the Warsaw Pact in May 1955.
Khrushchev also wanted to pursue a more active policy in the Third World.
In October 1955, he went on a highly publicized tour of India, Burma (today Myanmar), and Afghanistan.
Khrushchev argued that with the advent of nuclear technology, a military confrontation was inconceivable, and thus the USSR should adapt to new, peaceful forms of competition with the West, which were possible in the Third World.
The Soviet Union thus started forging new diplomatic, commercial, and cultural links with countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, as well as providing loans and developmental assistance.
Soviet academics also resuscitated the concept of “noncapitalist development,” which premised Third World countries could skip the “capitalist stage of development” and move directly to socialism with the support of the state and the Soviet Union.
Soviet allies were also supposed to pursue more active policies in the Third World.
On September 27, 1955, Nasser announced the purchase of weapons worth $45. million from Czechoslovakia.
Khrushchev’s boldest move came shortly afterward when he took on Stalin’s legacy at the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU in February 1956.
Khrushchev opened the Congress by asserting that a new world war was not inevitable and that different countries could take their own peaceful roads to socialism.
In fact, the new policy of “peaceful coexistence” dovetailed with his attack on Stalin, which he made at the closed session of the Congress on February 25.
The transcript was quickly leaked to the West, and an abridged version of the speech soon became available to Soviet citizens.
Although the speech was received with highly mixed reactions, it accelerated the so-called cultural Thaw that had begun shortly after Stalin’s death.
Soviet artists, theater directors, and writers were now permitted a never-before-seen degree of discussion and openness.
Although Khrushchev wanted to establish more equitable relations with Warsaw Pact partners, the secret speech unleashed a major crisis.
It started in Poland, where popular protests over living standards strengthened reformists who sought to redefine the relationship with Moscow.
In October 1956, the Polish leader, Wladyslaw Gomulka, managed to negotiate a new relationship with the Soviets and avoided intervention.
However, the situation turned out very differently in Hungary, where the newly appointed leader, Imre Nagy, was unable to calm street protests.
On November 4, Soviet tanks rolled into Budapest, crushing the Hungarian revolution.
While the Soviets were dealing with the consequences of the secret speech, a major international crisis was developing over access to the Suez Canal.
In July 1956, President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt proclaimed the nationalization of the Suez Canal Company, which had been controlled by a conglomerate of Western companies.
After failed talks, Israel, Britain, and France intervened militarily to retake control of the Suez in October.
The Soviets were initially slow to Mediators of Liberation 17 respond, but in November, Moscow issued a stark warning to end intervention, threatening a world war if there was no withdrawal.
Under pressure from the United States, the British government announced a ceasefire.
The Suez Crisis showed that the Cold War had moved to the periphery and that both the Soviet Union and the United States would be central players.
A resource-rich country two-thirds the size of Western Europe, Zaire became independent on June 30, 1960, after hasty negotiations between the Belgians, the former colonial power, and the main nationalist parties.
However, only five days after the proclamation of independence, Zaire’s army mutinied over low pay and the continuing presence of Belgian officers in high-level positions.
A workers’ and a general strike followed, unleashing widespread chaos and sporadic violence.
On July 11, Brussels sent in paratroopers, ostensibly to restore law and order, and the following day, Moise Tshombe, the leader of Katanga province, announced the secession of the resource-rich province.
Zaire’s first democratically elected prime minister, Patrice Lumumba, believed the Belgian intervention was a neocolonial coup and appealed to the United States, the United Nations, and the Soviet Union for military support against the secessionists in Katanga.
By August, Washington believed that Lumumba was dangerously close to the Soviets and started scheming for his removal.
The crisis reached its crescendo on September 5 when Lumumba was ousted from power in a U.S.-backed plot concocted by the army’s chief of staff, Joseph-Désiré Mobutu.
In 1961, Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence services would cooperate to support Lumumba’s loyalist Antoine Gizenga, who fled to Stanleyville , Eastern Zaire, after the coup.
The use of clandestine means in the African context was a way to fight the Cold War “on the cheap” since it did not require substantial material investments nor headstrong collision with the superpowers.
Khrushchey’s motivations for launching a new “offensive” in the Third World have become the subject of substantial debate.
The interplay of pragmatic and ideational motivations was deeply bound up with Khrushchev’s background and formative years.
His peasant upbringing gave him a strong sense of social justice, and he believed that the Soviet Union had a duty to help newly independent nations and revolutionary movements that leaned towards socialism.
His support for national liberation movements was thus necessarily interwoven with his domestic agenda.
The discussion below examines the two generations of Soviet party cadres who played influential roles in Soviet Africa policy.
The sections below highlight how their formative experiences informed their worldview and came to shape their attitudes toward policy in Africa.
Key People and Institutions In the 1950s, the Cominternians were a small yet influential group of people in the party apparatus.
These were mostly men of modest backgrounds in their sixties and seventies who had joined the Bolsheviks before or shortly after October 1917.
Many of them had participated in the Russian Civil War, building up their careers and networks when the Comintern was carrying out large-scale antiracist campaigns.
The one man among the Cominternian generation who possessed the most expertise on Africa was Ivan Potekhin.
He was born in 1903 in the village of Krivosheino, central Siberia, into a family of Old Believers.
After finishing school, he joined the Bolsheviks, working as a party organiser.
He was then mobilized into the Red Army and in 1929, served as a political commissar during an armed conflict with China over control of the Eastern Railroad in China’s northeast.
In the 1930s, Potekhin and several fellow A fricanists at Comintern-affiliated Communist Institute of the Toilers of the East launched their first academic program, which was intended to analyze the prospects for “noncapitalist development” in Africa.
However, in 1936, he was accused of “Trotskyism” and expelled from KUTV with party sanctions—a relatively light punishment compared to the terror unleashed only a year later.
After Stalin’s death, Potekhin became actively involved in reviving Soviet engagement with Africa.
He used connections from the interwar period to develop informal links with African leaders and pushed for the establishment of the Institute of African Studies as an independent research body within the Academy of Sciences.
Only twelve years old in 1917, Ponomarev claimed to have started his party career at fourteen, first serving as a party activist at a local textile factory in his native Zaraisk, near Moscow.
In 1936, Ponomarev became a personal assistant to Georgii Dimitrov, the new head of the Comintern.
At the height of the Stalinist purges in 1937, Ponomarev was accused of harboring “Trotskyist” sympathies and was questioned about his connections to high-ranking colleagues who had been purged.
A successor to the Comintern, the International Department was fairly insignificant in the postwar period.
However, after Khrushchev’s turn to the Third World in the mid-1950s, the International Department was entrusted with several crucial functions.
Its cadre collected and processed information from papers drafted by Soviet academic research institutes and reports from diplomatic, press, and intelligence sources abroad.
The department was also responsible for allocating cash allowances for communist parties and liberation movements from the International Trade Union Fund for Assistance to Left Workers’ Organizations.
Ponomarev was a protégé of the party ideologue Mikhail Susloy, but he had a notoriously contentious personal relationship with Andrei Gromyko, the longtime minister of foreign affairs.
In fact, the priorities of the Foreign Ministry and the International Department did not always coincide, and many conflicts ensued.
However, the International Department still retained the final say on policy vis-a-vis African anticolonial movements.
According to Karen Brutents, a senior official at the International Department in the 1970s, Ponomarev possessed a “Cominternian mindset” and tended to “preach” to foreign dignitaries who came to Moscow Mediators of Liberation 21 seeking assistance.
At the same time, he was also a “true anti-Stalinist” who supported people who had been persecuted during the 1930s.
Born in 1905 in Vitebsk, a city in modern-day Belarus, he joined the Red Army in 1920 and moved to Tashkent, in Soviet Uzbekistan.
In 1922, he was dispatched to Moscow and enrolled at the Institute of the Far East.
After graduation, he joined the Comintern-af filiated International Agrarian Institute, eventually becoming the head of the Far East and the Colonies section.
His life took a sharp turn on January 1, 1935, when he was arrested, charged with belonging to a Trotskyist organization, and dispatched to the Gulag.
Ulianovskii spent almost twenty years in labor camps and was only rehabilitated in 1955, during the Thaw.
The Soviet Solidarity Committee was established in 1956 as the Soviet branch of the Afro-Asian People’s Solidarity Organization on the heels of the Bandung conference.
Its goals were to represent Soviet agenda at AAPSO’s Permanent Secretariat based in Cairo and develop links with the so-called “progressive, democratic” forces in the colonies and newly independent countries.
In Moscow, the presidium of the Soviet Solidarity Committee consisted of prominent academics, cadres at relevant government ministries, and public figures who debated Third World policies during regular meetings.
The cadre of the Soviet Solidarity Committee also served as the first point of contact and the official hosts for non-state actors from Asia, Africa, and Latin America during their trips to the Soviet Union.
Meanwhile, the Soviet intelligence services worked to implement policy priorities by clandestine means.
Many cadres were forced to resign, while new, younger officers were promoted in their wake.
Khrushchev wanted to direct the KGB’s activities abroad, a task he entrusted to his protégé Aleksandr Shelepin.
Although the KGB and the International Department did not always see eye to eye, intelligence officers had to implement decisions made in Moscow.
The chief of the GRU was directly responsible to the minister of defense, and thus its aims were shaped by the priorities of the Soviet military.
Its efforts entailed gathering intelligence on Western weapons systems via a network of clandestine human contacts, as well as from signals intelligence.
GRU analyses also fed into reports for the CC CPSU and the International Department.
When it came to African liberation movements, the GRU was often more closely involved than the KGB—its officers often advised on military strategy, reviewed the requirements for weapons, and were involved in military training.
Born in 1909 as the son of a railway worker in Brest , Ivashutin trained as a military pilot.
During World War I, he worked for the Red Army’s military counterintelligence branch, rising to the rank of lieutenant general.
After the war, he was recruited by the KGB, becoming deputy chairman in 1954.
In this capacity, he was involved in the violent crackdown on protests in the Soviet city of Novocherkassk in June 1962.
However, he made his most significant mark at the GRU, expanding its capacity to collect signals intelligence, and would dominate the organization until his retirement in 1986.
Much has been said about the long-standing institutional rivalry between the KGB and the GRU, which often produced drastically different assessments of developments on the ground.
Ivashutin did little to foster cooperation with the KGB and apparently favored the “less politicized” nature of his job.
The GRU was arguably more professional and more selective in its recruitment practices than the KGB, but in general, the two intelligence services operated on the same turf, often using similar contacts and methods.
As the head of the International Department, Ponomarev was much more powerful than Potekhin, who was largely dependent on the party for resources and permission to do academic work abroad.
Recommendations and policy papers drafted by the Institute of African Studies could easily be rejected by middle-ranking desk officers of the International Department.
However, men like Potekhin still played a crucial role in reviving Soviet African studies and reengaging with African elites.
They were also sources of inspiration, patronage, and ideas for the younger generation that would come to dominate Soviet Africa policy.
The Soviet Bureaucratic Elite and Their Environment The younger generation was quite different from the Cominternians.
Born in the interwar period, they did not participate in or witness the Russian Revolution or the Civil War.
However, a lack of direct experience of 1917 did not mean that these young people were devoid of revolutionary ideals.
Growing up during the height of the Soviet antiracist campaigns in the early 1930s, many sympathized with the plight of African Americans and colonial subjects.
However, their core formative experience was World War II, in which they participated as combatants in the Red Army or as civilians working for the war effort.
Some experienced the war and its harsh deprivations as children or teenagers, and many lost family members and friends.
As a result, this generation shared an overwhelming sense of pride in their country.
This younger generation reacted to Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin in varying, often conflicting ways.
Some abhorred the Great Terror and welcomed Khrushchev’s secret speech, but their break with Stalin did not imply disillusionment with socialism.
Many believed Stalin had perverted the so-called “Leninist principles,” a mythologized concept that, in their imagination, contrasted the early Bolsheviks’ democracy and idealism with the privilege and terror unleashed by Stalin.
Georgii Mirskii was part of the team at the Institute of World Economy and International Relations in Moscow, working on theorizing such concepts as “noncapitalist development” in the 1950s.
Not all men and women of the younger generation supported Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin, however.
To some, Stalinism was synonymous with the massive surge of upward social mobility that allowed many men and women from modest peasant backgrounds to obtain an education and achieve a social standing that would never have been possible before 1917.
Whatever their attitudes to Stalin, Khrushchev’s opening to the Third World offered new opportunities for the younger generation.
For all these reasons, studying to become a foreign policy expert was highly competitive.
Entry required high academic achievement, and enrollment was also limited on the basis of one’s gender and ethnicity.
The main outlets for women area studies experts were either to enter academia to work as university professors or to be interpreters, translators, and foreign language instructors.
At MGIMO in the 1950s, the student body was divided between the children of the party elite, the Red Army veterans , and a large group of young people from outside Moscow whose parents did not have much influence.
The latter group was at the bottom of the ladder and eager to accept less prestigious jobs upon graduation.
European languages were considered the most prestigious, followed by Arabic, Hindi, and African languages.
African languages thus remained at the “bottom of the pile” in terms of prestige for the majority of graduates.
However, the continent also offered career opportunities, particularly for graduates from modest backgrounds who had niche skills.
The biographies of select cadres who came to occupy important roles in Soviet relations with the anticolonial movements in Portuguese Africa illustrate these points.
One of them was Petr Manchkha, the head of the Africa section at the International Department.
Of Greek origin, Manchkha was born in modern-day Ukraine, where he spent his childhood working in the countryside.
He had some naval experience before moving to Moscow, where he eventually became the chief of the Albania section at the International Department.
One of his tasks was maintaining relations with left-wing groups in Albania and Greece, for which he had to cross the Albanian—Greek border to meet Greek partisans, often on horseback.
When Soviet-Albanian relations faltered, Manchkha moved on to become the first head of the newly established Africa section in 1961.
According to Vladimir Shubin, Manchkha was a “cheerful and life-loving man, a Mediators of Liberation 25 52 However, he was not a trained Africanist, big patriot of the African continent. and rumor had it he had never visited the Lenin Library, a must for research work.
The man who became the key referent on Portuguese Africa was Petr Evsiukov.
Born on January 3, 1921, in Harbin, China, Evsiukov moved to Moscow at an early age.
After the war, he studied and then taught at the Military Institute of Foreign Languages.
After its dissolution in 1956, Evsiukov went to work at the Foreign Languages Publishing House.
He was brought in to work under Petr Manchkha as the desk officer for the Portuguese colonies in 1961 because he was fluent in Portuguese, a rare skill in the USSR at that time.
He was not an expert on Lusophone Africa, but he fairly quickly became well-informed since it was his job to filter and analyze information coming to the International Department from the Soviet press agencies, embassies, and the intelligence services.
He also became one of the regulars who would “meet and greet” the leaders of the African liberation movements in Moscow and process requests for assistance.
Like many men and women of his generation, Eysiukov believed that decolonization was an inevitable process and that the socialist countries had an internationalist duty to support national liberation movements.
These younger intelligence officers often had very similar backgrounds to their peers in the party bureaucracy and academia.
Born in 1922 in Kursk, he volunteered for the Red Army during World War II, serving in a paratrooper battalion.
After the war ended, Kirpichenko enrolled at the Moscow Institute of Eastern Studies, where he specialized in Arabic, graduating in 1952.
At the university, he was spotted by recruiters from the KGB, and after a year’s training at the Higher Intelligence School, he joined the KGB’s First (intelligence) Directorate in 1953.
In memoirs written shortly after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kirpichenko criticized the lawlessness of the security organs under Stalin.
However, he was ambivalent about de-Stalinization since it was undertaken by the same people, like Khrushchev, who had participated in the Great Terror.
Kirpichenko recalled great optimism among the officers who joined the Africa section in the early 1960s.
In general, the First Directorate’s Africa specialists believed that the newly independent African nations would soon choose the socialist path, but they also realized the continent was “riddled with problems,” including poverty and instability.
Like others in his generation, Kirpichenko was optimistic about the prospects of socialism in the Third World.
There was no other single event that better encapsulated the optimism of the 1950s than the Sixth World Festival of Youth and Students.
Held a year after Khrushchev’s secret speech, the festival was designed to celebrate the new era of de-Stalinized socialism.
In preparation for the celebration, tourist infrastructure was upgraded, and Soviet citizens were encouraged to learn foreign languages and engage in conversations with foreigners.
Meanwhile, the Soviet youth organization, the Komsomol, put together an impressive program of sports, cultural, and artistic events to project the image of a modern Soviet Union.
The African delegates enjoyed great popularity among Soviet citizens, and their hotel quickly became a vibrant social spot in the city.
In sum, the younger-generation cadres who worked for the foreign intelligence service, the International Department, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs all shared some core experiences and characteristics.
Educated at the most prestigious universities, they belonged to the Soviet elite.
They knew foreign languages, regularly met foreigners, traveled, and often lived abroad as government employees.
They were all profoundly shaped by World War I, both the traumas and the victory, which instilled in them a sense of pride and optimism about the socialist system.
Many had direct experience of combat, which would prove significant in their future dealings with African guerrillas.
However, few were trained Africanists, and most knew little about the continent or its people.
What they lacked in regional expertise they came to compensate for in personal relationships with Africans, which they started developing in the late 1950s.
This development does Mediators of Liberation 27 not mean they were free from prejudice or personal biases, but the majority did believe in the ideals of socialist internationalism.
As the following chapters show, men like Kirpichenko, Manchkha, and Evsiukov became “mediators of liberation” precisely because Africa would remain a relatively low priority for the Soviet leadership over the long term.
Conclusion The late 1950s saw a profound transformation of Soviet policy toward the Third World.
Highly ambitious yet at the same time personally insecure, Khrushchev used foreign policy pragmatically asa tool to raise his domestic and international profile.
After members of Stalin’s “old guard” made a failed attempt to remove Khrushchev in June 1957, he became the prime trendsetter in foreign policy.
However, his hopes for socialist revolution in the Third World and his belief in “peaceful competition” cannot be dismissed as simple pragmatism in the battle for supremacy after Stalin’s death.
Like many men and women in his generation, Khrushchev was convinced that socialism was superior to capitalism.
If only socialism could be purged of Stalinism and revived around “Leninist principles,” then its power and strength could also be restored on the international stage.
The revival of socialist internationalism was thus irrevocably connected to Khrushchev’s domestic program of de-Stalinization.
Because he promised to revive socialism around an idealized notion of “Leninist principles” (however ephemeral the actual meaning of that phrase may be), Soviet internationalism in the Third World could not be reversed by his successors.
However, Khrushchev’s belief in “peaceful competition” in the Third World was undermined by events in Zaire.
In fact, the crisis in Zaire would also prove a sobering experience for younger party cadres entering the service in the early 1960s.
Another long-term legacy of Khrushchev’s turn to the Third World was the expansion of the bureaucratic apparatus.
If only a handful of experts had a stake in the Third World in the mid-1950s, by the early 1960s, hundreds of young men and women would take up new jobs available in Soviet academia, the bureaucracy, and the intelligence services.
The profiles and personal experiences of the Soviet bureaucratic elite who would come to specialize in African affairs differed.
Men like Potekhin, Ponomarev, and Ulianovskii—the Cominternians— had had a long-standing belief in proletarian internationalism and some experience of supporting an international revolution.
The Cominternians were at the forefront of the Soviet outreach to the Third World in the 1950s, often due to their long-standing contacts with foreigners and international experiences.
These were young, ambitious men and women who were keen to seize the opportunities opening up in the 1950s.
However, they were not immune to idealism and held a genuine belief in the superiority of the socialist system.
Africa was not the most desirable destination for most young and ambitious cadres who joined the bureaucratic elite in the 1950s and 1960s.
However, those who did become involved would quickly establish contacts with African revolutionaries, travel around the continent, and often become keen lobbyists on behalf of their clients.
Both the Cominternians and the younger generation thus became important “mediators of liberation,” playing a pivotal role in fostering contacts with African revolutionaries, including those from Portuguese Africa.
The next chapter investigates the development of these initial contacts in the context of the 1950s.
The map showed the Portuguese colonies—Angola, Mozambique, GuineaBissau, Cape Verde, Sao Tomé and Principe, and Macau—superimposed on the political map of Europe.
Designed by Henrique Galvao, the curator of the exhibition, the map was supposed to represent the revival of Portugal’s status as a great European power.
The discussion that follows opens with an overview of the Portuguese presence in Africa, which began in the fifteenth century, and describes its transformation into more formal colonial rule by the early 1900s.
It analyzes the role of African labor in the Portuguese colonies and examines the key components of Salazar’s vision, enshrined in the ideology of Estado Novo in the 1930s.
The chapter then turns to the rise of nationalism in Portuguese Africa during the interwar period.
The core of the discussion is the analysis of the formative experiences of a select number of African intellectuals from Portuguese colonies—Amilcar Cabral, Agostinho Neto, Mario Pinto de Andrade, Viriato da Cruz, and Marcelino dos Santos—who would come to dominate the leadership of the anticolonial movements in the 1960s.
This chapter situates these future African leaders in a sociocultural milieu of urban centers across the Portuguese Empire.
It also traces their personal stories and ideological influences, following them on their first trips to socialist countries in the 1950s.
Finally, this chapter highlights the origins of the Cold War alliance that would define the international dimension of anticolonial movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau as rooted in the Soviet cultural diplomacy of the 1950s.
Trade, Labor, and Race in Portuguese Africa The small kingdom of Portugal was at the forefront of European maritime exploration during the “Age of Discovery” in the fifteenth century.
Driven by the pursuit of economic profit and the search for the legendary ruler Prester John , Prince Henrique (13941460) supported the development of the caravel—a highly maneuverable, light, and powerful vessel that could make long-distance voyages.
In 1482, Diogo Cao reached the mouth of the Zaire River and established the first European contact with the Kingdom of Kongo, which stretched across northern Angola and southwestern Zaire at the height of its influence.
In Africa, the Portuguese used a combination of infiltration, persuasion, and coercion to extend their influence.
They co-opted the rulers of Kongo, who adopted Christianity and welcomed Catholic missionaries.
However, further to the south, the Ndongo were more suspicious of the Portuguese.
On the eastern coast of Africa, the Portuguese gradually replaced Arab, Persian, and Swahili traders and established a garrison at Mozambique Island, which became the central point for exporting ivory, gold, and slaves to Portuguese India.
By the nineteenth century, the Portuguese dominated a network of trading posts from Lisbon to Nagasaki in Japan.
The abolition of slavery and the onset of the Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth century led to the beginning of more formalized colonial rule.
The Revolutionaries 31 competition between European powers for a sphere of influence in Africa led to a partition of the continent at the Berlin Conference in 1885.
Lisbon harbored plans to connect its possessions in East and West Africa into a central African empire.
However, the plan clashed with British ambitions to establish a protectorate, stretching from Cape Town to Cairo.
Lisbon had little choice but to accede, but national humiliation contributed to the downfall of the monarchy in 1910.
The extension of formal control beyond the coastal areas was also closely connected to the need to acquire cheap African labor.
Laborers were required to work in coastal fisheries, on agricultural plantations, and to build roads and railways.
The Portuguese also started constructing railways, connecting oceanic ports to mining centers in neighboring countries.
In Angola, the Benguela railway carried copper from Zaire to the ports of Beira and Lobito on the Atlantic coast.
Lisbon also struck a deal with London, allowing the British to recruit Mozambican laborers for the gold mines of Transvaal, South Africa, in exchange for paying taxes for the use of port facilities at Lourenco Marques.
Although slavery was officially abolished, in reality, the practice persisted.
The treatment of plantation workers in Sao Tomé was so dire that the international scandal even caused Cadbury to suspend cocoa imports in 1909.
After the Portuguese monarchy collapsed in 1910, the rulers of the First Republic wanted to rationalize the exploitation of the empire.
They stamped out slavery, imposed taxation, reduced protectionist tariffs, and gave colonial high commissioners a great deal of freedom to engage in developmental schemes.
All “natives” who had no income from cash crops were subject to at least three months of compulsory labor, known as chibalo.
However, the abusive practices did little to revive Portugal’s economic fortunes.
On May 28, 1926, a group of military officers launched a coup that brought down the First Republic.
In 1928, the military appointed Anténio de Oliveira Salazar finance minister, assigning him a brief to solve Portugal’s economic crisis.
Salazar was born on April 29, 1889, into a religious peasant family in Vimieiro, in northern Portugal.
An ultraconservative Catholic known for his ascetic lifestyle, Salazar rose rapidly, becoming prime minister in 1932.
One year later, he enshrined his vision for Portugal in the new constitution of the Estado Novo.
Portugal became a “unitary and corporatist republic,” and Salazar’s Uniao Nacional became the country’s only political party.
Unions were suppressed, and the police were given new powers to stamp out criticism of the regime.
The patriarchal nuclear family became institutionalized, and women faced restrictions on suffrage and discrimination in the labor market.
Salazar would come to dominate Portugal’s political life until a debilitating stroke in 1968.
In 1930, Salazar sponsored the Colonial Act, which ended colonial autonomy, centralized control over finances, and took steps to diminish the role of foreign capital in the colonies.
Prices and quotas were set to drive the production of raw materials, including cotton, coffee, tea, rice, sugar, and maize.
In the effort to rapidly expand trade with the empire, Salazar introduced the compulsory cultivation of certain crops, such as cotton, to fuel Portugal’s textile industry.
Economic autarky seemed ever more urgent with the onset of the Great Depression in the 1930s because Portugal’s regular trading partners, Europe and Brazil, imposed protectionist tariffs and capital controls, depriving Lisbon of its traditional sources of income.
Japan’s entry into World War II created shortages and stimulated demand for colonial goods, rapidly increasing the demand for African labor.
In 1942, the colonial authorities announced that Africans were obliged not only to pay Revolutionaries 33 taxes but also to cultivate an area of land or work for an employer.
Lisbon also instructed local administrators to assist with the allocation of labor.
The availability of cheap African labor was key to Salazar’s dream of economic autarky.
The latter category included white Europeans and the so-called assimilados , who were either mesti¢o Afro-Portuguese or Black Africans who fulfilled certain conditions.
However, there were many roadblocks to obtaining assimilado status, including the requirements to speak Portuguese, have a certain level of income, and show loyalty to the regime.
One of the critical roadblocks to achieving assimilado status was the highly restrictive educational system.
There were very few government schools, and these were reserved for Europeans, mesticos, and assimilados.
There were also Protestant mission schools run by Baptists, Methodists, and Swiss Presbyterians.
The crown therefore granted special trading rights and tax exemptions to propertied settlers on Santiago Island.
They acquired slaves to sell to the Americas or to cultivate cotton on local farms.
All Cape Verdeans were designated as 24o indigenas, and as a result, enjoyed better access to educational opportunities, which enabled many to take up lower-level administrative posts across the empire.
However, their special status did not spare Cape Verdeans from hardship.
The arid archipelago had been affected by droughts for centuries, and islanders often resorted to immigration as a way to escape starvation.
The only solution Lisbon proposed involved public works and encouraging people to migrate to Sao Tomé—but both measures were inadequate and came too late.
As a result, almost 24,643 people lost their lives in the famine that struck between 1941 and 1943.
Very little was done in the immediate aftermath to develop access to water or prevent soil erosion.
The transition to formal colonialism in the nineteenth century required the kind of investment and capital that Lisbon did not have.
Successive Portuguese administrations used human exploitation to extract profits from Empire, but these strategies failed to produce the desired results.
Only the exceptional circumstances during World War II brought Salazar’s dream of economic autarky closer to fruition—at Africans’ expense.
However, the war also accelerated a general crisis of colonialism, as subjects of Empire demanded equal rights for their sacrifice.
Abusive colonial practices encountered criticism, even from ardent supporters of colonial rule.
In a closed session of the Portuguese National Assembly in 1947, Henrique Galvao, the curator of the 1934 Colonial Exhibition, argued that the brutality of forced labor in Angola impelled many people to migrate to neighboring countries.
This was the context in which, by the late 1950s, opposition to Portuguese rule crystallized among the young men and women growing up under Salazar’s rule.
Coming of Age under Salazar While similar to its European counterparts, Portuguese colonialism had developed some distinctive characteristics by the early twentieth century.
The Portuguese were the first to explore all of Africa’s coasts, leading to the emergence of so-called “creoles” or “Luso-Africans,” who often spearheaded colonization with little direction from Lisbon.
Luso-Africans were a heterogeneous group of Black Africans and mesticos, who were born in the colonies.
Their European ancestors included conquistadores, soldiers, merchants, and criminals who had been banished from Portugal.
The changes in colonial rule in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries often marginalized creoles.
Another issue was the bureaucratization of the hierarchical racial order, which privileged white Europeans.
These grievances found expression in the so-called “nativist movement,” which saw notable creole intellectuals form associations and spearhead campaigns protesting racist laws and abuses committed by the colonial administration.
The new generation of urban Africans who grew up during the interwar period shared many similarities with their parents.
In some ways, they occupied positions of privilege in colonial society.
As already discussed, those designated as assimilados constituted a tiny proportion of the overall population, had citizenship rights, and were spared the harsh realities of forced labor.
Their parents were educated government employees or small business-owners who were often critical of the colonial administration.
Nevertheless, they were not a homogenous group, and many differences remained because of their varying ethnic, socioeconomic, and educational backgrounds.
The biographies of Amilcar Cabral, Marcelino dos Santos, Mario Pinto de Andrade, and Agostinho Neto provide insight into the early formative experiences of some of the key protagonists in this story.
Amilcar Cabral’s early years were fairly typical of many Cape Verdeans growing up during the interwar period.
Born on September 12, 1924 in Bafata, Central Guinea-Bissau, Cabral was the son of Juvenal Anténio da Costa Cabral and Iva Pinhel Evora.
Like thousands of Cape Verdeans who found employment in neighboring Portuguese colonies, Cabral’s parents met in Guinea-Bissau, where Juvenal was a schoolteacher, and Iva owned a small hotel.
His parents separated, and his mother was compelled to take up a succession of low-paying jobs to feed her children.
Cabral’s student days in Mindelo coincided with a literary renaissance movement known as the Caboverdenidade.
Developed around a new journal, Claridade, the movement sought to break with the sterile traditions of Portuguese literature and focus on Cape Verdean problems in the “nativist” tradition.
Like other young men and women at the time, Cabral in his early writings expressed outrage at the isolation and living conditions on the islands and spoke of hope and optimism for the future.
Santos was born on May 20, 1924 in Lumbo in northern Mozambique, the son of Firmindo dos Santos and Teresa Sabina dos Santos.
In 1947, Marcelino dos Santos left to study in Lisbon, where he shared an apartment with Cabral.
He was born on August 21, 1928 in Golungo Alto in northern Angola, to Ana Rodrigues Coelho and José Cristino Pinto de Andrade.
There were “old assimilados,” mainly Black Catholics with roots going back to the seventeenth century and few links to the countryside.
Revolutionaries 37 “New assimilados” retained links to the countryside and spoke both Kimbundu and Portuguese at home.
Many of them were educated by the Methodist missionaries who dominated Luanda and its surroundings.
Mario de Andrade’s lifestyle during his early years resembled that of “old assimilados” in many ways.
Mario attended the Catholic Seminario de Luanda and the Colégio das Beiras, two prestigious secondary schools that were accessible to both Luanda’s white inhabitants and assimilado Africans.
During the interwar period, the family lived in Ingombotas, a historically African neighborhood that was also home to many assimilado families.
However, their house was leveled after World War II to accommodate Portuguese immigrants, and the family had to move to a neighborhood close to the musseques, Luanda’s shantytowns.
Born in 1922 in Catete, Icolo e Bengo, near Luanda, Neto was the son of Pedro Neto, a Methodist pastor, and Maria da Silva Neto, a schoolteacher.
In Luanda, Neto managed to enroll at the Liceu Salvador Correia, one of the few government-sponsored high schools.
He also supplemented his income by working as a secretary for a colleague of his father’s, the Methodist bishop Ralph Dodge.
As Dodge later recalled, Neto was a “very serious lad, very studious and very intelligent,” one of the “very few blacks” who completed the lyceum, which allowed him the rare opportunity to apply for a place at the university.
There, he came into regular contact with contract laborers, an experience that opened his eyes to the violence inherent in Portuguese colonialism.
Neto’s early poetry illustrated his indignation at the violence and poverty of everyday life in Luanda’s musseques.
My Mother you taught me to wait and hope as you hoped in difficult times But life killed in me that mystic hope I do not wait now I am he who is awaited* All the key protagonists in this story—Marcelino dos Santos, Agostinho Neto, Mario de Andrade, and Amilcar Cabral—shared similar socioeconomic backgrounds, coming from assimilado or mestico families in urban centers across the Portuguese Empire.
Each belonged to a relatively privileged stratum of society, but they were by no means the colonial elite.
Recent research has also emphasized the role of Protestant missionaries and other religious networks in fostering a sense of national identity.
Above all, these were young men who all either bore witness to or directly experienced discrimination and injustice in their youth.
The memory of Portuguese abuses remains a key starting point for the generation who would later rebel against colonial rule.
In 2017, I visited Praia, Cape Verde, to talk to men and women who had participated in the liberation struggle.
Amélia was born in Luanda in 1933, the daughter of Felisbela Rodrigues de SA, an Angolan, and Joao Baptista Andrade Sanches from Cape Verde.
Her family was not wealthy but was still better off than the majority of Black Angolans.
As someone who became involved in the nationalist struggle as an adult, Amélia was keen to emphasize the injustices she had witnessed in her childhood.
She was distressed to see that Black people walking barefoot were not allowed to walk on the pavement.
One such confrontation occurred when her aunt took her to enroll in a state-run primary school in Luanda.
The room, she recalls, was full of “scruffy, dirty, and barefoot children,” waiting to be enrolled.
Agostinho Neto, Amilcar Cabral, José Araujo, Mario Pinto de Andrade and Marcelino dos Santos at the OAU summit in Accra, October 1965.
Another incident involved witnessing elderly agricultural workers being beaten as punishment for failing to pay taxes to the colonial authorities.
Amélia detested such discrimination, but she was not involved in political affairs.
Her life would change dramatically in 1956 after she joined her fiancé and future husband, José Aratijo, in Portugal, unaware that he was involved in nationalist activism.
Like elsewhere in Africa after World War II, many entertained reformist agendas and sought equal rights with the Europeans within the imperial context.
From Cultural Self-Discovery to Independent Statehood World War II and its aftermath was a moment of crisis for Salazar’s regime.
Portugal remained neutral during the war and thus escaped the physical destruction of other European countries.
However, the spiraling costs of living and problems with rationing resulted in food shortages and hunger in the countryside.
Across Europe, wartime devastation and the Red Army’s role in defeating fascism increased the appeal of Soviet socialism and fueled the rise of communist parties.
In 1945, Salazar allowed the opposition parties to contest parliamentary elections and implemented several measures to speed up economic development in the metropole and the colonies.
Only three years later, however, MUD was banned as the extent of opposition to Salazar’s rule became apparent.
In the colonies too, the majority remained without citizenship rights, and government-sponsored investment programs were curtailed.
The key reason was the strategic value of the Portuguese-controlled Azores archipelago, conveniently situated in the middle of the Atlantic.
During World War II, the British and the Americans used the Azores as a refueling and resupplying station.
As the Cold War gained traction in the late 1940s, continuity of access to the Azores was one of the main reasons why Portugal was invited to join NATO in 1949.
The U.S.-Portugal Lajes Base Agreement of 1951 stipulated that NATO could use the Azores as a military base and, in return, the United States would provide the country with military aid.
A secret clause allowed Lisbon to make use of United States aid in Africa.
He also maintained that harmonious racial relations prevailed across Portuguese Africa.
Revolutionaries 4] Beneath the veneer of stability, the 1950s would serve as a crucial decade for the formation of various clusters of nationalist activity in Portugal and across the empire.
One cluster formed among African students in Portugal—a group that was supposed to become the new colonial elite.
The CEI was a self-help organization with a canteen, a medical center, and a social club, which became a convenient spot for students from the Portuguese colonies to socialize.
Inspired by the Francophone African writers of the Négritude movement such as Aimé Césaire and Léopold Senghor, African students explored their cultural roots and what it meant to be an “assimilado” in the context of the Portuguese empire.
By studying and reconnecting to specifically African culture, these students rejected the concept of “Lusotropicalism,” arguing it was a convenient extension of a fundamentally exploitative and racist colonial order.
In Angola, Luanda’s musseques were the focal point for the formation ofa specific national culture.
As Marissa Moorman has argued, music was particularly significant in the development of Angolan consciousness, often to a greater extent than political nationalism.
In the late 1940s, several civil servants formed a band called Ngola Ritmos, which performed in Kimbundu and other Angolan languages, using local instruments.
The music was supposed to awaken people to colonial oppression, and many of its members were politically active.
In Luanda, a group of politicized youths calling themselves Novos Intelectuais de Angola published Mensagem, a journal dedicated to the rediscovery of Angola’s politics, culture, and history.
The editor of Mensagem, Viriato da Cruz, wasa childhood friend of Mario de Andrade.
The authorities considered Mensagem subversive and banned the publication after only two issues.
In the postwar period, many African leaders preferred socialism to capitalism for several reasons.
To them, capitalism in the African context was associated with colonial exploitation.
The majority of African economies relied on the export of agricultural goods, leaving them vulnerable to fluctuations of the global economy.
Socialism was attractive for many African leaders who wanted to overcome the colonial legacy and achieve rapid economic development upon independence.
However, many African leaders of the first post-independence generation did not believe their economies or societies were suited to a socialist transformation along the lines of the Soviet Union.
Many thus embraced “A frican socialism” to combine state-led development initiatives with the coexistence of private capital.
As a result, many African students in Portugal, including Andrade, Santos, Neto, and Cabral, forged contacts with the PCP upon their arrival.
Mario de Andrade recalled distributing Marxist literature, and all of them participated in the PCP-sponsored Soviet Peace Campaign launched by the USSR in response to the escalation of the Cold War in Europe.
African students resented that the Portuguese Communists prioritized struggle against the dictatorship over the liberation of the colonies.
These disagreements were resolved only when the PCP formally approved support for the independence of the colonies at its fifth congress in 1957.
One way or another, the PCP provided a vehicle for African students to gain experience of underground activism, with some, like Neto, forming long-term contacts that would prove vital in the long run.
Marxist ideas also gained some traction in urban centers across the Portuguese colonies.
It is unclear whether the PCP had any input in forming the PCA or drafting the manifesto.
The 1950s were a period of profound ideational transformation for African intellectuals, as they started to analyze the concepts of race and racism in the context of the Portuguese Empire.
However, they would soon abandon cultural nationalism in favor of a fundamentally Marxist analysis of Portuguese colonialism.
As Branwen Gruffydd Jones has argued, these young people abandoned Négritude because they concluded that the narrow assimilado culture of urban areas could not be connected with the experiences of the vast majority of people living under Portuguese rule.
In short, contacts with Portuguese communists helped politicize African students, but these did not determine their politics.
As Neto and Cabral argued, “African socialists” underplayed the importance of class struggle in Africa and the Marxist laws of historical development.
Such critiques of “A frican socialism” emerged gradually throughout the 1960s, but some of the fundamental differences were visible from the outset.
By the mid-1950s, it became clear that it would be challenging to engage in anticolonial activism in Portugal.
Cabral continued to work as an agricultural expert, first in Guinea-Bissau and then Angola.
By 1957, most nationalist activists in Angola were either in prison or in exile.
In 1957, Viriato da Cruz fled Luanda to join the others in Paris, fearing arrest.
The move signified that the center of political activism had to move outside of Portugal into exile.
Tashkent, Beijing, and Exile Activism in the 1950s From the outset of the interwar period, Paris served as a hub for nationalist activity for African intellectuals.
When Mario de Andrade arrived there, he started working for Présence Africaine, an influential journal founded by Alioune Diop, a famous Senegalese writer and a key figure in the Négritude movement.
Andrade’s association with the journal led to the development of contacts with other Francophone nationalists based in Paris and raised awareness of Portuguese colonialism.
However, disagreements between Francophone and Lusophone activists about the direction of political nationalism also emerged.
These became clear when Marcelino dos Santos, Viriato da Cruz, and Mario de Andrade were invited to attend the “First Conference of African and Asian Writers,” held in Tashkent, Soviet Uzbekistan, from October 7-13, 1958.
Nikita Khrushchev set the tone in his opening speech when he underlined the importance of writers in developing the nationalist consciousness of people struggling against imperialism.
Behind the scenes, though, the conference was marred by the delegates’ many competing agendas.
According to the Soviet version of events, the conflict began during preparatory meetings, where Diop insisted that the Soviets not Revolutionaries 45 participate in the proceedings.
The incident caused some controversy during discussions at the Presidium of the newly established Soviet Solidarity Committee, with some A fricanists like Alexander Zusmanovich arguing there should have been more “patient” engagement with Diop.
Although not everyone agreed with such a proposal, other members of the Presidium noted that many people in Diop’s circle did not share his views.
As Rossen Djagalov has argued, the Tashkent conference was divided among those writers who favored strong connections between literature and politics and those who wanted literature to maintain its independence.
He also met many prominent writers, among them the Turkish Nazim Hikmet.
Andrade made a very positive impression on the Soviet conference organizers.
Viriato da Cruz and Marcelino dos Santos were not listed in the reported, even though they both attended the Tashkent conference.
Andrade also established correspondence with Ivan Potekhin, the first director of the Institute of African Studies.
B Du Bois at the “First Conference of African and Asian Writers,” held in Tashkent, October 7-13, 1958.
Cultural exchanges remained an important part of the engagement between the Soviets and their new African allies.
In 1959, a collection of poems by Marcelino dos Santos was published in the USSR in Russian translation.
In the early 1960s, Pavel Shmelkov was given responsibility for sub-Saharan Africa at the Association for Friendship and Cultural Ties with Foreign Countries.
There gathered the library staff, readers, and simply young people who had found out there would be a meeting with the Africans gathered there.
The guests did not expect such a lively interest in their art, and they read poetry in Portuguese and French.
They showed the domestic audience that the revolution was still alive, with poetry reading serving as a way to connect African intellectuals with the Soviet public.
They also raised the prestige and increased the international exposure of African writers.
Thus, the Soviet cultural diplomacy of the 1950s was important for fostering personal contacts and connections between African revolutionaries and local intermediaries.
The Soviet Union was not the only actor interested in capturing the “hearts and minds” of Third World elites due to the rise of China as a formidable regional power with global ambitions in the 1950s.
Initially, the Chinese leadership forged a close alliance with the Soviet Union.
However, the CCP’s leader, Chairman Mao Zedong, was not happy with the pace of modernization and decided to pursue a “national road to socialism” after Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin.
In 1958, he launched the “Great Leap Forward,” a scheme that aimed to increase industrial production and agricultural output at breakneck speed.
Three of our protagonists— Mario de Andrade, Marcelino dos Santos, and Viriato da Cruz—grew infatuated with the Chinese Revolution during the 1950s.
He had already gone to Bucharest, Romania, for the Fourth World Festival of Youth and Students with Agostinho Neto and was impressed with the warm reception, which contrasted sharply with the reality of daily racism in Portugal.
He traversed the country, visiting factories, speaking to leaders of trade unions, women’s groups, and youth organizations.
He remembered being impressed with the massive scale of industrial construction, with all the work done through sheer physical labor.
Their first experience of state socialism would be significant for African intellectuals from the Portuguese colonies.
Although such expressions of socialist solidarity were often ritualized, the lack of any racial and ethnic hierarchies demonstrated what socialism could achieve, even in multiethnic societies.
The experience of the Chinese Revolution in the 1950s was particularly influential for African intellectuals because it offered a model of state-led mass mobilization for a non-white, non-Western country with a history of suffering from imperialism.
Although the Great Leap Forward would end in disaster and mass starvation in China, the perceived mobility and grandeur of the experiment that Africans witnessed during the often carefully choreographed tours left a profound and long-lasting impression.
In the USSR, the majority of these encounters were part of Soviet cultural diplomacy, an attempt to capture the “hearts and minds” of Third World elites.
The contacts forged through these early encounters, such as with Mario de Andrade, were significant—they placed the Paris-based African intellectuals in contact with central Soviet figures and organizations that were involved in establishing these personal contacts.
These international travels contributed to a radical vision of a just society that many African intellectuals from the Portuguese colonies would come to share by the late 1950s.
However, theirs was not the only one, and a number of local rivals would emerge in the 1950s and 1960s in urban centers across the Portuguese Empire and the neighboring countries.
In Angola, the Luanda-based intellectuals would be challenged by a group of people based in Zaire who sought inspiration and support from the United States.
Holden Roberto, Bakongo Nationalism, and the United States Various regions of the Portuguese Empire had long-standing links to neighboring countries, as people moved in search of better job opportunities or to escape the compulsory labor requirements that tightened under Salazar.
Masses of migrants traveled from Mozambique to work in the mines and on the railways of Southern Rhodesia and South Africa.
Thousands migrated from Cape Verde to Sao Tomé, Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, and Angola to escape famine.
Angola had historical links with the Belgian Congo to the north and Northern Rhodesia to the east.
By the late 1950s, migrants had started to set up selfhelp organizations to support members of their communities.
One such organization was based in Léopoldville (later renamed Kinshasa), the capital of Zaire.
Angolans living in Léopoldville were rooted in the Revolutionaries 49 5,000-strong Bakongo community, which had traditionally inhabited northern Angola and southwestern Zaire.
Those who settled in Zaire spoke fluent French rather than Portuguese and were well integrated into the local politics and culture.
These were key features of the so-called “Léopoldville group” of Angolans, initially dedicated to the restoration of the Kongo kingdom.
Unlike the Luanda-based intellectuals, the Léopoldville group was opposed to communism and derived their inspiration from the United States.
The man who would come to dominate the Léopoldville group was Holden Roberto.
Born in 1923 in Sao Salvador , northern Angola, Roberto’s family moved to Zaire when he was only two years old.
He studied at a Baptist missionary school and then worked as an accountant for the Belgian colonial administration in Léopoldville.
In 1958, Roberto represented the UPNA at the First All-African People’s Conference in Accra where he encountered many influential African leaders who advised him to broaden the organization’s appeal.
By dropping the narrow regional focus from the title, Roberto wanted to show the UPA aspired to represent all Angolans.
Although Roberto began to entertain ideas about the violent overthrow of colonial rule, he fashioned himself as a staunch anticommunist and established relations with United States officials.
In late 1955, Roberto first met with the United States Consulate in Léopoldville.
The timing was opportune, since Washington was in the process of revising its policy on Africa in the late 1950s.
Although the United States had a long-standing anticolonial tradition, many United States politicians saw Africans through a racial lens because of the bitter history of segregation in the southern United States.
However, this policy started to change, especially after Vice President Richard Nixon made an extended tour of Africa in 1957 and came back convinced that the continent would become the next battlefield between the West and the Eastern Bloc.
Eisenhower and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles agreed to a policy review, and on August 23, the National Security Council approved their final report, NSC 5719/1.
The Eisenhower administration also faced substantial criticism of its Africa policy.
One of the critics was John Fitzgerald Kennedy, a young Democratic senator at that time.
Kennedy believed that one had to engage with African nationalist leaders—or risk having them fall under the spell of communism.
On July 2, 1957, Kennedy shocked the Senate when he denounced United States support for the French colonial war in Algeria.
Holden Roberto thus established himself as a reliable “noncommunist nationalist,” which put him on a path of long-term collaboration with Washington.
The major differences between the Luanda and Léopoldville-based Angolan nationalists have attracted significant attention from historians.
Both groups represented educated elites, but they were distinct in terms of ethnic background, culture, and education.
While Luanda-based intellectuals embraced Marxism as a form of identification that stood above race largely due to their multiethnic background, Holden Roberto and the UPA identified predominantly with the Bakongo.
The difference in the way the two groups understood race was compounded by variations in religion and occupation.
As David Birmingham has argued, the UPA embraced a “capitalist ethos” because it was rooted in Bakongo-dominated Northwest Angola, a major coffee production center.
Although white farmers often occupied the best land, there was also substantial coffee planting among Africans.
More generally, these divisions were reflective of how “Angola” was put together, cutting across ethnocultural divides.
By 1960, the Revolutionaries 51 UPA emerged as a powerful rival to the Luanda-based intellectuals, as Holden Roberto managed to mobilize the Bakongo of northern Angola and started to develop a network of international patrons.
Toward an Armed Struggle As the 1950s drew to a close, it became increasingly evident that Salazar was not willing to relinquish Portugal’s empire in Africa.
Fearing that the same would happen in Angola, the colonial administration arrested and jailed fifty Angolans suspected of involvement in nationalist agitation.
In Guinea-Bissau, the police shot at peaceful protesters at the Pidjiguiti docks in Bissau, killing fifty people and injuring many more, on August 3, 1959.
The man who would connect this act of police brutality to the nationalist narrative was Amilcar Cabral.
There, he conducted the country’s first agricultural census and developed a critique of colonial land exploitation.
He also acquired connections among the Cape Verdean community in Bissau.
The Portuguese secret police, the PIDE, treated such activities with suspicion.
Cabral was forced to leave Guinea-Bissau, coming back only occasionally to see his family.
However, as Juliao Soares Sousa has discovered, Cabral actually set up the PAIGC after the events at the Pidjiguiti docks in August 1959.
The building pressure for violent action became apparent at the Second AILA frican People’s Conference, held on January 25, 1960, in Tunis.
The Tunis conference was very different from the first such meeting in Accra in 1958.
By 1960, the Algerian War had become a rallying point for the Non-Aligned Movement and inspired other Third World revolutionaries.
Frantz Fanon personified the militant mood in Tunis, calling upon delegates from the Portuguese colonies to launch an armed struggle against the Salazar regime in solidarity with the Algerian National Liberation Front , who were fighting against French rule in Algeria.
Cabral then went to Luanda but failed to find any recruits because of the repression.
In fact, Cabral’s trip showed that the conditions for armed rebellion were not right, but Fanon disagreed.
Paris-based activists had to move to Africa to mobilize support on the ground or lose out to regional rivals embedded in local politics.
Guinea provided an ideal “launching pad” for armed action in Guinea-Bissau.
The two countries share a long and porous border, which is difficult to control because of the long-standing movement of goods and people.
In the early 1960s, Conakry became a critical hub for African revolutionaries due to the patronage of Ahmed Sékou Touré, Guinea’s first president.
Touré’s name hit the international headlines in 1958 when Guineans voted to reject French president Charles de Gaulle’s proposal of continued membership of the French community.
Although the referendum result was very much an outcome of pressure from below, Touré used it to construct an image of himself as an uncompromising, radical nationalist leader, and he pledged support for African liberation.
China’s interest in Africa picked up in 1960 because of competition with the Soviets.
Sino-Soviet disagreements had been brewing for some time for many reasons.
The CCP’s chairman, Mao Zedong, wanted Moscow to treat Beijing as an equal partner.
He was unhappy when the Soviets criticized the Great Leap Forward and failed to support China in its border conflict with India.
As Sino-Soviet competition intensified, China started to challenge the USSR openly for leadership in the Third World.
Beijing stepped up its support for anticolonial movements in Africa and began offering cash and military training to these movements.
In addition to receiving the cash, Cabral and Cruz took some practical lessons in “guerrilla warfare” in China.
Some of their notes from the course were allegedly preserved on microfiche and transported secretly to MPLA supporters in Angola.
Cabral also negotiated with the Chinese to send recruits from Guinea-Bissau for a short training course at the Nanjing Military Academy.
As Anrade later recalled, the trip showed that the Chinese were much more willing to support armed struggle than the Soviets.
Then, the argument goes, the SACP influenced members of the African National Congress to engage in violence against the apartheid regime.
This led to the formation of its armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe , in 1961.
However, the central role of the USSR as “backing” the violent option has been disputed by several authors.
Similarly, there is no direct evidence that the Soviets encouraged a violent anticolonial uprising in the Portuguese colonies.
We know that Andrade, Cruz, and Cabral visited the Soviet Union in the summer of 1960, but the details of conversations they had there are unknown.
In fact, Andrade does not mention the trip in his otherwise detailed interview with Michel Laban.
Soviet inaction could also be explained by the fact that Portuguese colonialism was nowhere near the top of the Politburo agenda in 1960.
In fact, even if such requests were filed, the Soviets lacked the organizational capacity to process them.
During their early trips to Moscow, African anticolonial activists were usually hosted by members of the Soviet Solidarity Committee.
While the Chinese took a highly personalized approach, the Soviet bureaucracy was cumbersome and often slow, with minimal access to high-level decision-makers.
It would take some time—and some exceptional circumstances—for the Soviets to truly notice developments in the Portuguese colonies.
By 1960, it had become clear to African revolutionaries that they had to harness support for armed struggle quickly—or lose out to local rivals.
Although violence was never their preferred option, African intellectuals realized that they had to demonstrate the ability to challenge the Portuguese by the force of arms.
In Angola’s case, the rivalry between the Luanda-based intellectuals and the Léopoldville group emerged early on, with both vying for leadership in the anticolonial movement.
Speaking at the London Conference for Nationalist Leaders from the Portuguese Colonies on December 6, 1960, Mario de Andrade declared that the liberation movements would resort to “direct action” if faced with continued Portuguese intransigence.
Conclusion The 1950s were a crucial period in which the men and women who would later preach revolution in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau came of age.
Initially, these were young people who expressed their frustration with the colonial regime in ways that had been common in interwar Paris, London, and Brussels—through cultural production and selfdiscovery.
However, they eventually abandoned Négritude in favor of a more radical approach.
Specifically, they would come to understand the Portuguese colonial system in terms of class rather than race.
Their vision of the future came to rest on socialism as a way to ensure total liberation from colonialism.
Andrade, Cabral, and Neto envisioned a radical transformation of society.
By the late 1950s, they had adopted a Marxist framework to analyze colonialism and forged close connections with European left-wing circles and officials across the Eastern Bloc.
Their trips to the socialist countries were impactful, as they reinforced the belief in the mobilizing potential of socialism and fostered Revolutionaries 55 personal links with key people and institutions that would be significant once the anticolonial wars began in the early 1960s.
While intellectuals from Lusophone Africa preferred peaceful transition to independence, by 1960, it became clear that Salazar was unwilling to negotiate.
Asa result, leadership of the liberation struggle hinged upon the ability to prepare and ultimately lead armed uprisings in the colonies.
In the years that followed, they would have to compete with many local rivals who also claimed ownership of the nationalist project in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau.
Such divisions were evident early on in Angola because Luanda-based intellectuals were challenged by a group with a very different nationalist vision.
Thus, the mobilization of resources from African and international patrons became particularly pertinent.
A few years earlier, world prices for coffee, Angola’s most significant export commodity, had dropped, leading to wage cuts in the coffee-producing areas of the north.
In addition, 1960 was not a good year for the cotton farmers of the Kassange region.
In January 1961, wage cuts in Kassange spurred a wave of protests, which were soon answered by arrests.
This crisis led to a full-blown rebellion against the system of forced cotton growing in the area.
This revolt and the reprisals, known as “Maria’s War,” passed relatively unnoticed by the world press, mainly due to strict censorship.
In 1960, developments in the colonies still did not feature in international headlines—but this would change on January 23, 1961, when the Santa Maria, a Portuguese luxury liner, was hijacked by a group of political activists led by sixty-six-year-old Henrique Galvao.
Their leader was none other than Henrique Galvao, the curator of the 1934 Colonial Exhibition in Porto.
Galvao had been a staunch supporter of the regime, but turned against Salazar after his criticism of abusive labor practices in the colonies fell on deaf ears, eventually leading to his arrest.
However, it was the hijacking that would become the most dramatic event in Galvao’s career.
The hijacking attracted widespread attention, and rumors spread that his ship was sailing toward Luanda, the capital of Angola, to launch a coup.
After ten days navigating the Atlantic, the Santa Maria docked in Recife, Brazil.
The journalists who remained in Luanda bore witness to events that would shatter Salazar’s myth of harmonious racial relations in Portuguese Africa.
The events known as the “Angolan uprising” started with a series of violent incidents in Luanda on February 4, 1961.
In the north, local Bakongo joined the UPA, attacking farms, destroying property, and killing European farmers.
The Angolan uprising was a violent rebellion against the forced labor system, and the scale of the violence was unexpected—even among the nationalist leaders.
In April, Minister of Defense Julio Botelho Moniz demanded urgent reforms in Angola and called for Salazar’s resignation.
However, the coup failed, and Salazar resolved to crush the uprising in the north with overwhelming terror.
On orders 56 Cataclysm 57 from Salazar, the Portuguese army bombed and raided entire villages looking for suspects, killing thousands on the spot and arresting many more.
By the end of the year, about 50,000 Africans had been killed in the conflict, and 300,000 Angolan refugees had crossed the border into Zaire.
The Angola uprising raised questions regarding the salience of Portuguese colonialism.
In Washington, the newly elected John F Kennedy broke the pattern by siding with the Soviet Union to condemn Portugal at the UN Security Council.
He also used diplomatic channels and the promise of economic aid in an attempt to convince Salazar to proceed toward self-determination.
However, Washington’s response was constrained by the fact that Portugal controlled access to the Azores archipelago, which hosted a NATO military base at Lajes.
Lisbon made it clear that it would not hesitate to terminate the lease if Washington continued to exert pressure over its colonial policy.
Then, during the first meeting between Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna on June 4, 1961, the first secretary astounded the president with an announcement that the Soviet Union would sign a peace treaty with the GDR and terminate Western access to West Berlin.
Kennedy refused to relinquish Western access and ordered a military build-up to defend the city.
Over the summer, tensions rose as thousands of East Germans streamed to the West, leading to the construction of the Berlin Wall in August.
The Lajes military base in the Azores was used heavily during the Berlin airlift in the summer of 1961, thus strengthening the arguments of State Department and Pentagon officials who warned against alienating Salazar.
Kennedy continued to press Salazar for reforms but refrained from any measures that would deny continued United States access to the base.
Beyond supporting resolutions to condemn Portugal’s actions at the UN, the Soviets were initially slow to respond to events in Angola.
Czechoslovakia also emerged as an important patron of the MPLA and PAIGC, forging a special relationship with Viriato da Cruz and Amilcar Cabral.
This chapter charts the largely unknown story of how the interplay between the Angolan and Berlin crises led Moscow and Prague to approve the first aid packages for the MPLA and the PAIGC, detailing the important role key officials—mezhdunarodniki—played in such responses.
By evening, six white policemen, one African army corporal, and fourteen so-called rebels had been killed.
The next day, interracial violence erupted again at the large public funeral of those who had been killed on the previous day.
The prison was attacked again on February 10, leaving seven dead and seventeen wounded.
As Dalia and Alvaro Mateus have discovered, neither the MPLA nor the UPA orchestrated these events in Luanda.
In fact, the violence in the Angolan capital took the MPLA by surprise.
Meanwhile in Zaire, Holden Roberto was preparing to launch an armed struggle in northern Angola.
Although he advocated nonviolence in public, in private, he was frustrated with the failure of peaceful protest and was preparing for armed action.
In March, he went to the United States and spoke about Angola at the United Nations.
In a carefully crafted international strategy inspired by the FLN in Algeria, the timing of the UPA’s invasion of northern Angola on March 15 coincided with a vote on Angola at the UN Security Council.
Still, he managed to secure some support from Washington, allegedly after a meeting with Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
In April, the CIA put Roberto on an annual retainer of $6,000, which was subsequently raised to $10,000.
The Angolan uprising and Salazar’s brutal response drove home the importance of a coordinated response.
Its organizers—Amilcar Cabral, Mario de Andrade, and Marcelino dos Santos— envisioned that the new organization would raise the international profiles of the MPLA and the PAIGC and allow them to capture the leadership of the nationalist movement.
The first country to provide an assistance package to the MPLA was Czechoslovakia.
Starting in the 1950s, Czechoslovakia had been pursuing an active policy in the Third World.
One of the most industrialized states in Eastern Europe, Czechoslovakia boasted an advanced arms manufacturing industry that had been famous since the interwar period.
It also maintained a network of commercial and diplomatic contacts with many countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
The communist takeover in 1948 saw a temporary decline in Czechoslovak commercial and diplomatic engagement with Africa, Asia, and Latin America, but the 1955 Czechoslovak-Egyptian arms deal once again put Prague on the map as the “go-to” capital for Third World leaders looking for arms.
These considerations often matched the personal ambitions of the top leadership.
More than half of the Portuguese colonial army consisted of African troops, mainly rank-and-file soldiers under direction of European officers.
His immediate rival was Rudolf Barak, the minister of the interior, who oversaw the Czechoslovak state security and its foreign intelligence branch, the First Directorate.
In conversations with Czechoslovak officials, Viriato da Cruz emphasized the MPLA aspired to establish a common front of all the Angolan movements.
The Angolan uprising probably accelerated the timetable on Prague’s decision to approve the MPLA’s requests.
Prague also agreed to discuss the possible delivery of arms with their Soviet colleagues.
Ideology clearly mattered for the CPC leadership who emphasized ideational affinity with the MPLA and internalized Cruz’s politically charged Cold War identification of the UPA as essentially a foreign, U.S.-sponsored organization.
In comparison to Czechoslovakia, the Soviets were initially slow to respond to events in Angola.
The Soviet Union supported all the UN resolutions condemning Portugal’s action in the colonies, but did not actively engage with nationalist activists until May, when the Soviet Solidarity Committee offered to commandeer one of their staff, Valentin Ivanov, for a three-week reconnaissance trip to Morocco, Ghana, and Guinea.
Around the same time, the Soviet ambassador to China sought contact with Pascoal Luvualu, the Angolan trade union organization leader affiliated with the MPLA, and invited him for talks in the Soviet Union.
In Moscow on June 8, the Soviet Solidarity Committee informed Luvualu that they could offer “money, medicines, and food” to the MPLA in Conakry.
They also considered supplying weapons but asked him to explore ways to transfer arms to Angola— perhaps using African troops stationed in Léopoldville who were there under the auspices of the UN peacekeeping mission in Zaire.
These developments indicated that Moscow was stepping up its support for the Angolan nationalists.
As one of only few cadres in the party apparatus who could speak fluent Portuguese, Evsiukov would become a regular participant in meetings with lusophone anticolonial activists from the Portuguese colonies.
Once the Berlin Crisis erupted over the summer, the KGB and the Czechoslovak StB worked out the first set of measures that would guide their policy on Angola.
Among the myriad proposals against the “main enemy—the United States and its allies,” the KGB and the StB agreed to recruit “progressive agents” among the leaders of the liberation movements.
They also drafted joint action plans on Zaire, India, Indonesia, and Egypt.
The StB’s First Directorate pretty quickly proceeded to implement the plan.
He arrived in Conakry in 1960 and forged contacts with leaders of the African liberation movements based there, including with Amilcar Cabral and Viriato da Cruz.
On July 14, 1961, Adamek met Viriato da Cruz at his house in Conakry and proceeded to talk about Czechoslovak assistance for the MPLA, pointing out Cataclysm 63 that their goals were the same and that both sides would benefit from closer cooperation.
As Adamek reported to Prague, Cruz agreed that they shared the same goal—“fighting imperialism in A frica’—and promised to use his position as the MPLA’ secretary general to share information.
The Soviet-Czechoslovak plan for Angola was thus in the making by the time Viriato da Cruz and Mario de Andrade arrived in Moscow for talks in late July 1961.
They also asked for financial assistance, humanitarian aid for Angolan refugees, training for party cadres in the USSR, and arms.
The Soviets at least partially fulfilled these requests, as they allocated yearly financial assistance to the MPLA, starting with $25,000 in 1961 and 1962.
The MPLA was still based in Conakry, unable to move to Léopoldville because of the crisis in Zaire, so questions of logistics must have taken center stage.
There is both indirect and direct evidence to suggest that the Berlin Crisis hastened the intensification of support for African nationalist movements.
First, the timing—the Soviets stepped up their efforts to support the Angolan nationalist movement only toward the end of May and in particular after Khrushchev’s June meeting with Kennedy in Vienna.
Specifically, as Vladislav Zubok has discovered, on July 29, the KGB chief Shelepin sent Khrushchev a “mind-boggling set of proposals” for intelligence action in various parts of the world aimed at distracting the United States during the settlement of the Berlin Crisis.
These proposals included measures to “help organize mass anticolonial uprisings” in Kenya, Northern and Southern Rhodesia, and Guinea-Bissau by arming rebels and training military cadres.
Shelepin’s proposals seem as ambitious as the joint KGB-StB coordination plan from July and likely were part of the same strategy.
Surely, the Angolan uprising was a crucial factor motivating the Soviets to act, but the Cold War context also played an important role in accelerating attempts to develop a plan for Angola.
There had always been considerable cross-border movement in Guinea-Bissau, with men and women leaving for neighboring Senegal and Guinea to seek job opportunities, escape forced labor, or avoid political persecution.
By the time Cabral arrived in Conakry in 1960, several nationalist organizations had already started recruiting members among the immigrant community.
One such Conakry-based organization was led by Luiz da Silva and Belarmino Gomes.
There were also a number of nationalist organizations based in Dakar, the capital of Senegal.
One of them, the Movement for the Liberation of Guinea , managed to find support among the Manjako ethnic group in northern Guinea-Bissau and gained backing from the Senegalese authorities.
Most of these organizations opposed Cabral’s binationalist vision and advocated independence for Guinea-Bissau alone.
Settled in Conakry, he organized a leadership election, mobilizing Balante émigrés from Guinea-Bissau in support.
The Soviet Solidarity Committee wrote back, confirming that they had formed a similar view of Belarmino Gomes during his “one-day stay” in Moscow.
In Conakry, Cabral also met Miroslav Adamek who supported his request to visit Prague.
It was not Cabral’s first trip to the Soviet Union—one year earlier, he traveled to Moscow on his way to China with a group of recruits from Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde.
Cabral positively impressed his hosts, as he was “highly critical” of United States policies on Africa, criticized the concept of “African socialism” on the grounds that there was only “scientific socialism,” and marveled at Soviet achievements.
Most likely, Guinea-Bissau was not a priority for the Soviet leadership.
Cataclysm 65 Cabral’s trip to Czechoslovakia with his righthand man Aristides Pereira was much more fruitful.
In July, the KGB and the StB worked out a plan for Angola, and the StB proceeded with “recruitment” of MPLA'’s Viriato da Cruz.
The Ministry of the Interior also pledged to organize a six-month course for a dozen recruits.
Adamek’s “recruitment” meeting with Cabral on August 13, 1961 was similar to the one with Viriato da Cruz a month earlier.
He also asked Cabral to share information about people and the political situation throughout Africa.
According to Adamek’s report to the StB, Cabral promised to help, but also warned that his options were limited since he was often critical of the Guinean authorities.
While Adamek presented the meeting as a professional success, Cabral’s “recruitment” was a bit more ambiguous than the case of Viriato da Cruz since it is not clear whether Adamek broke his diplomatic cover or if any papers were signed.
Julius Nyerere, Eduardo Mondlane, and the Foundation of FRELIMO Meanwhile, political activity was on the rise among Mozambican migrants in East Africa.
The Makonde of northern Mozambique were particularly important in the history of the nationalist movement.
In the 1950s, many Mozambican Makonde emigrated to neighboring countries in British East Africa— Tanganyika, Zanzibar, and Kenya—to work on sisal plantations and escape the forced labor still in place in Portuguese Africa.
In the 1950s, a number of Makonde associations appeared in Tanganyika, including in Dar es Salaam, the capital, and Tanga.
The Dar es Salaam association consisted of a small group of politicized Makonde who spoke English and knew very little Portuguese.
In the 1950s, many joined Tanganyika’s African National Union , a nationalist front campaigning for the independence of Tanganyika, a territory held under British trusteeship.
In March 1960, TANU supported the transformation of the Dar es Salaam group into the Mozambique Africa National Union , with the 25-year-old Tanganyika-born Makonde Matthew Mmole as president.
In 1960, the Tanga association petitioned the Portuguese administration at Mueda, northern Mozambique, for permission to return to their home country.
That was the subject of a meeting on June 16, 1960, as crowds gathered at the office of the local authorities in Mueda.
However, the meeting quickly degenerated into violence when the police opened fire after people reacted angrily to the arrogant speech of the governor, who announced that their leaders had been arrested.
While the interpretation of the event—including the number of victims—has since been substantially revised in recent years, police brutality politicized the Makonde and reaffirmed their belief in the need for armed struggle in Mozambique.
The organization quickly managed to attract members from several regions, including Portuguese-speaking Makonde.
One of its founders was 22-year-old Adelino Gwambe, a former employee of the south Rhodesian railways from Inhambane in southern Mozambique.
In April 1961, Gwambe and MANU ’s president Matthew Mmole represented the Mozambican liberation movement at the CONCP meetings in Casablanca.
In July 1961, Gwambe publicly announced to the press in Dar es Salaam that he stood for immediate armed struggle.
As the claim was too radical for the local authorities, he was expelled from Tanganyika and moved to Ghana with support from President Kwame Nkrumah.
The role played by Marcelino dos Santos, who joined UDENAMO and moved to Dar es Salaam after Gwambe was expelled in 1961, might have been the reason for the allocation of funds.
UDENAMO’s main rival, the Dar-es-Salaam-based MANU, also appealed to the Soviets for assistance.
Mmole and Millinga also claimed that Gwambe’s UDENAMO was a movement of “assimilated” Mozambicans who had, in fact, made a secret deal with the Portuguese.
In June 1962, representatives from a number of Mozambican nationalist organizations gathered in Dar es Salaam to discuss unification in a common front under the auspices of TANU’s leader and the first president of Tanganyika, Julius Nyerere.
Alongside many African leaders of his generation, Nyerere believed that liberation would not be complete until all of Africa was free.
Since the 1950s, Nyerere had expressed staunch opposition to South Africa’s apartheid and was among the founders of the Britain-based Anti-Apartheid Movement.
After Tanganyika gained independence on December 9, 1961, Nyerere allowed exiled liberation movements from the Portuguese colonies, South West Africa , and South A frica to establish their offices and training camps in the country.
However, Nyerere did not approve of Gwambe’s militant rhetoric, which was one reason why he was expelled from Dar es Salaam in July 1961.
The candidate whom Nyerere favored for the leadership of the Mozambican nationalist movement was the U.S.-educated Mozambican Eduardo Chivambe Mondlane.
Born on June 20, 1920, he was the son of a Tsonga chief from Gaza province in southern Mozambique.
In South Africa, he became involved in political campaigning, for which he was expelled from the country.
Back in Mozambique’s capital, Lourenco Marques , he cofounded the association for Black students in Mozambique (NESAM; Nicleo dos Estudantes Africanos Secundarios de Mogambique), which spoke out against Portugal’s racist policies.
He then continued his education, first, briefly, in Lisbon, before moving to the United States to study sociology and anthropology at Oberlin, Northwestern, and Harvard.
While living there, he married Janet Rae Johnson, a white woman from Indiana.
In 1957, Mondlane started work as a research officer at the Trusteeship Department of the United Nations, where he met Nyerere.
Back in the United States, he established contacts with the Kennedy administration, urging them to put pressure on Salazar.
UDENAMO’s Uria Simango was appointed as vice president, Marcelino dos Santos became the secretary for foreign affairs, while MANU’s Matthew Mmole became treasurer and David Mabunda the general secretary.
Cataclysm 69 According to a nationalist narrative, FRELIMO represented a genuine union of ethno-nationalist organizations rooted in distinct communities of Mozambican émigrés.
As Michel Cahen has argued though, the FRELIMO base was made up of the Makonde-based UDENAMO, which had already become a “pluriethnic organization with a modernist program” by 1962.
In July 1962, David Mabunda, Fanuel Mahluza, and Matthew Mmole came to Moscow to participate in the International Congress for Peace and Disarmament.
Only one month after the formation of FRELIMO, they expressed concern about Mondlane’s election.
Mabunda questioned Mondlane’s “political affiliation” and declared that UDENAMO could withdraw from the union at any time.
In August, Adelino Gwambe accused Mondlane of being a United States agent and officially withdrew UDENAM6O from the front.
In his memoirs, Evsiukov recalled that Mondlane impressed him during his first visit to the USSR in early 1962 as someone who was well educated and knew the situation in his country well.
He was also not in a hurry to begin an armed struggle, a decision that the Soviets understood.
Student Activists Flee Portugal The Angolan uprising brought home the urgency of establishing a political and military organization in Africa.
While the most high-profile anticolonial nationalists had already left Portugal by 1961, many remained in the country and continued to engage in underground activism.
However, staying in Portugal became too dangerous, since the authorities increased their surveillance of A frican students and ramped up their recruitment drive for the colonial army.
In the aftermath of the Angolan uprising, A frican student activists feared they could be arrested or drafted into the Portuguese army.
Many also believed that they could best serve the anticolonial cause by joining the nationalist movements rather than continuing with underground activism in Portugal.
CIMADE developed a daring escape plan, which involved driving several groups of students to Porto, northern Portugal, before using boats to smuggle them to the border and across the Minho River to Spanish territory.
After they reached Spain, a group of young Americans drove them across the country to France.
One of the escapees was Amélia Araujo from Luanda, who had moved to Portugal in the late 1950s to join future husband José, who was involved in nationalist activism.
In 1961, Amélia fled Portugal with her three-month-old daughter Teresa.
However, when reaching France, she heard that her husband was among the group of escapees who had been arrested and imprisoned in Spain.
Then, they were suddenly released, allegedly on orders from Madrid, for reasons that are still not entirely clear.
After staying in France for several months, the group left for Accra, Ghana.
Those students who escaped Portugal became the core of the Western-educated, cosmopolitan elite who would take over critical functions in the administration of the anticolonial movements.
The Araujos joined the PAIGC at their headquarters in Conakry, where José worked closely with Cabral.
Cape Verdeans Maria da Luz “Lilica” Boal and Pedro Pires were dispatched to Senegal to recruit among the Cape Verdean community.
Lilica Boal would become the director of the PAIGC’s Escola-Piloto, an experimental school established in Conakry to educate the future national elite.
The Mozambican Joaquim Chissano continued his studies in France before joining FRELIMO’s leadership in Dar es Salaam.
The Angolan Henrique “Iko” Carreira became a member of the MPLA’s first executive committee, responsible for security, after undergoing training in Czechoslovakia.
Many of the cadres trained in Portugal continued their education in the Soviet Union and other socialist countries.
The majority of the recipients trained at professional technical colleges while the elite cadres studied at universities.
Amélia Araujo went to study radio broadcasting in the USSR before returning to lead Radio Libertagao in Conakry.
The children of the party leadership, including Cabral’s daughter Iva and Aratijo’s daughter Teresa, were sent to “Interdom,” the boarding school for the children of elite foreign communists in Ivanovo near Moscow.
Conclusion The Angolan uprising was a significant catalyst for the Portuguese colonies’ entry into the Cold War.
The events in Angola offered significant opportunities for both Moscow and Washington, but the international environment shaped their actions in very different ways.
While the Berlin Crisis limited the effectiveness of Kennedy’s anticolonial policy, rising Cold War tensions encouraged the Soviets to formulate a strategy on Portuguese Africa.
The story shows that the Soviet response to events in Angola was initially slow, and the initiative came from middle-ranking cadres in the Soviet bureaucracy, the mezhdunarodniki.
In due course, men like Petr Evsiukov would emerge as an increasingly important liaisons for day-to-day relations with African revolutionaries.
The involvement of the intelligence services with the liberation movements is not surprising.
The KGB and the StB played an important role in devising a plan for Angola in 1961.
From the perspective of Czechoslovakia, a country with limited resources, these secret contacts offered a good opportunity to influence the Cold War in Africa to Prague’s advantage.
As the following chapters show, the intelligence officers would play key roles as liaisons with the African anticolonial intellectuals, trying to establish the dominance of their allies over the nationalist movement.
While Cold War considerations certainly mattered, the choice of partners was closely tied to ideological considerations.
By 1961, Viriato da Cruz, Mario de Andrade, and Marcelino dos Santos were already known to the Soviets as A frican intellectuals influenced by Marxism.
A sense of ideological affinity mattered to the Soviets and Czechoslovaks, who saw the world in terms of class struggle.
However, these ideological interpretations were not rigid, and they could be reconsidered based on shifting realities.
Overall, support from the socialist countries in 1961 was fairly limited.
By the end of the year, the brutal suppression of the Angolan uprising showed that Salazar would not give up the empire without a fight.
The nationalist movements would have to organize in exile, mobilize and train recruits, and supply them with weapons if they wanted to launch an armed struggle.
They would thus need to find additional assistance from international donors, while maintaining support from their African host states and overcoming internal rivalries.
The next chapter addresses how our key protagonists used diplomacy to establish dominance over the nationalist movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Bissau.
Lisbon granted colonial subjects equal rights, abolished labor requirements, attempted to improve essential services, and opened up the colonies to foreign direct investment.
While the colonial elites welcomed these reforms, the measures were piecemeal at best, and there was no discussion of self-determination.
In December 1961, India seized the momentum occasioned by events in Angola and invaded the Portuguese-controlled Goa.
Salazar ordered the vastly outnumbered contingent of Portuguese troops in Goa to resist at all costs and court-martialed the officers who surrendered without much resistance.
Lisbon also acquired modern military equipment from France and West Germany to fight its colonial wars.
As explored in chapters 2 and 3, by 1962, the ability to wage armed struggle became fundamental to establishing a claim to leadership of the nationalist movement.
On May 25, 1963, thirty-two A frican leaders founded the Organization of African Unity as a forum for collective action on the continent.
In 1961-64, the MPLA, the PAIGC, and FRELIMO all confronted internal critics and local rivals that, for the most part, formulated alternative visions of anti-imperialism based on race and ethnicity.
After Agostinho Neto joined the MPLA in Léopoldville in 1962, he clashed with Viriato da Cruz and others, who argued against the preponderance of mesticos in leadership positions.
As the newly elected president of FRELIMO, Mondlane had to answer to charges that Mozambican “southerners” like himself occupied key posts in the organization.
What made things even more complicated was that the internal dynamics of liberation movements in exile was closely connected to the politics of their African host states that frequently maintained relationships with competing nationalist organizations.
China’s growing competition with the Soviet Union further complicated the internal dynamics of the liberation movements.
As Sino-Soviet disagreements burst into the open in the early 1960s, Beijing started to aggressively promote its model of a peasant-based, popular revolution that emphasized race and nation over class—in direct opposition to the Soviet model.
China’s ideas on race deepened factionalist struggles within liberation movements since critics often used Mao Zedong’s ideas to bolster their claims and often found an ally in Beijing.
The conflicts over race and privilege coincided with discussions of political strategy, thus complicating relationships with international patrons and African hosts.
While Cabral and Mondlane managed to secure their positions in Guinea and Tanzania, respectively, by 1964, the MPLA under Agostinho Neto was evicted from Zaire.
Diplomacy of Liberation 75 This chapter shows how the dynamics of local and international patronage were closely interlinked, with our key protagonists using international support to solidify their position in host states and vice versa.
It also demonstrates that the politics of African host states often shaped Soviet policy toward Lusophone liberation movements in the context of the Cold War and Sino-Soviet competition.
Based on their 1961 plan for Angola, the Soviets sought to establish a “common front” of all Angolan organizations, which would ensure continuous MPLA access to Zaire, a key “launching pad” for guerrilla action in the neighboring Angola.
As the new documents reveal, a substantive part of the plan included the Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence services infiltrating Holden Roberto’s UPA in Zaire.
In 1962, Moscow established a close relationship with Amilcar Cabral, but the provision of arms was delayed by the dynamics of its relationship with Guinea.
The Soviet interest in FRELIMO picked up in 1964 after what the Soviets perceived to be revolutionary changes in East Africa, following a left-wing revolution in Zanzibar.
The Soviets were still suspicious of Eduardo Mondlane, but they began to provide limited support due to advocacy from key individuals such as Marcelino dos Santos and the increased importance of Tanzania in the Cold War in Africa.
In an influential thesis, Jeremy Friedman has argued that Sino-Soviet competition in the Third World pushed Moscow to embrace militant, anti-imperialist struggles.
As we will see, African revolutionaries played a fundamental role in sustaining the Soviet commitment to their struggles in the aftermath of the Angolan uprising.
Race, Ideology, and the Struggle for Zaire The political fortunes of Angolan nationalists centered on the shifting political landscape in Zaire.
There, they established a center to support Angolan refugees, set up a newspaper, and organized a recruitment drive.
The move was highly significant for the MPLA since it opened up easy access to northern Angola.
The MPLA was keenly aware of the UPA’s advantage and hoped to pursue a “common front” strategy to solidify their position in the country.
The MPLA continued to use Cold War logic to “Americanize” Roberto, thus ensuring continued support from the socialist countries.
The task of securing a “common front” in Angola fell to Soviet and Czechoslovak intelligence officers stationed in Zaire.
The Soviet embassy staff and the KGB regidentura had been expelled from Zaire after the coup d’état that brought down Patrice Lumumba in September 1960.
Then, the Soviets tried to transfer funds and weapons to Antoine Gizenga, who had fled to Stanleyville following the coup in an attempt to challenge the new government in Léopoldville.
By the summer, it became clear, though, that Gizenga’s plan to restore power by military means had failed.
Still, members of the Binza group retained the most powerful positions, and a U.S-favored candidate, Cyrille Adoula, became the new prime minister.
One member of the KGB team who returned to Léopoldville in 1961 was Oleg Nazhestkin.
A young Soviet intelligence officer in 1961, Nazhestkin first went to Léopoldville in August 1960.
From the start, he was assigned to establish contacts with Angolan nationalists based in Zaire.
His mission was cut short because of the coup in Léopoldville, only to be revived a year later.
Although the UPA was fundamentally an ethno-nationalist organization representing the aspirations of the Angolan Bakongo rather than being specifically “pro-Western,” Nazhestkin clearly internalized the Cold War rhetoric employed by the MPLA against its local rivals.
The Soviet-Czechoslovak intelligence plan for Angola was quite elaborate, at least on paper.
The centerpiece of the Czechoslovak strategy for Angola from January 1962 involved infiltrating Holden Roberto’s UPA using various means.
The ultimate goal was to establish a common front between the MPLA and UPA, using clandestine means if necessary.
Meanwhile, Holden Roberto also made moves to claim leadership over the Angolan nationalist movement.
In December 1961, the MPLA accused the UPA of capturing and executing a group of their men, who were on an exploratory mission to northern Angola, fueling fears that the competition was turning violent.
The formation of GRAE was a significant propaganda success and legitimized Roberto’s leadership beyond his core Bakongo base.
Members of the Binza group continued to dominate the government; and in early 1962, key MPLA ally Antoine Gizenga was detained and placed under house arrest.
In fact, the reasons for such an attitude toward the MPLA were internal.
Roberto was an asset to the Binza group since they could rely on his men to intercept the Katangese gendarmes who had escaped to Angola after the fall of Moise Tshombe’s secessionist state.
Adoula was friendly with Roberto (the two had played semi-professional football together before getting involved in politics) and permitted the FNLA to establish representation in Katanga.
The decision was a significant blow to the MPLA because it meant the Zairean government would no longer provide safe haven for the organization.
The OAU were not wrong—in 1963, the MPLA was in the midst of its first major crisis.
His prestige and international credentials made Neto a natural candidate for the leadership position, and at the MPLA’s first conference in December 1962, he was elected president.
Neto then abolished the position of secretary-general, occupied by Viriato da Cruz, setting the two men on a collision course.
Cruz left Léopoldville, but when he returned in 1963, he found the MPLA stripped of official recognition by the Zairean authorities.
On July 7, the conflict culminated in a physical fight for control over the MPLA office in Léopoldville.
The root causes of the schism have been the subject of much speculation.
On the surface, the crisis had all the features of a power struggle between Cruz and Neto.
However, others have emphasized fundamental differences, which centered on issues of race, ideology, and the Cold War.
In October 1962, Neto had approached the United States embassy in Léopoldville, looking to establish contacts.
Cruz’s views on race might have been influenced by the ideas of Mao Zedong.
He was inspired by the Chinese revolution after his trip to China in 1958 and often participated in Beijing-sponsored events.
Cruz was not the only one who disagreed with Neto’s political strategy.
However, when in 1963 Neto announced he would establish a “common front” with a number of small Bakongo nationalist organizations, Andrade was among many who opposed the decision, citing their dubious connections to the Portuguese authorities.
He remained part of the MPLA, but continued to be critical of Neto and his leadership style.
Although Cruz branded Neto as “pro-Soviet,” the International Department did not necessarily back Neto in his struggle with Viriato da Cruz, at least not initially.
Viriato da Cruz was well known to the Soviets, while Neto had spent the previous decade in and out of prison and was thus a relatively new figure.
One of Neto’s regular Soviet contacts in Léopoldville was Oleg Nazhestkin.
After returning to the Zairean capital in 1961, Nazhestkin acted as Neto’s regular liaison in Léopoldville, handing over cash and relaying messages from Moscow.
As Nazhestkin recalled in his memoirs, he had been intrigued by Neto since their first clandestine meeting in Léopoldville, in 1962.
Neto seemed a gentle, intelligent, and kind man—an image that did not quite correspond to Nazhestkin’s idea of a leader determined to wage an armed struggle.
Nazhestkin liked that Neto had his “own philosophy,” as well as integrity.
His positive impression of Neto did not quite match with those of the International Department members, though.
As Nazhestkin recalled, Moscow frequently Diplomacy of Liberation 81 instructed the KGB to investigate Neto’s contacts in the United States, even ifthe International Department actually advised African leaders to find allies among United States officials who opposed Washington’s policy on Portugal.
Although the sources do not tell us exactly how and why Neto’s relationship with the International Department soured, the schism in the MPLA might have contributed to this division.
When the crisis unfolded in 1963, Prague continued to maintain relation with both Neto and Cruz, but cut all financial assistance to the organization.
As a result, relations with Neto soured, and at some point, the MPLA leadership even suggested that it was Czechoslovakia who wanted to split the organization via its “informant”— Viriato da Cruz—and others.
The StB also developed a clandestine relationship with the MPLA’s Henrique “Iko” Carreira who first came to Czechoslovakia for training in internal security in January 1963.
In November 1963, the Soviet presence in Léopoldville ended abruptly because of the renewed political crisis in Zaire.
As the Simba rebellion gathered strength in eastern Zaire, the Soviet embassy was once again expelled from Léopoldville.
Having lost their foothold in Zaire for the second time in three years, the Soviets engaged in a last-ditch attempt to enact their plan for Angola.
In a surprising twist, in late 1963, Holden Roberto approached the Soviets, seeking assistance.
Holden Roberto, Jonas Savimbi, and the Disintegration of the Soviet Plan for Angola, 1963-1964 As 1963 drew to a close, Holden Roberto grew increasingly impatient with the lack of support from Washington.
In late 1963, he publicly attacked the United States for its policy in Angola and approached representatives of the Soviet Union and China, seeking support.
In his conversations with Soviet representatives on December 4, 1963, Roberto admitted that his contacts with Moscow had so far been limited because he did not want to become a “second Lumumba” and feared losing access to Zaire.
On December 17, a group of Soviet officials met him at Nairobi’s Ambassadeur Hotel.
According to a report by secretary of the Soviet Solidarity Committee Dmitrii Dolidze, Roberto seemed “visibly worried and nervous” as he relayed his requests for weapons, medicine, and provisions for Angolan refugees.
He also insisted that the FNLA controlled 75 percent of Angolan territory, that he was not “pro-American,” and that he intended to go to China.
Over the course of the conversation, however, it became clear that Roberto was not open to the idea of any common front with the MPLA in which the two organizations would be equals.
Instead, he charged Neto with collaborating with the Portuguese secret police and the colonial administration.
Although the Soviets were clearly concerned about Roberto’s stance on the MPLA, they invited him to the Soviet Union.
In Washington, Roberto’s challenge spurred the new president, Lyndon B Johnson, to act.
Johnson’s administration recognized that Roberto’s move was a pressure tactic designed to extract additional support from Washington.
Therefore, in early 1964, the CIA, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and the Africa Bureau of the State Department pushed to expand funding.
In the meantime, opposition to Roberto’s leadership crystallized around the figure of thirty-year-old Jonas Malheiro Savimbi.
Born in 1934 in Munhango, Eastern Angola, Savimbi belonged to the Ovimbundu, Angola’s largest ethnic group.
In Lisbon, he became involved in nationalist politics and got to know many student activists, including Neto.
He was also primarily responsible for reorganizing the UPA into the FNLA/GRAE and harnessing African support.
However, by 1963, Savimbi had become increasingly critical of Roberto for favoring his own Bakongo ethnic group, his dictatorial leadership style, and his failure to take military action in Angola.
Savimbi also argued that the FNLA should seek assistance from the socialist countries in order to obtain arms for armed struggle.
In early 1964, he approached representatives of Czechoslovakia, the Soviet Union, and the GDR there.
In his pitch to the Czechoslovak ambassador to Egypt, Frantisek Zachystal, Savimbi emphasized his left-wing views and contacts with Portuguese and French Communists, and he praised Neto for enjoying popular support in Angola.
The East German ambassador Ernst Scholz was particularly impressed with Savimbi and even advised East Berlin to extend formal recognition to the FNLA/GRAE without necessarily asking for permission from Moscow.
Once the common front was established, Adoula’s government would have no choice but to support it.
Savimbi also compared his revolutionary stance with that of Holden Roberto, who never intended to go to either China or the Soviet Union and maintained close contact with United States officials.
He also cautioned against recognizing the FNLA/GRAE because it would strengthen Roberto.
His opening thus presented an opportunity for the Soviets to enact their plan.
The organization had lost support from Zaire and the OAU and was reeling from the split between Neto and Cruz.
On November 2, the Zairean authorities ordered the MPLA to leave the country.
The ban on activities in the Zaire presented a major problem because it denied the MPLA access to the crucial territory of northern Angola—the center of the 1961 uprising.
The MPLA’s remaining option was to establish a new center of operations in neighboring Congo-Brazzaville, a former French colony.
Although Congo-Brazzaville had no direct access to Angola proper, it bordered on the Angolan enclave of Cabinda, which Neto picked as a new target for military operations against the Portuguese.
In August 1963, the first president of Congo-Brazzaville, the defrocked priest Abbé Fulbert Youlou, was deposed in a coup d’état after three days of street riots.
His successor, Alphonse Massamba-Débat, promised to fight corruption, proclaimed his adherence to scientific socialism, and established relations with socialist countries.
With support from Massamba-Deébat, in January 1964, Neto gathered his supporters in Brazzaville for a conference, which reconstituted the MPLA under his leadership.
The MPLA then went on a diplomatic offensive to restore recognition from the OAU and discredit Roberto and Savimbi.
Apparently, Khrushchev made the decision impulsively and without consulting the International Department.
According to Evsiukoy, Cunhal used his connections with the Soviet leadership, and the decision was reversed.
Although Nazhestkin was forced to leave Léopoldville in November 1963 with other embassy staff, he continued to monitor the situation among the Angolan liberation movements.
In a brief from June 1964, Nazhestkin sharply criticized Cruz for his “factional” activities, arguing that by joining with the FNLA, he had proven that he was motivated solely by personal ambition.
In a conversation with Latip Maksudov in Cairo on July 30, Savimbi warned the Soviets against engaging in any more “flirtations” with Holden Roberto.
He argued that official recognition of the FNLA/GRAE would severely damage the prospects of the “progressive forces” and that Roberto was only using the prospect of visiting China or the USSR as a bargaining chip to extract more support from the United States.
He also warned about Cruz’s close links with the Chinese, highlighting the fact that Beijing had advised him to agree to join the FNLA/GRAE with the prospect of taking over the movement.
However, talks with Neto failed, and Savimbi left Angola for training in China only to reemerge three years later as a major challenger to the MPLA in southeast Angola.
In July, the rebels quickly approached Léopoldville, and Moise Tshombe, the former leader of the Katanga secessionists, was recalled from exile and replaced Cyrille Adoula as the new prime minister in the hopes he could provide strong leadership in crisis.
While Adoula was an ardent supporter of Roberto’s, Tshombe pursued a hostile policy toward the FNLA/GRAE as he reengaged with South Africa and Portugal, bringing in a mercenary army to fight the Simbas.
Along with information coming from interlocutors like Neto and Savimbi, the Soviets received regular reports from their Czechoslovak counterparts, who still had a diplomatic presence in Léopoldville.
According to the Czechoslovak journalist Dugan Provaznik, Roberto’s fortunes were declining following Adoula’s departure, while the MPLA’s were on the rise because of increased support from Massamba-Débat.
The Soviets must have calculated that engaging seriously with the FNLA/GRAE in Zaire under Tshombe was unrealistic and could bring about reputational risks rather than benefits.
On December 16, 1964, Pravda published an article by Evsiukov’s immediate superior, Veniamin Midtsev, who lashed out at Roberto for allegedly colluding with Tshombe in a military campaign against the Simbas.
Soviet policy was fundamentally shaped by the changing realities in Zaire, as seen through the prism of their Marxist-Leninist worldview.
The rationale for the “common front” strategy rested on the MPLA’s need to establish a foothold in Zaire.
The same held for Jonas Savimbi, who flaunted his left-wing credentials and his willingness to create a “common front” with Neto.
In the end, Neto’s continuous diplomacy and interventions from allies like Alvaro Cunhal “saved” the MPLA from the ad-hoc withdrawal of Soviet recognition.
Although the Sino-Soviet split intensified the schism Diplomacy of Liberation 87 in the MPLA, Cruz’s contacts with China did not seem to be a problem for the Soviets, at least initially, and breaking the bond between Roberto and the United States remained the primary target for Moscow.
One way or another, the Soviets and their Czechoslovak partners tried to undermine Roberto’s influence in the movement and establish a common front, using clandestine means if necessary.
Although we do not know if the Soviets or the Czechoslovaks were successful in “infiltrating” the FNLA/GRAE, the goal of creating a “common front” was not achieved.
The MPLA lost access to Zaire and would strive to stake a claim to national leadership from a new base in Congo-Brazzaville in the following years.
Over the long term, expulsion from Zaire deepened the divide between the MPLA and FNLA and solidified ties with their respective regional and international patrons.
Amilcar Cabral, Petr Evsiukov, and the Rivalry for Primacy in Guinea, 1961-1964 While the Angolan nationalists’ fortunes hinged on access to Zaire, the PAIGC relied on access to Guinea.
As he conveyed to his StB contact in Conakry, Miroslav Adamek in November 1961, the PAIGC was “finishing off preparations for armed struggle,” and the Guinean Ministry of Defense had even agreed to provide trucks to transport arms to the border with Guinea-Bissau.
As for Soviet assistance, continued Cabral, his older brother Amilcar was planning to visit the USSR to discuss the requests in person.
Amilcar Cabral’s trip to the USSR in early 1962 was significant—it was then that he made a lasting impression on Petr Evsiukov.
Although Cabral had visited the Soviet Union several times, this was his first meeting with Evsiukov, who greeted him at the Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow.
In his memoirs, Evsiukov shared his high regard for Cabral, whom he described as “physically attractive,” “erudite,” and a man who could debate complex issues in a way that would not offend his interlocutors.
Indeed, Cabral’s timetable for hostilities ran into problems in late 1961 when the Guinean authorities seized a shipment of arms from Prague upon arrival in Conakry.
In conversations with Czechoslovak interlocutors, Cabral argued that the main cause was his conflict with the Guinean minister of defense, Keita Fodéba.
Allegedly, Fodéba did not like it when Cabral, who worked as an agricultural adviser to the Guinean authorities upon his arrival to Conakry, criticized the army for not cultivating their peanuts themselves.
When Cabral expressed staunch opposition to the plan, they started putting obstacles in the PAIGC’s way.
In fact, continued Cabral, Fodéba was among the foremost supporters of the union.
The Soviet Union had established a close relationship with Sékou Touré after the Guineans famously rejected membership in the French Community in a 1958 referendum.
The crisis was precipitated by a wave of strikes involving students and teachers protesting against poor working conditions, with some voicing left-wing criticism of the government.
Although there was no indication that Solod had directly participated in opposition activities, the Soviets were eager to restore Diplomacy of Liberation 89 relations with Guinea.
While Cabral continued to lobby the Guinean authorities to release the Czechoslovak arms, he also engaged in hectic diplomacy to find alternative routes to smuggle weapons into the country.
Newly enthroned Moroccan King Hassan II wanted to continue his father’s legacy and support liberation movements.
When Cabral arrived in Rabat, the king offered Moroccan arms and allegedly even dispatched a special mission to ask Sékou Touré for permission for Moroccan aircraft to land matériel in Conakry.
Hassan also allowed Morocco to be used as a transportation hub for arms from Algeria and elsewhere but refused to help with illegal smuggling.
Cabral also held successful talks with the Algerian president Ben Bella, who promised to either airlift a shipment of arms or smuggle them to Conakry by boat.
The congress was an important event for Cabral because it represented an opportunity to assert his primacy over the nationalist movement.
However, as he discovered, a number of his rivals had been invited to attend.
As the congress began, Diallo convinced his colleagues to let Cabral attend and make a speech.
The Guinean authorities responded by arresting four high-ranking members of the PAIGC for illegal smuggling.
In conversation with StB officers in Rabat, Morocco, Cabral argued that the incident was no mistake.
Although the PAIGC would soon emerge as a dominant nationalist movement in Guinea, there was still no firm backing from Senegal—another important “launching pad” for military operations in northern Guinea-Bissau.
As discussed in chapter three, Senegal had provided support for numerous local lusophone nationalist organizations with links to the political establishment.
As the name suggests, FLING opposed Cabral’s binationalist vision and contested the PAIGC’s national leadership on racial grounds, arguing against the presence of Cape Verdeans in the movement.
In 1963, FLING conducted some military operations at the northern border, and it would later receive some assistance from China.
In some ways, the FLING/ PAIGC juxtaposition on racial grounds paralleled the MPLA/FNLA competition in Angola.
As the PAIGC grew to dominate the guerrilla campaign, the importance of FLING diminished.
Cabral’s diplomacy in this period was closely entangled with the politics of its main host state—Guinea.
To claim leadership of the liberation movement, which was still contested by local rivals like FLING, the PAIGC needed to launch an armed campaign against the Portuguese.
Thus, much of Cabral’s early politics involved finding ways to smuggle arms to Conakry.
In contrast to the MPLA, the PAIGC emerged as the dominant nationalist movement in Guinea, partly due to Cabral’s diplomatic skills and international connections.
He also established a close personal relationship with Petr Evsiukov, which proved fundamental to the PAIGC’s long-term success in establishing itself as the dominant nationalist movement.
The Mozambican nationalist movement would face similar problems in its early years.
Eduardo Mondlane, Marcelino dos Santos, and Revolution in East Africa, 1962-1964 On June 25, 1962, Mozambican activists established a new anticolonial front, FRELIMO, with Eduardo Mondlane as its president.
A native of the southern Gaza province, Mondlane received better access to socioeconomic and educational opportunities than those Mozambicans living in the rather remote and underdeveloped north of the country.
Only three former MANU members were elected to the new eleven-man Central Committee, which was dominated by former UDENAMO activists from the south.
To make matters worse, controversy surrounded the appointment of Leo Milas as the Secretary for Information and Culture.
Although Milas claimed to have been born in Mozambique, he did not speak Portuguese or any African languages, and suspicions about his true identity and contacts with the CIA arose upon his 1962 arrival in Dar es Salaam.
On January 5, 1963, a number of high-ranking members of FRELIMO accused Milas of being a CIA agent and physically attacked him.
However, vice-president Uria Simango and Marcelino dos Santos backed Milas, and the Central Committee thus issued orders to expel David Mabunda, Paulo Gumane, and Fanuel Mahluza for their alleged role in the incident.
Mondlane was in the United States for much of the infighting and continued to trust Milas, even placing him in charge of planning military operations.
Only after making inquiries, Mondlane found out that suspicions were justified, since Milas was actually born in the United States and that his real name was Leo Clinton Aldridge.
In the meantime, Mondlane’s critics sought support from Moscow, painting the internal conflict in Cold War terms.
As the Soviets tried to understand the nature of the crisis, Marcelino dos Santos played a critical role in backing Mondlane’s leadership.
In several conversations between Marcelino dos Santos and Latip Maksudov, the Soviet representative to the AAPSO secretariat in Cairo, Santos argued that the schism in the movement had nothing to do with ideological differences or Mondlane’s proUnited States orientation.
The real reason that David Mabunda had left for Cairo, Marcelino dos Santos argued, was because he could not handle the hardships of life in Dar es Salaam.
Another important figure who provided support for Mondlane was Oscar Kambona.
One of the most influential politicians in Tanganyika, Kambona had regular contact with representatives of the socialist countries in Dar es Salaam as Tanganyika’s first minister of foreign affairs.
In 1963, Kambona was appointed the first head of the OAU’s Liberation Committee, based in Dar es Salaam.
Tanganyikan politics in 1963 were conducive to FRELIMO’s mobilization for armed struggle.
Portuguese colonialism was one of the central topics at the founding meeting of the OAU, where all the delegates signed a charter pledging to support the liberation of the entire continent.
For his part, Julius Nyerere formally declared that safe havens for guerrillas should be established along the Mozambique-Tanganyika border.
Nyerere also intensified his efforts to convince Washington and London to pressure Portugal and South Africa to accept Diplomacy of Liberation 93 majority rule.
As Nyerere increasingly lost faith in the possibility of a negotiated settlement, pressure was building for FRELIMO to prepare for a guerrilla war.
In February 1963, Mondlane met Attorney General Robert Kennedy in Washington.
Kennedy found Mondlane a “terrifically impressive fellow” who could ensure a peaceful solution to the Mozambique problem.
Kennedy then arranged for the Ford Foundation to give $99,700 to the Mozambican Institute in Dar es Salaam, which Mondlane had established to cater to refugees who had fled to Tanganyika.
Meanwhile, Marcelino dos Santos provided a link with the socialist countries.
Having been inspired by the Chinese revolution, Santos was keen to establish a close relationship with Beijing.
When he visited China in 1963, he met Chairman Mao Zedong himself and allegedly received an offer of financial assistance.
On his return, Santos urged Mondlane to also go to Beijing to seal the deal.
Santos also lobbied the Soviet embassy in Dar es Salaam, submitting a request for military training, humanitarian assistance and financial assistance, and the treatment of wounded soldiers in the Soviet Union.
The crisis started on the island of Zanzibar, a former British colony with close connections to mainland Tanganyika.
On January 12, 1964, a group of revolutionaries overthrew the sultan, set up a revolutionary council, and proclaimed the People’s Republic of Zanzibar.
The events spurred antigovernment protests in Kenya, Uganda, and Tanganyika.
In Dar es Salaam, soldiers mutinied over low pay and the retention of European officers in top positions.
Convinced that events in Zanzibar and elsewhere in East Africa were linked, Nyerere exploited the power struggle in Zanzibar to push for unification with the mainland.
On April 24, the agreement was signed, and the new state was named the United Republic of Tanzania.
The turmoil in East Africa put a temporary stop to FRELIMO’s military preparations.
Tanzanian authorities confiscated a consignment of Algerian weapons for FRELIMO, releasing them only in May.
The Soviet Union and other socialist countries applauded events in Zanzibar, extended diplomatic recognition, and offered economic assistance.
Zanzibar was the first country in Africa to grant diplomatic recognition to the GDR, leading to an inflow of East German aid.
Thus, British intervention and the union agreement were a major disappointment for the Soviets, who believed it represented a backlash against the revolution.
The Soviets and Czechoslovaks were particularly disappointed with Oscar Kambona, who had a pivotal role in negotiating with the mutineers in Dar es Salaam and supported Nyerere.
Although Evsiukov writes in his memoirs that Mondlane’s prestige was “unquestionable,” we do know that Moscow was suspicious of Mondlane and supportive of what they called “progressive” critics of the party.
In fact, events of 1964 in East Africa must have played a key part in Soviet calculations.
Although the union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar frustrated Soviet hopes for an “African Cuba,” the revolution raised the region’s importance in Cold War terms.
The “Leo Milas” controversy complicated matters further, especially since Mondlane was only rarely present in Dar es Salaam before 1964.
Although the Soviets sympathized with Mondlane’s critics, they extended limited support to FRELIMO due to lobbying from Marcelino dos Santos and the realization that the organization enjoyed exclusive support from Nyerere.
Although COREMO mounted no significant challenge to FRELIMO, power struggles and debates over race, class, and privilege among Mozambicans in Dar es Salaam continued to center on the figure of Eduardo Mondlane and his wife Janet.
Racism in the USSR and the Chinese Challenge in Africa In the early 1960s, the Chinese launched a massive propaganda offensive to spread their revolutionary model in Africa.
The Chinese also used radio broadcasts, cultural events, and film screenings to spread their ideas to a wider local audience.
Some of the men who were trained in China in the 1960s were inspired by the Maoist model of guerrilla warfare, which was based on peasant mobilizations.
Having escaped the Angolan military in 1961, he joined the PAIGC in Conakry in 1963.
As previously discussed, the Chinese challenge manifested itself in leadership struggles in the MPLA and FRELIMO, especially as Sino-Soviet disagreements intensified in the early 1960s.
By 1964, there were ninety-two men and women from the Portuguese colonies studying in the Soviet Union.
He first arrived in the Soviet Union as a student after escaping Portugal to join the PAIGC in 1961.
It was clear it would not be possible to provide free bread for everybody, and one of his professors even warned international students against blindly emulating the Soviet experiment.
As for daily experiences, Silva recalled it was still “novel” for Soviet citizens to see an African person on the streets of Moscow.
The reactions of Soviet citizens to African students varied, ranging from expressions of friendship to overt hostility.
Tensions also emerged over African students’ romantic relationships with Soviet women.
African students often complained to the authorities about abuse, discrimination, and sometimes instances of physical violence, but the Soviet authorities regularly dismissed their concerns.
In the highly charged atmosphere of 1963, the Congress of the Federation of African Students in the USSR adopted a pro-Chinese stance.
The fact that the students targeted Cape Verdeans was particularly dangerous since the PAIGC was dedicated to a binationalist vision of unity between the mainland and the archipelago.
Although Osvaldo Lopes da Silva had previously complained to the Ukrainian authorities about racially charged acts of violence, faced with a direct challenge to Cabral and the status of Cape Verdeans, Silva helped put down the revolt.
Students were told to adhere to the party line, and in 1965 the MPLA and the PAIGC voted against the Maoists in the Federation of African Students.
Silva confirmed that the rebellious students basically expressed their opposition toward Cabral’s binationalist project.
In 1963, Ghanaian Emmanuel John Hevi published a highly critical account of his time in China, highlighting the strict control, poor living conditions, and discrimination experienced by African students.
It is not clear if African students in the Soviet Union were aware of these allegations or how they perceived them.
As much as the MPLA, PAIGC, and FRELIMO tried to control students’ behavior, these attempts often proved problematic.
Students sometimes defied party orders and caused problems by marrying local women, failing to return to their countries of origin, or, worse, defecting to the West.
In the context of an open conflict with China, Moscow carefully monitored all expressions of “pro-Chinese” sentiments among African students.
Those who continued to support the Maoist line openly would be expelled.
The MPLA leadership sought to establish a “common front” with Roberto’s FNLA in order to gain access to Zaire and ultimately take over the movement.
As new evidence shows, the Soviets backed the MPLA’s plan by trying to subvert Holden Roberto’s FNLA through clandestine means.
However, Roberto was a formidable rival, who likewise used international diplomacy successfully to bolster his claim to national leadership.
While Neto’s contacts with the Portuguese Communists helped him maintain support from the Soviets at a time of intense internal infighting within the MPLA, his diplomatic effort failed to prevent the MPLA’s expulsion from Zaire.
While the MPLA faced stiff competition in Zaire, the PAIGC’s local competition in Guinea was much weaker.
Amilcar Cabral used diplomacy to forge exclusive relationships with a number of African states and international donors Diplomacy of Liberation 99 in order to smuggle weapons into Guinea.
In 1962, he established a close relationship with Petr Evsiukov—a testimony to Cabral’s well-known diplomatic skills.
However, Moscow erred on the side of caution regarding providing weapons, mainly because of a delicate relationship with Touré’s Guinea.
Among the socialist countries, Czechoslovakia remained the key ally, providing cash, arms, and training for Cabral.
As we will see in the following chapter, it was only after the PAIGC began guerrilla warfare in early 1963 that the movement would secure its dominant position in Guinea.
Meanwhile, Tanzanian support was fundamental to FRELIMO’s claims to nationalist leadership.
Mozambican early nationalist politics were highly fractured and dominated by disagreements over Mondlane’s election as president.
The Soviets were highly suspicious of Mondlane for ideological reasons and initially doubted FRELIMO’s long-term viability.
The Soviets provided only limited material support for FRELIMO in 1964 in the context of what they considered revolutionary developments in Zanzibar, which raised the importance of Tanzania more generally.
However, the relationship would remain complicated because of uncertainty around Mondlane’s allegiance and, starting in the mid-1960s, increasing concerns about a burgeoning relationship with China.
The Sino-Soviet split was damaging to the nationalist movements not only because it potentially ensconced the African revolutionaries in a tug-ofwar between Beijing and Moscow but also because it undermined internal unity.
For the MPLA’s and the PAIGC’s multiracial and largely assimilado leadership, Chinese claims of unity based on nonwhite identity risked exacerbating existing divisions based on ethnic, linguistic, and racial lines.
As the schisms within the MPLA and FRELIMO and among PAIGC students in the Soviet Union showed, leaders of the liberation movements were susceptible to challenges on ethnic or racial grounds.
Since China’s ideas of anti-imperialism based on race could be employed to mount a critique to national leadership, it is not surprising that Cabral in particular, but also Mondlane and Neto to an extent, grew skeptical of Maoism.
In the following years, as we will see, China would curtail its assistance to the MPLA and PAIGC and would only maintain a strong connection with FRELIMO because of Beijing’s close connection with Tanzania.
However, critics of racial and ethnic-based privilege among the leadership did not disappear.
In fact, in the course of the anticolonial struggle, they would frequently resurface during moments of crises.
The continuous ascendancy of their modernizing visions would depend on the African revolutionaries’ ability to obtain the “means of war” to fight against the Portuguese.
The onset of guerrilla campaigns meant a much greater commitment was required, especially from the Soviet military.
The next chapter thus turns to the militarization of Soviet involvement in Africa in the mid-1960s.
The organizers of the palace coup—all of whom were Khrushchev’s protégés—were unhappy with his leadership style and his domestic and foreign policy.
The Soviets believed they underestimated the role of armies and thus increasingly used supplies of arms and training to strengthen relations with key African allies, drawing the military and intelligence services into deeper involvement on the continent.
The chapter also shows how the Soviets became the key supplier of military equipment and training to Lusophone nationalist movements.
However, the extent of Soviet involvement would be limited due to the MPLA’s logistical problems after their expulsion from Zaire.
The Soviet relationship with FRELIMO once again proved particularly complex.
Although Moscow supplied arms and material support for the organization, the Soviets were continuously distrustful of president Mondlane.
In 1966-1968, FRELIMO plunged into an internal crisis, culminating in Mondlane’s assassination in Dar es Salaam in 1969.
The Soviet intelligence services closely followed FRELIMO’s rivalries through a variety of clandestine sources, eventually adopting a rather critical view of its leadership.
Still, the Soviet military held high hopes that their training programs would win African revolutionaries over to their side.
As the oral histories in this chapter will show, African soldiers saw Soviet military technology as a symbol of modernity and a practical tool of their own liberation.
As the anticolonial wars began, the strategy of guerrilla warfare also became a contested subject.
In Guinea-Bissau, Cabral opted for a “cautious approach” toward military operations in order to limit casualties.
The MPLA suffered from logistical and supply problems in eastern Angola and Cabinda, while FRELIMO’s guerrilla operations were hampered by an internal crisis.
New evidence shows the Soviet military were frustrated by the lack of progress and, in the case of the MPLA, believed that Neto was not doing enough to forge broad political alliances.
Thus, this chapter recovers the role of military strategy in understanding how the relationship between the Soviets and the Lusophone nationalist movements developed and evolved in the 1960s.
Soviet Policy in Africa after Khrushchev The collective leadership that took over from Nikita Khrushchev was well aware that early Soviet optimism about a quick revolutionary transformation of the African continent was premature.
In the late 1950s, Moscow believed that by following the “Soviet model of development” and benefiting from Soviet assistance and advice, newly independent African countries would achieve fast economic growth and move toward socialism.
Leaders like the Guinean president Sékou Touré, argued the report, reaped the benefits of Soviet aid but gave little in return.
In practical terms, there were many continuities with the pre-Khrushchev period.
The cadres at the International Department and its Africa desk—the head of department Boris Ponomarev, his deputy Rostislav Ulianovskii, the head of the Africa section Petr Manchkha, and Petr Evsiukov—all stayed at their posts.
The International Department probably became even more prominent after Khrushchev’s departure since Brezhnev preferred a collegiate decision-making style and increasingly left each department to make decisions in their own domain.
Once Khrushchev was ousted, the CC CPSU approved the construction of a large training facility for mainly African revolutionaries at the village of Perevalnoe in Crimea, Soviet Ukraine.
Meanwhile, the “coup contagion” in Africa stimulated a discussion about policy implications.
In consultations with his Czechoslovak colleagues in late April 1966, the Soviet deputy foreign minister Iakov Malik stated that the socialist countries faced a double bind.
On the other hand, they had to face the continuous assault of the “neocolonial and imperialist” forces, which exploited internal problems in newly independent states.
He argued that the socialist countries should become more attuned to was happening with the army and police and continue cooperation, especially in the military sphere.
As KGB Chairman Vladimir Semichastnyi admitted to his Bulgarian counterparts on March 18, 1966, the security services had underestimated the value of clandestine work among the military forces in Africa.
The Soviets believed the coups represented a temporary setback and that socialist countries should strengthen alliances with African military and the security services.
The situation in Africa became a hotly debated topic during the first coordination meeting of solidarity committees from the Warsaw Pact countries in June 1966.
One country seeking to limit the costs of involvement in Africa was Czechoslovakia.
Although Prague was among the first to pursue an active Africa policy since the 1950s, by the mid-1960s, many among the bureaucracy were starting to reevaluate their commitments.
While the economy grew at an impressive rate after World War II, Czechoslovakia experienced a significant downturn in the early 1960s and shortages of foreign cash.
The lively debates stimulated by the Prague Spring ended abruptly after the Warsaw Pact invaded Czechoslovakia to crack down on liberalization in August 1968.
As Soviet tanks rolled into Prague, thousands of Czechoslovak citizens protested the invasion.
Many Czechoslovak intelligence personnel supported the Prague Spring, and some defected from their posts following the intervention.
The intervention in Czechoslovakia was a public relations disaster with longterm consequences for the communist movement, but in Africa, official reactions were mixed.
Zambia’s Kenneth Kaunda and Tanzania’s Julius Nyerere openly condemned the invasion.
The public reaction to events in Czechoslovakia was particularly dramatic in Tanzania.
In 1968, the Youth League spearheaded a number of policing campaigns, including “Operation Vijana,” which were designed to eliminate all signs of “imperialist behavior” and dress.
Elsewhere in Africa though, the Cultural Revolution prevented Beijing from capitalizing on events in Czechoslovakia.
While China had been an active player in Africa since the early 1960s, the Cultural Revolution ushered in a period of self-imposed diplomatic isolation, as Beijing recalled many of its ambassadors and scaled down overseas commitments.
The Chinese also started to pursue more aggressive anti-Soviet tactics in the Third World, pressuring African liberation movements to break contact with Moscow.
In response, the Soviets launched their own campaign to counter the Chinese, including in international forums.
In 1965, attendees at the fourth AA PSO conference in Winneba, Ghana, agreed to hold the subsequent, fifth, conference in Beijing.
The decision risked completely sidelining the Soviets from the AAPSO, and the Soviet Solidarity Committee mobilized its contacts to reverse the decision.
At the meeting of the AAPSO Presidium in Nicosia, Cyprus, on March 15, 1967, Cabral was one of the delegates who successfully pushed for the motion to reverse the decision made at Winneba.
The Nicosia meeting also purged the AAPSO of pro-Chinese liberation groups.
In January 1969, the AAPSO hosted an International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Portuguese Colonies and Southern A frica in Khartoum, Sudan.
The conference also bolstered the prestige of the Soviet-backed liberation movements, including the MPLA, FRELIMO, and PAIGC, since they were declared the only “authentic” representatives of the liberation struggle in their respective countries.
On February 19, 1969, the deputy of the CC CPSU International Department, Rostislav Ulianovskii, spoke about his impressions of the conference to the Presidium of the Soviet Solidarity Committee.
Ulianovskii argued the Vietnam War showed African revolutionaries that it was “impossible to defeat imperialist racism” without Soviet military assistance.
In particular, leaders like Eduardo Mondlane and Agostinho Neto had come to understand the utility of scientific socialism and the value of the Soviet approach to questions of ethnicity and race.
By the late 1960s, the Soviets believed they had managed to restore their prestige in the Third World.
The collective leadership that took over from Khrushchev shared much of the same commitment to proletarian internationalism, and there was no bureaucratic overhaul, ensuring many continuities.
The Soviets continued to be preoccupied with challenges on the “right” and “left,” especially those emanating from China.
The most significant change involved the reevaluation of the importance of African army and security services.
Starting from the mid-1960s, the Soviets sought to strengthen their alliances with African allies by providing weapons and military training.
Czechoslovak Advisers and Soviet Instructors for Cabral’s Guerrillas On January 23, 1963, the PAIGC launched its armed struggle by attacking the Portuguese garrison at Tite, in southern Guinea-Bissau.
The official PAIGC narrative, now firmly rooted in the literature, credits the PAIGC leadership with preplanning the attacks.
Among the small group that was involved in the attacks was Dauda Bangura.
In my interview with him in 2019 Bangura claimed that the order to fire the “first shots” did not come from the PAIGC in Conakry; the decision was instead taken on the local group’s own initiative.
In a detailed study of Cabral’s correspondence, Juliao Soares Sousa confirms Bangura’s account.
Nonetheless, preparations for armed action had been ongoing since 1961, with Czechoslovakia the one actor that was actively involved.
In 1961, the StB decided to support Cabral’s bid for dominance over the nationalist movement.
Some of the measures included the StB helping the PAIGC design and spread anti-war propaganda among the Portuguese garrisons, assisting in infiltrating one of its Senegal-based rivals, and shipping arms to Conakry.
The StB also feared the PAIGC could lose momentum in competition with local rivals if they further delayed hostilities.
He argued that “sabotage” could only alarm the Portuguese, pushing them to reinforce their military presence, which would make it harder to launch guerrilla action.
Instead, Cabral insisted that he engage in diplomacy to find an alternative route for weapons via Algeria or Morocco.
When Cabral secured a route to smuggle arms via Morocco in December 1962, the StB decided to deliver another shipment of weapons.
While Operation BETA was later canceled, Czechoslovak weapons clandestinely reached Conakry via Morocco.
He was twenty years old in December 1961 when PAIGC guerrillas came to his village to mobilize people.
Among them was Domingos Ramos, a charismatic commander who apparently convinced the villagers to join the struggle.
In most cases, the process involved moving the whole village to the bush under the control of the guerrillas.
Young people would be organized to patrol villages, make shelters, and recruit others while simultaneously receiving basic military and political instruction from more experienced combatants.
Armed with the new weapon, he would patrol the villages and talk to people, convincing them to join the fight.
The message was for Africans to follow the example of Guinea and take back their land from the colonizers.
The weapons served as “encouragement” to show that they had the means to fight the Portuguese army.
Once armed attacks against the Portuguese began in January 1963, the rebellion quickly spread.
The province bordered on Guinea, and Cabral’s guerrillas had reasonably easy access to Tombali by land and sea.
In early 1964, the guerrillas mounted a concerted resistance against a large-scale Portuguese operation to retain control over the island of Como.
The fight over the rice-growing marshy island in southern Guinea-Bissau saw the Portuguese deploy 3,000 ground troops to the island, backed by aerial support.
Both sides suffered casualties, and the Portuguese eventually withdrew, having lost the support of the local population.
While the battle over Como was in full swing, Cabral faced a major challenge to his authority.
By 1964, reports had emerged that many regional military commanders were abusing the civilian population for personal gain.
Although the PAIGC stood for a modernizing platform, these regional commanders often used deep-set beliefs to attack local rivals.
Witchcraft was acommon charge, and people accused of being futseru could be attacked or killed, especially since these were often accompanied by accusations of espionage and betrayal.
Some guerrillas used their status to take away girls and women and subject them to sexual violence.
Insubordinate military commanders were ordered to attend, and those who refused were arrested and imprisoned.
The Congress also pledged to establish a network of essential social services for the civilian population—basic health facilities, “people’s stores,” and bush schools—in order to harness support from the population and effect socio-cultural transformation in the countryside.
Another set of measures included putting the guerrillas under centralized control.
Cabral set up the Conselho de Guerra (War Council), which would supervise all military operations.
In September 1964, Czechoslovakia dispatched an StB officer, Frantigek Polda , to counsel Cabral in Conakry.
Polda’s task was to organize the FARP general staff and train recruits, especially in intelligence and security matters.
Naturally, he would report back on his conversations with Cabral and share his opinions about the military situation and political developments in the organization.
Czechoslovak instructors taught the recruitment of agents and collaborators, operative techniques like wiretapping, the basics of investigation and interrogation, and the fundamentals of criminalistics.
The first group of recruits from Guinea-Bissau arrived in June 1964 for a six-month training course in Leningrad.
While early courses could accommodate no more than several dozen men from each organization, Perevalnoe was a large training facility that could host several hundred men at the same time.
Its secluded location off the main road between Simferopol, the capital of Crimea, and Alushta, a famous vacation destination on the Black Sea, was to protect the guerrillas’ identities and limit unsupervised contact with the local population.
Outside of the extra secrecy, Perevalnoe functioned like a regular Soviet military school.
Trainees’ daily lives were governed by the strict rules of military discipline and hierarchy.
The leadership of the liberation movements selected trainees for particular specializations and reviewed performance reports.
Those in anti-aircraft defense initially practiced how to operate Soviet heavy machine guns designed to hit low-flying targets—Portuguese aircraft—at close range.
Military training became closely tied to the provision of Soviet arms since new systems would have to be first introduced to by guerrillas at Perevalnoe.
These involved informal “cultural events” ranging from outings to popular tourist sites and model communal farms to film screenings.
The formal political training classes included an introduction to Marxism-Leninism, the history of slavery and colonialism in Africa, and discussions of current events.
In many internal reports, Soviet instructors heralded the political training program as a success, reporting that exposure to the combination of discussions and sightseeing tours convinced the cadets of the benefits of the socialist system.
It is difficult to evaluate whether military training in the USSR actually had such a significant impact on the trainees, as Gorbunov suggests.
Sae Breia was among the first group of twenty-five recruits to go for military training in the USSR in June 1964.
He recalled that the time he spent in Leningrad was transformative because what they learned about slavery and the Russian Revolution made them angry and even more convinced they should fight the Portuguese.
The screenings of World War II films, with their stories of personal sacrifice—showcasing the role of the USSR in the defeat of Nazism— were also memorable for many cadets.
The trainee is operating a Soviet heavy machine DShK gun, which became a common weapon of guerrilla warfare in the Portuguese colonies in the 1960s.
Fundacao Mario Soares e Maria Barroso/Arquivo Amilcar Cabral. classes as a continuation of their studies.
As he recalled in 2017 his experiences in Perevalnoe exposed to him hierarchies inherent in the Soviet system.
The extent of Czechoslovakia’s involvement with the PAIGC during the early stages of armed struggle was extraordinary.
Prague was the first to offer a comprehensive assistance package to the PAIGC and, as we know now, pushed Cabral to proceed with “acts of sabotage” to maintain dominance over its local rivals.
Nonetheless, Cabral resisted StB’s “advice,” and it is clear that the initiative for armed action came from local activists rather than being dictated from abroad.
As the war progressed, Perevalnoe increasingly became a critical contact zone for interaction between African revolutionaries and their Soviet instructors.
Moscow and Prague hoped that arms and training would allow the FARP to put mounting pressure on the Portuguese to negotiate.
However, the prospect of a quick military breakthrough would prove fleeting.
Fidel Castro, Amilcar Cabral, and the Debates over Military Strategy in Guinea-Bissau The years following the Cassaca Congress were exceptionally fortuitous for the guerrillas in Guinea-Bissau.
Having secured training and military support from the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, in 1965, Cabral planned to move to a new stage of the war to eliminate Portuguese fortified posts.
The leadership had also decided to start armed struggle on the Cape Verde archipelago.
As Cabral conveyed to Czechoslovak Minister of the Interior Josef Kudrna during a visit to Prague in May 1965, he had decided to expand operations across the whole country and start liquidating the garrisons.
Prague believed that prospects of a breakthrough were good and allocated $1.85 million worth of arms to the PAIGC in 1965.
In late 1963, the Argentinean-born revolutionary Ernesto “Che” Guevara visited Conakry as part of his Africa tour to find volunteers to join the Simba rebellion in Zaire.
Back in Havana, Guevara pressed the Cuban leader Fidel Castro to provide military training for Cabral’s men, especially Cape Verdeans, since he believed conditions for armed struggle in the archipelago were good.
In July 1965, a handful of Cape Verdeans journeyed to Cuba for military training.
Cuba also provided goods—sugar, cigars, uniforms, and transport vehicles.
Although the FARP had become much better equipped and supplied than at the beginning of the war, by 1967, it became clear there would be no easy victory against the Portuguese.
The PAIGC faced a particular problem in expanding its operations in the Gabu region in Eastern Guinea-Bissau.
One reason for these difficulties was that the region was dominated by the Fula.
While the Balanta generally provided the bedrock of support for the PAIGC in the south, the Fula were often resistant to the nationalist drive, and many had been co-opted to serve in the Portuguese army.
The Fula saw the Portuguese had much more advanced weapons than the PAIGC, recalled Dauda Bangura, and thus did not believe it would be possible to defeat the colonial power.
When the war escalated in 1966, the majority of the population fled to such villages near Portuguese posts at Madina de Boé and Beli.
Located close to the border with Guinea, the fort blocked the guerrillas’ access to the eastern hinterland.
When the PAIGC launched a major attack against Madina do Boé on November 11, 1966, the operation failed tragically, resulting in multiple casualties.
Cabral was particularly distraught by the death of Domingos Ramos, who was hit by a mortar shell during the failed operation.
Ramos was a charismatic leader and an effective mobilizer who became the commander of the eastern front after the Cassaca Congress.
The disaster at Madina do Boé made Cabral rethink his military strategy.
As he informed the head of the Africa desk at the StB, Josef Janou§, on February 13, 1967, the operations in the Gabu region would continue, but these would have to be much more carefully planned to avoid significant losses.
While Cabral preferred a war of attrition to avoid high casualties, the Cubans argued in favor of more extensive operations.
In November 1966, the Soviets and their Czechoslovak counterparts gathered to discuss the war in Guinea-Bissau.
They acknowledged that the guerrillas’ morale was low, and their military reconnaissance was lacking.
The solution was to “work out a strategic and tactical plan” for the PAIGC in consultation with the Cubans and then “choose and teach a few qualified men” who could carry it out.
Although the full details of the plan are unclear, the Czechoslovak adviser Frantisek Polda believed FARP should be organized into larger military units capable of “preplanned” military operations.
Cabral pushed back, arguing that the commanders did not yet have the proper training.
Polda remained wedded to his advice, Cabral’s opposition notwithstanding.
Cabral again argued for caution since the FARP lacked anti-aerial defense and feared retaliatory bombings; he hoped that the new 122mm mortars he had obtained from the USSR would lead to a breakthrough.
In a tense exchange, Polda countered that the liberation struggle increasingly resembled a “war game,” to which Cabral replied that was precisely part of the “psychological warfare” to put pressure on the Portuguese.
In 1968, a group of thirty Cape Verdean recruits arrived for advanced weapons training in Skhodnia, near Moscow.
The majority of the men in the group— Pedro Pires, Silvino da Luz, Olivio Pires, Osvaldo Lopes da Silva, Antonio Leite, and Julio de Carvalho, among others—had arrived in Moscow from Cuba, where they had been undergoing training for a clandestine mission to launch an armed struggle in Cape Verde.
In Cuba, military preparation involved “basic guerrilla training,” while in Skhodnia, the group learned to operate advanced artillery, including 120mm mortars.
However, most seemed to share an appreciation of Soviet military technology.
Meanwhile, Cabral continued to seek additional advanced weapons from the Soviet Union.
Petr Evsiukov recollected that the GRU’s chief Petr Ivashutin acted as a champion of Cabral’s struggle.
In his memoirs, he described at least one occasion when Cabral came to Moscow with his second wife, Anna Maria, with a request for additional heavy weapons.
Ivashutin believed the Soviets should help, but the minister of defense, Marshal Andrei Grechko, rejected his request.
Ivashutin and Evsiukov thus agreed that the former would introduce Cabral and Anna Maria to Grechko at a state reception, hoping a personal interaction would reverse the decision.
Evsiukov recalled that Grechko was quite “excited” and in a “good mood” during the state reception.
It is more challenging to determine Soviet views about Cabral’s military strategy.
Osvaldo Lopes da Silva became an artillery commander on the eastern front after finishing military training in the USSR in 1969.
Predvechnov also criticized Cabral’s strategy of relying too much on acquiring advanced weapons from the USSR to boost morale.
The new weapons that Predvechnov referred to was Grad-P , a system that the Soviets made available to the FARP in 1969.
A lightweight version of the BM-21 “Grad” weapons system, Grad-P was developed in the 1960s for the North Vietnamese where it was known as 122mm DKZ-B rocket launcher.
The weapon soon became a popular means of guerrilla warfare because of its transportability and ability to withstand humid conditions.
The offer of Grad-P was significant, since unlike the heavy machine guns from World War II that had dominated Soviet deliveries before that, Grad-P could be operated individually and was lighter than a mortar.
To sum up, the lack of military progress in Guinea-Bissau led to the emergence of debates over military strategy.
Cabral was well aware that the guerrillas might have claimed vast “liberated areas,” but the Portuguese still commanded the skies.
He thus wanted to move cautiously and continuously pushed the Soviets to provide additional weapons systems, including anti-aerial defense.
It is not fully clear how the Soviets evaluated such a strategy, but there are indications that Prague, Moscow, and Havana shared similar criticisms of Cabral’s tactics.
While it is unclear whether this move was connected to the Prague Spring or any disagreements with Cabral, debates about military strategy would continue.
In the meantime, similar conversations about military strategy in Angola would emerge in the mid-1960s.
The MPLA and Guerrilla War in Cabinda and Southeast Angola, 1964-1970 Back in west-central Africa, the MPLA faced tremendous logistical challenges in starting military operations in Angola.
Having lost access to Zaire in 1964, Neto and his followers crossed the Zaire River from Léopoldville to the neighboring Congo-Brazzaville.
One included starting guerrilla operations in Cabinda, an Angolan enclave that bordered on Congo-Brazzaville.
The party could also smuggle men and weapons across Zaire to northern Angola, but it was a treacherous path where the guerrillas risked capture by Mobutu’s troops.
The final possibility involved moving the center of operations to southeast Angola.
The relationship between the MPLA and Cuba was forged after Che Guevara’s talks with Neto in early 1965 in Brazzaville.
The Cubans provided protection for Massamba-Débat’s government in Congo-Brazzaville and also advised Neto on military strategy.
In May 1965, after the first Cuban advisers arrived in Brazzaville, MPLA guerrillas ventured across the border to Cabinda and engaged in minor hit-and-run skirmishes with the Portuguese patrols.
As was the case in Guinea-Bissau, the MPLA leadership disagreed with the Cuban advisers about the need to launch larger-scale operations to attack Portuguese forts.
One such MPLA-Cuban operation, entitled “Operation Macaco,” involved a plan to engage about one hundred guerrillas and a few pieces of 75mm artillery in an attack on the Portuguese fort of Sanga Planicie in northeast Cabinda.
The MPLA did not want to proceed, arguing that the proposed size of the unit was too large and the operation too risky.
Neto was also keen to restart operations in northern Angola—the heartland of the rebellion in 1961.
However, that involved trekking almost 400km through thick jungle and across Zairean territory.
What was even more perilous than the journey itself was the attitude of the Zairean authorities.
In November 1965, the powerful chief of the Zairean army, Colonel Joseph Désiré Mobutu seized, power in a bloodless coup d’état.
The others were apprehended by the Zairean authorities, arrested, and imprisoned.
By June 1967, the MPLA had run out of weapons and realized the futility of the enterprise.
The Cubans, who provided the training for the columns, ended their support for the MPLA in June 1967.
Havana claimed their mission in Congo-Brazzaville was over, but there was clearly no love lost between the two sides.
Starting in 1966, the MPLA began to infiltrate southeast Angola from a new base in Zambia.
Zambia’s first president, Kenneth Kaunda, was initially reluctant to allow liberation movements to operate from Zambia since the country was landlocked and relied on neighboring Southern Rhodesia to transport its copper.
However, things changed after November 11, 1965, when Southern Rhodesia announced a Unilateral Declaration of Independence to preserve white minority rule.
In opposition to the UDI, Kaunda allowed liberation movements to open offices in Zambian territory.
Most weapons for the liberation movements in Eastern Africa arrived at the port of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania.
Moreover, Zambia initially refused to allow arms that were transported from Tanzania.
Beyond the logistical challenges, Jonas Savimbi’s UNITA had reemerged as a rival to the MPLA in southeast Angola.
Savimbi was an Ovimbundu, an ethnic group that dominated southeast Angola.
He and his organization, UNITA, thus gained local followers and support from the Zambian authorities.
Only in October 1966 did Lusaka lift an unofficial ban over the movement of men and arms across the Zambia-Tanzania border.
According to Slipchenko, Kaunda reacted against the Portuguese soldiers launching a cross-border raid across the Angola-Zambia border yet remained reluctant to support the liberation movements wholeheartedly.
Soviet financial assistance jumped from $50,000 in 1963 to $100,000 in 1965, and Moscow began providing the MPLA with weapons.
He confirmed that Moscow had fulfilled “all of the MPLA’s requests” for assistance which included, uniforms, medicine, equipment for the printing press, hospital equipment, cash, and arms via Dar es Salaam.
Soviet journalists also started to support the MPLA’ effort to construct its image as the only liberation movement dedicated to armed struggle in Angola.
He came back with field notes that he published in a series of articles in Pravda between May and June 1965.
He was followed by Tomas Kolesnichenko, one of Pravda’s leading foreign correspondents, known for his lively writing style and flair for adventure.
In early 1966, Kolesnichenko published a series of reports for Pravda, in which he depicted scenes from the “liberated areas” and featured conversations with popular guerrilla commanders, like the MPLA’s Hoji Ya Henda.
These romanticized reports from the “liberated areas” served several purposes.
They helped the liberation movements construct heroic metanarratives of anticolonial struggle for international consumption.
By invoking the struggle for justice and socialism in faraway lands, they were also meant to validate the socialist experiment and increase the prestige of the Soviet Union.
Ignatev’s interest in Guinea-Bissau in particular was shaped by a close personal relationship that he developed with Amilcar Cabral, whom he first met in November 1965.
Upon Cabral’s suggestion, Ignatev ventured to Guinea-Bissau for the first time the following year.
He became a regular visitor to Guinea-Bissau, returning in 1968 to shoot a film about the PAIGC, followed by trips in 1970 and 1973.
Ignatev also went to Angola and Mozambique and would often serve as a go-between for the leadership of the liberation movements and Soviet officials, providing firsthand information about developments on the ground.
The Soviet embassy in Congo-Brazzaville argued in February 1967 that the MPLA had failed to win over the local population in Cabinda since the majority of guerrillas had come from around Luanda and northern Angola.
In particular, the movement needed to develop “clear and attractive slogans” to pull different groups, especially the peasantry, into fighting the Portuguese.
The people needed to have a clear understanding of the benefits of independence.
As for military operations, the embassy acknowledged the logistical problems of moving guerrillas and weapons via Zambia.
The MPLA had experienced leaders and organizers who were united around Neto, the embassy continued, but military operations were still scattered.
There was little coordination of military operations and no radio contact between small groups of guerrillas.
For the most part, the Soviets had to rely on conversations with different MPLA representatives and, most likely, Cubans who were closely involved in guerrilla operations.
In general, access to what the Soviets termed “reliable information” about military progress would become an important issue for Moscow and would often determine the level of assistance.
In late 1966, Zambia’s permission to transfer arms across the border opened up new opportunities for the anticolonial campaign in southeast Angola.
Genadii Fomin, the head of the Third African Department at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Vadim Kirpichenko, the head of the Africa desk at the KGB’s First Directorate; and Petr Evsiukov and Petr Manchkha from the International Department.
Kirpichenko recalled that their primary focus was Angola, and their task was to “find anybody” who had firsthand evidence of military operations.
Apparently, at the MPLA’s main base at Dolisie in Congo-Brazzaville, they met a Soviet doctor who confirmed that guerrillas had been arriving at the hospital ona daily basis.
Kirpichenko also recalled that Neto made a good impression since he did not exaggerate the MPLA’s achievements and had realistic expectations of Soviet assistance.
As Fomin shared with the GDR’s consul at Dar es Salaam, Gottfried Lessing, the Soviet delegation was impressed by the “unity and political clarity” of the MPLA’s leaders.
In addition, the opening of the new route for weapons to reach Angola through Tanzania and Zambia created possibilities for increasing pressure on the Portuguese in southeast Angola.
Starting in 1965, Neto started receiving assistance from Yugoslavia, which he preferred to the countries of the Eastern Bloc because of its nonaligned status.
The two discussed military strategy in Angola, and Tito strongly criticized the Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia.
Initially, the Soviets did not seem to have a problem with Neto’s relationship with Tito.
When the MPLA’s Anibal de Melo met Ambassador Slipchenko in Lusaka on September 4, 1969, he shared his frustration about his recent trip to Moscow.
Neto and Melo were right to detect the Soviets’ frustration with the lack of military progress in Angola.
In a note for the CC CPSU from June 1970, the KGB made a scathing critique of the MPLA’s progress in southeast Angola, arguing that the efficacy of armed action had decreased.
The MPLA’s leadership had “underestimated the value of underground work” in big cities like Luanda, and they had no clandestine cells in urban areas.
The MPLA was further hindered by “tribal” tendencies in southeast Angola, which were exacerbated by arbitrary attitudes toward the local population.
Soviet relations with the MPLA at least partly revolved around disagreements over military strategy.
Although we do not know how often the Soviets consulted with the Cubans, their general assessments of Neto’s military strategy in Cabinda were similarly critical.
The Soviets believed that the MPLA was not doing enough to embed themselves in the local population.
Although Moscow was well aware of the MPLA’s logistical limitations and increased support in 1967, new documents show that the Soviet military was quite critical about what they perceived as a lack of military progress.
While the full extent of Soviet conversations with Neto is not available, the evidence we do have suggests that the relationship was often conflictual and that military and political strategy was subject to much debate.
Personalities mattered since, in contrast to Cabral, Neto never really established a close relationship with his Soviet liaisons.
As we will see, the Soviets also developed a skeptical view of the FRELIMO leadership.
The first attack claimed by FRELIMO took place on September 25, 1964, when a number of guerrillas attacked the post of the chefe do posto in the small town of Chai in Cabo Delgado, a northern Mozambican province bordering Tanzania.
As FRELIMO’s president Eduardo Mondlane admitted in his 1968 book, The Struggle for Mozambique, in 1964, FRELIMO had only “250 men trained and equipped” who engaged in hit-and-run attacks against the Portuguese.
While Mondlane argued that armed action was the only option because the Portuguese were not ready to accept self-determination, he knew he could no longer delay violent action because of pressure from activists, the Tanzanian authorities, and local competitors.
In June 1964, a rival organization, MANU, had staged an attack in the northern Cabo Delgado province and killed Father Daniel Boorman.
Once FRELIMO started its campaign in late 1964, Mondlane engaged in hectic diplomacy to obtain further military support from the socialist countries.
The Soviets provided weapons and ammunition, as well as medical supplies and other types of humanitarian assistance.
However, the Soviets continued to deny such requests because of Mondlane’s connections to Washington.
Allegedly, the head of the KGB’s First Directorate, Aleksandr Sakharovskii, also supported Ulianovskii’s decision to deny Mondlane an invitation to the Congress.
Born in 1926 to a peasant family in Sofala province, central Mozambique, Simango was educated by Protestant missionaries in Mozambique and Southern Rhodesia and was ordained as a Church of Christ pastor in 1956.
In fact, Moscow took Mondlane’s contacts with Washington seriously, especially since they believed British influence in Tanzania was still strong.
At the same time, the Soviets worried about growing Chinese influence in Tanzania, which became increasingly prominent after the revolution in Zanzibar.
After Tanganyika and Zanzibar signed an act of union in 1964, a number of Marxist politicians, among them Abdulrahman Mohammed Babu, moved from Zanzibar to the mainland and joined Julius Nyerere’s cabinet.
In 1967, Beijing announced that it would construct a railway linking the copper mines of landlocked Zambia to the port of Dar es Salaam and committed a $401 million, interest-free loan to finance the project.
China’s influence in Tanzania extended beyond developmental assistance.
A longtime proponent of “African socialism,” Nyerere was inspired by the Chinese revolution.
In the words of Priya Lal, the Cultural Revolution and Nyerere’s wjamaa “shared imaginaries” such as a dedication to self-reliance, discipline, hard work, and commitment to rural transformation.
One such member was a FRELIMO military commander named Samora Moisés Machel.
After attracting attention because of his outspoken views on Portuguese colonialism, he fled to Dar es Salaam in 1963.
In 1965, he was sent on a mission to open a new front in Niassa province.
He was also responsible for training recruits at a base in Nachingwea, where he became quite popular with the rank-and-file recruits.
In Nachingwea, Machel was first introduced to Mao Zedong’s ideas by Chinese instructors who worked at the camp.
As Machel often claimed, his Marxism resulted from his own experiences of colonialism and racial discrimination.
Naturally, it was not always easy for the Soviets to establish exactly who was “pro-Chinese” since the Mozambicans were inspired by a variety of African, Third World, and European “socialisms,” often rooted in their own experiences.
Mondlane tried to play on Soviet sensibilities during his trip to Moscow in November 1966.
In conversations with Soviet interlocutors, he acknowledged the achievements of Soviet socialism in Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan and complained about China’s “anti-Soviet tactics,” especially the way they played out at international conferences.
As Genadii Fomin shared with Gottfried Lessing in Dar es Salaam in February 1967, Mondlane did not seem to have “political clarity” and exhibited “opportunistic tendencies” during his trip to Moscow.
By 1968, the Soviets believed Mondlane had “moved left” in terms of his views, but they would never trust him completely.
They seemed to have developed a more favorable view of Simango and maintained clandestine sources within FRELIMO, who informed the Soviets about internal developments.
As we will see, the juxtaposition of the proUnited States and pro-China lines within the organization would continue to preoccupy the Soviets, as they tried to make sense of the crisis that would thrust FRELIMO into internal turmoil in 1966-70.
The View from Moscow The crisis that enveloped FRELIMO in 1966-69 consisted of an interconnected series of intraparty conflicts, culminating in the murder of Eduardo Mondlane in 1969.
Noskov/Sputnik. had been defined by struggles between “northerners,” predominantly Makonde rank-and-file members, and “southerners,” mestico-assimilado elites epitomized by such figures as Eduardo Mondlane and Marcelino dos Santos.
Debates around race, class, and ideology were closely intertwined with rivalries over access to political power.
The crisis was further complicated as warring factions sought supporters in TANU, Tanzania’s ruling party.
The Soviets acted mainly as observers in this process as they tried to untangle the shifting political alliances to determine which “side” reflected their interests.
On October 10, Filipe Magaia, FRELIMO’s first chief of defense and security, was killed while crossing a river after nightfall with a group of guerrillas inside Mozambique.
Although FRELIMO claimed Magaia’s death was an accidental shooting, it quickly became a subject of controversy.
Earlier that year, Magaia had allegedly criticized the leadership in Dar es Salaam for not heeding advice from the military commanders and for releasing boastful war communiqués that threatened the guerrillas’ safety, leading to mounting casualties.
A Roman Catholic priest, Gwenjere joined FRELIMO in Dar es Salaam in 1967 and started teaching at the Mozambique Institute.
He caught Mondlane’s eye due to his intelligence and was dispatched together with Simango to speak at the UN General Assembly.
In March 1968, tensions exploded into the open when students at the Mozambique Institute openly rebelled against FRELIMO’s leadership.
The Mozambique Institute was a key project envisioned by Mondlane and his wife, Janet, to educate and train cadres for a future independent Mozambique.
However, by 1967, it had become clear that educational priorities had given way to the needs of the revolution when FRELIMO required students to attend a military preparation course at the Nachingwea camp during the school holidays.
With Gwenjere’s support, students spoke out against the leadership and campaigned to remove the white professors from the institute.
A Makonde entrepreneur from Cabo Delgado province, Nkavandame initially joined FRELIMO because he became frustrated that the Portuguese were hindering his efforts to set up an agricultural cooperative in the north.
When FRELIMO appointed Nkavandame the head of the civil administration in Cabo Delgado province in 1963, he continued to modernize Makonde agriculture based on the “free British capitalism” model he had experienced in Tanzania.
Nkavandame was also responsible for FRELIMO-administered stores and trade in Cabo Delgado province, amassing a small fortune in the process.
Fearing he would be sidelined, Nkavandame allied with Mateus Gwenjere to replace Mondlane with Uria Simango.
On at least two occasions in May, Nkavandame’s supporters entered FRELIMO’s offices in Nkrumah Street, Dar es Salaam, and engaged in physical altercations with Mondlane’s supporters.
Then Nkavandame and Gwenjere called for FRELIMO’s Second Congress to be convened and elections for new leadership.
Nkavandame hoped that ifa FRELIMO Congress could be held in Tanzania, he could amass enough support.
However, Mondlane managed to undercut his opposition by holding the Congress in Mozambique in late July 1968.
Many Tanzanian politicians were of Makonde origin, like Nkavandame and the majority of rank-and-file recruits.
Although Mondlane received strong support from Nyerere, Makonde Tanzanians often found common cause with those who opposed the FRELIMO president.
A minister of state for refugees in the office of Vice President Rashidi Kawawa, Sijaona was a Makonde like Nkavandame and shared his dislike for Mondlane on racial grounds.
At a meeting in Mtwara, Tanzania, in August 1968, Nkavandame and other Cabo Delgado leaders charged FRELIMO with executing military and civilian leaders who had opposed the leadership in Dar es Salaam.
Nkavandame then issued orders to border committees to bar FRELIMO from entering Cabo Delgado.
When Paulo Kankhomba, FRELIMO’s deputy chief of operations, defied the ban and entered the province in December 1968, he was killed, allegedly by local Makonde militants.
He persuaded the Tanzanian authorities to place Gwenjere under house arrest and suspended Nkavandame from his post.
Nyerere’s support for Mondlane undoubtedly allowed him to overcome opposition at crucial moments in the crisis.
The Soviets received information about FRELIMO’s internal politics through a variety of sources.
A native of southern Gaza province like Mondlane, Chissano had participated in the student activist organization NESAM before pursuing a degree in medicine, first in Portugal and then in France.
These records show that Chissano started collaborating with the KGB after receiving training in the USSR in 1965.
While recent revelations about Chissano’s contacts with the KGB made quite a furor in the press, in reality, the Soviets had many sources of information about developments in the Mozambican liberation movement.
They had regular conversations with the top leadership, especially with Mondlane, Santos, Simango, and Chissano.
In October 1968, one such “trusted source” of the GRU submitted a full report on the situation inside the organization after the Second Congress and the August meeting in Mtwara.
The source detailed the tense exchange between Mondlane and Nkavandame, noting that Simango was playing both sides in the standoff between the two men.
The report also described the close connections between Lawi Sijaona and Nkavandame.
As he sat down to work and opened his mail, Mondlane was instantly killed by a parcel bomb, hidden in a book bearing a stamp from Moscow.
The assassination had clear signs of Portuguese involvement, and evidence pointed to the so-called Aginter Press, a clandestine network of sleeper agents who fought against Portugal’s enemies in Africa.
Local collaboration was also likely, and most people pointed to Sijaona and Mondlane’s key critics, including Nkavandame, Simango, and his ally Silvério Nungu.
Although Sijaona was very likely involved, there is little evidence to suggest that either Simango or Nungu played a role.
As George Roberts has argued in his detailed reconstruction of the various theories, the plan was most likely concocted by the Portuguese and executed with African collaboration.
In a note on developments in FRELIMO after the murder, the KGB’s deputy chairman Nikolai Zakharov argued that Mondlane’s foreign policy, which included maintaining relations with both socialist and capitalist countries, had been sharply criticized by Algeria, Cuba, and especially China.
Moreover, Mondlane had angered some among the Tanzanian establishment by maintaining a relatively independent stance since many of them still hoped to create a federation between Tanzania and Mozambique.
The Czechoslovak intelligence service also tried to comprehend the mystery behind Mondlane’s murder.
In an overview of the situation in FRELIMO from February 1969, the StB declared that Mondlane’s assassination was part of a wider trend of “political murders” to target the late president and his supporters.
The men who potentially profited from the murder were Simango, Silvério Nungu, and Lazaro Nkavandame.
The PIDE must have been involved as well as “elements in the Tanzanian government,” in particular Lawi Sijaona.
Kirschner had arrived in Dar es Salaam in 1966 and worked undercover, teaching civics at the Mozambique Institute.
In his role, he had established friendly relations with the teachers at the Institute and FRELIMO’s leadership.
The report shows the StB had a much more favorable evaluation of Mondlane than their Soviet counterparts.
Kirschner was recalled to Prague in October 1968 and subsequently “released” from his duties at the StB due to his opposition to the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.
In April 1969, Uria Simango, Samora Machel, and Marcelino dos Santos established the Council of the Presidency.
Although Simango expected to occupy Mondlane’s position after his death, he was forced to share power with the others.
For about six months, the triumvirate managed to keep the appearance of unity.
In November, Simango released a pamphlet, “Gloomy Situation in FRELIMO,” in which he accused Machel and Santos of usurping power, eliminating political rivals, and plotting to kill him.
He also criticized the late Mondlane for allowing the Portuguese to dominate the Mozambique Institute and accused his widow Janet of conspiring with the CIA to infiltrate the organization.
Simango denied he was racist at the time, as did his biographer Ncomo, who argued the vice president wanted to prevent FRELIMO’s domination by southern elites.
In a lengthy analysis of the triumvirate in July 1969, Petr Ivashutin argued that FRELIMO was a weak organization, rooted in the “peasant masses,” with little experience of armed struggle, and riven by intra-ethnic tensions.
He described Simango, Santos, and Machel as “petit-bourgeoisie” who mistakenly shared the “pseudo-revolutionary” Maoist concept of popular partisan warfare.
The only significant difference between the two factions was their attitudes toward white Mozambicans.
At the same time, Ivashutin acknowledged that the nationalist movement in Mozambique was important because of the country’s location, bordering Southern Rhodesia and South Africa.
From the GRU’s perspective, it also allowed for the possibility of expanding its signals intelligence capability.
In a conversation with Arkadii Glukhov in Dar es Salaam on September 25, Simango outlined familiar arguments about the dominance of southerners in leadership positions.
He also argued that Janet Mondlane was dangerous because she was a “white American,” and the CIA could continue to exercise control over the movement through her.
After the release of “the Gloomy Situation” in November, Simango approached the Soviets again with an explanation.
He never wanted to make the criticisms public, but the inaction of the Tanzanian authorities left him no choice.
Once again, he charged FRELIMO’s leadership with corruption, “tribalism,” and political killings.
While Simango was looking to improve relations with the USSR, the GRU doubted his intentions.
In a striking passage, Predvechnov argued that FRELIMO had always been determined to lock Soviet influence out of the organization.
He relayed the suggestions of “trusted sources” who insisted that Filipe Magaia and Paulo Kankhomba—FRELIMO military commanders allegedly close to the USSR—were assassinated by those who feared the strengthening of Soviet influence over the movement.
In an evaluation of developments inside FRELMO one month later, Ivashutin mirrored Simango’s assessment of Janet Mondlane, arguing the CIA could use her close relationship with Machel to influence internal politics.
Shortly after the publication of “Gloomy Situation in FRELIMO,” Simango was suspended from the Presidential Council and deported from Dar es Salaam.
After Mozambique became independent in 1975, FRELIMO brought Simango and other critics like Nkavandame back to Mozambique.
Machel would come to dominate FRELIMO until he died in a plane crash in 1986.
Conclusion The Soviet view of developments in Africa was fundamentally ideological.
Moscow believed the African military was a neocolonial institution, prone to Western influence and outright meddling.
They were also concerned about the challenge posed by China, especially in East Africa.
The Soviets thus attempted to correct what they considered their mistake of underestimating the role of African militaries in politics.
They thus drew in allies by ramping up assistance and making new clandestine contacts with the eventual goal of extending the reach of Soviet navy and signals intelligence.
At the same time, military training was meant to earn loyalty from young soldiers and convince them of the attractiveness of the socialist system.
Thus, the Soviet military was increasingly drawn in as officials became involved in advising, training, and providing military supplies to allies.
The level of assistance depended on the vastly different dynamics of the Soviets’ relationships with Cabral, Neto, and Mondlane.
By the mid-1960s, the Soviets had developed a close relationship with Cabral, based on his personal associations with men like Evsiukov.
Since military advisers wanted to enable victory, heated disagreements emerged about guerrilla strategy.
Although many details of these discussions are still unclear, Soviet, Czechoslovak, and Cuban advisers shared at least some criticisms of Cabral’s military strategy.
Still, Cabral managed to resist pressure and used contacts with Soviet liaisons to obtain new weapons systems.
The majority of Cabral’s guerrillas experienced Soviet modernity mainly during their time in military training.
However, Soviet military technology, rather than ideology or organizing principles, seemed to most significantly impact rank-and-file soldiers, who felt that weapons equaled liberation.
Although we do not have the exact figures, it seems that the provision of arms was initially limited, mainly due to logistical challenges.
Although Moscow did ramp up assistance to Neto after 1967, the Soviets became critical of the MPLA’s campaign in Cabinda and southeast Angola.
Fundamentally, the Soviets did not believe the MPLA was doing enough to create a truly broad movement and often questioned the efficacy and scope of military operations.
Criticisms of this kind fed into their rocky relationship with Neto, who looked to Yugoslavia and elsewhere for alternative sources of military support.
The new evidence does not shed light on any disagreements between the International Department and the Soviet military or the KGB and the GRU on the MPLA’s progress.
It is very likely, though, that the Soviet military played an important role in shaping views of developments on the ground, which contributed to the complicated relationship Neto had with Moscow.
Military strategy played less of an essential role in Soviet views of FRELIMO in the 1960s.
The documents reveal a strikingly bleak view that the Soviets and especially the GRU developed of their relationship with the Mozambicans.
The GRU had multiple sources inside the organization but still struggled to come to grips with its factionalism, becoming convinced the leadership was fundamentally anti-Soviet.
On the one hand, the Soviets distrusted Mondlane because of his contacts in Washington and feared CIA influence.
On the other, they resented what they believed was growing Chinese influence, which meant that even initial allies like Marcelino dos Santos were not seen favorably.
The GRU initially saw Machel as a popular yet amenable figure who could be influenced by Mondlane’s widow.
As the crisis within the organization deepened, the Soviets were being pulled in different directions, as various factions all sought support from international patrons.
Nevertheless, the GRU argued that the Soviet Union should increase its military support for FRELIMO to strengthen its foothold in the organization.
Once Machel centralized power in 1970, the Soviets would proceed to court him with offers of new assistance packages for the guerrilla campaign.
The full story of cooperation between Prague, Havana, and Moscow is still buried in the archives.
The level of Czechoslovak involvement with liberation movements such as the PAIGC, in particular, was extraordinary, and there clearly existed cooperation between advisers on the ground and those at higher levels.
This collaboration did not preclude differences of opinion, and the StB evaluations of Mondlane point to one such example.
The Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia in 1968 did not seem to impact its relations with the nationalist movements in any significant way.
By the mid-1960s, Prague was already seeking to limit its commitments to anticolonial movements for fundamentally economic reasons, and the events of 1968 only accentuated the trend.
The evidence available shows that Havana, Prague, and Moscow were broadly aligned in terms of their view of the guerrilla struggle in the Portuguese colonies.
As the next chapter shows, the often-heated discussions of military strategy would continue.
However, the Soviets would have to square the ever-intensifying demands of the anticolonial movements with their burgeoning détente with the United States.
Unlike his ascetic predecessor, Caetano was married with four children.
Salazar had never ventured beyond Portugal’s borders, while Caetano had traveled widely, spoke French, and fashioned himself as a moderate.
Caetano also shared Salazar’s resolve to retain the empire at any cost.
In 1970, he authorized major military offensives against the nationalist movements in the colonies.
The offensives put immense pressure on the liberation movements, intensifying internal divisions—to devastating effect.
Caetano found that the new incumbents of the White House—President Richard Nixon and his influential national security adviser Henry Kissinger— were fairly accommodating.
In the face of domestic opposition to the Vietnam War, Nixon and Kissinger sought to reduce commitments in the Third World.
In Africa, their strategy entailed relying on regional “policemen” like Joseph Mobutu in Zaire to contain communism.
They also believed that white minority rule in southern Africa would continue and favored closer relations with Southern Rhodesia, South Africa, and Portugal.
At the same time, Nixon and Kissinger’s realpolitik foreign policy provided an opening for a rapprochement with the Soviet Union known as détente.
Arguably a conservative reaction to the crises of 1968, détente started in Europe with West German chancellor Willy Brandt’s Ostpolitik , which aimed to settle the status of East Germany to ensure a durable peace in Europe.
They also launched a parallel rapprochement with China and employed “triangular diplomacy” with the Soviets to encourage progress in ongoing talks on arms limitations.
The 1970 Moscow Treaty recognized the postwar border in Europe, and the 1972 Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty limited the build-up of antiballistic missiles.
Détente would have been impossible without CC CPSU general secretary Leonid Brezhnev.
As Rui Lopes has argued, détente actually helped strengthen Portugal’s Western alliances since it legitimized the notion of working with disreputable regimes and solidified divisions between the Global North and South.
The impact of détente on Soviet policy in the Third World has been subject to substantial debate.
Although there was a considerable relaxation of tensions in Europe in the 1970s, the Cold War in the Third World did not exhibit any signs of abating.
The United States failed to constrain its ally, Israel, during the Yom Kippur War and backed a coup against Salvador Allende, Chile’s socialist president, in 1973.
Meanwhile, the Soviets and Cubans became involved in crises in Angola and Ethiopia, and in 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan.
In fact, the Soviets saw events such as United States actions during the Yom Kippur War as evidence that Washington was still determined to exclude Moscow from engagements in the Third World.
In Africa, the argument continues, the KGB developed a “new Soviet African strategy,” which entailed greater support for liberation movements in southern A frica.
As discussed in the previous chapter, by the mid-1960s, the Soviet intelligence services had come to believe that Western countries would not shy away from using military means and “subversion” to protect their interests in Africa.
They saw Nixon’s policy in Africa as a continuation of confrontation by other means and worried about the “reemergence” of China.
The Soviets also faced a challenge posed by European social democracies, especially after the Nordic countries began providing humanitarian assistance to the liberation movements.
In the face of Portuguese offensives, guerrilla warfare strategy once again became a subject of significant discussion.
The Soviets were willing to ramp up military assistance and provided new weapons systems, such as the modified portable rocket launcher Grad-P, but they also hoped their clients would heed their advice and devise a more ambitious military strategy.
In Angola, the Portuguese offensive wreaked havoc on the MPLA, resurrecting internal debates about political and military strategy.
As these disagreements had exploded into a major internal crisis by 1973, the Soviets suspended assistance to the MPLA to put pressure on Neto to come to an agreement with his internal critics.
Meanwhile, the Soviets increased assistance to FRELIMO, now centralized under the leadership of Samora Machel.
In the early 1970s, the Portuguese tried to break the military stalemate with a number of daring operations to capture the PAIGC leadership in Conakry.
Meanwhile, Cabral pressed the Soviets for new military technology to overcome Portugal’s air superiority, obtaining the surface-to-air Strela-2 “Arrows” missile complex in 1972.
New evidence reveals how the Soviet military evaluated debates on guerrilla strategy in Guinea-Bissau, their differences with the Cubans, and their response to Cabral’s murder.
The chapter highlights that détente played only a limited role in Soviet relations with the liberation movements.
Andropov argued that the West viewed coups in Somalia, Libya, and Sudan with alarm and were determined to counter Soviet influence.
The key Western tactic was to rely on proxies, such as Morocco, Ethiopia, and Zaire in their attempts to subvert Soviet influence on the continent.
In another note to Boris Ponomarev, Andropov shared his view that the West believed the Soviet Union was not planning for a “broad offensive” in southern Africa.
Ina note to the Central Committee in April 1970, the KGB outlined several worrying trends vis-a-vis African attitudes toward the liberation movements.
Meanwhile, vital host states such as Tanzania and Zambia “constrained the development of nationalist liberation struggle” because they feared retaliation from white minority regimes while pocketing the military hardware designated for the liberation movements.
A major symptom of the trend toward accommodation was the 1969 Lusaka manifesto, which prioritized “peaceful means of struggle” against white minority regimes.
Meanwhile, Soviet military intelligence highlighted Africa’s central role should there be another war.
In a sweeping overview of Western military relations with A frican countries, the GRU’s Lev Tolokonnikov argued that Western countries were stepping up their military cooperation with African countries in exchange for permission to construct United States military bases.
In particular, he emphasized the role of South Africa as a source of crucial minerals and resources, which grew in importance following the closure of the Suez Canal after the 1967 Six Day War.
The role of African armies was on the rise, and Western countries targeted the military to exert influence.
The breakthrough in Soviet-American relations after signing the SALT I treaty in 1972 did not do much to change the KGB’s outlook on Western policy in Africa.
Nixon was making serious efforts to weaken Soviet influence on the continent, and thus he was strengthening his cooperation with white minority regimes and Portugal.
The United States was no longer interested in “direct interference” in African countries but believed that the development of long-term commercial and political relations would bring the desired benefits.
In the early 1970s, China emerged from the peak of the Cultural Revolution, and Beijing was eager to reconstruct its role on the international stage.
In 1971, China’s rapprochement with the United States enabled its admission to the United Nations.
The CCP revived diplomatic relations with most African countries and pursued an increasingly active international agenda to win over allies at Moscow’s expense.
While China’s militant anti-Soviet stance had derailed relations with the MPLA and the PAIGC, in the early 1970s, Beijing sought rapprochement.
The GRU believed that China’s growing influence could be countered with Soviet military assistance.
In an October 1970 overview of China’s activities in Africa, Petr Ivashutin and General Nikolai Dagaev argued that the key to China’s success was the quick provision of economic and military aid on preferential terms.
To tackle the challenge, the Soviet military should be allowed to make independent decisions about dispatching advisers quickly on request, expanding propaganda related to military assistance programs, and ensuring that military aid satisfied the requirements of the recipients.
Another challenge to the Soviets in Africa stemmed from European social democracies.
The response of the Nordic countries was at least partly shaped by changes in European public opinion.
Since the late 1960s, a number of solidarity organizations in Europe and the United States had started to campaign against white minority rule in southern Africa.
One notable campaign focused on Portugal’s plan to construct a hydroelectric dam on the Zambezi River at Cabora Bassa in Mozambique’s Tete province.
Solidarity groups believed the scheme served to attract white settlers and entrench Portuguese rule and thus they campaigned vigorously against the participation of Western capital.
In 1969, the Swedish firm ASEA withdrew from the project due to widespread opposition.
The clearest indication of a change in public opinion came in 1970 when Pope Paul VI held a brief audience with Marcelino dos Santos, Agostinho Neto, and Amilcar Cabral at the Vatican.
The Soviets never publicly voiced opposition to the support from the Nordic countries.
Soviet military support was an open secret, but public acknowledgment demonstrated that Moscow wanted credit for supporting the anticolonial campaigns.
The Soviet military and intelligence services did not believe détente had a significant effect on the Cold War in Africa.
The USSR’s solutions to challenges from the West and China were familiar and included expanding aid and contacts with African militaries.
The Soviet military and the GRU wanted greater involvement and more “independence” to provide a viable alternative to Western and Chinese assistance.
However, there is little evidence to suggest that Soviet policy in Africa added up to a new, coordinated strategy.
As Vladislav Zubok has argued, the Soviet military’s lobbying for more international assistance might have been at least partly motivated by material gain.
The 1970s saw the emergence of what has been described as Brezhnev’s “little deal,” which involved a system of perks and privileges, which often functioned via the shadow economy, allowing certain sections of society to enjoy daily comforts.
While these motivations are impossible to discern from the documents, they were not incompatible with the strategic considerations that fitted into a fundamentally ideological worldview shared by the Soviet military.
As far as the liberation movements were concerned, the early 1970s saw the expansion of military assistance from the socialist countries.
The impetus for such developments came as the Soviets observed the changes in military strategies adopted by the Lusophone nationalist movements.
Its architect, General Francisco da Costa Gomes, borrowed from the French in Algeria, employing a quadrillage garrisoning system, which divided the country into sectors, each permanently controlled by troops, to isolate the guerrillas.
These tactics caused widespread deprivation and starvation in the MPLA-controlled zones, while transportation problems hindered resupply.
However, it was also consistent with what the Soviets and the Cubans had been advising for some time.
In a lengthy report to Moscow, Belokolos argued that the Soviets should support Neto’s plan by providing necessary logistical assistance and advice on operations.
In a progress report from April 1972, the Soviet ambassador to Tanzania, Viacheslav Ustinov, noted that guerrilla campaigns were limited to mainly sporadic hit-and-run tactics in the border areas.
The liberation movements did not prioritize extending the geographical reach of military operations and did not build “underground cells” across the country.
Now, continued Ustinov, the MPLA and FRELIMO understood that they had to reorganize small guerrilla detachments into a regular army and set up a network of cells to create a clandestine underground movement, including in the cities.
In February 1972, Costa Gomes launched Operation Attila, a large-scale offensive in southeast Angola that included aircraft dropping defoliants to destroy crops and communication lines.
Having established UNITA in 1966, Savimbi had built up his following among the Ovimbundu of southeast Angola.
Costa Gomes and Savimbi agreed that they would not fight each other but would cooperate to eliminate the MPLA with intelligence support from UNITA, including on locations of the MPLA bases.
By late 1972, the colonial authorities estimated that the offensive had reduced the insurgents’ strength by more than half of the total number of men recorded in 1970.
The majority of the MPLA’s top-level commanders and the political leadership were of Mbundu or multiracial origins and came from Luanda and northwest Angola.
The commanders thus often had little in common with the rank-and-file soldiers, many Ovimbundu, in southeast Angola.
As Neto’s close MPLA associate Lucio Lara later acknowledged, some commanders in southeast Angola did indeed “abuse their positions” by ordering the rank-and-file soldiers to carry heavy loads on long marches from Zambia to the southeast.
As Neto acknowledged in a conversation with Ambassador Belokolos on March 18, 1972, the MPLA experienced incidents of “tribalism,” but reassured that these would not impact the armed struggle.
Brazzaville-based recruits also criticized Neto and Lara for misappropriating funds and matériel from the socialist countries.
According to MPLA vice president Domingos da Silva, the crux of the conflict lay in disputes over relations with the Soviet Union.
He contended that the MPLA was split between pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese factions.
Silva argued that Neto secretly belonged to the pro-Chinese faction and wanted to limit Soviet influence.
Although Revolta Activa became particularly prominent in 1974, discord was clearly fomenting for some time.
Neto always believed that northern Angola should be the core base of operations for the guerrilla movement.
As Neto explained to his Soviet interlocutors, an agreement with Roberto would mean the Zairean authorities would allow the MPLA to cross into northern Angola.
As the Soviet embassy in Kinshasa argued in a telegram to Moscow, the agreement could mean much greater Zairean and, therefore, United States influence on the Angolan liberation movement.
The outcome could mean a “pro-Western” regime in the country after independence.
It is true that Neto’s agreement with Roberto did little to calm growing discord inside the organization.
In April 1973, the MPLA made a dramatic announcement that some of its members had conspired to assassinate Neto.
The MPLA leadership proceeded to arrest the plotters and imprisoned them in the Kalombo camp in western Zambia.
Under interrogation, the men confessed that their ringleader was Daniel Chipenda.
After fleeing Portugal in 1961, he joined the MPLA, was elected the youth leader, and became a popular commander on the eastern front, no doubt partly because of his Ovimbundu heritage.
As Chipenda recalled to an interviewer much later, in May 1973, the MPLA’s Henrique “Iko” Carreira arrived in Lusaka with orders for him to depart for the front in Angola.
He then remained in Lusaka and maintained an uneasy standoff with Neto.
MPLA camps in western Zambia became divided between Neto’s and Chipenda’s supporters and were shaken by outbursts of violence.
He argued that Neto had mishandled complaints about arbitrary executions of civilians and other abuses committed by MPLA field commanders in southeast Angola.
Chipenda claimed that he had opposed the Chinese-inspired campaign because it would only stir up “racist accusations” against the leadership, and he maintained that a “fundamental structural adjustment” was required to address underlying issues.
He also denied that there was ever any coup against Neto, arguing that the arrest and subsequent torture of the Kalombo detainees sparked the Eastern Revolt.
Chipenda was the one who did not want to be accountable to the people and therefore was expelled.
One way or another, the Eastern Revolt presented a significant challenge to Neto’s leadership and drastically curtailed the MPLA’s attempts to organize military operations in southeastern Angola.
As the crisis within the MPLA unfolded, the Soviets tried to mediate between Neto and Chipenda.
In September 1973, Petr Evsiukov and GRU’s Ivan Plakhin arrived in Dar es Salaam for talks.
Although a record of the conversation is not available, the schism with Chipenda was likely on the agenda.
Further, the presence of Plakhin, who was responsible for coordinating aid to the liberation movements, attests to the seriousness of the matter.
On October 18, Neto wrote directly to Leonid Brezhnev, describing the schism in the MPLA as part of an “imperialist plan” to derail the Angolan nationalist movement.
On December 21, 1973, Viktor Kulikov, the chief of the Soviet General Staff, presented a damning evaluation of Neto’s actions during the crisis.
Instead of understanding the causes behind the crisis, continued Kulikov, Neto used brute force and executed alleged plotters when confronted with criticism.
When the majority of guerrillas in the Zambian base camps rebelled in August 1973, Neto responded by cutting supplies.
The outcome of all these mistakes, concluded Kulikovy, was the almost complete cessation of MPLA military operations.
Although the military adopted Chipenda’s version of the crisis, the KGB might have seen the conflict differently.
Neto’s first KGB contact from Zaire in the early 1960s, Oleg Nazhestkin, recalled that he and his superiors never trusted Chipenda.
Another piece of evidence comes from Marga Holness, a British activist who worked as Neto’s interpreter in Dar es Salam.
According to her recollections, around the time of Chipenda’s revolt, she was approached by an official she recognized as a Soviet embassy staff member in Dar es Salaam.
The man told her that he did not share the views of the Soviet embassy in Zambia.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to discern if the said official was a KGB officer.
However, Vladimir Shubin’s recollections support the contention that a highly negative view of Neto might have been perpetuated by the Soviet embassy in Zambia, mainly by GRU’s Vladimir Bezukladnikov, a World War II veteran who served as the counsellor at the embassy in Lusaka.
One way or another, the suspension of assistance came unexpectedly to Neto.
He argued that the Soviets followed the conclusion reached by the Zambian authorities, who were prejudiced in Chipenda’s favor.
Soviet financial assistance was the primary source of cash for the organization, and therefore the termination of aid was putting the organization in an extremely difficult position.
Since the mid-1960s, the Soviets believed that Neto’s dictatorial leadership style and reliance on mesticos was preventing the organization from fully connecting with rank-and-file recruits across Angola.
The MPLA was elitist and non-representative of all ethnicities, they believed, which prevented substantial progress in the guerrilla campaign.
The Soviet military and the International Department saw Neto’s conflict with Daniel Chipenda in the same light.
To them, Chipenda represented the Ovimbundu and a chance to make the MPLA genuinely popular in the southeast.
By suspending assistance, the Soviets wanted to put pressure on Neto to come to an accommodation with Chipenda.
As 1974 approached, the Angolan nationalist movement was deeply divided, and Portuguese pressure seemed to have worked.
A strong supporter of the dictatorship and a three-star general when he arrived in 1970, Arriaga vowed to crush the insurgency by the end of the year.
His plan for the offensive, Operagéo Né Gérdio , was to strike FRELIMO’s stronghold in Cabo Delgado province in northern Mozambique and cut supply links with Tanzania, supported by heavy bombardment.
Arriaga’s offensives pushed the guerrillas out of Cabo Delgado, but it failed to end the war.
The guerrillas did not directly engage the armed forces but fled to the bush.
FRELIMO also started to build new bases along the Zambian border, moving from Cabo Delgado to Tete province.
The celebrations were premature since Lisbon canceled all further offensives because of spiraling costs and mounting casualties.
Then, Arriaga reinforced the deployment of African troops in Grupos Especiais and created units of African commandos in the local security service.
The bombing raids were devastating for the local population, but FRELIMO managed to survive and adapt.
Samora Machel, who was now firmly in charge of FRELIMO, realized he needed a more significant commitment from international patrons to overcome the effects of Arriaga’s offensives.
In the summer of 1971, Machel left for a tour of Eastern Europe, the USSR, and China.
FRELIMO leadership had long been dissatisfied with the extent of the Soviet commitment.
He took part in the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the CPSU, held from March 30 to April 9, but the real purpose of Machel’s trip was to obtain modern arms.
Machel’s close associate, Sérgio Vieira, recalled that Machel complained to General Kulikov that FRELIMO had not received any of the modern arms on display in Moscow.
As discussed in the previous chapter, the Soviets had a complicated view of FRELIMO’s new president, his close relationship with Janet Mondlane, and what they believed was his “pro-Chinese” stance.
As the Soviets frequently observed, Machel was eager to play Moscow against Beijing in a bidding war for more aid.
As the Soviet embassy in Tanzania reported to Moscow in June 1972, the guerrillas managed to subvert the construction of the important Cabora Bassa project and achieved some military successes in Cabo Delgado, Niassa, and Tete provinces.
The introduction of modern Soviet weapons systems into FRELIMO’s arsenal would dominate the USSR’s relations with Machel for the remainder of the war.
The operation to introduce the weapons meant that Soviet arms experts were dispatched to a camp near Arusha in Tanzania to provide training on the spot.
A group of FRELIMO recruits was also selected to receive specialized training in the Soviet Union.
In a conversation with Ambassador Ustinov on June 20, 1972, in Dar es Salaam, Machel emphasized that FRELIMO was betting on the new weapon, which they hoped to use against Portuguese tanks in Tete province.
These instructors effectively passed on advanced skills quickly, unlike those in the Soviet Union, who wasted a lot of time teaching the men how to operate rudimentary weapons.
Runov/Sputnik. should focus on learning how to operate Grad-P only, and all the other classes, including the political ones, should be limited.
The Soviets also supported FRELIMO’s campaign to attract international attention to Portuguese conduct during the colonial war in Mozambique.
On July 10, 1973, The Times in London published an article by a British priest named Adrian Hastings detailing a massacre perpetrated by the Portuguese army in Wiriyamu, a collection of villages in the vicinity of Cabora Bassa, in Central Tete province.
In 1972, the Portuguese had discovered that FRELIMO men and supplies were coming through Wiriyamu.
On December 16, 1972, they launched a punitive operation, slaughtering hundreds of men, women, and children.
As Machel shared with Ambassador Slipchenko, the Vatican had gotten ahead of FRELIMO in publicizing the Portuguese atrocities.
He did not want the Vatican to gain political capital and asked Slipchenko to support several measures at the UN in order to seize the initiative.
After learning about Wiriyamu, the Soviets started a campaign in the press.
They also supported attempts to condemn Portugal at the United Nations.
Marcelino dos Santos testified about the events in Wiriyamu at the United Nations, comparing them Nazi death camps, Sharpeville in South AF rica, and Pidjiguiti in Guinea-Bissau.
In the final years of the war, FRELIMO slowly expanded its operations south of the Zambezi River.
FRELIMO’s alliance with ZANU was more than matched by Portugal’s close relationship with Southern Rhodesia and South Africa, which secretly included agreements on cooperation in fighting nationalist movements in southern Africa.
The weapon was potentially a game-changer in the context of the colonial wars in the Portuguese colonies because it could strike much more effectively at low-flying aircraft, thus eliminating Portugal’s key advantage over the guerrillas.
As will be discussed shortly, the PAIGC was the first to receive Strela-2 from Moscow.
The Soviets hoped that military technology would be the winning card in their competition with Beijing in East Africa.
In a lengthy report on China’s influence in Tanzania, made in February 1973, Slipchenko argued that Dar es Salaam had started to look toward closer cooperation with the Soviet Union.
Among the many reasons for this was Tanzania’s disappointment with Chinese military technology and training, making the country vulnerable in its developing conflict with neighboring Uganda.
The Tanzanians also realized that they did not have a modern air force or an anti-aerial defense system and had to turn to the Soviet Union for the latter.
In addition, Dar es Salaam realized that the Soviet weapons supplied to the liberation movements were more effective than what China had delivered to the Tanzanian army.
Overall, the Soviets stepped up their support for FRELIMO in the early 1970s.
Although competition with China might have played a role, the main reason for the delivery of modern weapons was the extension of guerrilla warfare beyond the remote Cabo Delgado province.
Although the Portuguese offensive was devastating for the civilian population and slowed the insurgency in northern Mozambique, FRELIMO managed to survive and solidify alliances with international patrons.
The Soviets provided the Mozambicans with support over its international strategy, highlighting Portuguese atrocities such as Wiriyamu.
However, their most important role was as the supplier of weapons for guerrilla warfare.
In fact, the Soviets realized that by transferring military technology and providing training, they could effectively compete with rivals “on the left,” such as China.
In 1974, FRELIMO managed to extend its operations into the central Manica and Sofala provinces.
The military stalemate with the Portuguese would only be broken in Guinea-Bissau.
Cubans, Soviets, and the PAIGC Back in west Africa, the Portuguese campaign against the PAIGC in Guinea-Bissau was led by General Antonio de Spinola.
He asked urgently for reinforcements, eventually building the army’s fighting capacity up to 40,000 men—its highest level ever.
Spinola also sped up the Africanization of the Portuguese army, eventually employing up to 10,000 African commandos, many from the Fula ethnic group, to fight alongside white army officers.
He also decided to abandon some forts and focused on defending only those crucial for cutting the guerrillas’ supply lines to Guinea.
These measures included building schools and hospitals in rural areas and providing better access to food and water.
African farmers received improved access to credit, while loyal chiefs were given sponsored trips to Portugal and Mecca.
As previously discussed, the war in Guinea-Bissau had stalled, but the PAIGC managed to make some progress, such as at Madina do Boé in 1969.
The stalemate made Spinola increasingly impatient, and in 1970, he gambled ona bold scheme to attack the PAIGC’s headquarters in Guinea.
The plan, codenamed Operacao Mar Verde , included sending a raiding party to free Portuguese prisoners of war held at a PAIGC detention center in Conakry and arresting Cabral and other high-ranking party members.
They succeeded in freeing the Portuguese prisoners of war and inflicting some damage on the PAIGC’s buildings and vehicles.
However, the men who failed to escape were questioned and quickly identified their real sponsors.
After the attack on Conakry, Havana revived their program to train the local police force and provided additional weapons and ammunition—all at a whopping cost of $2 million.
The Cubans believed that the survival of Touré’s regime was at stake, especially since the status of the PAIGC in Guinea could be endangered in the event of a successful coup.
Argiielles was the head of Décima Direccién, the special task force in charge of all Cuban military missions abroad.
He came to discuss the new training for Touré’s militia, but the war in Guinea-Bissau was also on his agenda.
During a meeting with the Soviet ambassador to Guinea, Anatolii Ratanovy, on December 17, 1971, Argiielles criticized Cabral for prioritising diplomacy and giving only minimal attention to military operations.
Soviet assistance and modern weapons were being used ineffectively, argued Argiielles, since Cabral did not plan for any large-scale operations and limited the war to ambushes.
In his report to Moscow, Ratanov disagreed with Argiielles’s assessment.
The Cubans were too critical of Cabral, relying extensively on military commanders like Vieira.
One reason for Cubans’ criticism, speculated Ratanoy, might be that Cabral did not want an even closer relationship with Cuba.
In late 1971, a high-ranking Soviet delegation arrived in Conakry to discuss the stalemate in Guinea-Bissau.
The delegation included Petr Evsiukov, the GRU’s general Ivan Plakhin, and Nikolai Tiazhev, who had recently been appointed to coordinate questions related to military assistance in Guinea.
The delegation stayed in Conakry, but also made a trip to “liberated areas” inside Guinea-Bissau.
In his memoirs, Evsiukov remembered sailing past a Portuguese military post at Guiledge, in southern Guinea-Bissau, without any precautions.
While Evsiukov thought Portuguese inaction was “strange,” Cabral explained it as a result of the clandestine contacts he had with some officers among the Portuguese high command in Guinea-Bissau.
Although the details of these negotiations are still unavailable, new evidence suggests that Cuban criticisms of Cabral’s military strategy was on the agenda.
The specifics come from conversations between Tiazhev and members of the Cuban military mission in Guinea.
As Cabral’s Cuban adviser, Eduardo César, informed Tiazhev on December 31, 1971, there still existed major differences among the PAIGC’s leadership on military strategy.
Some military leaders were unhappy that Cabral was mainly focused on politics and diplomacy and did not pursue a more aggressive military strategy.
Talks with the Soviet delegation, César continued, seemed to convince Cabral of the need to crush the enemy at its fortified posts.
Still, continued César, Cabral argued that the FARP lacked heavy weaponry and mote assistance from the socialist countries was necessary to a renewed offensive.
In another conversation with Tiazhev, he explained that after talks with the Soviet delegation, the Cuban leadership finally realized it was “unreasonable to demand” that the PAIGC engage in large-scale operations because these could lead to multiple casualties and result in a decline in morale.
It is not clear, though, whether the Soviet efforts to persuade the Cubans change their stance were entirely successful.
In May 1972, Fidel Castro stopped in Conakry on his way to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
He arrived to discuss economic and military aid to Guinea as well as the war in Guinea-Bissau.
On May 7, Castro had a long meeting with Soviet ambassador Anatolii Ratanov.
As the conversation reveals, Castro remained critical of Cabral’s military strategy.
In his report to Moscow, Ratanov argued that Castro was wrong to criticize Cabral because the Cuban leader had underestimated the difficulties of the war in Guinea-Bissau.
Ratanov was particularly aghast at Castro’s suggestion that the Guineans should help by sending troops— Cabral regularly expressed anxiety about Touré’s meddling.
During a meeting with Ratanov and Tiazhev on May 9, Cabral shared his irritation about some Cuban advisers who wanted him to accept some “premature decisions” on military strategy.
The FARP was preparing for the “intensification of armed struggle,” but they still lacked anti-aerial defense.
Czechoslovak-trained Otto Schacht is first from the left in the first row, holding a gun.
The Soviet delegation travelled to Guinea-Bissau and engaged in consultations with the PAIGC leadership in Conakry and the Cubans.
Strela complex while reading news articles about the Vietnam War and argued that the new weapon could provide the solution to breaking Portuguese aerial power.
Cabral’s Murder and the Soviet Response On January 20, 1973, Amélia Araujo and her daughter Teresa stayed late at Escola Piloto.
Run by the Cape Verdean Maria da Luz “Lilica” Boal, the school educated the children of PAIGC commanders and others selected from the interior to prepare them for further education in the Soviet Union.
Lilica Boal recalled that suddenly their meeting was interrupted by reports of “shots fired” at Miniére—the location of PAIGC headquarters in Conakry.
After hearing about the shots, Teresa remembered that they drove off in a car with her parents in the direction of Miniére.
As they approached the location where Cabral’s house was located, they were told they could not proceed any further.
The only eyewitness account we have of Cabral’s murder comes from his wife, Anna Maria, as she relayed it to the Soviet journalist Oleg Ignatev.
A good friend of Cabral’s, Ignatev happened to be in Guinea-Bissau in January 1973, covering the war for the Soviet daily Pravda.
When he heard the news, he rushed back to Conakry to record her version of events, published in Pravda on March 6, 1973.
According to the account, Cabral and Anna Maria had almost reached their apartment after returning from a reception at the Polish embassy when they noticed a group of armed men approaching their car.
Kani ordered Cabral to get out of his car and tried to tie him up with a piece of rope.
Once Cabral was dead, the assassins seized his right-hand man, Aristides Pereira, drove him to the port, threw him onto a barge, and sailed away.
Another group of conspirators arrested other Cape Verdeans in the PAIGC leadership and incarcerated them in La Montagna prison in Conakry.
However, the plot unraveled after Sékou Touré learned about the coup and ordered his soldiers to release the incarcerated PAIGC leaders and arrest the conspirators.
Ratanov agreed to help and drove to the port, where a Soviet navy vessel was docked.
He then convinced the Soviet captain to chase the vessel—a risk since he was acting without official approval from Moscow.
Most commentators agree that the plot was the outcome of a Portuguese secret operation.
Frustrated by the stalemate and fearful that the PAIGC might proclaim independence in 1973, the Portuguese secret police exploited what they saw as long-standing tensions among Cape Verdeans and the Guinean-Bissauans.
In September 1972, Cabral amnestied those who had been accused of plotting against the party.
Somewhat ironically, Mamadou Ndjai was temporarily put in charge of security at the PAIGC headquarters.
He had been fired for personal misconduct but then restored to his post since Cabral believed in the rehabilitation of party members.
While this theory remains unproven, the coup clearly targeted Cape Verdeans.
Julio de Carvalho was deployed in the south of the country when he heard the news on the radio.
He and another commander, Umaro Djald, immediately went out to tell the soldiers.
In reality, the PAIGC faced an acute crisis in the aftermath of Cabral’s death.
Almost immediately, the Portuguese started to drop propaganda leaflets saying, “Cabral is dead, the war is over.
Villages everywhere held tchur (funeral proceedings), and people were crying and saying that now the Portuguese would come and take the land.
The Political Bureau in Conakry realized they had to convince people that Cabral’s murder did not mean an end to the struggle for independence.
Since Aristides Pereira was still recovering from his injuries, Pedro Pires sent radio messages and emissaries to explain that the war would continue.
In his reports for Pravda, he emphasized Cabral’s bravery in dealing with his assassins, reinforcing his image as a slain revolutionary hero.
In his commentary, Ignatev stressed that Cabral was murdered by mere criminals who worked for the Portuguese.
His reports were meant to help ensure the PAIGC’s success and provide support for an organization in crisis.
Over many years, he had developed close personal relations with many Soviet liaisons, including Evsiukov.
Evsiukov then appealed to the CC CPSU to rename a square in Moscow after Amilcar Cabral.
Vladimir Shubin participated on behalf of the Soviet Solidarity Committee.
The Soviet military also feared that with Cabral gone, the PAIGC could be vulnerable to outside interference.
In a striking report on the aftermath of Cabral’s death, General Kulikov argued that the Guineans and the Cubans were trying to exert control over the organization.
The Guinean authorities in Conakry kept the PAIGC leadership under arrest for several days, seizing control of the warehouses and taking over all communications and transport.
They also proposed that Guinean soldiers join FARP to fight in Guinea-Bissau—an offer that Cabral had always rejected because he feared the loss of autonomy.
The Cubans were also guilty of putting pressure on Cabral for stepping up operations “at all costs” and maintained direct contact with the military leadership.
Cabral did not allow the Cubans direct involvement in planning military operations, which caused dissatisfaction.
Vladimir Shubin from the Soviet Solidarity Committee is third from left in the front row.
Between 1963 and 1973, Moscow provided military funding and matériel in the sum of 21. million rubles and 4. million rubles in humanitarian aid.
The influx of Soviet arms and the removal of all limits on the use of ammunition led to more aggressive offensive tactics.
In the autumn of 1972, a group of twenty-four men led by commander Manuel “Manecas” dos Santos was selected to undergo a three-month course to learn how to operate the Stela-2 complex.
On March 28, 1973, the PAIGC shot down the Fiat G-91 that belonged to Almeida Brito, the chief of the Portuguese air force.
The Portuguese did not expect the arrival of Strela missiles and canceled all aerial operations after Brito’s death.
A year earlier, the party had organized an election to the “National Assembly” in the so-called liberation zones.
In a show of international support for the PAIGC, on November 2, 1973, the UN General Assembly passed a motion, which “welcomed the recent accession to independence of the people of Guinea-Bissau” and condemned Portugal’s continuous presence in the country.
By early 1974, it had become clear that the endgame in Guinea-Bissau was close.
Contacts between the Portuguese military and the PAIGC already existed, but in early 1974, Marcelo Caetano started looking for a way out of the war.
In March 1974, a three-person mission went to London to discuss a negotiated settlement with Caetano’s envoy.
The meeting, he recalled, did not go well because the Portuguese negotiators refused to discuss Cape Verde’s independence.
Conclusion This chapter shows that superpower détente and the Cold War in Africa ran along two parallel tracks.
While détente negotiations were overseen by senior Soviet diplomats and Brezhnev personally, the cadres of the International Department and the Soviet military held sway over day-to-day relations with the liberation movements.
The Soviet military and the KGB believed that the West remained committed to countering Soviet influence in Africa and would not shy away from using “subversion” and sponsoring coups to maintain a strategic advantage.
These views did not change as détente progressed, and in fact, the Soviet military believed Nixon’s appeasement of white minority regimes and Portugal only confirmed the ongoing competition in the Third World.
Since the late 1960s, the Soviet military had propagated a more active approach to guerrilla strategy because they believed that hit-and-run operations would not impact the welltrained and well-equipped Portuguese army.
By 1971, the MPLA, FRELIMO, and PAIGC had made new plans to ramp up the intensity of attacks, and thus they received new weapons systems, such as the Grad-P and Strela-2 complexes from Moscow.
In Guinea-Bissau, the Strela-2 complex had a particularly decisive impact on the war.
The Soviets had also come to believe that the provision of advanced military technologies would play an important role in their continuing competition with China in East Africa.
The Soviets’ personal relations with African revolutionaries were also important.
As viewed from Moscow, the fundamentally intra-MPLA conflict between the mestico leadership and the Ovimbundu rank-and-file was closely tied to debates about relations with the socialist countries and failures in the military field.
Since the 1960s, the Soviets believed that under Neto, the MPLA was not representative enough of the Black majority in Angola and thus failed to achieve military progress.
That is why it was unsurprising that the Soviets accepted Chipenda’s version of events in 1973 and opted to suspend assistance.
As of 1974, Soviet relations with the MPLA were at a new low, and the Portuguese were in the driver’s seat from a military perspective.
These factors would prove crucial for the way events unfolded in Angola after the Carnation Revolution in Portugal.
Simultaneously, the Soviets’ close relationship with Cabral led to a very different reaction to military developments in Guinea-Bissau.
As was also the case in Angola, the Soviet military believed the PAIGC could have carried out a much more active guerrilla campaign.
Still, new evidence shows they disagreed with Havana’s harsh criticism of Cabral’s strategy.
In the end, Cabral engaged in a delicate and ultimately successful balancing act, arguing that only Soviet military technology could make possible the necessary breakthrough against the Portuguese.
Cabral’s long-term strategy worked—the acquisition of Strela-2 missiles in 1973 led to a tipping point in the war.
In contrast to the MPLA, by 1974, the PAIGC was well positioned to take advantage of any changes in Portugal.
By 1974, the army was war weary, unwilling to keep fighting a war that increasingly looked unwinnable.
In 1974, a clandestine organization knownas the Armed Forces Movement emerged.
The MFA was composed mainly of junior military officers who were initially dissatisfied with the army’s new system of promotions and privileges.
Their agenda soon became more radical, and they started plotting a coup to overthrow the dictatorship.
In September 1973, General Anténio de Spinola returned to Portugal, exhausted with the war in Guinea-Bissau.
Haunted by what had transpired in Goa in 1961 when Salazar had blamed the military for the loss of Portuguese India, he spent the following months writing Portugal eo futuro , a book in which he described a negotiated solution to the colonial wars.
First, the MFA seized all the key strategic locations in Lisbon, including radio and television stations, the airport, and bridges.
Once the first stage of the coup was complete, detachments loyal to the MFA rolled into the capital, encountering little resistance.
They soon learned that Prime Minister Marcelo Caetano had fled to the Carmo barracks, the headquarters of the National Republican Guard.
The MFA surrounded the barracks, and after several hours of negotiation, Caetano agreed to surrender to General Anténio de Spinola.
Meanwhile, jubilant crowds swamped the city, festooning soldiers with red carnations.
On April 25, the MFA Coordinating Committee appointed the Junta of National Salvation, which abolished censorship and freed political prisoners.
In May, it established the first Portuguese provisional government, comprised of a broad coalition of political parties.
The MFA Coordinating Committee preferred quick transfers of power to the liberation movements.
Thus, in 1974, Lisbon struck deals to transfer control to the PAIGC in Guinea-Bissau and to FRELIMO in Mozambique.
In Angola, however, the transition was much more complicated because the liberation movement was split between three nationalist organizations—FNLA, MPLA, and UNITA—with each relying on regional allies and international donors for support.
In January 1975, the Portuguese negotiated a power-sharing agreement between the three movements with independence set for November 11, 1975.
This chapter argues that the Soviet response to decolonization was more significantly shaped by the evolution of events in Portugal than previously thought.
The Soviets saw events in Portugal and its colonies in ideological terms.
Shortly after the coup, the leader of the Portuguese Communists, Alvaro Cunhal, returned to Lisbon to a hero’s welcome after many years in exile and was appointed minister without portfolio in the first provisional government.
The Soviets believed that these developments signified a major victory for the so-called progressive forces, but they were also anxious about a counter-coup in Portugal.
To bolster Cunhal’s position, the Soviets established diplomatic relations with Portugal and urged the liberation movements to moderate their pressure on Lisbon during decolonization talks in the spring-summer of 1974.
It has already been established that Moscow denied aid to Neto and pushed for the unification of various MPLA factions in the aftermath of the coup in Lisbon.
New evidence shows precisely why the Soviets resumed military assistance to the MPLA by January 1975.
It details how Agostinho Neto lobbied the Soviets, arguing his close connections to the MFA made him the clear candidate for the top job in independent Angola.
The Soviets decided to restore military support for the MPLA because they perceived events in Luanda as part of an international conspiracy backed by Zaire and the United States, and they believed Soviet arms could maintain the military equilibrium.
Though they hoped the Portuguese could ensure relative peace in Angola before independence, an escalation of armed clashes between MPLA and FNLA loyalists in Luanda in the spring of 1975 shook their confidence in a diplomatic solution.
The new documents provide the details of the Soviet decision to arm the MPLA and the logistics of arms transfers via Congo-Brazzaville.
These records also confirm that Soviet cooperation with the Cubans in Angola was minimal until independence on November 11.
On the one hand, many rejoiced that now, at last, negotiations and peace might be possible.
The Mozambican Mateus Oscar Kido was in training at Perevalnoe when he heard the news about the fall of the dictatorship.
Since uncertainty was high, the PAIGC responded with a propaganda drive and other mobilizational measures to demonstrate strength.
In April, the organization invited its close allies to establish formal diplomatic relations.
The PAIGC also began rallying support among population in the urban areas, de facto taking over the towns in Guinea-Bissau.
Cape Verdeans in the PAIGC were particularly concerned about the status of the archipelago since there had been no fighting there.
They thus started to organize their supporters and ferried arms to the islands.
The MFA manifesto on decolonization, published on April 26, 1974, urged “peace” and “dialogue” to obtain a “political rather than military solution” in the colonies, but there were no direct references to self-determination.
Another source of mistrust was the appointment of General Spinola as president of Portugal.
Although Spinola had criticized Caetano’s colonial policy, he preferred moderate political change and pushed for a referendum to decide the future relationship with the colonies.
When the foreign minister Mario Soares began talks with the PAIGC in May, Spinola’s agenda shaped the Portuguese negotiating position.
Second, the Portuguese negotiators refused to accept self-determination for Cape Verde, which was fundamental to the PAIGC’s binational project.
Another sticking point was the Portuguese offer to hold a referendum on the future of Guinea-Bissau.
The PAIGC’s tough negotiating stance was reinforced when the OAU called on the liberation movements not to accept a ceasefire before Portugal committed to independence.
Realizing that his position was unworkable, Mario Soares flew to Lisbon in the middle of negotiations, trying to persuade Spinola to be more accommodating.
However, the president refused, and talks broke down on June 14’ Spinola then launched a diplomatic offensive to gain support for his decolonization strategy.
He tried to convince the British government to support his referendum plan publicly and approached Senegal’s president Léopold Senghor, who promised to try to sway the PAIGC leadership.
In a meeting with United States president Richard Nixon in the Azores on June 19, Spinola tried to get the president to publicly back his plan.
He warned Nixon about the threat of communism in Portugal and argued that the Soviets were responsible for the breakdown of talks because they wanted to establish military bases in Cape Verde.
On the one hand, the Carnation Revolution offered the prospects of a revolutionary transformation in Portugal.
The PCP had dominated the underground resistance against the dictatorship, thus acquiring many followers among the professional middle class, the army, and the workers.
On the other hand, the PCP remained highly insecure, fearing a right-wing counter-coup in Portugal.
As a member of the first provisional government, Cunhal adopted a moderate position.
The PCP urged restraint in labor disputes and compromised on the minimum wage, hoping to cement an alliance with the urban middle class.
The Soviets wanted to reinforce Cunhal’s position in the provisional government, which precluded them from putting excessive pressure on Lisbon over decolonization.
On June 4, the PCP advised the Soviets against establishing formal diplomatic relations with Portugal.
However, only days later, the PCP recommended that Moscow establish diplomatic relations with Portugal as soon as possible.
The request had come directly from Spinola, and Cunhal believed that by acting as intermediaries with Moscow, the PCP could solidify their position within the provisional government.
The USSR launched formal diplomatic relations with Portugal only four days later, on June 10, 1974.
The Soviet decision revealed a clash of priorities with the liberation movements, which wanted to maintain constant pressure on Lisbon.
In July, Petr Manchkha and Andrei Urnov from the International Department went to Dar es Salaam for informal talks.
In one particularly heated meeting on July 6, FRELIMO’s president Samora Machel criticized the Soviets for establishing diplomatic relations with Portugal, arguing it could negatively affect the ongoing negotiations.
While the guerrilla campaign played a significant role in the collapse of the dictatorship, argued Machel, there were no positive results from the coup.
Despite this rocky start, domestic developments in Portugal favored the agenda of the liberation movements.
On July 8, the first provisional government led by Palma Carlos resigned.
A key figure in the MFA, Gongalves was close to Cunhal, and his appointment was deemed a leftist victory.
In addition, one of the key architects of the MFA’s decolonization policy, Major Melo Antunes, became the minister responsible for decolonization.
On July 27, the MFA Coordinating Committee forced Spinola to sign Constitutional Law 7/74 , which recognized the right to selfdetermination for the colonies.
These developments paved the way for UN secretary-general Kurt Waldheim to visit Portugal to discuss decolonization.
In August, Mario Soares resumed talks with the PAIGC in Algiers, quickly reaching a settlement and an agreement on the withdrawal of troops.
Guinea-Bissau became an independent country under the PAIGC government on September 10, while the future of Cape Verde would be settled in a referendum.
Mario Soares then turned his attention to the settlement in Mozambique.
However, after talks with Samora Machel in Dar es Salaam in mid-August, Soares changed course.
On September 7, the Portuguese publicized an agreement to form a provisional government that would govern during a transition period, with full independence set for June 25, 1975.
FRELIMO would assume the dominant role in the provisional government, paving the way for single-party rule after the proclamation of independence in 1975.
Negotiations for the independence of Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique took place in record time after an initial delay.
The main reason behind the quick transfers of power was the stance of the MFA Coordinating Committee, which favored rapid decolonization.
Although General Spinola claimed the Soviets wanted to derail the process, the opposite was, in fact, the case.
Moscow viewed developments in Portugal through the lens of PCP priorities and thus urged accommodation between liberation movements and the provisional government.
Their strategy did not align with that of the independence leaders, and thus the Soviets had limited influence over the negotiating process.
The early stage of decolonization conveyed important lessons to the leadership of the liberation movements.
The first lesson was that Lisbon was indeed willing to negotiate quick transfers of power, especially after Vasco Gongalves became the prime minister.
The one obstacle to speedy decolonization was General Anténio de Spinola.
He remained unhappy with the outcome of the talks, and in September, he announced that he was taking charge of the transition in Angola personally and called on the “silent majority” to support his policies.
On September 30, after two days of unrest in the capital, Spinola resigned.
His replacement, General Costa Gomes, announced the government would immediately proceed with decolonization in Angola.
The liberation movements believed the threat to resume hostilities sped up the negotiating process and excluded potential local rivals.
Shortly after the coup in Lisbon, all three appealed to regional and international donors to reinforce their bids for a dominant position in Angola.
These rivalries would make a peaceful transition increasingly challenging to achieve, but a violent outcome was neither predetermined nor predictable from the perspective of 1974.
The Search for Unity in Angola, April 1974-January 1975 The revolution in Portugal led to new attempts to unite the Angolan nationalist movement.
In July 1974, Agostino Neto, Holden Roberto, and Jonas Savimbi met in Bukavu, Zaire, and pledged to act as a common front in negotiations with the Portuguese.
Marien Ngouabi of Congo-Brazzaville, Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, Joseph-Désiré Mobutu of Zaire, and Tanzania’s Julius Nyerere.
Kaunda favored Savimbi’s UNITA and was also sheltering Daniel Chipenda and his Eastern Revolt faction in Zambia.
Mobutu had been a long-time supporter of Holden Roberto, and soon after the revolution in Portugal, he began to build up the FNLA’s military wing with the support of Chinese instructors.
Ngouabi harbored sympathies for Active Revolt, an MPLA splinter group based in Brazzaville and led by the MPLA’s former president, Mario Pinto de Andrade, and his older brother Joaquim.
Both Mobutu and Ngouabi also had their eyes on the oil-rich Cabinda enclave and courted the leaders of FLEC, the Cabindan separatist movement.
Such a constellation of conflicting interests would not bode well for unity.
Neto’s top priority was to restore Soviet support, which had been suspended in early 1974 due to his conflict with Chipenda.
We do not know the exact wording of the Soviet response, but Moscow did give a modicum of reassurance.
When Neto spoke to the Soviet ambassador to Brazzaville Evgenii Afanasenko on June 8, he expressed gratitude for the Soviets’ response and their trust in him personally.
The International Department was still committed to putting pressure on Neto to reconcile with Chipenda before resuming support.
In a meeting with the Soviet ambassador in Zambia Dmitrii Belokolos on May 6, Chipenda argued that Neto’s unwillingness to compromise with the opposition had already alienated Kaunda and Nyerere.
The MPLA Congress finally opened near Lusaka on August 12, but it failed to achieve unity.
During the first week, the conflict became apparent—members loyal to Agostinho Neto insisted the delegates confirm him as the MPLA’s president.
When one of Chipenda’s supporters openly proclaimed his loyalty to the FNLA, Neto and his followers withdrew from the meeting and announced they would hold their own congress inside Angola.
The Zambian authorities objected, warning Neto they would “lock the border” if he decided to go forward with the plan.
Then, Kaunda, Ngouabi, and Nyerere tried to broker an agreement between Neto and Chipenda.
On September 3, Neto reached a compromise, appointing himself as president and Chipenda and Mario de Andrade as vice-presidents in the new Central Committee.
In fact, in September, Chipenda moved to Kinshasa (formerly Léopoldville), where he formed a tentative alliance with Holden Roberto.
In late September, Neto held a new regional conference in southeast Angola.
One of Neto’s regular contacts in Brazzaville was Boris Putilin, aGRU officer who had arrived in the country a year earlier to liaise with the MPLA’ leadership.
As Putilin told a Polish diplomat, Chipenda’s group was “compromised” once they started to cooperate with the FNLA and Mobutu.
Another major factor in the change in Soviet attitudes was the MFA’s support for Neto.
In July, the MFA Coordinating Committee appointed one of their own, Admiral Anténio Alva Rosa Coutinho, as the new governor-general of Angola.
Coutinho liked the MPLA for their explicitly nonracist ideology and believed they enjoyed broad support among the Angolan bureaucracy and intelligentsia.
While enjoying Coutinho’s support on the ground in Angola, Neto also presented himself as the MFA’s preferred partner during the transition.
In conversations with Manchkha, Urnov, and Soviet ambassador Sergei Slipchenko in Dar es Salaam in July, Neto flaunted his backchannel communications with Mario Soares and close contacts with the Portuguese Communists.
The newly released documents reveal that Neto claimed to have struck a secret deal with the MFA that guaranteed him wide-ranging Portuguese support on the ground in Angola during the transition.
On December 1, 1974, Neto met ambassador Slipchenko for lunch in Dar es Salaam.
In a striking exchange, Neto revealed that the MPLA and MFA had struck a secret agreement to coordinate their policies and prevent the FNLA from coming to power in talks with the Portuguese delegation in Algeria.
The president of Congo-Brazzaville, Marien Ngouabi, was also apparently on board with the plan.
In late December, MPLA defense minister Iko Carreira and Pedro van Dunem arrived in Moscow for talks.
According to Carreira, the MPLA had entered into an alliance with the MFA, but the FNLA held a much stronger military position and could seize power by force.
The implication was that to overcome the MPLA’s vulnerability, Soviet assistance was crucial.
In late September 1974, the Soviet journalist Oleg Ignatev visited Luanda.
In his report, he emphasized that Holden Roberto had been building up his armed forces, and 3,000 of his soldiers had already entered northern Angola.
The timing reveals the decision to resume aid to the MPLA was on the Soviet agenda if not fully finalized by that point.
In late January 1975, Afanasenko spoke to Ngouabi again, seeking approval.
Having received Ngouabi’s approval, Afanasenko could inform the MPLA about the resumption of Soviet military assistance.
On January 30, 1975, Afanasenko relayed to José Eduardo dos Santos the Soviet decision to deliver weapons and war matériel to the MPLA via Congo-Brazzaville without charge.
Around twenty to thirty underwent a crash training course at the famous “Vystrel” Higher Officer courses, while another approximately two hundred men would be dispatched to Perevalnoe in Soviet Crimea.
These men would constitute the so-called Ninth Brigade of the FAPLA, who later played an important role in countering FNLA attacks on Luanda.
Georgii Kornienko, then the head of the Africa desk at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, recalled that the CC CPSU Politburo initially only agreed to provide “political and some material support for the MPLA” but refused to become militarily entangled in Angola.
However, “only a few days later,” Kornienko recalled, the International Department drafted a resolution to give the MPLA a limited number of weapons.
Kornienko was worried that the escalation of support could jeopardize ongoing arms limitation talks with the United States and tried to persuade the foreign minister Andrei Gromyko not to endorse the resolution.
Gromyko still signed, grudgingly, since support for the liberation movements was the realm of Boris Ponomarey, the head of the International Department.
By the end of January 1975, the Soviets had recommitted to Agostinho Neto’s MPLA for three main reasons.
The Soviets felt that Mobutu represented United States imperialism and thus Moscow saw Chipenda’s move as a betrayal.
In contrast, Neto emerged as the key partner for negotiations with the Portuguese.
As the new documents reveal, Neto claimed he enjoyed a special clandestine relationship with the MFA, which would ensure a quick transition to MPLA control in Angola.
Only a military challenge by the FNLA, backed by Zaire and the United States, could prevent such an outcome.
Neto’s interpretation of events matched that of the Soviets, who saw developments in Angola and Portugal through an ideological lens.
Still, it took Moscow nine months to renew military support for the MPLA, testifying to ongoing distrust of Neto and possibly an unwillingness to damage the détente with the United States.
However, the MPLA and the Soviets still believed the transition to independence could be peaceful.
That perception would change in the course of the following six months.
From Urban Violence to Civil War, January-July 1975 On January 15, the Portuguese government, Agostinho Neto, Jonas Savimbi, and Holden Roberto signed the Alvor Agreement outlining the transition to independence in Angola.
The three organizations would form a transitional government, which would be run jointly by the Portuguese high commissioner and a three-person presidential council.
Elections would be held in October with de jure independence to follow on November 11, 1975.
The agreement also called for the creation ofa mixed military force to compensate for the withdrawal of Portuguese troops.
However, the Alvor Agreement did not limit the number of troops the liberation movements were allowed to maintain outside the joint military force.
In addition, MPLA, FNLA and UNITA were allowed to maintain their separate barracks and installations in the city.
Asa result, the MPLA and FNLA continued to increase their number of loyal soldiers in Luanda.
In private conversations with the Cubans, Neto expressed dissatisfaction with the Alvor Agreement and conceded that he accepted power-sharing due to the “growing influence of the FNLA and UNITA in Angola.
The violence on the streets of Luanda had been festering since November 1974.
In the city, the FNLA had been amassing stocks of weapons, which could be easily transported from Zaire via northern Angola, and assembling men.
Admiral Rosa Coutinho, Agostinho Neto, Francisco da Costa Gomes, Holden Roberto , Jonas Savimbi and Mario Soares.
Meanwhile, the MPLA established its headquarters in the city, with crowds cheering when Neto’s right-hand man Lucio Lara arrived in the capital on November 8.
Shortly afterward, Tom Killoran, the United States consul general in Luanda, reported the first violent outburst in the city, which left fifty dead and a hundred wounded.
On January 25, the FNLA kidnapped and assaulted the deputy director ofa local radio station, whom they believed was an MPLA sympathizer.
To showcase support for Neto in anticipation of his return, the MPLA invited representatives of the socialist countries to visit Luanda.
The head of the Soviet delegation was Aleksandr Dzasokhov, the general secretary of the Soviet Solidarity Committee.
Although the available records do not tell us about the contents of Neto’s talks with Dzasokhov, in meetings with representatives of the socialist countries around the same time, the MPLA president highlighted the FNLA’s military dominance.
As the Polish ambassador to Zaire, Lucjan Wolniewicz, reported to Warsaw after visiting Luanda at the same time as Dzasokhov, the MPLA leadership argued that the FNLA had already smuggled well-trained guerrilla units into Luanda and would liquidate their competition unless they encountered a resolute response.
The MPLA thus required weapons, cash, and means of transportation to safeguard the coastline and move arms from Cabinda and Congo-Brazzaville to Luanda.
Neto also urged the socialist countries to open consulates in Luanda for ease of communications.
According to a report from March 21, the KGB reported that the FNLA continued to strengthen its military in the capital, with “Air Zaire” delivering large arms shipments to Angola.
While Holden Roberto and the FNLA provided an explicit and increasingly violent challenge to the MPLA in Luanda, Jonas Savimbi’s endgame was less clear.
Although Savimbi had been building support in Ovimbundu-dominated southeast Angola since the late 1960s, UNITA had only 1,500 trained soldiers in 1974.
In July, the Paris-based magazine Afrique-Asie published documents revealing UNITA had collaborated with the Portuguese military to wipe out the MPLA in southeast Angola in 1972.
Although Savimbi denounced these as forgeries, the documents were genuine, most likely leaked by MPLA supporters in the Portuguese military.
New documents reveal that in January 1975, Savimbi approached President Marien Ngouabi and warned that Zaire had drafted a plan to intervene militarily in Angola, which would start with Chipenda’s followers attacking Neto’s in Luanda.
Although we do not know if Mobutu actually entertained any such plans at that point, the message was characteristic of Savimbi’s balancing act.
Ngouabi favored an MPLA-UNITA alliance, not least because the idea was appealing to Joaquim Pinto de Andrade, the leader of the MPLA’s Active Revolt faction, who was close to Brazzaville.
In the meantime, Savimbi’s backchannel communications might have reinforced the specter of a possible showdown between the MPLA and FNLA in Luanda.
Neto’s return to Luanda and talk of a Zairean intervention led to a more aggressive MPLA strategy to build up its presence in the capital.
They organized “popular power” and “neighborhood” committees consisting of supporters in the suburbs of Luanda.
In February, the MPLA also launched a military operation to dislodge Chipenda’s faction from the capital.
In that particular incident, FNLA patrols stopped trucks allegedly carrying MPLA soldiers and civilians on the road from Luanda to Caxito.
Despite the rising violence, MPLA leaders believed that with the arrival of Soviet arms, they could avoid a full-blown civil war.
During a conversation with the Soviet chargé d’affaires in Brazzaville on April 16, 1975, Iko Carreira and José Eduardo dos Santos shared that the timely arrival of Soviet weapons on March 18 had allowed the MPLA to counter the FNLA’s attempts to surround their barracks in Luanda.
The pair argued that a military confrontation with the FNLA was probably “inevitable,” but open civil war would not begin, at least until the declaration of independence on November 11.
Ina report from March 28, Uvarov argued that the Alvor Agreement did little to resolve disagreements among the competing nationalist organizations because of its very distinctive approaches to Angola’s future.
The FNLA was a proxy for the United States, which was trying to establish several areas as “buffers” against the spread of the MPLA’s “communist” ideas and influence.
The Portuguese, in general, supported the MPLA because they stood no chance of having any economic influence in Angola if the FNLA came to power.
The Portuguese military presence also contributed to peace in the country, and it was unlikely that significant fighting between the MPLA and FNLA would occur before elections in October 1975.
These predictions of a relatively peaceful transition would soon change.
On the eve of Labor Day celebrations, a violent conflict between the supporters of the MPLA and FNLA once again erupted in Luanda.
On April 28, heavy mortar and machine-gun fire started at night in the city’s poverty-stricken areas.
The following day, fighting spread into the European sector when MPLA forces launched an attack on the headquarters of the Angolan militia, which the FNLA had recently occupied.
The fighting caused multiple casualties and appeals for blood donors were issued over the radio.
Tom Killoran reported to Kissinger that violence had been instigated by the MPLA, who, as rumor had it, wanted to start a “bloodbath” during the May Day parade, which would give them an excuse for a coup d’état.
The experience of violence in Luanda seemed to bea key turning point for the Soviets.
As they arrived, an airport clerk informed them that all rallies had been canceled due to the escalation of violence.
They spent the night on the floor of their hotel, keeping away from the windows to avoid stray bullets.
The following morning, they spoke to Agostinho Neto, who informed them that armed action was the only way forward because of the FNLA’s recurrent provocations.
Back in Moscow, the Soviet delegation submitted a lengthy report, arguing that armed conflict was inevitable, especially after the departure of the Portuguese.
On June 12, another load of arms for the MPLA docked at Pointe-Noire aboard the Soviet trawler Captain Anistratenko.
As Petr Manchkha argued in a closed session of the Soviet Solidarity Committee on June 5, 1975, events in Angola were part of a “serious international imperialist conspiracy” that involved “imperialist circles” striking out against the Soviet Union in Africa after their defeat in Vietnam and Cambodia.
The Soviet Union had invested “enormous material resources” in the MPLA, he continued, and these should not have been expended in vain.
Hailed as the “Summit of Hope,” this represented a last-ditch attempt to avoid a civil war.
Although all sides reiterated their support for the provisional government and the Alvor Agreement, the peace did not last.
A few weeks later, fighting in northern Angola resumed with new intensity, and the country descended into a full-blown civil war.
In the nearest future, it will receive larger quantities of weapons and means of transport.
This internal communiqué was a strong message of support for the MPLA and expressed a commitment to escalate assistance.
Shortly afterward, Poland promised to provide 5 million zloty in equipment.
In Brazzaville, ambassador Afanasenko ramped up pressure on the Congolese government to support the logistics of the Soviet arms deliveries.
In January, he had received confirmation from President Ngouabi that the Congolese authorities would facilitate the unloading of weapons and matériel for the MPLA at Pointe-Noire.
In an emotional exchange with Afanasenko on June 14, Ngouabi confirmed he had a difficult relationship with Neto, who maintained “no contact” with Brazzaville and instead criticized the Congolese authorities for sheltering Joaquim Pinto de Andrade, the leader of the MPLA’s Active Revolt faction.
Moscow made it clear that the MPLA had to sort out relations with Brazzaville to ensure uninterrupted supplies.
However, there is no direct evidence that the Soviets asked the Cubans to intervene at that point, even though it is not inconceivable that Moscow and Havana both applied backchannel pressure on Brazzaville.
However, they still refused to allow supplies to pass via Cabinda, and it would take the Cubans’ intervention to convince Ngouabi to change his mind.
The Soviet assessment of outcomes in Angola changed dramatically between January and June 1975.
In the aftermath of the Alvor Agreement, Moscow believed the delivery of Soviet arms would enable the MPLA to maintain an equilibrium with the FNLA and that relative peace was likely before the final withdrawal of Portuguese troops on November 11.
However, the escalation of violence in Luanda in late April showed that the Portuguese army would not intervene to keep the peace.
As we now know, the Soviets dispatched at least two shiploads of weapons to Pointe-Noire before the end of June, which allowed the MPLA to gain dominance in Luanda.
By June, the Soviets had come to believe that events in Angola were part of a major international conspiracy, backed by the United States, and increased their military support to prevent a “Zairean scenario” in Angola, whilst still hoping for a negotiated solution.
However, it was actually not until July 1975 that Washington intervened directly to support the FNLA via Zaire.
From Civil War to Cold War Hot Spot, July-November 1975 Washington did not pay much attention to Angola until early 1975.
Although Henry Kissinger retained a decisive role in the White House under Nixon’s successor Gerald Ford, he was busy dealing with the crisis in South-East Asia as North Vietnamese troops overran Saigon in April.
However, the United States did not extend any additional military support to the FNLA or Zaire.
Kissinger started to pay more attention to Angola in May when the Zambians and the Chinese lobbied Washington for greater involvement.
On June 15, the Zairean daily Elima accused the United States of involvement in a coup against Mobutu, and United States ambassador Deane Hinton was ordered to leave the country.
To Kissinger, Mobutu’s action showed that United States allies were losing faith following the Vietnam debacle.
The National Security Council remained split about the wisdom of greater United States support for the FNLA because some feared international criticism and doubted Roberto’s potential as a military leader.
In August, Ford approved another $11 million, and he signed off on another $7 million in November.
To oversee the operation, the CIA hastily compiled an Angola Task Force headed by John Stockwell.
As he later recalled, by early August, Mobutu’s army had transferred “enough arms for two infantry battalions” as well as nine armored cars to the FNLA base at Ambriz, only seventy miles north of Luanda.
The escalation of United States involvement in Angola paralleled South A frica’s.
South Africa was deeply concerned about the security of South West Africa , which could potentially be attacked by the guerrillas of the South West African People’s Organization from Angola if the MPLA came to power.
Another step in the escalation of Pretoria’s involvement occurred in early August, when the SADF seized control of the Pretoria-funded Calueque Dam and the Ruacana hydroelectric installations across the Angola-Namibia border, citing security concerns.
The FAPLA had managed to stop the FNLA’s offensive and “blockade” them in northern Angola.
They also defeated the FNLA’s detachments who had landed to the south of Luanda at Novo Redondo and Port Amboim.
In fact, according to Neto, the USA had decreased their support for Roberto in favor of Savimbi.
In Moscow, Carreira and Dunem painted a fairly optimistic about the military situation.
The MPLA managed to counter the FNLA advance on Luanda in July, and they hoped to push the FNLA back from the coastal areas and the northern provinces with Soviet assistance.
The Soviets offered additional military assistance, while Warsaw agreed to provide uniforms, means of communication, and medicine.
First, Fidel Castro might have been unwilling to jeopardize the chance of a rapprochement with the United States.
Further, Cuba’s relations with the MPLA had been complicated since the 1960s, and Castro might have felt there was no need for intervention.
In early August, the head of the Cuban Décima Direccién , Diaz Argiielles, led a mission to Luanda for talks with Neto.
The Congolese authorities also finally granted permission to transport weapons and supplies via Cabinda after talks between Marien Ngouabi and Fidel Castro in mid-September.
The newly released documents do not shed any further light on communications between Moscow and Havana at this point.
However, as we will see, it is clear there were no Cuban troops in Angola before November, only military instructors.
Despite the increase in support, the MPLA’s fortunes on the battlefield deteriorated throughout September.
Much of the fighting in northern Angola focused on Caxito, a small town located only forty-two miles north of Luanda.
Boris Putilin recalled that the MPLA leadership was generally unhappy with the extent of Soviet assistance.
Then, on October 14, South Africa initiated a direct invasion of Angola from Pretoria-controlled South West Africa , codenamed Operation Savannah.
Fighting in Angola, 1975 1,000 men, including Daniel Chipenda’s FNLA and so-called flechas, Angolan soldiers who had fought with the Portuguese during the anticolonial wars.
The group was initially led by a small group of white South African officers.
On October 28, Zulu captured Mogamedes , a major port in southern Angola and pushed northwards towards the key coastal towns of Benguela and Lobito in a race towards the capital—Luanda.
We still do not have a complete picture of the role the United States played in Pretoria’s decision to intervene.
Kissinger always denied any knowledge of the intervention, but many early commentators believed he pushed for it via backchannel communications with Pretoria.
On September 25, Moscow agreed to send additional arms, including five BM-21s “Grad,” to Luanda by November 11.
However, the deterioration of the military situation led to the Soviet decision to airlift the BM-21s directly to Brazzaville.
On November 2, Soviet AN-22 “Antei” cargo planes landed in Brazzaville with the weapons on board.
The Soviets also dispatched a group of weapons experts to Brazzaville to train the FAPLA to operate the surface-to-air Strela-2 in the case of bombing raids on Luanda.
In fact, Moscow was still hoping for a last-minute accommodation among the The Soviets did not want to ramp up its intervention before three nationalist movements before November 11.
However, when he landed in Brazzaville around November 1, he received new instructions.
As late as November 3, 1975, Nyerere urged Ambassador Slipchenko to try to persuade the MPLA to include rival nationalist movements in the new government.
Given such efforts at last-minute accommodation, it makes sense that the Soviets would use recognition as a tactic to put pressure on the MPLA to negotiate.
The FNLA had engaged in torture, rape, and even “acts of cannibalism” in Luanda, argued Teixeira, and thus a “return to the past” was not possible.
It was also apparent that many African countries favored the MPLA, especially after Pretoria’s intervention.
For example, Brazzaville pressed the Soviets not to push for accommodation.
Neto recognized that the Soviet decision to unilaterally recognize the MPLA as the government of Angola on November 11 was an unmistakable sign of its commitment.
On November 2, Nazhestkin flew to a besieged Luanda with new instructions.
He, alongside Oleg Ignatev and Igor Uvarov, then drove to Neto’s residence to deliver the message.
The Cubans and other friends are helping us, but it was very difficult without the Soviet Union.
We do not know the exact wording of the message, but according to Nazhestkin, Neto expected the Soviets to work with the Cubans to step up military support.
The following day, Nazhestkin met with the head of the Cuban mission in Luanda.
The Cubans, recalled Nazhestkin, told them that they were waiting for a special message from Havana about assistance to the MPLA and said that a battalion of Cuban Special Forces had already been dispatched to Luanda.
On October 28, the South African Zulu force overran Mocgdmedes and was racing toward Benguela and Lobito, two major ports on the Atlantic coast.
On November 2, the FAPLA and around forty Cuban instructors ambushed the advancing South African column with heavy artillery fire at the town of Catengue on the way to Benguela.
After a grueling battle, FAPLA and the Cubans retreated from Benguela and Lobito.
Meanwhile, Holden Roberto’s FNLA also intensified attacks against Quifangondo on the outskirts of Luanda.
Gleijeses has argued that Fidel Castro decided to dispatch regular Cuban troops to Angola, launching Operation Carlota on November 4.
FAPLA and the Cuban instructors had already discussed the need for troops, and after Catengue, Diaz Argiielles asked for reinforcements.
The first battalion of elite Special Forces would fly directly to Luanda, and an artillery regiment would follow by boat.
Newly available records of conversations between Fidel Castro and the Soviet ambassador to Cuba Nikita Tolubeev confirm Gleijeses’s timeline.
On November 3, Tolubeev informed Castro about the Soviet decision to provide unilateral recognition of the MPLA as the government of Angola on November 11.
He also expressed concern that FAPLA was still weak and lacking in military experience.
Asa result, Angolan soldiers often abandoned their positions, leaving the Cubans alone on the battlefield.
What Castro referred to was most likely the battle over Catengue (the reference to Cabinda must have been a mistake in the document), where the Cubans had suffered their first casualties.
Then, on November 5, Castro informed Tolubeev about the decision to dispatch regular troops—the start of Operation Carlota.
The South African troops had advanced almost “halfway” between Namibia and Luanda and taken over many cities and ports.
To further explain the decision, Castro argued that unlike the Zaireans, the South African force was much more effective.
Two days later, Castro informed Tolubeev that the Cubans had already departed for Angola the previous day and that he wanted to dispatch another 1,200 troops in November—December.
He suggested the Soviet Union should supply BM-21s and once again expressed the hope that there would be cooperation.
Georgii Kornienko recalled that he and other Soviet leaders found out about Castro’s decision by chance when a Soviet ambassador requested landing rights in Conakry.
Andropoy and Grechko drafted an urgent letter to Castro in an attempt to dissuade him, but it was too late.
Indeed, Castro informed Tolubeev of his decision on November 5, a day after the first plane with Cuban Special Forces onboard had departed from Havana for Luanda.
The new records show that the Soviets undoubtedly preferred an “African solution” to the Angolan conflict.
On November 8, the Soviet ambassador to Guinea-Bissau, Viacheslav Semenov, informed Luis Cabral that Moscow had decided to recognize the MPLA as the official government of Angola.
The newly released documents thus resolve several questions about the buildup of Cuban troops and Soviet-Cuban cooperation.
It seems the Soviets were in the driver’s seat in the first six months of 1975.
Only in August did Castro start pushing the Soviets to coordinate military assistance.
Although the Soviets and Cubans exchanged opinions and shared information on developments in Angola throughout 1975, there is no evidence that military cooperation took place before November, when Castro decided to dispatch regular troops without asking the Soviets.
The decision was made after Moscow had agreed to extend official diplomatic recognition to the MPLA on November 11 and increased military support.
Castro would likely have launched Operation Carlota either way, but the Soviet decision to recognize the MPLA might have been a contributing factor.
After the official declaration on November 11, 1975, the numbers of Cuban troops in Angola increased quickly.
The Soviet-Cuban Intervention in Angola and Its Consequences The first urgent task was the defense of Luanda in the run-up to the declaration of independence.
On November 7, the Cuban ship La Plata transported six Soviet BM-21s from Pointe-Noire to Luanda.
With only a few days to go before official independence, FAPLA and the Cubans prepared to defend the city against Holden Roberto’s forces, stationed only a few dozen kilometers north of Luanda.
Eager to reach Luanda in one last push before the Portuguese withdrawal—scheduled for the following day—Roberto took charge.
As the new black-and-white Angolan flag was placed on the mast and raised, soldiers started firing rounds of ammunition into the night sky.
Celebrations continued the fol25 Ambassador A fanasenko and lowing day with a military parade and speeches.
Once the MPLA was officially the government of Angola, the Soviet-Cuban operation began in earnest.
Cooperation between the Soviet instructors and the Cuban troops was very close, and relations were amicable.
On November 16, a group of Soviet instructors, which had increased in size due to reinforcements from Moscow, flew to Luanda.
The Soviet instructors set up mini learning centers at the Luanda airport to provide weapons training to FAPLA soldiers.
Grigorovich also recalled that IL-62s started arriving almost every night at the end of December, with Cuban airhostesses and Cuban soldiers in full military gear.
The story of how FAPLA and the Cubans managed to halt the advance of the South African troops is well known.
The Cubans managed to stop South Africa’s advance toward Port Amboim by blowing up the bridge over the Queve River.
Then, Zulu turned eastwards to find an alternative route toward Luanda, but Cuban and FAPLA troops managed to hold them off around the town of Quibala.
In the following weeks, the bulk of the Cuban troops (numbering 1,254 overall) arrived in Luanda.
By the end of 1974, FAPLA and the Cubans managed to stop South Africa’s advance.
Washington initially responded to South Africa’s defeats by escalating support.
Kissinger believed that the United States could still reverse the losses if they could match the Cuban effort and bring allies on board.
However, his plans were cut short on December 19 when United States Congress refused to approve any additional funding for a covert operation in Angola.
Kissinger then approached the Shah of Iran, the Saudi Arabian government, and Egyptian president Anwar Sadat to provide additional funds for Zaire.
The central problem was that there could be no substitute for South Africa, yet association with Pretoria became a significant problem, as news of direct SADF involvement hit the press.
The Soviets believed that Kissinger was using Angola as an excuse to roll détente back.
After all, détente had proceeded apace in the early 1970s, despite rivalry in the Middle East, Chile, and elsewhere.
As Boris Ponomarev, the head of the International Department, told Anatolii Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the United States, détente did not prevent the United States from consolidating its positions in Egypt and overthrowing a legitimate ‘55 Brezhnev felt similarly.
The MPLA subscribed to gender equality and thus both men and women were often portrayed as fighters in the struggle for national liberation.
Moscow signed a military protocol in which the Soviets pledged to transport 35 million rubles worth of weapons directly to the Cubans in Angola.
Eleven years of anticolonial wars led to the rise of dominant armed movements, which claimed to represent the people of Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique.
The MPLA also claimed to represent the nation but did not acquire the equivalent preponderance in Angola.
At its outset, the Angolan Civil War was a complex, regional African conflict with multiple stakeholders.
The new documents recreate Soviet views on the decolonization of the Portuguese Empire.
The Soviets took a somewhat “Portugal-centric” view of decolonization, relying on the PCP and left-wing members of the MFA to push for rapid transfers of power in the colonies.
As seen from Moscow, events in Portugal and the colonies were closely linked, and they believed that strengthening the left wing within the provisional government would endow it with greater power and result in success for the liberation movements.
We already knew that the MFA favored the MPLA during negotiations, but new documents show that Neto harnessed his unique relationship with the MFA and their “clandestine agreements” to convince the Soviets to resume military assistance.
Neto also perpetuated a conspiratorial version of events in Angola, arguing that the FNLA was a puppet for Zaire and the United States.
The Soviet decision to restart military assistance in January 1975 was thus meant to restore military parity between the MPLA and its rivals, putting it in a position of dominance, given MFA support.
We also know now that the Soviet weapons that first arrived in Luanda in March of that year made it possible to maintain the balance of military force in Luanda and keep the FNLA at bay.
However, the strategy faltered when it became clear that the Portuguese army could not keep the peace in Angola.
The Labor Day violence was a critical turning point, convincing the Soviets that the Portuguese were incapable of preventing a civil war before independence.
Moscow thus stepped up their commitment to the MPLA to avoid a “Zairean scenario” in Angola before the CIA launched its operation to supply the FNLA via Zaire in July.
The new documents also resolve some key questions about Soviet relations with Cuba.
Although we still do not have access to the majority of Soviet-Cuban discussions, it is clear that Moscow fundamentally wanted an “African solution” in Angola.
The Soviets rested their hopes on Soviet-trained FAPLA members and, as we know, preferred that the MPLA’s African allies, like the PAIGC, intervene to help defend Luanda.
They held off until November 3 to unilaterally recognize the MPLA government, perhaps leaving the door open for a last-minute negotiated solution.
On November 4, Castro decisively seized the initiative with the introduction of Cuban troops.
With the support of Soviet weapons and Cuban troops, the FAPLA managed to hold onto Luanda and subsequently roll back the South African invasion.
By 1976, the lines had been drawn and the stage set for another round of violence that would last, intermittently, until Jonas Savimbi’s death in 2002.
Conclusion HE COLD WAR HAD a profound impact on the course, strategies, and outcomes of anticolonial movements in Portuguese Africa.
The global competition over the meaning of modernity was at the core of the projects pursued by African revolutionaries.
This was partly due to the perceived failure of “African socialism” in countries such as Ghana or Guinea and partly following outbreaks of ethno-nationalism that the liberation movements experienced during their struggle for independence.
In the context of societies that were often highly diverse and frequently divided, socialism served as a unifying, nation-building framework.
The African revolutionaries who led the MPLA, FRELIMO, and the PAIGC thus favored socialist-inspired modernization for fundamentally internal reasons, but ideological competition provided both the ideational framework and served as a key source of external legitimacy.
The contacts forged during the years of armed struggle were important, too.
While only a small minority of African nationalist leaders traveled to the socialist countries in the 1950s, the onset of military campaigns led to an expansion of exchanges and interactions, as increasing numbers of Africans came to the USSR, mainly as students.
The majority of rank-and-file men traveled to the Soviet Union, China, Cuba, and state socialist Eastern Europe for military training.
Although Africans’ experiences in socialist countries were not uniform, they were often impressed by what they saw.
While China and Cuba provided inspiration due to the perceived dynamism of their revolutions, the Soviet Union represented a kind of advanced technological modernity embodied in its military technology.
Although China, Cuba, and the Eastern European countries could provide weapons, only the Soviet Union could contribute the kind of arms required to change the outcomes of war.
In the context of the Vietnam War, Soviet military technology often signified liberation from colonial rule.
The Cold War also shaped the diplomatic strategies pursued by African revolutionaries.
The fundamental reality facing African nationalists was the refusal of the Portuguese to proceed toward self-government.
By the early 1960s, it had become clear that whichever political force could engage in armed struggle against the Portuguese would acquire the legitimacy to represent “the nation” on both domestic and international levels.
From the start, the MPLA, FRELIMO, and PAIGC all faced internal rivals that claimed leadership of the liberation movement.
The ability to harness international support and legitimacy thus became crucial to overcoming domestic competitors.
In the context of the Cold War, the Soviet Union and the socialist countries became key to sustaining armed struggle.
This book has shown how African revolutionaries from the Portuguese colonies used diplomacy to initiate and increase Soviet support and deny similar assistance to their rivals.
The MPLA, FRELIMO, and the PAIGC all leveraged the Cold War, but their strategies differed.
In Guinea-Bissau, Amilcar Cabral used personal diplomacy to forge close relations with his foreign patrons.
In the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, Cabral managed to establish trust with his interlocutors, based on their shared view of colonialism and imperialism.
In the guerrilla campaign, Cabral followed a cautious military strategy that relied upon the receipt of advanced military technology from the Soviet Union to put pressure on the Portuguese.
This book shows that the Cubans disputed this strategy much more persistently than previously known and demonstrates that Soviets and Czechoslovak advisers were closely involved in such discussions.
In the end, Cabral managed to maintain his line of support from the Soviets and maintain his independence.
According to PAIGC estimates, total Soviet aid before independence in 1974 amounted to thirty million U.S dollars.
Once the PAIGC received the Strela missile complex from the Soviet Union, the Portuguese started to lose their military advantage.
After the Carnation Revolution therefore, there was little that the Portuguese could do but negotiate a speedy transfer of power to the PAIGC in Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde.
After Guinea-Bissau gained independence in 1974, the PAIGC government pursued a pragmatic foreign policy, encouraging diverse sources of assistance to sponsor a modest program of import-substitution industrialization.
According to Soviet estimates, after 1974, the USSR became the most significant foreign aid donor to Guinea-Bissau.
The majority of the officer corps was trained in the USSR and equipped with Soviet weapons.
However, Cabral’s vision of unity for Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde did not last.
On November 14, 1980, Joao Bernardo Vieira toppled Luis Cabral’s government, citing grievances over the dominance of Cape Verdeans at the highest level of government.
The coup put an end to the formal union of Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau, splitting the PAIGC into two national branches.
Joao Vieira’s government proceeded to accept a structural adjustment program from the IMF and greatly expanded the cultivation of cashews for export.
In 1985, the Soviets lost the right to fish in Guinea-Bissau’s waters because the government complained about the unfair conditions governing its joint venture, the Estrela do Mar.
However, Soviet military cooperation with Guinea-Bissau continued right up to the collapse of the USSR in 1991.
While Cabral relied on personal connections, FRELIMO leadership leveraged the Sino-Soviet split.
In East Africa and especially Tanzania, the “China factor” was crucial for the Soviets because Beijing remained influential, even throughout the Cultural Revolution.
Nevertheless, FRELIMO managed to secure Soviet support, first through personal contacts and then by leveraging their relations with Beijing.
The strategic significance of Mozambique for the struggle in South Africa mattered, too, especially for the GRU and the Soviet military.
Only after the consolidation of leadership around Samora Machel and what they regarded as “progress” in military operations did Moscow increase assistance to FRELIMO and dispatch new weapons systems.
In Mozambique, too, the Portuguese had little option but to transfer power to FRELIMO after a brief transition period.
Similar patterns emerged in Soviet relations with FRELIMO after independence.
Out of 1.184 million rubles in credits provided to Mozambique between 1975 and 1987, almost half accounted for military equipment.
In one of the most controversial acts of his entire career, on March 16, 1984, Samora Machel signed the Nkomati Accord with South Africa.
By 1985, FRELIMO also abandoned “Marxism-Leninism” as its official ideology and proceeded toward market reforms.
On October 19, 1986, Machel’s Tu-34 plane, operated by a Soviet pilot, crashed en route from Mbala, Zambia, to Maputo, killing the president.
The civil war in Mozambique continued intermittently until a peace agreement was signed in 1992.
The Soviet relationship with Agostinho Neto was similarly complex because he never established close relations with the International Department cadres or the Soviet military.
The Soviets believed the MPLA under Neto was not representative of rank-and-file members and thus lacked the support required to expand military operations.
Thus, the Soviet bureaucratic and military elite was consistently critical of Neto’s military and political strategy, and those opposed to him often found a sympathetic ear among the Soviets.
Once again, Neto leveraged his contacts with the PCP and the left wing of the MFA to obtain a commitment of military assistance from Moscow.
As this book has shown, Soviet military assistance was decisive in the MPLA’s battle for the control of Luanda in 1975.
This book also confirms that the Soviets preferred an “African solution” to the Angolan problem.
Although we still do not know the full extent of Soviet plans for Angola after the declaration of independence on November 11, it would likely have been much more limited without Cuba’s involvement.
The most immediate was the rapid expansion of the Soviet commitment to Angola.
By 1983, Pretoria launched a massive military invasion of southwestern Angola.
We do not know if the MPLA would have been able to stay in power without the support of Cuban troops and the influx of Soviet arms.
While the Cold War was winding down by the late 1980s, it was arguably the shift in the balance of power following the successful Cuban defense at Cuito Cuanavale in 1987 that pushed Pretoria to agree to peace talks.
The Soviet-Cuban involvement in Angola thus fundamentally shaped the Cold War endgame in southern Africa.
While “successes” in Angola and elsewhere in the Third World were events driven by regional and local factors, many Soviet cadres interpreted these as signs of United States structural weakness.
In December 1979, the Politburo authorized the deployment of Soviet troops to Afghanistan to install a government friendly to Moscow.
These interventions were all meant to be temporary measures, yet Moscow was inevitably pulled into local power struggles with unpredictable results.
This book has shown that the origins of Soviet interventions were deeply rooted in the 1960s.
One outcome was the rise of a Soviet bureaucratic and military elite with a stake in African affairs.
These changes were a direct result of the expansion of the Soviet foreign policy bureaucracy under Nikita Khrushchev.
The main thrust of Khrushchev’s policy in the Third World was to revive Soviet socialism based on an idealist notion of “Leninist principles,” which included a commitment to socialist internationalism.
The expansion of the CC CPSU International Department and the establishment of the Institute of African Studies and the Soviet Solidarity Committee, among other bodies, led to the emergence of a new cast of mezhdunarodniki whose job was to expand Soviet engagement with Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
The people who would come to “manage” Soviet relations with Africa were a mixed bunch.
There were men like Ponomarev, Ulianovskii, and Potekhin, who still held memories of the Comintern and the debates surrounding African liberation.
However, the most populous group was made up of men from a younger generation, whose formative experiences were shaped by World War II and the optimism of the postwar years.
The younger cohort also initially believed that socialism would bring prosperity to developing countries.
Many of them would become dedicated supporters of the anticolonial struggles in the course of the 1960s, as they forged personal relationships with African revolutionaries.
Since Africa was never among the Soviet leadership’s priorities, these men came to influence decisions at the top.
One such man, and one of the key protagonists in this story, was Petr Evsiukov, who grew to play an essential role as a liaison, but also as someone who could influence information flows, and ultimately decision-making at the top.
Men like Evsiukov would continue to sustain the Soviet commitment to Africa in a variety of roles.
Another consequence of the 1960s was the militarization of the Soviet engagement with the African continent.
By the mid-1960s, it had become clear that Soviet-inspired development initiatives did not lead to rapid economic growth.
Soviet economic assistance proved costly and was often a source of conflict rather than cooperation with African partners.
The Soviets thus concluded that training armies and supplying them with weapons would probably be a more effective way to gain influence and allies among these powerful groups.
In addition, the military believed that soldiers and officers trained in the USSR would become friends of the Soviet Union.
By gaining new friends and allies in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, the Soviet military hoped to gain access to port facilities and airfields, thus increasing their reach.
This book has also highlighted the role of the GRU which was instrumental in providing information on internal developments and coordinated the distribution of arms and advice to anticolonial movements.
Although the roles of the Soviet military in general and specific individuals require further research, GRU chief Petr Ivashutin was clearly interested in the Third World for strategic, Cold War reasons.
The collapse of the Portuguese Empire in Africa opened up new military intelligence and reconnaissance opportunities in the Atlantic and the Indian Oceans.
According to CIA files, the GRU maintained signals intelligence posts in Angola and Mozambique after independence.
This system of benefits does not mean that the military was solely motivated by material gain.
However, by the early 1980s, a significant sector of the Soviet elite started to voice criticism about the prospects for revolutionary transformation in the Third World.
Criticism came from the International Department and the KGB, who complained about corruption, economic mismanagement, and double-dealing with the West.
There were also ever-increasing concerns about the economic and human costs of Soviet intervention, especially in Afghanistan.
These criticisms started to shift attitudes at the top, including policy on AF rica.
When Mikhail Gorbachev first came to power in 1985, there was little indication of a major policy change.
In fact, Gorbachev reaffirmed Soviet commitments toward Third World allies.
In 1986, the head of the International Department was replaced by Anatolii Dobrynin, the long-serving Soviet ambassador to the United States.
Andrei Urnov, who had previously worked in the Africa section of the International Department, became Dobrynin’s deputy, replacing Rostislav Ulianovskii.
Although these were important changes, to Urnoy, this indicated a strengthening of the International Department, which was supposed to become a new “coordinating center” for Soviet policy.
In fact, changes at the top generally reflected Gorbachev’s broader reforms.
As figures of Third World debt became public, there was increasing pressure to scale down overseas commitments.
However, not all mezhdunarodniki applauded the changes in Soviet policy in the Third World.
In 1989, the United States proposed that the UN reduce the size of UNTAG’s military contingent, allegedly to cut costs.
Such a compromise, argued Urnoy, led to a tragedy in April 1989 when South African forces started attacking SWAPO guerrillas who had crossed the border into Namibia in anticipation of a ceasefire.
By 1989, South Africa’s government had started talks with the ANC, but Gorbachev and Shevardnadze sought ways to have a direct rapprochement with Pretoria.
One of the most vocal critics of such an approach was Vasilii Solodovnikov who occupied the position as director of the Institute of African Studies before serving as Ambassador to Zambia from 1976 to 1981.
After a meeting with Nelson Mandela shortly after his release from prison in 1991, Solodovnikov recommended that the Soviet Union continue supporting the ANC because they were destined to play a leading role in post-apartheid South Africa.
The debate about Soviet policy in Africa raged up to the dissolution of the Soviet Union, mainly in academic circles and the press.
A meeting held by the Soviet Solidarity Committee in June 1991 to discuss its future reflected sharp divisions between those who defended sustained engagement in Africa on an economic and political basis and others who argued for the “de-ideologization” of Soviet policy.
We often take tactical proclamations of Western leaders as matters of strategic principle.
Men like Solodovnikov, Evsiukov, and Urnov criticized Gorbachev's approach for several reasons, but at its core, their critique was a moral one.
It was wrong to abandon “old friends” to improve relations with the United States at all costs.
To them, disengagement from Africa meant losing hard-earned political capital and potential profits, which could become a source of income for the flagging Soviet economy.
In the end, what united those who criticized disengagement from Africa was a fundamental understanding of the USSR as a global power and Africa as an important area for economic and political gains.
They also shared a particular worldview, an ideology based on a Marxist reading of history.
The sudden collapse of the Soviet Union rendered these disagreements obsolete.
However, the debate about Russia’s role in the world in general and in Africa more specif ically was never resolved.
Under President Vladimir Putin, Russia has tried to “return to Africa,” often using military and security cooperation as the basis of constructing new partnerships.
Although the motivations behind Russia’s involvement are very different today, these cannot be understood without delving into the past.
Nguyen, Hanoi’s War; Miller, African Volk; Harmer, Allende’s Chile; Friedman, Shadow Cold War; Litthi, Cold Wars.
See Onslow, Cold War in Southern Africa; Sapire, “Liberation Movements’; Sapire and Saunders, Southern African Liberation Struggles; White and Larmer, “Mobile Soldiers and Un-National Liberation”; Alexander, McGregor, and Tendi, “Transnational Histories”; Dallywater, Saunders, and Fonseca, Southern African Liberation Movements.
For two very different perspectives, see Ellis, External Mission; Macmillan, The Lusaka Years.
Peterson, Dubois, Fanon, Cabral; Lopes, Africa’s Contemporary Challenges; Manji and Fletcher, Claim No Easy Victories; Rabaka, Africana Critical Theory; Saucier, A Luta Continua.
A number of Cold War historians have revised their interpretations of the Cold War conflict.
John Lewis Gaddis first focused on “national interest” but later acknowledged the role of ideas in We Now Know.
Radoslav Yordanov revives the juxtaposition of “revolutionary” and “statist” lines in Soviet foreign policy, arguing that the “statist” or pragmatic line often prevailed, thus contradicting current historiographical trends.
Some of the early works include Legum, After Angola; Klinghoffer, The Angolan War; Somerville, Angola; Kempton, Soviet Strategy toward Southern Africa.
A similar interpretation is pursued by Melvyn P Leffler in For the Soul of Mankind, 255.
Some of these records were initially made available only to a select number of scholars in the 1990s.
Since then, they have been reclassified, only to be reopened around 2015 after undergoing a special declassification process.
Bowen, State against the Peasantry; Brinkman, War for People; Moorman, Intonations; Pearce, Political Identity and Conflict.
On the role of African Americans in the Comintern, see Adi, Pan-Africanism and Communism.
The main exception for Stalin was the status of Italian colonies, over which Stalin bickered with the Allies at the Yalta conference.
Quoted in Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War, 57; Taubman, Khrushchev, 354.
The Belgian Congo became the “The Democratic Republic of the Congo ” upon independence in June 1960.
In 1971, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was renamed “Zaire,” a name it retained until 1997 before re-gaining its name from 1960.
Fora detailed bibliography of Aleksandr Shelepin, see Mlechin, Zheleznyi Shurik.
For an in-depth study of the postwar generation, see First, Stalin’s Last Generation.
For a detailed study of forced labor in Sao Tomé, see Higgs, Chocolate Islands.
For a detailed summary of the early years and the road to power, see Meneses, Salazar, ch.
There is still a debate about whether politics or economics was fundamental to Salazar’s conception of the Portuguese Empire.
For the two sides of the debate, see Clarence-Smith, Third Portuguese Empire, and Pitcher, Politics.
Around 1,703 Cape Verdean immigrants appear in the 1950 census of Guinea-Bissau.
A number of historians still have found it useful to employ these terms, especially in reference to the complex cultural milieu of interwar Luanda.
See “Statement of Bishop Ralph E Dodge, Washington D.C..,” in United States Senate, Hearings before the Subcommittee on African Affairs, 202.
Other important members included the Mozambican poetess Noémia de Sousa, Lucio Lara from Angola, Vasco Cabral from Guinea-Bissau, Francisco José Tenreiro from Sao Tomé, and Guilherme Espirito Santo.
On the impact of events in Algeria on anticolonial movements, see Connelly, Connelly, Diplomatic Revolution; Byrne, Mecca of Revolution.
Galvao later confirmed in his memoirs that engineering a coup in Angola was part of his plan.
On Czechoslovak motivations, see Richterova, Pesta, and Telepneva, “Banking on Military Assistance”; Muehlenbeck, Czechoslovakia in Africa, 2-17.
In the USSR and Czechoslovakia, the KGB and the StB contained under its umbrella domestic security and foreign intelligence branches.
In the context of this book, I refer to “KGB” and “StB” when speaking about foreign intelligence and not internal security.
V Tereshkin to CC CPSU, May 30, 1961, Rossiiskii Gosudarsvennyi Arkhiv Noveishei Istorii (Russian State Archive for Contemporary History, hereafter RGANI), 5, op., 360, 72; D Dolidze to CC CPSU, May 23, 1961, RGANL 5, op., 360, 71.
Deklaratsiia sovetskogo pravitelstva [The Situation in Angola: Declaration of the Soviet Government],” Pravda, May 27, 1961.
Alter to Barak , June 21, 1961, Archiv Bezpeénostnich Slozek , 43197/000, 3-5.
The author could not locate the document that Zubok refers to in the archive.
Vaclav David to Antonin Novotny, July 20, 1961, NA, 1261/0/44, KSC/UV/ANIL inv.4,166.
Cahen has argued that the real number of people killed in those events fell between 9 and 36.
It was organized by migrant workers in British Nyasaland, later independent Malawi.
Ruaridh Nicoll, “The Great Escape that Changed Africa’s Future,” The Guaraian, March 8, 2015; Harper and Nottingham, Escape from Portugal.
Klein to Prague, conversation between R Klein and N Bazanov on January 22, 1964, Archiv Ministerstva Zahraniénich Véci (Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, hereafter AMZV), TERITORIALNI ODBORY TAJNE /IV/4, sign.4, 125.
Prague, reception of the FNLA delegation by the Czechoslovak Solidarity Committee on April 14, 1964, AMZV, TO-T/IV/4, sign.4, 1-7; Berlin, April 22, 1964, Information about the visit of Dr.
The timing of the incident is still not entirely clear, but there are several indications it took place in March 1964.
Za edinstvo patriotov” [Angola: For the unity of patriots], Pravda, March 17, 1964.
The document is Patolichev’s summary of the notes Provaznik passed to the Soviet embassy in Czechoslovakia.
Schneidman, Engaging Africa, 46; Roberts, “Assassination of Eduardo Mondlane,” 8.
Mondlane to the Soviet Government, March 11, 1965, AVPRF, £659, op., 1, 1, 1-2.
In his overview of Soviet relations with southern Africa, Westad focuses mainly on the 1970s.
Vaclav David to Antonin Novotny (CSSR general secretary), May 7, 1966, Narodni Archiv, KSC-UV-ANIL, 1261/0/44, inv.
Consultation between representatives of the solidarity committees of the European socialist countries on June 28 and 29, 1966, BA-SAPMO, DZ8/32, 54.
CCP Politburo Resolution, June 1, 1965, NA, 1261/0/44, KSC/UV/ANIL, inv.
On the aborted mission to Cape Verde, see Lopes, Aristides Pereira, 130.
RGANI, 89, inv., 8; Algiers to Prague, January 21, 1965, AMZV, TO-tajng, IV/6, sign.4/111.
Lessing to MfAA, February 24, 1967, February 18, 1967, PAAA-MfAA, M3/136, 1-8.
The author thanks George Roberts for providing access to this document.
Information about the stay of Uria Simango and Marcelino dos Santos as guests of the GDR’s Solidarity Committee from December 6-13, 1963, BA-SAPMO, DZ8/163.
Marcum, Conceiving Mozambique, 103; see the entry for “Simango, Uria Timoteo” in Darch, Historical Dictionary of Mozambique.
Seiferth to Ministerium fiir Auswartige Angelegenheiten , November 30, 1966, November 26, 1966, PAAA-MfAA, A1166, 147.
Rui Duarte Silva, “Chissano confirma colaboracao com o KGB” [Chissano confirms collaboration with the KGB], Expresso, April 8, 2016.
One of the Czechoslovak clandestine contacts was Dennis Phombeah, a close ally of Oscar Kambona.
Cestmir Podzemny to Vasek (deputy interior minister, CSSR), February 5, 1969, ABS, 11616/101, 7-15.
See the arguments made by Latip Maksudov, Georgii Kim, and Mirzo Tursun-Zade in Stenogram of SKSSAA Presidium session on August 10, 1971, GARF, £9540, op., 287, 26, 30, 33.
For overviews of Nordic countries’ support for African liberation movements, see Soiri and Peltola, Finland and National Liberation; Eriksen, Norway and National Liberation; Morgenstierne, Denmark and National Liberation.
Lucio Lara and Joaquim Chissano, interviewed in Sellstrém, Liberation in Southern Africa, 19, 39.
Tornimbeni, “Nationalism and Internationalism”; Lopes, Aristides Pereira, 149.
Ulianovskii to MO, January 7, 1974, RGANL 89, op., 104, 32; Manchkha to Lusaka, RGANIL, 89, op., 104, 29.
For a detailed account of the Wiriyamu massacre, see Dhada, Portuguese Massacre.
On the issue of Portuguese colonialism at the UN, see Santos, 4 Organizacao das Nagoes Unidas.
Slipchenko to MO, conversation with Julius Nyerere, February 7, 1973, RGANI, £.5, op., 865, 4-9.
There is some evidence to suggest the rumors were engineered by East German intelligence.
Tiazhev to MO, January 6, 1972, December 31, 1971, RGANI, 5, op., 528, 1-2.
Reportazh iz Gvinei [Who killed Amilcar Cabral: A report from Guinea ],” Pravda, March 6, 1973, 4.
For Soviet coverage of the ceremony, see Oleg Ignatev, “Tak sozdavalos’ gosudarstvo ,” Pravda, November 13, 1973, 4.
Amélia and Teresa Araujo interview; Na Nhakpba interview; Matta interview; Carvalho interview; Leite interview.
Slipchenko to MO, conversation with Samora Machel on September 11, 1974, RGANL 5, op., 784.
This document is a record of a conversation between Neto and Slipchenko on September 30, 1974, during which Neto refers to the talks with Manchkha and Urnoy in July.
This document is a record of conversation with Angolan students José Neluba de Carlmo and Sebastian Correira.
It is not clear if any Soviet representatives actually took part in the failed MPLA Congress.
Putilinem [Conversation with the first secretary of the Soviet embassy in Brazzaville, comrade Putilin],” September 11, 1974, Archiwum Ministerstwa Spraw Zagranicznych , 19.77.
The author could not locate the document detailing meetings with Iko Carreira and Dunem in the Russian archives.
Dzasokhov to CC CPSU, October 18, 1974, Report on O Ignatev’s trip to Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Angola, and Mozambique, RGANI, 5, op., 897, 201.
According to Portuguese army estimates, by February, Holden Roberto had mustered about 20,000 men, Agostinho Neto had 10,000, and Jonas Savimbi could count on 8,000.
The author could not locate the record of Dzasokhov’s trip to Luanda in February 1975.
In an internal report about his trip to Luanda, Oleg Ignatev mentioned that the documents were genuine and that the Soviets could request photocopies from “friends” in the Portuguese military if necessary.
The author could not obtain a copy of Evsiukoy’s unpublished memoirs on Angola or locate the record of the meeting in the archives.
The author did not have access to Evsiukov’s unpublished memoir on Angola or the documents to which Shubin refers.
Pomocy dla Ruchow Narodowo-wyzwolenczych w Afryce [Assistance to the National-Liberation Movements in Africa],” AAN, PZPR, LXXVI1.541.
South West Africa was originally a German colony and was placed under a South African mandate by the League of Nations.
The UN terminated the mandate in 1966, but Pretoria refused to relinquish control.
The author could not locate the records of Carreira’s meeting with the Soviets in late August in the Russian archives.
The author could not locate documents with these discussions in the archives.
The date of the conversation between the two ambassadors has been the subject of some controversy.
The newly released documents show the meeting took place on December 4.
Westad, Global Cold War, 236; Jorge Risquet, interview, in Jaime and Barber, Angola, 344.
It is still not possible to determine exactly how much weaponry was passed to the Cubans and FAPLA in Angola during this period.
The PAIGC received $35,000 in 1962, $50,000 in 1963, $70,000 in 1965 and 1966, and $100,000 in 1970.
Semenoy to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, record of conversation with Vasco Cabral on September 11, 1976, AVPRF, 661, op., 3, 2, 143.
According to Soviet estimates, by 1979, the Soviet Union had provided $57. million in foreign assistance to Guinea-Bissau, with $35. million provided gratis.
According to Soviet estimates, by 1977, Portugal accounted for 60 percent of all exports from Guinea-Bissau and 40 percent of all its imports.
I would like to thank Elizabeth Banks for drawing my attention to these figures.
According to CIA estimates, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe provided $122 million in economic assistance, while members of the OECD countries gave $1.102 million / over $1. billion to Mozambique between 1975 and 1982.
Shubin staunchly denied Soviet involvement, citing the change of leadership in Moscow as evidence there was no reason for Moscow to plot Machel’s murder.
According to CIA estimates, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe provided $52 million in economic assistance, while the OECD countries gave $413 million to Angola between 1975 and 1982.
Speech given at the First Tricontinental Conference of the Peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, Havana, January 1966.
The KGB and the Bulgarian State Security Service—Connections and Dependences.
Hearings before the Subcommittee on African Affairs on United States Involvement in Civil War in Angola.th Cong,, 2nd sess.76.
Civilians, Mobility, and Legitimacy in South-East Angola During the MPLA’s War for Independence.
Algeria’s Fight for Independence and the Origins of the Post-Cold War Era.
An Assessment of Professional Expertise in the Making of Soviet Foreign Policy.
Havana, Washington, Pretoria, and the Struggle for Southern Africa, 1976-1991.
Self-Determination and the International Origins of Anticolonial Nationalism.
Handbook of the Communist Security Apparatus in East Central Europe, 1944-1989.
Pringle, Robert W Historical Dictionary of Russian and Soviet Intelligence, 2nd ed.
The Portuguese Policy of Decolonization and Détente in Angola and Mozambique Journal of Cold War Studies 21, no. : 3-51.
The Secret Struggle » for the Global South—Espionage, Military Assistance and State Security in the Cold War,” International History Review 43, no. : 1-11.
African Americans and the Soviet Indictment of United States Racism, 1928-1937.
Interaction and Exchange between the USSR and Latin America During the Cold War.
Regional and Swedish Voices; Interviews from Angola, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Zimbabwe, the Frontline and Sweden.
Kamba Simango and the Protestant Community in Manica and Sofala, 1892-1945.
