In the process, Kennedy shifted at least some of the blame for the fiasco to the nation's press.
John F Kennedy, Cold War, Bay of Pigs, free speech, presidential crisis rhetoric John F Kennedy enjoyed a unique relationship with the press during his presidency.
Based on his own experience as a reporter, he both understood the mechanics of news reporting and respected the potential influence of the press on public opinion.
In this essay, we analyze Kennedy's speech, ""The President and the Press,"" which he delivered before the American Newspaper Publishers Association on April 27, 1961.
Confronted with allegations that he deliberately misled the press and the people about the Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy crafted a presidential ""crisis"" speech that attempted to explain and justify the invasion, blamed the press for its failure, and pressured the news media to voluntarily censor itself on national security issues.
We argue that Kennedy's speech was widely considered a failure because few bought into his ""crisis"" narrative and because the press refused to accept his attempt to scapegoat and censor them.
Our analysis lends insight into how presidents may attempt to rhetorically exacerbate crisis situations in order to manage press coverage and cultivate public consent.
The second section contextualizes ""The President and the Press"" by providing some historical background on the Cold War era, including the controversy surrounding the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The third section analyzes the text of the speech itself, illuminating how Kennedy employed presidential crisis rhetoric and Cold War arguments to shift blame for the Bay of Pigs debacle to the press, and to pressure the press into exercising more self‐restraint.
The final section of this essay considers the legacy and lessons of Kennedy's speech in light of later instances of presidential crisis rhetoric and governmental attempts to limit free speech.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy and the Cold War John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born to Rose and Joseph Kennedy on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, Massachusetts.
Rose was the daughter of John Francis ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, a popular Democratic mayor of Boston.
After graduating from Harvard in 1940, Kennedy served honorably as a World War II naval officer from 1941 to 1945.
Among his military decorations, Kennedy earned the Purple Heart and the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for leading his crew to safety when their patrol torpedo boat was rammed by a Japanese destroyer.
The year following his discharge from the Navy marked JFK's entry into politics.
In 1946, Kennedy became a Democratic congressman from Massachusetts, and six years later, he won a seat in the United States Senate.
Shortly after his senate victory, Kennedy married Jacqueline Bouvier, also from an affluent and influential family.
Continuing his political climb, Kennedy earned national attention in 1956 when he was nominated for Vice President.
Even though he lost that nomination, it was only four years later when Kennedy became the Democratic nominee for president.
Nixon—the first televised presidential debates in United States history.
Kennedy ended up defeating Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the twentieth century to become the youngest person, as well as the first Roman Catholic, ever elected to the United States presidency.
The challenges presented by the Cold War and international politics informed many of President Kennedy's executive initiatives.
By 1961, the Soviet Union was ahead in the space race, having launched a satellite and orbited a man around Earth.
Motivated by Russia's successes, Kennedy expanded the United States space program and vowed to land a man on the moon by the end of the decade.
In what he considered a first step in ending the Cold War and the atomic arms race, Kennedy signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban treaty on October 7, 1963.
Also signed by the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union, the treaty greatly restricted nuclear testing and committed its signatories to work toward complete disarmament.
Perhaps Kennedy's most trying moment as president came in October 1962, after United States intelligence discovered that the Soviet Union was building missile sites in Cuba.
The Truman Doctrine At its most basic level, the Cold War was a struggle between democracy and capitalism in the West versus communism in the East.
The United States, a country committed to democracy— and the Soviet Union, a country committed to communism—represented the two major players in this struggle.
Many trace the genesis of the Cold War to the end of World War II, when the United States dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.
Although they had been allies during the war, the atomic bomb heightened distrust between the United States and the Soviet Union and led to an escalating nuclear arms race.
Shortly after World War II ended, President Harry S Truman articulated what became known as the Truman Doctrine, pledging the United States to the ""containment"" of communism.
The goal was to stop the spread of communism into neighboring free nations.
More often than not, this commitment meant sending financial and military assistance to nations like Greece and Turkey, which were threatened by communist insurgencies.
Some scholars point to the economic collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1980s as the end of the Cold War.
In 1959, the United States Central Intelligence Agency began planning an invasion of Cuba after Fidel Castro overthrew the American‐backed dictator, Fulgencio Batista.
The following year, the CIA, operating under the secret authorization of President Dwight D Eisenhower, began training anti‐Castro Cuban exiles for an invasion of the island nation.
Shortly after Kennedy took office in 1961, the CIA informed the new president of their plan to unleash their trained forces at the Bay of Pigs, located on the south shore of Cuba.
Kennedy was forced to do damage control, as he was widely criticized for the ""fiasco"" and for misleading the American public in the days leading up to the invasion.
For many Americans and press professionals, the most troubling aspect of the Bay of Pigs situation was that the president had lied to them regarding America's policy toward Cuba.
However, as we argue in our analysis, Kennedy miscalculated the rhetorical situation and delivered a presidential crisis speech in which he blamed the press for the Bay of Pigs debacle and advocated for journalistic self‐restraint.
Kennedy faulted the press for leaking information about the Bay of Pigs operation just days before its execution.
The first report to uncover the president's plans was slated for publication in the New Republic magazine.
Kennedy instructed Schlesinger to have the story killed, and Schlesinger succeeded in his mission.
The Times’ publisher also downplayed Szulc's story by eliminating a four‐column banner headline and running it instead as a more routine single column story on the front page.
Kennedy reportedly complained in private that ""Castro doesn't need agents over here.
Amidst these lingering feelings of mutual distrust between the president and the press, Kennedy took to the podium.
Studying the contrast between the ASNE and the subsequent ANPA speech is important because it highlights two different ways in which Kennedy responded to the same exigency.
Yet his April 27 speech stirred up controversy about the Bay of Pigs mission again by implicating the press in the mission's failure.
The president might have viewed his ANPA speech as an opportunity to build upon his ASNE speech, fostering still more trust and goodwill between the president and the press.
The situation called for an after dinner or ceremonial address—a black tie dinner held in a grand ballroom of a hotel.
Kennedy instead delivered an accusatory speech, shifting blame for the failed invasion onto the press and calling for the press to censor itself in the face of national security threats.
Kennedy's speech to the ANPA, we contend, exploited the tragedy by portraying it as a crisis and demanding more control over the nation's free press.
Kennedy's rhetorical miscalculation led to one of his most notable rhetorical failures because his rhetoric of crisis backfired.
Kennedy's speech exhibited several key qualities of presidential crisis rhetoric.
But the strategy backfired and only damaged the president's relationship with the press.
Since Windt's original discussion of presidential crisis rhetoric, rhetorical scholars have written a lot about this complex type of oratory.
Most notably, Bonnie Dow argues for a broader understanding of crisis rhetoric, explaining how some ""crisis"" exigencies trigger policy speeches, while others result in more ceremonial or ""epideictic"" rhetorical responses.
Although Windt's framework conceived of crisis rhetoric as crisis‐creating, Dow argues that not all crises are rhetorical constructions; she also demonstrates how epideictic strategies may be especially fitting in situations where the audience perceives that a crisis already exists.
And we realize that there is no definitive description of crisis rhetoric as a genre.
Yet, we find Windt's framework particularly useful in detailing how Kennedy's rhetoric aimed to provoke and amplify a crisis in order to exercise more control over the press and to silence debate.
In ""The President and the Press,"" Kennedy utilized rhetorical patterns characteristic of Cold War rhetoric to frame the melodrama of his speech.
A defining characteristic of Cold War rhetoric—and of all war rhetoric, really—is its use of god and devil terms.
As we illustrate in our analysis, Kennedy relied on the dualisms central to Cold War rhetoric to construct a melodrama of good versus evil that he hoped might pressure press professionals to censor themselves.
The following analysis examines how John F Kennedy's speech, ""The President and the Press,"" followed a script of ""crisis"" and ""good versus evil"" to legitimate his call for more press restraint.
That responsibility meant not leaking government national security secrets to the public .59 While Kennedy's audience was certainly aware of the Bay of Pigs debacle, the president's rhetoric selected particular facts to mark the crisis in a way that absolved Kennedy of responsibility and shifted blame for the fiasco onto the press.
Kennedy declared the ""New Facts"" of the situation by explaining what his speech would not be about.
The events of recent weeks may have helped to illuminate that challenge for some; but the dimensions of its threat have loomed large on the horizon for many years.
Whatever our hopes may be for the future—for reducing this threat or living with it—there is no escaping either the gravity or the totality of its challenge to our survival and to our security.
Kennedy's audiences understood that the ""events of recent weeks"" referred to the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Those events also included Kennedy's misstatements to the press regarding the incident and the role the press allegedly played in compromising the mission.
Thus, Kennedy combined selective ""New Facts"" about the Bay of Pigs debacle with an on‐going Cold War narrative about the communist threat.
Kennedy suggested he merely wished to discuss the relationship and shared responsibilities of the president and the press rather than forge an adversarial relationship between them.
Kennedy's opening remarks thus appeared to position himself on the side of his journalistic audience, but those assurances rang hollow as he proceeded to cast suspicion on the motives and even the loyalties of the press in the rest of the speech.
Because some newspapers chose to report on the administration's ""covert plans"" for an invasion of Cuba, they in effect provided aid to the enemy.
Kennedy made the condemnation of the press clearest when he stated that, details of this nation's covert preparations to counter the enemy's covert operations have been available to every newspaper reader, friend and foe alike; that the size, the strength, the location and the nature of our forces and weapons, and our plans and strategy for their use, have all been pinpointed in the press and other news media to a degree sufficient to satisfy any foreign power.
With this statement, Kennedy seemed to suggest that had the press not leaked ""this nation's covert preparations,"" perhaps the Bay of Pigs invasion would have succeeded.
Essentially, these were not the words of a president accepting responsibility for his role in a crisis, as Kennedy had done in his earlier ASNE speech.
Taken together, Kennedy's statement of facts served to define the situation as a crisis, to absolve Kennedy from blame, and to instead shift blame for the Bay of Pigs debacle to the press.
Given the make‐up of his audience, however, this proved a rhetorical blunder, and that blunder was only exacerbated by Kennedy's melodramatic Cold War narrative.
A Cold War Melodrama A second key feature of Kennedy's address is the proliferation of a Cold War melodrama pitting good versus evil.
Kennedy's melodramatic framing divided the world into two opposing camps and raised the stakes for those in his audience.
In the process, he suggested that journalistic restraint was necessary if the free world was to prevail in the fight against communism.
The dualistic juxtaposition of good versus evil ran through Kennedy's address and amplified communism as a constant threat to democracy.
Kennedy raised questions about the role of the press in the battle between good versus evil.
He would eventually invite his audience to prove their commitment to anticommunism by practicing journalistic restraint.
But when all his financial appeals were refused, Marx looked around for other means of livelihood and fame, eventually terminating his relationship with The Tribune and devoting his talents full time to the cause that would bequeath to the world the seeds of Leninism, Stalinism, revolution and the cold war.
The ""cause"" that informed the evils of ""Leninism, Stalinism, revolution, and the cold war"" was, of course, Marxism, and Kennedy implicated the co‐author of The Communist Manifesto, Friedrich Engels, as well.
The journalists and editors laughed and applauded at this ironic story of how a capitalist newspaper somehow inspired Marx and Engels to found the communist movement.
Although intended as a humorous anecdote, Kennedy's implication that the press might somehow have aided the spread of communism was hard to miss.
In addition to implicating the press in his Cold War melodrama, Kennedy deployed the language of secrecy and deception in describing the nature of the communist threat.
Kennedy never directly identified the Soviet Union or Cuba as enemies of the United States.
The free world was in a new kind of undeclared ""war"" with these forces of secrecy and deception, and at stake in that war was America's democratic way of American life.
As Kennedy explained, Today no war has been declared—and however fierce the struggle may be, it may never be declared in the traditional fashion.
And yet no war has been declared, no borders have been crossed by marching troops, no missiles have been fired.
This melodramatic framing—a framing common to crisis rhetoric—helped insulate Kennedy's speech against various counterarguments.
Kennedy's narrative of an undeclared war with a secretive and deceptive communist enemy cast a wide net of suspicion that defied refutation or counterevidence.
Kennedy's melodramatic Cold War narrative was, of course, quite common in his day.
By emphasizing the secrecy and deception of the communist threat, however, he described a situation of particular relevance to his attempt to shift blame for the Bay of Pigs onto the American press.
Promoting fears that America's free press might unwillingly aid the enemy, he positioned himself to call on the press to censor itself in the interest of national security.
And he portrayed that self‐censorship not merely as a practical necessity but as a moral responsibility.
Moral Responsibility With his definition of the ""New Situation"" and his Cold War melodrama in place, Kennedy finally asked his audience of professional journalists for their support, portraying press restraint in wartime as a moral and patriotic duty.
Although he claimed to trust newspaper editors and publishers to use good judgment about what to print during perilous times, Kennedy's crisis rhetoric placed significant pressure on his audience of journalistic professionals to defer to his will.
Windt reminds us that presidential crisis rhetoric often functions to close down debate.
He explained, ""In such speeches the policy is not proposed but declared.
Yet viewed through the lens of presidential crisis rhetoric, it functioned to constrain the press from further criticism of Kennedy's Cold War policies.
Presenting his audience with the appearance of choice in the matter, he implied that he trusted them to make the right choices.
At the same time, however, Kennedy implied that during a wartime crisis they ought to err on the side of patriotic restraint.
Kennedy framed journalistic ""self‐restraint"" as a time‐honored tradition among patriotic press professionals.
Distancing himself from the sort of censorship practiced by President Woodrow Wilson and the Committee on Public Information during World War I,64 Kennedy announced, ""I have no intention of establishing a new Office of War Information to govern the flow of news.
I am not suggesting any new forms of censorship or new types of security classifications.
This part of Kennedy's speech drew the most applause from his audience.
If the press refused to police itself, the government might be justified in censoring the news.
Referring to his audience as ""citizens who serve in the newspaper business,"" Kennedy stripped his audience of special status and admonished those who would fail to uphold the duties of good citizenship.
Good citizenship, of course, required all to sacrifice their individual rights to the common good, especially to protect the nation's security.
In the wake of the Bay of Pigs disaster, Kennedy's call for journalists to ""reexamine their own responsibilities"" implied a past failure, specifically their release of information about the planned invasion.
The Legacy of “The President and the Press” Kennedy's first term as president ended tragically on November 22, 1963, when he was assassinated in Dallas, Texas.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson was sworn in as the 36th president less than two hours after Kennedy was shot and killed.
Despite his relatively short time in office, Kennedy is remembered as an eloquent, politically savvy, and effective public speaker.
Rhetorical scholars often rank his ""First Inaugural Address"" and ""Houston Ministerial Association Address"" as two of the greatest speeches in American history.
It is our contention that Kennedy's speech on April 27, 1961—although it does not ""rank in eloquence or perhaps in wisdom with his very greatest speeches""69—should be considered one of his most important speeches.
As an object lesson in the use of crisis rhetoric to stifle free speech and debate, it speaks volumes not only about Kennedy, but about both the power and the limits of the modern rhetorical presidency.
Crisis rhetoric places significant pressure on its audience to succumb to the will of the president.
In this case, Kennedy tried to use the ethos of the presidency to silence debate.
This rhetoric of crisis may have worked to insulate the speech from counterargument, turning journalistic self‐restraint into a test of moral responsibility and patriotism.
And yet there is plenty of evidence for those who prefer the explanation that the ASNE and ANPA speeches were simply distractions, deflections—even deceptions.
Kennedy's attempt to deflect responsibility for the Bay of Pigs stood to jeopardize his good standing with the media and the American people.
In the field of information policies this administration has been characterized more with a desire for political propaganda than for a free flow of non‐security information.
At the time this speech was delivered, however, it was not yet so clear how Cuba fit into the president's melodramatic drama.
The larger legacy of Kennedy's ""The President and the Press"" is its relevance to ongoing debates over the First Amendment.
As Craig R Smith has argued, the First Amendment is especially vulnerable during times of national crises.
So while Kennedy's attempt to use crisis rhetoric to limit First Amendment rights may have failed, we must remain on guard against attempts to exploit, heighten, or prolong national security crises that threaten our civil liberties.
Later presidents would be more successful in arguing for restrictions on free speech during national crises.
Invoking the same sort of melodramatic narratives of good versus evil, others have been more successful at shutting down debate, insulating themselves against counterargument, and shaming the voices of dissent.
Indeed, Douglass Kellner has warned that dualistic discourses of good and evil invariably undermine democratic deliberation.
As scholars and citizens, we should always cast a critical eye whenever faced with a script of presidential crisis rhetoric.
The authors wish to thank Shawn J Parry‐Giles, J Michael Hogan, and the anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful feedback on this unit.
Thanks also to Sharon Kelly, reference technician at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, for all her assistance.
Castro later ransomed the captives to the United States for food and medicine.
According to Sorensen, ""the President 'almost always' served as an outliner who suggested guidelines which an assistant used in writing the first draft.
Second, he 'almost always' acted as an editor and collaborator who tuned up thoughts, revised arguments, deleted words, sentences, and paragraphs, and inserted others.
James L Golden, ""John F Kennedy and the 'Ghosts,'"" Quarterly Journal of Speech 52 : 351.
Lois J Einhorn, ""The Ghosts Talk: Personal Interviews with Three Former Speechwriters,"" Communication Quarterly 36 : 94‐108, for an interview that includes another Kennedy speech writer, Dr.
Denise M Bostdorff, The Presidency and the Rhetoric of Foreign Crisis , vii‐vii; and Richard A Cherwitz and Kenneth S Zagacki, ""Consummatory Versus Justificatory Crisis Rhetoric,"" Western Journal of Speech Communication 50 : 309.
Conceptually and Critically,"" in Cold War Rhetoric: Strategy, Metaphor, and Ideology, ed.
Martin J Medhurst, Robert L Ivie, Philip Wander, and Robert L Scott , 13.
The Amalgamation of 9/11, Iraq, and Moral Values,"" American Behavioral Scientist 49 : 41.
David Altheide, Creating Fear: News and the Construction of Crisis , 175‐197, and Barry Glassner, The Culture of Fear: Why Americans are Afraid of the Wrong Things , 1‐20.
Presidential Rhetoric in the 'War on Terror,'"" Presidential Studies Quarterly 37 : 622‐645.
