The October 1962 crisis, always a popular subject, has become even more so within the last year as new information has emerged and provoked reexaminations of what was perhaps the world's most perilous nuclear confrontation.
Garthoff, a fellow at the Brookings Institution, was at least marginally involved in the crisis as a staff-level advisor in the State Department.
The book is partially his personal memoir, interwoven with references to memoranda he wrote during the crisis.
These declassified memoranda appear in an appendix, and while supplementing the historical record, they were not central to American decision-making at the time nor do they represent a breakthrough in our understanding of this complex episode.
Rather, Garthoff 's account is most useful for its coverage of Soviet sources and perceptions of what they label the ""Caribbean Crisis,"" and of its aftermath.
Moreover, he convincingly illustrates how, because the adequate verification and safeguard demands by President Kennedy were never met, the United States did not formally pledge itself against future invasion of Cuba.
Not until 1970, when the Soviets again broached the issue, did Washington make such a commitment.
SAC commander General Thomas Power, without the authorization or knowledge of Kennedy or his advisors on the ""ExComm,"" issued the orders placing his forces on full-alert ""in the clear"" rather than in code in order to ""rub the Soviets' noses"" in our overwhelming nuclear superiority.
Philip Nash is a candidate for the MALD degree at The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy.
See ""Robertson Stands by his Statement on Cuban Missiles,"" Boston Globe , 16 February 1988, 13, and ""New Sources Cited for Missile Charge,"" Boston Globe , 17 February 1988, 11.
United States forces were placed on ""DefCon 2,"" the highest alert ever.
Fortunately, the CIA decided his signal was false and did not pass it on to the ExComm.
The downing of an American U-2 spy plane at the height of the crisis may have been the work of Cuban forces that had seized control of a surface-to-air missile site from the Soviets.
President Kennedy, contrary to existing accounts, was willing to sustain serious political costs and publicly trade United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles' removal rather than eliminate them with the airstrikes planned for October 29 or 30.
Apparently, with the knowledge only of Secretary of State Dean Rusk and a go-between, Kennedy was prepared to arrange for the UN Secretary-General to propose such a deal if Khrushchev were to reject the American ultimatum of late October 27.
Some of these developments could have led to nuclear war despite the fact that the Americans, with their vast nuclear superiority, did not want nuclear war any more than the Soviets did.
Deemphasizing crisis management, GarthofF concludes with the notion oř ""crisis prevention,"" something that interests Soviet observers much more than American.
The greatest weakness oF GarthofF 's book is that he introduces new Facts and certain issues without analyzing them.
Kennedy's safety-valve plan to swap Turkish for Cuban missiles, arguably the single most significant fact brought out last year, is included but not discussed.
We may infer that Garthoff, by stressing uncontrolled and potentially dangerous incidents, believes that nuclear war was more likely in 1962 than we have supposed.
Garthoff does not identify the source of this information by name, but we now know it is Daniel Ellsberg, who worked for the Defense Department at the time.
Thus, while in fairness Garthoff has achieved most of what he set out to do adding to the existing body of memoir material, incorporating new information and more of the Soviet perspective his Reflections are not particularly reflective.
Others will still be better off reading Robert F Kennedy's Thirteen Days , with all its shortcomings, in conjunction with more recent journal articles.
