I will use Stephan armed Iran as threatening to regional and world M Walt’s “Balance of Threat” theory to address security.
I consider Stephan M Walt’s “Balance of Threat” theory5 to be a convincing theory for explaining state behaviour as I agree that states  Professor for International Politics, react to threats, not to power.
The action that one state understanding is open to a wide range of potential must take in order to increase its security will be state reactions: military build-up as well as the perceived as a threat to the security of another forming of alliances, economic sanctions or state, which will then initiate the appropriate diplomatic pressure.
This will only increase the some disagreement about the meaning of insecurity of the first state.
Consequently, measures of others as potentially threatening”.19 balancing is directed at a particular target, “the When speaking of power, the most threatening state or the most powerful state, term should be understood to that is, a potential threat or even a traditional represent more than raw rival”.15 Therefore, the purpose of balancing is to capabilities. weaken a state or alliance perceived as a threat.
Iran has felt threatened, perhaps even be hard or soft balancing, and either can be endangered, for some time.
Tehran’s perceived pursued through a positive or negative approach. adherence to its nuclear weapons programme can The “Balance of Threat” theory thus opposes therefore be explained as a reaction to this the core assumption of the “Balance of Power” perceived threat.
The solution to the crisis theory, namely that states attempt to prevent a therefore depends on successfully changing Iran’s potential hegemon from arising by balancing perception.
The latest and maybe most striking security and insecurity are crucial to example for the accuracy of Walt’s theory is the understanding the crisis in Iran, and the Cuban current Iranian nuclear crisis.
The focus on perception means “aggregate power”.20 That leads us to question that the following is not a question of the what makes a state a threat.
Given that balancing fails and likely “offensive capabilities”;24 the greater the backfires in that it exacerbates the security offensive power, the greater the threat a dilemma and reinforces the threat perceived by state can pose.
Offensive power is the balancing state, the use of balancing closely related to both aggregate power strategies would be counterproductive.
Thus, for and geographic proximity. the current Iranian nuclear crisis, balancing  Aggressive intentions refer to how states against Iran would be futile.
If anything, it would perceive a potential foe. strengthen the belief in Tehran that Iranian I assume that aggregate power, geographic nuclear weapons are a necessary means of proximity, and offensive power are not decisive deterrence and self-defence. for constituting a threat.
For tremendous supremacy of the United States in terms of both crises, I describe the same vicious circle of aggregate and offensive power.
The United States is neither even”.32 perceived as aggressive nor as hostile.
First, Nikita Khrushchev felt the culminated in a Russian-Chinese-Indian alliance, need to protect Cuba from renewed US the alliance ultimately failed to materialise aggression; second, he wanted to reduce the because “the principal powers began to perceive feeling of strategic vulnerability; and third, he the likelihood of ‘potential American military wanted to repay in kind.
Taken together, these intervention in their internal wars of secession in reasons made stationing nuclear missiles in Cuba Kashmir, Chechnya, and Xinjiang’ as extremely seem like the best available solution for low”.30 Despite the tremendous military power of Khrushchev.
The United States policy towards post-Batista the US, the perception of the United States as nonCuba and the Soviet Union can also be described threatening was crucial for Russian and China. as balancing.
Last year’s failed assault isn’t the system or, more precisely, to bring about a going to stop Washington”.36 counter-revolution in Cuba.
The first, on 17 April Strategic vulnerability 1961, was an attempt by Cuban exiles with US The Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first support to overthrow Castro.
The invasion failed, artificial Earth satellite, on 4 October 1957. however, and Kennedy was humiliated.
Sputnik haunted the US destabilise the regime in Havana and kill because Khrushchev made an honest effort to Castro.
At the same time, the United States held off a generate the feeling of Soviet superiority in the series of large-scale manoeuvres which—albeit United States after the successful Sputnik mission. poorly disguised—constituted preparations for a Concerns that the United States could be inferior to the possible invasion of Cuba, something that USSR became the dominant topic of the Khrushchev feared.
Kennedy massively knowledge that the Americans could not stomach criticised President Dwight D Eisenhower for having Castro’s Cuba right next to them.
They being responsible for the so-called missile gap. would do something.
The United States was socialism without interference from the Red indeed superior to the Soviet Union, both in Army; the former because of its proximity to terms of the number and technical maturity of North America—his reaction to the perceived nuclear intercontinental ballistic missiles.
This immediate threat of the United States was only rational. was not unknown to Khrushchev, who did not Andrei Gromyko, Soviet Foreign Minister from only see himself challenged in Cuba.
Medium-range Jupiter war, you can have it, but remember it will be missiles with a range of more than 2,000 your war.
Our rockets will fly automatically”. 40 kilometres were then stationed in Italy.
In April 1961, Jupiter missiles were also stationed in In response to the increasingly bellicose Turkey.
This decision of the Eisenhower rhetoric of Khrushchev (from the perspective of administration was a direct response to the US the US), which had caused near-catastrophe at fear of Soviet strategic superiority, which was Checkpoint Charlie in divided Berlin in October provoked by the Sputnik.
Therefore, for the US, 1961, Kennedy allowed Deputy Secretary of these missiles were merely a defensive means of Defence Roswell L Gilpatric to publicly declare deterrence.
Khrushchev, however, perceived them the military superiority of the United States on 21 October differently.
While they could have easily reached and the Soviets can deliver by striking first. destroyed the Soviet capital, the Jupiter missiles Therefore, we are confident that the Soviets will were extremely vulnerable; even with not provoke a major nuclear conflict“.41 While conventional weapons they would not have Kennedy saw the appeasement as a means of survived a Soviet attack.
For Khrushchev, the US.42 possibility of a United States first strike must have seemed realistic—and the missiles in Cuba, a necessary means of self-defence.
Both sides were ready to go.”43 information as confirming this image, whereas Objectively speaking, nuclear weapons the same information about a country thought to represent a massive threat.
Khrushchev regarded how the relevant key players the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba as a perceive and judge the means of defending the island against the threat intentions of the threatening of United States invasion.
Kennedy perceived this as an state , a immediate threat to United States security.
Self-perception and external perception may But this secret, swift, and extraordinary buildup of Communist—in an area well known to have also fundamentally differ, as former United States Secretary a special and historical relationship to the United States and the nations of the Western of State, John Foster Dulles stated: “Khrushchev Hemisphere, in violation of Soviet assurances, does not need to be convinced of our good and in defiance of American and hemispheric policy—this sudden, clandestine decision to intentions.
He describes caused more rigorous countermeasures and made perception as “an active rather than a passive the security situation for both sides even more process; it constructs rather than records precarious.
This mutually reinforcing process is ‘reality’”.47 This process, in which people highly dependent on the perceived intentions of construct their own version of reality, is “strongly the potential adversary.
This would, of through which both superpowers course, include the capacity to produce nuclear were granted secure secondweapons of mass destruction when strike capability during the Tehran deems it necessary.
Even a successful nuclear perception which is strongly influenced (but not first strike cannot prevent a nuclear response with determined) by an image already formed.
The mutually disastrous consequences. image of a state as aggressive and the perception A first strike would be as self destructive for of its intentions as aggressive are mutually Iran as it was for the United States or the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
This Iran's standpoint, a nuclear first strike would be dynamic process50 I’ve illustrated and described highly irrational and should therefore be regarded as highly unlikely.
And of course, it poses a War, with the arms race and so on”.58 In a letter great, direct threat on us too”, warned Israel’s addressed to Kennedy, Khrushchev defended his Premier Benjamin Netanyahu in October 2011 in decision as a backlash to the nuclear missiles in a speech to the Knesset.
You say that this someone comes to kill you, rise up and kill him disturbs you because it is 90 miles by sea from first”.56 the coast of the United States of America.
But Turkey adjoins us…”.59 From the perspective of a rational actor, adhering to the nuclear weapons programme The same applies to Iran’s adherence to the makes little sense.
One might assume that Iran is nuclear programme despite massive, longan irrational actor.
Thereby, the Iranian quest for standing, and sustained international pressure. nuclear weapons, as irrational as it seems, would Here, we must try to understand why Tehran has once again make sense.
Of course, the Iranian nuclear weapons religious considerations alone…”.57 Thus, this plans can be perceived from an Israeli, American situation resembles Khrushchev’s decision to or European perspective.
From a the nuclear programme certainly appears as a contemporary perspective, this step appears rational means of self-defence, self-preservation irrational and highly risky.
From Khrushchev’s and retribution . perspective, however, it was not completely Vulnerability irrational to expect the United States to tolerate nuclear The fact that Iran so eagerly seeks possession missiles (which could have easily reached of nuclear weapons is essentially the result of Washington) in its own backyard.
Since the mid-20th century, the United States has continue the anomalous state of US-Iraq relations, though we recognize that the road first positioned itself as a stabiliser and supporter towards improvement is a long one. of the Shah and second as a supporter of Saddam With the support of Saddam Hussein, the US Hussein and Iran's enemies.
However, Iran has hoped that the regime in Tehran could not only be done little to promote constructive relations with contained but perhaps even abolished.
In order to officially support Iraq first of many problematic events. in the war against Iran, the United States removed the In 1953, the United States actively participated in the Baghdad regime from the blacklist of terrorismoverthrow of a popular prime minister and the supporting states in February 1982.
Between restoration of the Shah,61 and this plays an 1983 and 1987, not only did Iraq receive trade especially large role in the collective memory of credits equivalent to several hundred million US Iran.
The first Gulf War should have decisive dollars, but the United States also supplied Iraq with weight in setting the course for Iran's security and important intelligence.
Furthermore, Washington should profoundly and lastingly change the encouraged its European partners to co-operate assessment of WMD. with Baghdad.
Saudi Arabia and the automobiles but also building vast complexes for regime of the Shah of Iran.
With the end of the Iraq’s chemical warfare, biological warfare, and Shah, Washington chose Iran's neighbour, ballistic missiles program”.63 Through the use of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq.
We feel that Iraq desires to be independent, that First Gulf War, and another 5,000 were killed.
In Chemical and biological weapons are the poor fact, the United States showed the opposite reaction.
We should at least consider them for former United States Ambassador Peter W Galbraith our defence.
A week before and power-political means of deterrence and selfHussein invaded Kuwait, the administration defence.
This sense of treat and vulnerability has vociferously opposed legislation that would have conditioned United States assistance to Iraq on a remained unchanged. commitment not to use chemical weapons and to stop the genocide against the Kurds.
Ayatollah Khomeini had originally attempt to bring about a regime change.
Iran therefore of intention does not need to have anything in suspended its nuclear programme, which had common with actual intentions. been initiated under the Shah with Western It is therefore not important whether or not the help.
It is and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty . only important that United States policy toward Iran had But the First Gulf War taught Iran that such created this impression . agreements do not guarantee protection and that Tehran must provide for its own self-defence.
In 1995, he imposed strict oil and of enmity between the two countries.
Khatami trade sanctions against Tehran and practically offered to stop supporting militant Palestinian prevented all trade between the United States and Iran. groups, to transform Hezbollah into a purely George W Bush followed this line, and included political organisation, to work to for a two-state Iran among the “axis of evil”, together with Iraq solution between Israel and Palestine and to and North Korea, in his State of the Union disclose its own nuclear programme.
Iran demanded the lifting of United States sanctions, free States like these, and their terrorist allies, access to civilian nuclear technology and security constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten the guarantees.
By seeking weapons of mass destruction, these regimes pose a grave statement about Iran being part of the “axis of and growing danger.
They could provide these evil”.77 But the Bush administration rejected this arms to terrorists, giving them the means to match their hatred.
They could attack our allies initiative. or attempt to blackmail the United States.
In any of these cases, the price of indifference Tit-for-tat would be catastrophic.
Iran perceived Bush’s speech to have a special In the debate over Iran’s nuclear programme, meaning.
India, Israel, believe that nuclear weapons are a necessary Pakistan and North Korea.
The United States had led regime of these states should have the right to possess change in Iraq, and in October 2006, Pyongyang nuclear weapons, because according to Article IX only briefly declared its possession of atomic only a state that “has manufactured and exploded weapons before Washington provided a security a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive guarantee.
However, no such guarantee has device prior to 1 January 1967” has the right to been made for Iran. nuclear weapons.
Iran has shown a general interest in deOn the basis of the NPT, Iran should therefore escalation.
In 2003, immediately after the start of be treated no differently than North Korea, India, Operation “Iraqi Freedom”, President Pakistan and Israel.
Nevertheless, these nuclear Mohammad Khatami explored the options for a powers will be tolerated.
One might argue that mention determined) by an image already formed since India, Israel, Pakistan and North Korea are of Iran as an aggressive, anti-Semitic and antino longer party to the NPT that its provisions no Israeli country.
This is an threatening regime in Tehran that would need to unconvincing argument, and was unacceptable to be ‘balanced’ in the future”.80 the international community in the case of North Therefore, with respect to the policy against a Korea.
This can be considered clandestine purchase of centrifuges may be a vicious cycle.
How the United States and Israel react will aggressive, and the perception of Iranian policy depend largely on the fosters the image of Iran as an perceived intentions of Iran. aggressive, anti-Semitic and anti-Israeli country.
From Iran’s perspective, having a nuclear They may perceive the clandestine purchase of weapons programme would then be quite rational centrifuges as clear and convincing evidence for as it is a security measure to reduce the an Iranian nuclear programe., as a threat.
The vulnerability of the country and safeguards the way state B regime against external attempts to bring about a will react depends largely on regime change.
Nuclear weapons reduce the vulnerability of the country and safeguard the A solution to the conflict over Iran’s nuclear regime against external attempts to bring about a programme is indeed still possible, but it will regime change.
Iran’s nuclear just the nuclear programme, has lasted so long. programme is also highly unreasonable as it leads Basically, the current problem is restoring the Iran to the brink of war.
Thus, the nuclear confidence that was destroyed on both sides over weapons programme makes security interests the last few decades.
Conversely, the United States is the greatest threat to the regime in Tehran.
Any concessions to Accepting the realities Washington would therefore be interpreted as a The United States and Europe must deal with the reality sign of weakness and increase Tehran's sense of of the Iranian theocracy and accept Khamenei as insecurity.
In the end it is Khamenei who expected. will make decisions regarding the realignment of In fact, I believe that there is no alternative to Iranian security policy.
Thus, contacts with de-escalation—if the conflict with Iran is to be religious leaders of Iran are prerequisite to successfully defused.
Military action against increasing the feeling of security also on the part Iranian nuclear facilities would be of United States and its allies.
Therefore, it is counterproductive because it would only slow counterproductive to de-legitimise Khamenei as a down the nuclear programme instead of “non-elected decision maker”.86 The election of permanently hindering it.
If anything, an attack Hassan Rouhani as Iranian president also offers a on Tehran would strengthen the belief that Iranian chance for president Obama to initiate a new nuclear weapons are a necessary means of start.
Rouhani is not Mahmoud Ahmadinejad; this deterrence and self-defence. could make it easier for the United States to accept the reality of an Islamic state.
A different rhetoric The first step toward understanding has to be Sanctions to moderate the rhetoric against Iran.
Rhetoric The system of sanctions against Iran has long that does not threaten Tehran with military strikes been an integral part of robust diplomacy in the and regime change could reduce the sense of dispute over its nuclear programme.
However, threat on the part of Iran and thus contribute to a the penalty system should be modified so that it détente.
In 2003, Tripoli abandoned its WMD that the offer of “double suspension” will programme,92 and in 2005, Pyongyang had been continue to be maintained.
The basic idea is that contractually obliged to dismantle its plutonium the sanctions will be suspended if Iran suspends reactor (which could not, however, prevent the its uranium enrichment programme.
Iran would accept the two-state Pakistan, has repeatedly stated that it has a vital solution in the Israel-Palestine conflict, cease interest in a reliable non-proliferation regime. support for militant Palestinian groups and The diplomatic task is therefore to dispel the disclose its nuclear programme.
As Robert Jervis remain intact. writes, a plausible scenario for United States leaders could If Tehran assesses the United States security guarantee be to “to try to communicate that they are ready to be credible and alters its perception on the for an agreement by letting the Iranian regime importance of the nuclear programme, adhering know that they are studying how to suspend to the military nuclear programme would then be sanctions in stages and developing various forms irrational.
Because Iran’s nuclear programme of security guarantees”.89 would make the security guarantee of the US Security impossible, the nuclear programme itself would The Iranian nuclear programme is a rational present a perceived threat to security.
The pursuit response to perceived security threats to the of atomic weapons would thus be no longer a country and regime.
It Mr President, we and you ought not now to pull on the end of the rope in which would be a perpetual conflict that is constantly at you have tied the knot of war, because the the brink of a devastating war.
Here, once again, more the two of us pull, the tighter the knot will be tied.
The warning Khrushchev even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it.
And then it will be issued to Kennedy at the height of the Cuban necessary to cut that knot.
Unipolarity, Threat Perception, and Negative Balancing Strategies after the Cold War”, 161.
However, Tehran continues to deny that the use of nuclear technology goes beyond civil research.
For the policy towards Iran, it is irrelevant whether Tehran actually strives for the atomic bomb or merely the mastery of the fuel cycle; the only decisive factor is how the key players, the United States, Israel and the EU, perceive the Iranian policy.
The same applies to Iran's adherence to the nuclear programme despite the massive, long-standing and sustained international pressure.
Here, one must also try to understand why Tehran has apparently decided to resume its nuclear programme and military development.
Theoretical reflections on Stephan M Walt’s “Balance of Threat” Theory.
What Does It Mean and What Can Be Done, Tel Aviv, Institute for National Security Studies, 2007, 9.
Saddam Hussein’s Quest for Power and the Gulf Crisis, Hoboken, Wiley-Blackwell, 1991, 162.
Theory and Practice in Foreign Policy, Washington, United States Institute of Peace Press 1993, 34.
Balancing refers to all state strategies intended to weaken the power position of the state perceived as a threat.
