When quizzed Missile Crisis of 1962 from the annals of about his views on the value of International Cold War.
Thus, in order to fully comprehend fortunately, since then. the contours of any current inter-state dispute it might be helpful to sift through the Comparing the Cuban Missile annals of international history to find appropriate cases that more or less fit the and the Doklam Crisis current circumstances and draw lessons from them to meet contemporary challenges.
On 16 October 1962 it came to the notice of American President John F Kennedy that a U-2 spy plane flying on a regular reconnaissance sortie over Cuba had pitched contest of political brinkmanship. captured photographic evidence of missileAlthough the current crisis has comfortably building activities on the east coast of Cuba. surpassed the 13-day mark of the 1962 USGiven the closeness of Cuba to the shores of Soviet crisis, there is little sign of either the United States, this Soviet move of India or China backing down to settle the emplacing missiles – a clearly offensive dispute.
To be sure there are some critical Never had the United States and the differences between the two crises.
Firstly, USSR come so close to the and most importantly, the two superpowers brink of nuclear apocalypse were operating under high-pressure as during the Cuban Missile conditions of the Cold War as leaders of two Crisis. clearly outlined camps.
After intense discussions among members of the ExComm – a special group assembled by President Kennedy in the immediate Unlike in the Cold War aftermath of the discovery – over what the there is no significant US’ next moves should be, Kennedy ideological competition publicly declared a blockade on Cuba on 22 between India and China.
In contrast, India and China today operate under considerably less pressure.
On 28 October, after a week of back and Notwithstanding the nature of systemic forth between Kennedy and Soviet leader power politics India and China share a far Nikita Khrushchev – both operating with the closer relationship than the United States and Soviet conscious knowledge that their decisions Union did.
At the least there is no mention were critical to the very survival of their two of ‘war’ to describe the context of their states – the two compromised and backedcurrent relationship.
Instead, they have a off by preempting disastrous consequences large trading relationship and given the in the event of further escalation. economic potential of the two states, benefits from economic interdependence are Now fast forward to the current Doklam only expected to grow manifold in the crisis between India and China.
Sensible leaders on both sides on the lines of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, of the border clearly understand the adverse here too are nuclear armed adversaries in a 2 INSTITUTE OF CHINESE STUDIES, DELHI ● AUG 2017 impact that any conflagration could have on relations with each other and both have potential economic benefits. allies that effectively are from the other side of their own political inclination.
Moreover, Secondly, both the Soviet Union and the United States China has a nominally democratic Pakistan had far more nuclear weapons than do India as an all-weather friend and India has a and China.
Moreover, given the intense communist Vietnam as a close ally in the conditions of the Cold War, nuclear war was southwestern neighborhood of China. never off the strategic radar.
As a result the stakes in comparison to the current crisis Finally, both Kennedy and Khrushchev were much higher.
There are no signs that could derive much needed political capital either India or China envisages a nuclear from the Cuban incident.
For Khrushchev war, save some rash, tunnel-eyed warthe move to create a security risk for the US mongers in both countries.
However, any was aimed at, among others, in symbolizing small escalation leading to a shooting match to the Communist camp that the Soviet could easily end in a nuclear war.
Union and not China was still the leader in revolutionary class struggle.
International politics is a dangerous business and therefore, any poorly thought out move International politics is a could quickly spiral out of control.
Uncertainty and unpredictability vigorous Republican opponents that the are the core elements of the laws of war.
Soviet Union was not involved in any ‘offensive’ military buildup in Cuba.
Thirdly, unlike in the Cold War there is no Moreover, after the disastrous failure of the significant ideological competition between Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961, India and China.
It is true that one is a Kennedy could surely not afford yet another democracy and the other an authoritarian foreign policy blunder.
With the surprise state but neither sees themselves nor the discovery of nuclear tipped missiles at US’ other solely through that lens, as was the door steps, any political vacillation would case with the United States and the Soviet Union have at best cost Kennedy an election. during the Cold War.
As pointed out above India and China share extensive trade Contrast this with the virtual absence of any such external or domestic political needs for INSTITUTE OF CHINESE STUDIES, DELHI ● AUG 2017 3 Narendra Modi in India and Xi Jinping in that an adversary should never be pushed to China.
Both these leaders now have a firm such a degree that s/he is left with only a grasp over domestic affairs and perhaps are binary ‘choice of either a humiliating retreat the most popular leaders in their respective or a nuclear war’ ; for such a countries.
Learning from the Cuban Escalation of the Doklam Missile Crisis standoff would significantly These important distinctions between the dent the economic agenda of Modi and Xi.
Five lessons have pull back to the Indian side of the boundary’ been pointed out below.
The purpose is not is an indication of to provide concrete steps by which the its failure to understand that pushing India to current dispute can be diffused, rather to the wall is unlikely to diffuse the crisis.
In only highlight some lessons that can be democratic states, leaders operate in stifled drawn from the 1962 crisis for it to be useful decision-making corridors with immense in thinking about a path to meet the pressures to prove their decisiveness to the challenges of the Doklam crisis. electorate and therefore, ultimatums like the one mentioned above are going to make Empathize with your adversary compromises increasingly difficult.
In a crisis in which significant risks are at stake, as is the case with nuclear war, it is Beware of non-rational factors important that leaders put themselves in the Graham Allison in his classic book – shoes of their adversaries.
He Kennedy noted in the aftermath of the crisis pointed out that the rational actor model is an inadequate tool in predicting the outcome 4 INSTITUTE OF CHINESE STUDIES, DELHI ● AUG 2017 of a crisis.
Curtis Lemay, chief of internal government politics and structures United States Air Force, scoffed at this move, saying and principles of organizations are equally that ‘this blockade and political action… important to the outcome of a crisis.
Adversaries should not be Civilian leadership, most crucially the heads left with only a ‘choice of of states, should keep these overly either a humiliating retreat militaristic elements at bay.
With a diffusing the crisis. camouflage things would have turned out very differently.
Leaders of India and China, Military option a last resort in a therefore, must keep in mind that crisis MAD world situations can often lead to unintended The distinctive aspect of the outcome of the consequences by actions of actors who are Cuban crisis was that even though both sides miles away from Delhi and Beijing. came extremely close to war, negotiations to resolve the crisis by finding a common Civilian leadership is critical ground never stopped.
Given the reality of A recurrent theme during the Cuban Missile mutually assured destruction in a crisis, in fact since the time Kennedy took world with nuclear weapons, a war, even a office, was the hawkishness of his military limited one between the two states would personnel.
The chiefs were game to go one potentially have been profoundly up on the Soviets and therefore, devastating.
Robert McNamara, then enthusiastically advised the president for a Secretary of Defense, noted later that ‘it is surprise air attack on Cuba; confidently impossible to predict with a high degree of expecting the Soviet Union to be a mere confidence what the effects of the use of spectator.
One critical reason that 1962 conflict between India and China The current India-China standoff is much was a limited war was because neither India less dramatic.
However, both sides have yet to must be toned down. show a strong desire to compromise.
Disputes between big nations with even Malleability in decision-making is larger egos cannot be resolved with a zerocritical sum approach.
And the possibility that a Allison has observed that ‘the first and most flare up could occur will continue to exist as important lesson from the missile crisis… is long as both India and China do not find a that when presented with a binary choice face-saving compromise.
It is absolutely imperative economic benefits that the two countries can for leaders on both sides of the border to not achieve in the future.
With catastrophic perhaps has never been as clear as it is in consequences at stake neither should shut this case. their eyes to innovative non-militaristic REFERENCES alternatives.
But from-policymakers/ . both sides showed that if the desire to avoid war is strong enough, even the most pressing Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. 2017c.
Troops Must Pull Back to Their Side of the Boundary, Unconditionally, Immediately, Says China’, 6 July, Zhang,Ye.17.
The views expressed here are those of the author and not necessarily of the Institute of Chinese Studies.
The ICS is an interdisciplinary research institution which has a leadership role in promoting Chinese and East Asian Studies in India.
The ICS Analysis aims to provide informed and balanced inputs in policy formulation based on extensive interactions among wide community of scholars, experts, diplomats and military personnel.
