Picture courtesy of the National Security Archive On 16 October, 1962, the CIA placed before United States President Kennedy the first confirmed pictures of Soviet nuclear missile emplacements in Cuba and what became known as the Missile Crisis or October Crisis began.
The news of the discovery was not made known to the public until six days later, when Kennedy made his dramatic televised address to the United States population and announced a naval blockade of the Caribbean island.
While the United States saw the emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba as aggression, the Soviets and Cubans viewed their actions as defensive.
There followed 13 notorious days of worldwide terror at the prospect of a nuclear war between the superpowers.
In Cuba, the population prepared for a military invasion, as the leaderships in Washington and Moscow struggled to find a diplomatic way to resolve their differences.
FURTHER DETAILS OF COSTS, TIMETABLE, ACCOMMODATION etc, will be posted in due course.
New evidence, which continues to come from the archives of the former Soviet Union, shows that we were much closer to nuclear war than has been believed so far.
In my presentation, I will focus on a number of newly discovered documents that support that interpretation of the crisis.
The first of them is the previously unknown draft of Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy, in which the Soviet premier compared the actions of the American president to those of Hitler, shows how emotionally charged relations between the two leaders had become.
The letter was already on its way to the United States embassy when Khrushchev changed his mind and recalled it.
That action, as well as his decision to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba, was influenced by reports that the United States Strategic Air Command had gone on high alert, shifting from Defcon-3 to Defcon-2.
Ironically, that shift of combat readiness, which frightened Khrushchev, was barely mentioned in the discussions among members of JFK’s ExCom.
The KGB reports coming from the Ukrainian archives, show how the Soviets managed to smuggle four times as many officers and soldiers into Cuba as the Americans believed to be there—this despite careful surveillance by American pilots.
The memoirs of Soviet participants in the crisis show that at its height, Soviet commanders on the island had the authority and opportunity to use tactical nuclear weapons in self-defense.
The Americans knew nothing about the existence of those weapons, and only sheer luck prevented the firing of a Soviet nuclear-armed torpedo at American ships in the Caribbean.
This new evidence allows us to reevaluate the severity of the risks presented by the insistence of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on invading Cuba and Kennedy’s own belief that the best way to deal with the Soviet ballistic missiles was to “wipe them out” with an air strike.
He was HMG Ambassador to Mosicow from 1988, the Foreign Policy Adviser to the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon.
The Nuclear Confrontation Misperceptions: Mutual failures of intelligence and understanding During the Cuban missile crisis, as in the Cold War as a whole, each side found it hard to work out what the other was up to.
Technical methods of gathering intelligence were improving, though the information they produced could be misleading or plain wrong.
Neither side had a well-placed agent inside the other’s top decision-making apparatus – indeed it is hard to see how such an agent could have been found and operated.
John Kennedy mitigated them because he never lost sight of how the evolving crisis looked to Nikita Khrushchev.
But he also knew that his own side would get restive if he showed too much understanding of his opponent.
To honor his final work, this presentation offers an assessment of the cogent arguments, and new details, that Sherwin provided which focused on just how lucky mankind was to survive the 1962 superpower conflict in Cuba.
But the lessons both countries drew from the crisis actually made the possibility of future conflict more likely because they ignored the role of empathy.
Moreover, neither leader chose to empathize with Fidel Castro, or was unwilling to do so.
That lack of empathy, especially on the part of the United States, continues to shape contemporary US-Cuban relations.
The ‘Missile’ Crisis as seen from Cuba, and with Håkan Karlsson of The Missile Crisis from a Cuban Perspective.
As an 18 year-old, Tomás served in the Cuban military during the Crisis.
In Defence of Principles For Cubans, the crisis was a lesson that confirmed and strengthened their conceptions of how to defend the country.
At the same time, it proved to the world the ideological strength of the principles upheld by the Cuban Revolution, because in face of the actions of the two superpowers, Cuba defended, with dignity and courage, its self-determination and sovereignty.
Cuba firmly confronted the United States policy of arrogance and force.
And, basing its stance on justice and reason, Cuba discussed the disagreements that emerged with the Soviet Union in the midst of the crisis, due to the unilateral manner in which the USSR negotiated to end the conflict.
In those “brilliant yet sad” days, as Ernesto Che Guevara described them, Cuba’s policy was distinguished by having the necessary flexibility to make negotiations possible, without making any concessions of principle, despite the unceasing efforts of the United States government to exclude Cuba from the process.
The project is a cooperation between Swedish archaeologists, Cuban archaeologists, historians and anthropologists.
It focuses on the material that remains in the old Soviet nuclear missile bases, the reuse of the material from the bases in the fields and towns surrounding the sites, the memories and narratives held by local people and communities, and plans for this cultural heritage in local museums.
The aim is to contribute with more human and complementary dimensions to the crisis and its “dominant narrative”, and in this way reach new forms of knowledge about the October Crisis.
The project shows that it is possible to complement the dominant narrative of the crisis with material and immaterial remains.
