Hint Kennedy and Khrushchev Kennedy and Andropov Kennedy and Brezhnev Nixon and Khrushchev NEXT> 2.
Hint Air strikes followed by invasion A first strike Using the CIA to overthrow Castro Attacking the USSR NEXT> 3.
Hint A naval blockade of Cuba A naval blockade of the USSR Set up more missiles in Western Europe He did nothing NEXT> 4.
Hint Khrushchev's rise to power Castro's revolution The failed Bay of Pigs invasion The Nixon-Castro-Khrushchev meeting NEXT> 5.
Hint Nothing Took missiles out of West Berlin Promised not to invade Cuba and took down some of its missiles in Turkey Promised not to assassinate Castro NEXT> 7.
Hint Trying to subvert the Bolshevik revolution Trying to assassinate Castro Trying to assassinate various Soviet leaders Trying to invade East Berlin NEXT> 9.
Hint comprehensive ban of nuclear weapons proliferation the ABM treaty A direct phone line from the White House to the Kremlin SALT NEXT> 10.
Good thing Kennedy was tough enough not to get pushed around by the military.
If the United States had attacked Cuba, we might not be sitting here at our computers now.
Probably the best option, he could not have sat by and done nothing, nor could he be overly aggressive.
This was just the right move to ""tighten the rope"", and to call the Soviet's bluff.
Tactically, it was useless, since Soviet ships could have gone around the blockade.
Oddly enough, the USA can be blamed just as much as the Soviets and the Cubans.
When Castro first came to power in January 1959, he wanted to meet with United States officials, and wanted to ally himself with the West.
Castro met with Nixon in April 1959, and it did not go well.Nixon despised Castro for his socialist tendencies.
Nixon essentially told Castro he was not interested in any kind of alliance with him.
The Soviets withdrew their missiles on the understanding that the USA would not invade Cuba and would remove their missiles from Turkey.
The United States delegate to the UN embarrassed the Soviets in front of every member nation.
The Soviets denied putting missiles on Cuba, up until Stevenson pulled the evidence from his briefcase.
Promised not to invade Cuba and took down some of its missiles in Turkey.
Since the USSR didn't suffer any tactical loss, in the end the Soviets stood where they originally were, and the United States gave up 2 things.
Please note that the Turkey missiles were already scheduled for removal, but Kennedy used it as a bargaining chip.
It wasn't technically part of the deal, but it put the United States in a favorable position to offer Turkey in exchange for Cuba.
With a trade embargo, Cuba's economy has been suffering, but amazingly, Castro remained in power till 2008.
There is still a lot of resentment towards Castro for accepting the Soviet missiles.
This resentment is totally appropriate, considering Castro's actions were irresponsible and created a dangerous situation.
One of the biggest problems during the CMC was the inability for the two powers to communicate.
This created confusion and misinterpretation between the two countries.
At the time, the United States thought no Soviet SAM could fly that high.
Author maranello550 This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor bloomsby before going online.
Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system. .push; Related Quizzes 1.
