In 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States discovered that Russia was secretly installing nuclear missiles on the island of Cuba.
President John F Kennedy convenes a team of counselors to help determine how to respond.
The challenge is how to force Russia to withdraw missiles without triggering a nuclear war.
Days shows President Kennedy's leadership in resisting demands for airstrikes and aggression that would have triggered the nuclear holocaust.
Kevin Costner , Bruce Greenwood , Stephen Culp , Dylan Baker , Kevin Conway , Bill Smitrovich , Henry Strozier , Elijah Baskin The 13 days capture the tensions caused by the crisis and provide examples of how foreign policy was conducted in the second half of the 20th century.
You can understand the importance of diplomacy and leadership in high office.
Students will gain insight into United States history and this period in the Cuban missile crisis.
The Useful Background section of this study guide provides the information you need to make these fixes.
If kids want more information about this dangerous period in Cold War history, read the helpful background information in this guide.
The 13 days are the story of nuclear Armageddon and humanity's closest brush.
The film captures the tensions caused by the crisis and provides an example of how foreign policy was conducted in the second half of the 20th century.
Supplementing the information provided in this learning guide, the film shows how wise leadership saved the world from nuclear war during crises, while errors and errors of judgment led to crises.
The film is an excellent platform for discussions on the Cuban missile crisis, nuclear weapons policy during the Cold War, and current foreign policy issues.
AndThe film, outlined in this learning guide, serves as a motivation and supplement to the Cold War unit.
Just as the world was horrified in October 1962, even policymakers did not recognize how close the situation really was to disaster.
Kennedy thought the chances of a nuclear war were a third, but the administration didn't know much.
For example, the missiles were not working and soviet personnel were thought to have just 2 to 3,000 personnel.
Therefore, the airstrikes were planned on the 30th before the installation of a nuclear warhead.
In 1991-92, Soviet authorities revealed that 42 missiles had been installed and were fully operating.
In addition, the 9 SRBM was ready to be used against the Americans in case of invasion.
The Soviet Union had tactical nuclear weapons that local commanders were authorized to use to repel attacks.
Shaken after he found out about this in 1992, McNamara told reporters, This is horrible.
This meant that a United States invasion took place.% of the time they thought a nuclear war would begin.
The crisis began and ended in October 1962, but the story began much earlier.
In the immediate aftermath of World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending the cooperation that allowed the Allies to overthrow Nazi Germany.
In response, Britain and the United States launched containment policies to try to block the expansion of the Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan into Iran and limit the expansion of the Soviet Union.
As the Cold War began, Americans became alarmed by the spread of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and East Asia.
The Soviet Union was worried about the unity of the United States and powerful Western European nations after the war.
The communist bloc and capitalist democracy fell from crisis to crisis.
These ranged from the Soviet blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace, Chinese shelling of Taiwan's Kemoy Island and pines, and confrontations over the Suez Canal between Soviet allies Egypt and Western allies Israel, France and Britain.
THE ATM could not reach the United States , but it was able to reach Western Europe.
There was defense against long-range bombers, but no defense against ICBMs or ICBMs.
In 1962, the United States government knew its nuclear capabilities were much stronger than the Soviet Union, but found it unacceptable to lose a major city with casualties approaching 100,000.
Moreover, through treaty obligations and real issues, Washington did not allow the destruction of Europe.
However, the Soviet Union felt the inferiority sense of the nuclear deterrent sharply.
The effort to install missiles in Cuba was an effort by Russia to quickly and cheaply improve its nuclear capabilities.
Refueled and maintained missile transport aircraft and missile-ready tents.
The United States increased military spending under Kennedy and increased its nuclear weapons lead over Russia, while simultaneously refusing to deny it a nuclear first strike.
Moreover, despite the fall of the Bay of Pigs, the United States continued its efforts to destabilize Cuba and assassinate dictator Fidel Castro.
The Soviet leadership was not aware of how afraid the United States was of Russia's nuclear deterrent.
In an attempt to redress the nuclear missile imbalance and prevent the United States from invading Cuba again, Soviet dictator Nikita Khrushchev launched a plan to secretly place medium-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
These missiles would be able to reach almost all of the continental United States.
The CIA found out about the suspicious activity from sources on the island, and the United States sent a U-2 spy plane to investigate.
When the U-2 returned with a photo of the missile launch site under construction, President Kennedy convened an adviser before announcing the discovery to the world.
Some recommended diplomacy, while others pressed for military options such as airstrikes and the invasion of Cuba.
President Kennedy adopted a mid-range approach to prevent the United States Navy from isolating the island of Cuba and preventing additional missiles and assault weapons from reaching the island.Meanwhile, the United States used world opinion to launch a diplomatic attack to try to pressure the Soviet Union to remove the missiles.
Soviet ships tested the blockade, but ultimately chose not to challenge quarantine.
The United States has allowed ships with food and fuel through quarantine for part of it.
Acting without Moscow's approval, a Soviet ground-to-air missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, resulting in the death of the pilot.
In an agreement on the sensitive side, the United States promised to remove 15 outdated Jupiter missiles from Turkey in the future.
President Kennedy had ordered the removal of these missiles a few months ago, but due to opposition between the Turks and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles remained in place.
After the Cuban missile crisis, the superpowers moved to reduce the risk of nuclear confrontation.
Difficulties in communication encountered during the crisis led to the installation of direct telephone communications between the leaders to avoid future misunderstandings.
Future United States presidents and Soviet leaders conducted strategic arms restriction talks in the 1960s and 1970s, limiting the number of nuclear warheads ready to strike the other side.
The 1969 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty stried to limit the spread of nuclear weapons to other countries.
The United States and Russia are not likely to come again to the same level of threat that characterized the 13 days of October 1962.
The additional background below will help you understand the concerns of the participants and their statements, as described in the film.
Resurrected in the 1930s, Nazi Germany violated the restrictions on military power set out in the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I In an aim to expand, Germany demanded that a part of czech territory called Sudetenland, where about 3 million ethnic Germans lived, be ceded to Czechoslovakia.
At a conference in Munich held to consider Hitler's demands, leaders of western countries -France and Britain -agreed to fall apart in Czechoslovakia to protect Hitler.
Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed Sudetenland, it would not seek additional territory.
British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlainhome saying he brought peace in our time.
The Munich conference convinced Hitler that France and Britain were weak, leading to germany's invasion of Poland.
Recognizing his mistakes with Czechoslovakia, Britain and France, he declared war on Germany.
Their father, Joseph P Kennedy, was one of the few billionaires to support Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election.
In a dedicated cable and public speech to the State Department, Ambassador Kennedy backed the Munich compromise.
From the days of Munich until long after the United States declared war on Germany, Joseph P Kennedy insisted on a compromise between Hitler and an isolationist foreign policy.
As a young man, President Kennedy wrote best-selling books criticizing comfort.
Nevertheless, until the missile crisis was over, John Kennedy supported reconciliation under the burden of his father's position.
On December 7, 1941, the Japanese Navy launched an infiltration attack on a United States Naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii.
Japan had not declared war on United States President Roosevelt on December 7, labeling it a day to live falsely.
First, the lesson that adversaries might launch sneak attacks was absorbed by United States intelligence agencies and was partly responsible for U-2 flights and aerial reconnaissance that found the missiles.
Second, through Excom's deliberations, the fear of losing the moral high altitude by launching a sneak attack on a missile base serves as a restraint for policymakers.
President Kennedy, for example, volunteered for combat and hid issues that would easily win immunity from military service.
When the PT boat he commanded crashed into a Japanese destroyer and sank, Kennedy rescued one seriously injured sailor by taking his men to a small island a few miles away and holding a strap in the reserve of life between his teeth as he swam to shore.
Kennedy was awarded the Navy-Marine Corps Medal for his leadership and courage.
Russia suffered more from war than any other country in terms of casualties and property destruction.
During the Cuban missile crisis, men making decisions in Moscow and the United States knew first-hand the terrible effects of a massive war.
Importantly, Fidel Castro had only experienceA relatively painless civil war.
As seen, Castro's willingness to trigger a nuclear war was one of the destabilizing factors in the crisis.
After World War II, the Allies divided the German capital, Berlin, into four occupied territories.
Shortly after the war, western countries integrated their zone into a new state called West Germany.
Russia established a communist state in their zone called East Germany.
The Russian sector of Berlin has d'e000 to be the capital of East Germany.
The western sector of Berlin has 100,000, despite being deep within the territory of East Germany.
The status and prosperity of West Berlin has increasingly stirn up Russians and East Germans.
Western countries, led by the United States, have installed effective airlifts to bring supplies to cities.
Western democracies have made it clear that war will happen if the Soviet Union interferes with the airlift.
In the end, the Russians withseed the blockade when they were convinced that the West would not back down.
West Berlin became a symbol of the United States' determination to resist soviet expansion.
Therefore, it was the basis of the Western policy of containment that stried to thwart the expansion of Russian influence and communist ideology.
Over the years, West Berlin has become a glittering oasis of wealth that stands in contrast to the Drabs of East Germany and the relatively poor life.
West Germany also became an economic powerhouse, making its eastern rivals smaller.
Many East Germans fled to West Berlin on their way to West Germany in search of a better life in the West.
For the Russian and East German governments, the situation has become unbearable.
Khrushchev had committed his personal prestige and Soviet prestige to action against Western interests in Berlin.
Cable United States Ambassador to Russia Lluwellyn Tommy Thompson to Kennedy, 1961) As Khrushchev colorfully puts it, Berlin was the Soviet throat bone.
Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromiko told President Kennedy during the crisis that Russia would be forced to take steps to end its Western presence in Berlin after the United States election in November.
Kennedy Tape: Inside the White House during the Cuban missile crisis May and Zelikow, below Kennedy Tape, pg.6.
In August 1961, russians and East Germans sealed off West Berlin and began building the Berlin Wall to stop the spill from Berlin to West Germany.
Its defenders were surrounded on all fours by an excellent number of East German and Russian and East German troops.
The Communists and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization acknowledged this fact.
Allies of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization will not tolerate the loss of West Berlin.
If the United States allows the Russians to accept West Berlin, its Western European partners especially England and France will feel betrayed, and the NATO alliance will feel severely weakened if it is not destroyed.
In response to the need of Western Europeans to maintain the status quo in Berlin, and because the West was unable to defend the city using conventional forces, the United States policy declared by President Kennedy was to defend West Berlin with a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union if necessary.
For the United States, maintaining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance was militarily more important than removing missiles from Cuba.
But the United States public would not tolerate the presence of Russian missiles in the Western Hemisphere, and if they had allowed missiles to be secretly introduced to the island, the U.S. would not have had credit for its allies or enemies.
In April 1961, the CIA, with the approval of President Kennedy, carried out an invasion of Cuba with Cuban exiles as its first landing force.
President Kennedy relied on the advice of an experienced man in government who told him that the invasion would succeed.
The invasion was an un mitigating disaster for the United States government and President Kennedy.
Responsible officials, cia director and aide , were told by President Kennedy that they were to resign after a decent interval.
After the Invasion of the Bay of Pigs, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro.
Robert Kennedy, at the president's direction, was very tenacious in overseeing these activities personally and pushing the CIA for more aggressive action against Cuba and personal action against Castro.
This was a massive operation with 6000 acts of destructive activity carried out in Cuba.
He now knew he needed to explore the possible consequences of each alternative action and seek advice from various sources inside and outside government before making important decisions.
He used this processThe summer of 1961, when the Soviet Union posed its first threat to West Berlin.
The Excom deliberations shown in the film were a means by which President Kennedy got advice during the Cuban missile crisis.
Excomm was an unusual institution because it included representatives outside the government, in this case former Secretary of State Dean Aceson.
Typically, the committee included government officials from agencies not involved in important military decisions.
As shown in the film, United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adry Stevenson and the former two-time Democratic presidential candidate advocated reconciliation for the Russians.
President Kennedy said it prevented Stevenson from being expelled from Excom and removed as ambassador to the United Nations, as advised by Bobby Kennedy.
In the end, Stevenson proved invaluable to the United States by dramatically showing that Russia was lying to the world about missiles.
His speech was the single most significant victory in the propaganda war that was a key part of Cuba's missile crisis.
In contrast to President Kennedy's reach out to a wide range of advisers to help make crisis decisions, President Khrushchev had few advisers.
He saw the members of the Precisionum as political adversaries who would have provided the most experienced and logical pool of advisers.
For more information about Khrushchev and the fact that he came up with policies and expanded the crisis to try to gain more leverage over the United States, see the discussion below.
In the end, faced with the possibility that his ploy in Cuba could lead to a nuclear war and was given an out by the United States, Khrushchev acted in a civilized way and withdrew the missile.
But when we say we're not going to , they go ahead and do it, and we do nothing, and I think we're going to have a higher risk.
I agree, it makes no difference. they have enough to blow us up right now anyway and I think it's just a problem.
If they do not have enough ICBMs today , they will have them in a year's time. pg.6.
If we do nothing, they have a missile base there with all the pressure to bear on the United States and damage our prestige.
Attacking Cuba, missiles and Cuba in any way gives us a clear line to take berlin so that we can do it in Hungary under Egypt's Anglo-war.
We think we have this fixation about Cuba anyway we would be seen as a trigger-happy American who lost Berlin.
And people will believe that we let Berlin go because we didn't have the courage to endure the situation in Cuba.
So I would say that because of the preemptive actions we took in Cuba, we risked their interests and their security and reunification and everything else.
Third, if we do nothing, they will have these missiles, and they will be able to say that whenever we try to do something about Cuba, they will launch these missiles.
I think it's dangerous, but rather satisfying, from their point of view.
If you take a view, really, the basic thing for them is Berlin and there is no doubt about it.
Last night too we talked about Cuba for a while, but Berlin is what Khrushchev personally promised himself.
If we go into rapid airstrikes and take them out, we will neutralize the possibility of danger to the United States, where these missiles are used, and prevent the situation from austing, at least within Cuba, where the Cubans themselves have the means to exercise some authority in this hemisphere.
On the other hand, I think it will greatly increase my chances.Retaliation from the Soviet Union is always in their just going in and taking Berlin by force at some point.
This leave me with the only option, it is to launch a nuclear weapon this is a hell of an alternative and all this kind of thing going on and start a nuclear exchange, while if we start the blockade we're talking about, they could start a blockade and say we started it.
So once again, they will say that the sense that the blockade of Berlin was initiated by our blockade will happen in Europe.
Our problem is not just Cuba, but Berlin, which is a three-day dilemma when we recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe and recognize the importance of our allies.
Otherwise, our answer is very simple, on the other hand, we went to do something.
There was an additional fact that Khrushchev knew it was very important, and this was a fact he did not understand when he gave the order to put missiles in Cuba.
The United States population did not want to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Therefore, it is impossible for Washington to allow missiles to remain, and if necessary, the United States will go to war to get rid of them.
Khrushchev's key mistake in his crisis plan was that he did not gauge the reaction of ordinary United States citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba.
It was certainly an understandable error for the Russian leader to make.
Khrushchev forgot about the continental United States, and United States experts didn't tell himhas been invaded since 1812.
By 1962, with the advent of nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles, its insulation may have been irrational, but it was still very real.
Khrushchev never dreamed that the American populaci would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba.
In the words of Sergei Khrushchev, the reaction of U.S. citizens was Father's miscalculation..) and, moreover, communication in 1962 was not what it is today.
As a result, Khrushchev only had full control of Russian military units in Cuba.
The main example was when an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba on October 27.
This occurred when the Russian commander violated the order and acted on his own initiative.
Given its history, including a massive military buildup in Florida and attempts at invasions in The Bay of Pigs and Mongoose operations in its destructive activities and assassination attempts, Castro had good reason for this belief.
He may not have fully recognized the huge advantages the United States had in the ICBM, but he knew that Russia's ICRBM in Cuba could deal a major blow to his hateful enemies to the North.
Castro thought that if the invasion triggered a nuclear war, the Soviet Union would have the best chance of winning if it struck first with their nuclear weapons.
Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated, but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for his friends in the communist bloc.
When Castro suggested to Khrushchev that Russia would start a nuclear war before the invasion, Khrushchev was moved.
Khrushchev had already decided to remove the missile, he was just waiting for the right time.
After knowing Castro's position, Khrushchev determined that Russia must dismantle the missile immediately.
Decades later, at a conference on the Cuban missile crisis, Castro told Kennedy's Defense Secretary Robert McNamara that he advocated the first Soviet nuclear strike knowing it would lead to a U.S. nuclear attack on Cuba in 1962.
Finally, Khrushchev said president Kennedy was happy to resign.A formal commitment that if the missiles were to withdraw, the United States would not invade Cuba and would not help others.
It gave Khrushchev a way to claim that he had achieved an important objective, even though he had removed the missile.
President Kennedy is accused of forcing Russia to remove missiles without triggering a nuclear war.
The disclosure of once secret documents changed our understanding of Kennedy's victory, but the crisis is still seen as a major success for him and for United States foreign policy.
In the first aftermath of the crisis and the years that followed, the removal of the missiles appeared to have been achieved without the United States making any real concessions to Russia.
The scope of Operation Mongoose was not known and was not the official United States policy of invading Cuba.
Therefore, the pledge of aggression was merely an amendment to existing policies.
Over the years, as details of the crisis became public, it became clear that the pledge of non-aggression was a real concession.
The Kennedy brothers were actively working to change the Cuban government and assassinate Castro.
They were replaced by submarines patrolling the Mediterranean, armed with nuclear missiles, a much more effective deterrent.
But as more information came out, Kennedy's role in detaining United States troops hoping for airstrikes and an invasion of Cuba was revealed.
As shown in the film, President Kennedy chose an action that would not always lead to war, while preparing for war if he was not prepared for war.
He always maneuvered and stirred up pressure on the Soviet Union in steps that left the Soviet room with time to decide what to do rationally.
President Kennedy gave Khrushchev a way out of the crisis through his willingness to formally agree not to invade Cuba.
It shows the wisdom of President Kennedy's approach in the 1990s, when it was revealed that the Russians had secretly carried out a massive military buildup in Cuba, deploying 40,000 Red Army troops, and 42 nuclear missiles were in operation during the crisis.
By detaining those who wanted to launch airstrikes and invasions and launching a United States response in naval quarantine, President Kennedy avoided war.
The main example of Kennedy's detention occurred on October 27, when a Russian land-landing missile shot down a United States U-2 spy plane, killing the pilot.
He treats the incident as a deliberate escalation ordered by the Kremlin orCommander of the Soviet Union.
One choice moved the world much closer to nuclear war, while the other kept alive hopes of a peaceful solution.
Kennedy chose to believe that the attack on the Under-2s was unauthorized.
If he had been wrong, we would have come close to war if we had ordered the United States Air Force to take out sam batteries fired in U-2s.
Khrushchev, on the other hand, showed very poor leadership for causing the crisis.
He put his country and the whole world at great risk of a nuclear holocaust.
But by retreating and removing the missiles without keeping his promise of aggression, Khrushchev showed fore-lookingness and political courage.
The consensus among historians is that most of the blame is with Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, but both sides contributed to the crisis.
Khrushchev seems to have had several goals when he ordered an ICBM to be installed in Cuba.
He wanted to increase Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build Russia's own missile fleet.
At the time of the crisis, Russia had fewer than 40 ICBMs, while the United States had about 170.
The Soviet Union could save billions of rubles if it could immediately install an ICBM in Cuba instead of waiting for russia to build an ICBM that could hit the United States.
President Kennedy did not believe that United States superiority in ICBMs meant that the United States could safely go nuclear with Russia.
Even with a significant United States advantage, there was no defense against the 40 ICBMs owned by the Soviet Union.
The victims of such exchanges, in the tens of millions, were unacceptable to United States leaders.
President Kennedy also realized that United States dominance was temporary and that Russia would soon increase its ICBM fleet.
It didn't matter much to him that Russia achieved nuclear parity a year or two early by placing missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the United States in the service of Russia's new imperialism and communist solidarity.
Even before the crisis, with the history of the Gulf of Pigs invasion and the ongoing Mongoose Operation, the Russians and Cubans United States intentions.
After the crisis, Khrushchev insisted that defending Cuba's sovereignty was the only goal of putting missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aides indicating that it is important for him to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities and reduce United States superiority.
Castro's reason for accepting the missiles was based on solidarity with other communist countries, rather than protecting Cuba from United States attacks.
The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba would hamper many of Castro's other goals, such as exporting revolutions to other Latin American countries.
Khrushchev, for example, may have sent 40,000 Red Army troops with the task of defending the island.
Everyone knew that an attack on the large number of Red Army troops would have sparked a greater war.
After all, if they were trapped on the island, they would be the only defensive in nature.
The only reason for the massive Soviet military buildup on the island was to protect missiles, not Cuba.
Khrushchev wanted to change the status quo in West Berlin and damage the NATO alliance by using missiles to force the United States to withdraw from Berlin, taking missiles out of Cuba, and trading west Berlin so as not to react to Russia's takeover of West Berlin.
If they had passed, the Europeans would have indicated that they would not rely on the United States to take care of their interests and would undermine the NATO alliance.
At the time, he was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union, and the entire precisionum signed a plan to put missiles in Cuba, but Khrushchev's words were final.
Secretly putting aggressive nuclear weapons outside the Soviet Union, 90 miles from the continental United States, was a clandestin military attack that siosted to change the nuclear balance of terrorism.
The United States and the Kennedy administration contributed to the Cuban missile crisis through a number of policies.Following the Invasion of Cuba in the Gulf of Pigs, Operation Mongoose, which stried to topple the Castro regime and assassinate Castro, certainly helped set the stage for the crisis.
The United States had an 18-to-1 advantage over the Soviet Union in ICBMs.
But because of the numerical advantage of the Red and Chinese militaries, the United States would not rule out a nuclear first strike as a military option.
United States policymakers, with substantial legitimacy, felt that its nuclear shield was all about keeping Peace in Europe.
The cost of maintaining an army large enough to counter the Red Army in Europe and the Chinese army in Asia would have put a heavy strain on western economies.
Moreover, if Russia had not been convinced that the United States would conduct a nuclear war to protect Berlin, the western outposts in Berlin would surely have fallen, and perhaps the entire North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance would have failed.
But Russia was justifiably nervous about the United States refusal to deny it a first nuclear strike.
On balance, responsibility for events that jeopardize the future of the world falls more on the Soviet side than on the Soviet side than on the United States. to Khrushchev more than Kennedy.
We think this played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down and that was his saving grace.
Indeed, the world was very fortunate that the United States had not had another escalating incident that would have elected a president who would resist those demanding invasions and airstrikes that would have led to the war, and force Kennedy's hand.
For this generation of Americans, it recreates many of the realities of the most dangerous moment in human history.
It is a vivid recall of the conflict in which nuclear war was really possible and a lasting truth about the nuclear age.
It invites viewers to the room as president and fights against a once-difficult issue that his advisers do not offer a good option.
The language of many important conversations is quickly removed from participant transcripts and reports.
That being said, the film leave some important false impressions for viewers.
According to the film, the Kennedy administration needed to risk nuclear war to replicate the existing balance of nuclear power.
At the time of the crisis, Russia was well behind the United States in its nuclear capabilities, but the 40 operational ICBMs located in Russia would have caused unacceptable casualties in the United States and Russian IMBMs.
This was President Kennedy's position, as shown in his statement quoted above.
Believing that Russia had no plans to put missiles in Cuba, President Kennedy was on record as he said the United States would never accept nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Thus, the credibility of the Kennedy administration, along with its friends and its enemies, was tied to the liberation of Cuba from Russian missiles.
The installation of missiles in Cuba was the opening gambit of Russia's long planned move against West Berlin.
An attack on Cuba would give the Russians an excuse to overrun West Berlin.
Europeans will take these events as evidence that the United States valued taking missiles out of Cuba more than preserving Berlin.
Tensions in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance were serious and probably fatal.
The secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba was an aggressive move by the Soviet Union.
Note that none of these reasons for enforcing the removal of the missile had anything to do with the actual damage it would do to the United States, but instead were secondary effects of the deployment.An appropriate assessment of the actions of President Kennedy and his administration should refer to these goals.
It's important, but we have to answer the question of whether it's worth risking a nuclear war.
To achieve Washington's policy goals, Russia had to be forced to remove the missiles on what seemed to be a victory for United States foreign policy.
At the same time, the crisis was not allowed to escalate into World War III if Russia refused to remove the missiles and the United States invaded Cuba.
In 13 very tense days in October 1962, President Kennedy and his advisers achieved these goals.
The superpowers then introduced new procedures to ease the crisis and acted more cautiously.
They maintained competition and after the Cuban missile crisis, wars were held in places such as Vietnam, Angola and Afghanistan, but both superpowers made sudden surprises and radical moves that endangered the opponent's population and leadership.
The film does not show the role played by United States foreign policy in helping create the atmosphere in which the crisis took place.
Even after the fall of the Bay of Pigs, the United States tried to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro.
Given the historical trend of the United States invading Latin American countries and the ongoing Mongoose operation, the Russians and Cubans legitimately feared cuba's territorial integrity.
The continued United States nuclear weapons buildup has led to a missile gap in support of the United States completion of its 15 Jupiter missile installations in Turkey in 1962.
This infuriated the Russians and, as President Kennedy repeatedly stated, the missiles were already outdated and, if anything, added little to the power of the United States military, so they were totally unnecessary.
United States policymakers clearly understood that Russia's nuclear capabilities could result in unastoodly high casualties.
There was certainly disagreement and mistrust between President Kennedy and Air Force Chief of Staff Lemay.
General Rumey thought a nuclear war with the Soviet Union was inevitable and wanted it to happen before the United States lost its 18-to-1 advantage in nuclear-sending devices.
See also statement, 119, for 13 days attributed to one of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
There was alsoBetween Secretary McNamara and the Chief of The Navy Staff.
We are not knew of any evidence to show the military's concerted efforts to drive the United States to war.
Our reading, and our own interviews with senior State Department officials who served during that time, reveal that Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had the confidence of President Kennedy before, during and after the crisis.
The subplot, in which O'Donnell contacts a United States pilot, bypasses the chain of command and asks his boss to make false statements, is just fiction.
The film acknowledges the importance of the Organization of American States' vote in favor of quarantine.
The vote also had a significant psychological and practical effect on the Russians and changed our position from a lawless position in violation of international law to a country that acted in accordance with the 20 allies that legally protect their status.
But the film sheds light on the importance of the rapid support of United States North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies and African countries that would have played a key role if Russia had served as an air route to Cuba to avoid a naval blockade.
The only available landing strips for refueling were two countries, Guinea and Senegal, which agreed not to allow flights.
O'Donnell's role was exaggerated, and the role of other advisers with very important inputs for President Kennedy was minimized.
But the second, tougher letter, really,Prompted by Kennedy's trade proposal.
After offering to remove the missile only for United States assurances that it would not invade Cuba, Khrushchev tried to change the middle horse when informed of Kennedy's feeling that the United States might also trade missiles in Turkey.
At that time, an American U-2 pilot was killed, and it was only President Kennedy's detention that prevented a nuclear war.
We are fortunate that no other incident that would have caused the general war did not happen.
Another beautiful and elegant touch is the conversation between McNamara and MacCone at the end of the film in which they agree that the strategic position of the United States has been greatly strengthened by the consequences of a crisis that has now been able to run the table to the Russians in places like Asia.
Given the United States experience in Vietnam, the conversation shows the dialected nature of the historical struggle.
Shortly after he came to power, President Kennedy asked everyone in the security counsel to read Barbara Tukman's Guns of August.
According to McNamara of the Fog of War, Tukman was related to the conversation between two men who were German chancellors at different times of the war.
One asked how the war came to be, and the other said he wanted to know.
If anyone writes after this, they are going to understand that we have made every effort to find peace and have made every effort to give our adversaries room to move.
Khrushchev did not see the missile crisis through the eyes of United States leaders or the public.
For example, the presence of nuclear missiles 90 miles off the United States coast was generally unbearable in the United States because of its history of isolation and protection behind the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
This may have been unreasonable, as an ICBM launched from Russia would only take a few minutes to reach the United States, but that was the case.
It was also a hypocritical view given the fact that the United States maintains nuclear missiles in Turkey and several other countries close to the Soviet Union.
A key factor in Khrushchev's decision to back down is that the United States population was aroused and forced the government to go to war to get rid of the missiles.
Khrushchev didn't know much about United States history, and United States experts couldn't tell him about this.
The person making the final decision should be the President of the United States and benefit from the best possible information and many recommendations and opinions from inside and outside government.
In fact, President Kennedy learned this lesson from the obstacles of the Bay of Pigs.
During the deliberations, President Kennedy called for Llewellyn Thompson, who had just served as the United States ambassador to Moscow.
Thompson offered President Kennedy important advice on Khrushchev's response and his thinking.
At times, Ambassador Thompson directly contradicted President Kennedy's initial ideas and persuaded him to change his mind.
But based on our experience with the Cuban missile crisis, we can derive some general principles.
As mentioned above, try to see the situation through the eyes of the adversary.
Policymakers must understand that while trying to get the best information possible, there is a lot he doesn't know.
All diplomatic and peaceful paths should be tested before a commitment to war exists.
A step-by-step approach that always preserves your face to the other person is best.
Be flexible in compromising on small things, but don't be comforted by giving important points.
After the missiles were removed, President Kennedy explained the process of crisis management, saying that one must be firm, get the best information possible, and act with care.
During the crisis, he said, there is always a son of Cuba's missile crisis lasted 13 days in October 1962, but the story began much earlier.
At the end of World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending the cooperation that allowed the Allies to overthrow Nazi Germany.
Russia supported Greece's communist revolutionaries.And the United States tried to block the expansion of the Azerbaijan-Soviet Republic into Iran, launch a policy of containment, and limit the expansion of the Soviet Union.
Democracy in the communist bloc and capitalism has fallen from crisis to crisis.
These ranged from the Soviet blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace, Chinese shelling of taiwan's islands Kemoy and Pine, and confrontations over the Suez Canal between Soviet allies Egypt and western allies Israel, France and Britain.
ATMs on Russian soil could not reach the United States outside of Alaska, but they were able to reach Western Europe.
In April 1961, with the approval of President Kennedy, the CIA carried out a planned invasion of Cuba during the Eisenhower administration to stop the spread of communism.
Using Cuban exiles as the first landing troops, the target was the Gulf of Pigs on the Cuban coast.
Responsible officials, cia director Allen Dulles and aides were told by President Kennedy that he would step down after a decent interval.
After the Gulf of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed a mongoose operation to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Cuban President Fidel Castro.
This isOperation with 6000 acts of destructive activity carried out in Cuba.
In 1962, the U.S. government knew its nuclear capabilities were much stronger than the Soviet Union, but found it unacceptable to lose a major city with casualties approaching 100,000.
The Soviet Union, for their part, sharply felt an inferiority sense of their nuclear deterrent.
But the Soviet leadership did not realize how afraid the United States was of Russia's nuclear powers.
In an attempt to redress the nuclear missile imbalance and prevent the United States from invading Cuba again, Soviet Leader Nikita Khrushchev launched a plan to secretly install medium-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The CIA found out about the suspicious activity from sources on the island, and the United States dispatched U-2 spy planes to investigate.
I'd recommend a fewOthers pressed for military options such as airstrikes and the invasion of Cuba.
President Kennedy adopted an intermediate approach to establishing quarantine that would prevent the United States Navy from reaching the island with additional missiles and assault weapons.
Meanwhile, the United States has used global opinion in public relations and diplomatic strikes to try to pressure the Soviet Union to remove the missiles.
Acting without Moscow's approval, a Soviet ground-to-air missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot and exacerbating tensions between Cold War fighters.
Finally, in secret negotiations, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle Cuban missiles.
President Kennedy promised that the United States would not invade Cuba.
Future presidents and Soviet leaders agreed to the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty in the 1960s and 1970s, limiting the number of nuclear warheads ready to strike the other side.
The United States and Russia will never come to the brink of nuclear Armageddon again.
Looking back at the crisis from decades of safe distance, it's easy to see the contrast between the decision-making styles of both President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.
President Kennedy reached out to a wide range of advisers to help with decision-making, but Chairman Khrushchev had few advisers.
In the crisis, United States policymakers rushed to prepare an invasion of the island, not knowing that the missiles were already in operation and that the island was guarded by 40,000 Red Army personnel armed with tactical nuclear weapons the size of bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
He also knew that if there had been a war.The weapons were used by the United States military.
Nevertheless, Khrushchev withdrew the missile when his ploy in Cuba faced the possibility of leading to a nuclear war and was given an out by the United States.
What Khrushchev did not understand when he issued the order to place missiles in Cuba in the first place is that the United States population did not want to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles in Cuba.
By 1962, with the advent of nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles, its insulation was irrational, but still retained by many Americans.
Another important element of Khrushchev's decision is the fact that communications in 1962 was not what it is now.
Given the massive military buildup in Florida, the attempted invasion in the Bay of Pigs, and Operation Mongoose with its destructive activities and assassination attempts, Castro had good reason for this belief.
He may not have fully recognized the huge advantages the United States had in the ICBM, but he knew that Russia's ICRBM in Cuba could hit his enemies hard to the North.
Castro, if the invasion causeswar, the Soviet Union had the best chance of winning if it struck first with their nuclear weapons.
Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated, but was happy to sacrifice the island and its people for communists around the world.
In Castro's letter to Khrushchev, Khrushchev was moved when he suggested that the Russians start a nuclear war before the invasion.
The last reason Khrushchev is willing to pull back could be attributed to President Kennedy's willingness to offer a formal commitment that the United States would not invade Cuba and would not help others if the missiles were to withdraw.
As shown in the film, President Kennedy always chose not to lead to war if he did not go to war.
He could treat the incident as a deliberate escalation ordered by the Kremlin or be seen as unauthorized action by an excessive Soviet commander.
But President Kennedy knew that one choice had made the world much closer to nuclear war, while the other remained hopefulA peaceful solution.
President Kennedy chose to believe that an attack on the U-2 was unauthorized.
What was the outcome of President Kennedy's belief that the U-2 incident was ordered by the Russian government, while Khrushchev has scant leadership for causing the crisis.
Most Western historians believe that the most significant responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, but both sides contributed to the crisis.
He wanted to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Soviet scientists and engineers to upgrade Russia's own missile fleet.
Moreover, in the service of Russian new imperialism and communist solidarity, Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the United States.
Even before the crisis, with the history of the Gulf of Pigs invasion and the ongoing Mongoose Operation, russians and Cubans had reason to fear United States intentions.
The United States and the Kennedy administration contributed to the cuban missile crisis crisis through a number of policies.
Attempts to invade Cuba in the Gulf of Pigs, followed by Operation Mongoose, which toppled the Castro regime and attempted to assassinate Castro, certainly helped set the stage for the crisis.
U.S. policymakers felt that its nuclear shield was all about keeping peace in Europe.
Responsibility for events that place the future of the world in balancefall far more to the Soviet side than the United States. to Khrushchev more than Kennedy.
This imbalance of blame most likely played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down, which was his saving grace.
Indeed, the world and Khrushchev were fortunate that the United States had enough wisdom and personal strength to resist the demands of invasion and airstrikes, and chose not to have another escalating incident that would force President Kennedy's hand.
During the crisis, he warned that there would be people taking action to push the country towards nuclear Armageddon, either through stupidity or because of their own agenda.
Students should be aware that each side has what they get and must lose in any conflict.
The best conclusion to a deadly stand-off is an honorable exit that preserves the face as both parties return from inexplicable positions.
In democracies, many believe that the repository of wisdom is ultimately in the people.
But in 1962, the American people thought that installing intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba would have brought about an unbearable change in the balance of power.
The Soviet Union already had 40 nuclear-armed ICBMs stationed on Russian soil.
These missiles were able to destroy all major United States population centers that kill an estimated 100,000 people.
So while the United States had more ICBMs than Russia, the two superpowers were deadlocked.
The addition of ATMs to Cuba could not really change that fact, and the American people were wrong to regard the installation of missiles in Cuba as a major shift in the balance of power.
But it was probably impossible for President Kennedy to convince them of this.
President Kennedy's solution was to try to force Russia to dismantle the missiles through diplomacy and naval quarantine.
There were other considerations, such as the need to look strong on the international stage.All of these that need to punish Russia for reckless gambling, etc., were provided by a solution created by President Kennedy.
A key episode of the film 13 Days is a confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop.
The Navy Admiral claims his ship correctly followed the traditional rules of engagement.
Defence Secretary Robert McNamara insisted the rules had changed given the importance of the crisis and the possibility of misunderstandings and mistakes.
Under the United States Constitution, it is a decision made by civilian leaders because the commander-in-chief of the armed forces is the president of the Four Presidents of the United States.
Some might suggest that President Kennedy affirmed his aggressive behavior toward a small and weak enemy and supported peace when the stakes were high and the enemy was powerful.
In the film, O'Donnell's character asks Bobby Kennedy to consider whether the hostile second letter is the result of the feeling he and his brother, the president, sent to Khrushchev, who offered to exchange outdated NATO missiles in Turkey for Russian missiles in Cuba.
The second letter from Khrushchev was a direct result of President Kennedy's suggestion that he might be willing to add Turkish missiles to the deal.
Khrushchev was trying to take advantage of the situation and change his initial offer.
In the last film, McNamara's character and McCorn's character have a conversation in which they mention running the table to the Russians in several places, including Asia.
It was not like Munich in the sense that we knew it was going to be replaced by a submarine-based missile.
At the Munich Conference, the German ArmyA great profit, namely, Germany was given a large amount of territory and it gained possession of the Czech fortress with the only natural barrier between Germany and the rest of Czechoslovakia.
The situation in 1962 was like Munich in that the Soviet Union wanted missiles from Turkey, and a political victory might have prompted them to demand more if they achieved their goals through intimidation and aggressive action.
President Kennedy worried that a surprise preemptive strike against Cuba would be a moral equivalent of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor.
Japan felt that United States economic sanctions were hampering Asia's growing war.
In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, the Castro government had secretly allowed hostile foreign powers to mount nuclear weapons aimed at the United States.
However, while there were other reasons to avoid a preemptive strike against Cuba, specifically forcing Russia to forcibly remove nuclear missiles with less force than a preemptive strike or invasion did not prove impossible.
The preemptive strike invasion was extremely dangerous because the United States was not sure it had destroyed all its nuclear weapons and would require only one nuclear strike against the United States to launch a nuclear war with the Soviet Union.
And the invasion will not succeed, or it may be much harder than we expected.
In fact, unknownst to President Kennedy and the United States government, Cuba had 40,000 Red Army troops equipped with battlefield nuclear weapons.
President Kennedy convened a large group of military leaders and diplomatic experts in a team known as Excomm.
A good answer should include some of the following concepts:In large groups, the president is exposed to a wide range of opinions and ideas.
Groups of people working on the problem can often come up with alternatives and ideas that one person did not consider no matter how intelligent they were.
Large groups, if properly managed, will support the establishment of a political agreement and a united front against Russia.
A large group tries to make a decision by compromise, which is very dangerous.
Ultimately, there should be one decision maker who weighs every argument and makes decisions.
In addition to agreeing not to invade Cuba, United Nations Ambassador Adry Stevenson recommended the option of making substantial concessions to Russia.
Munich taught us that one concession is usually followed by a demand for another, until the war arises as a result of miscalculation, or when the aggressor simply goes too much.
Wisdom is to know the difference between concessions and legitimate compromises.
History determined that while the additional concessions may have been reconciliation, the pledge not to invade Cuba was a legitimate compromise.
There was no United States policy of invading Cuba, and Kennedy wanted to dispose of or assassinate Castro, but the United States could say it had given up nothing by agreeing not to invade Cuba.
Paradoxically, the threat of nuclear war between the two countries protected peace during the Cold War.
Bobby Kennedy was referring to a situation that all of the president's key advisers saidWhen the invasion of the Bay of Pigs succeeds.
During the Cuban missile crisis, the military predicted success in Cuba, not knowing that the United States military would counter 40,000 Red Army troops equipped with tactical nuclear weapons.
A fullfledged United States invasion would have been very different from Punny Bay's efforts on pigs.
United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara observes that the United States could use the blockade because it was previously mapped as a war game.
The advantage of using previously planned scenarios is that the stress of the current crisis was developed at a leisure time that did not deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously.
The United States never signed a peace treaty that removed the nuclear first strike option from the table.
The first strike with nuclear weapons was not necessarily a surprise strike.
Nor is there a morally defensive reason to respond if your country is attacked in such an attack.
In any case, the majority of those killed would have been completely innocent.
The only good reason to prepare for a first or retaliatory nuclear attack is to convince the other side that if it hits you, it will be destroyed in turn.
The Soviet Union claimed that the missiles they were installing in Cuba were defensive weapons to protect the Cuban island.
It did nothing to stop the construction of missile launch sites or the arming of existing missiles with nuclear warheads.
This put the United States in a position to quickly cut off oil and other important imports to Cuba in case of war.
U.S. military preparations for the quarantine and invasion of Cuba convinced Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles, along with public and civilian assurances that they would be removed if the missiles were not taken down by the United States.
Excomm's critics of President Kennedy's plan pointed out that without tough policies, the United States would look weak.
Pacifists argue that building large armies and using threats will result in war through miscalculations, either because countries decide that war is in their best interests.
The self-proclaimed realists who make up the majority believe that looking weak invites others to take advantage of you and, as Munich has shown, reconciliation will result in further aggression.
President Kennedy was told that airstrikes would probably not destroy all missiles.
As the film accurately shows, the only person killed in the confrontation was Major Rudolph Anderson, who was shot down over Cuba by a U-2 pilot.
In an interview with the History Channel, the Soviet leader of the missile battery that shot down the U-2 said he acted on his own, that politicians later decided to sort it out and acted without authority from Moscow.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff is a ground-to-air missile that shot down a U.M-2 spy plane.
Memorable scenes from the film include a demonstration by United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adry Stevenson showing the Soviet Union installing missiles in Cuba and that they are lying about it.
In 2003, United States Secretary of State Colin Powell claimed a case of war with Iraq at the United Nations.
Many have pointed out the similarities and differences between these two events.
Stevenson presented irrefutable evidence and galvanized global public opinion.
Much of the information Powell put out turned out to be exaggerated, misleading or wrong.
A Report by the Republican-controlled Senate Intelligence Committee was issued on July 9, 2004.
We know that Iraq did not have a program to make weapons of mass destruction or weapons.
Stevenson's speech helped prevent war and increased United States prestige.
During the Cuban missile crisis, United States intelligence agencies helped make the case that missiles actually existed.
This information was essential to bringing about the weight of opinion in the world on the part of the United States.
The next time the United States or the West asks the world or the United Nations to act on intelligence, there will be very strong questions about whether its intelligence is accurate.
It requires more evidence and increases the risk of sources being compromised.
This means that for years, perhaps decades, the United States and its allies in Western democraciesIn order to obtain consent and cooperation in the international crisis, we must work even more and give up more information.
A key point in the film 13 Days is a naval confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop.
Civilians not only have a valuable perspective, but are ultimately responsible.
The United States Constitution requires this by making the president commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
Cuban leader Fidel Castro stried to justify Russia's actions by insisting that his island needed nuclear weapons to protect itself from aggression by the United States.
The consensus of the world community expressed in some treaties is that nuclear, biological and chemical weapons are special cases and their development should be controlled.
But the country that controls the weapons does not want to relinquish control.
The film take facts and some freedom, for example, the role of adviser Kevin O'Donnell may be exaggerated, and civilian/military conflict is exaggerated.
The film's focus is so limited that it is not enough to provide a balanced view of the crisis.
Subplots that go around the military chain of command and force pilots to make false reports to their superiors about whether they have been subjected to an air-to-air fire are fictitious.
If the essence of the situation is conveyed, a film dealing with historical issues will be beneficial.
You need to make the correct information available to the public and compare it to historical records.
Express and justify President Kennedy's leadership during the Cuban missile crisis.
The general consensus is that President Kennedy demonstrated excellent leadership skills in this crisis and that this leadership was important in avoiding nuclear war.
Look why the Cuban missile crisis was considered such a success for President Kennedy.
John F Kennedy was a cold warrior who used force when he felt it was in America's interest.
His policies before the Cuban missile crisis can be criticized as overly aggressive and dangerous.
But President Kennedy understood the horrors of war, especially nuclear war.
He is one of those in history who has led the world back from the brink of nuclear war.
A good answer touches on the problems described in the notes from the author before this question.
Discussion questions on ethical issues facilitate the use of this film to teach ethical principles and critical viewing.
We will argue that President Kennedy acted in a responsible way during the crisis by making choices that minimized the possibility of war during the preparation of the war.
Khrushchev can make a strong argument that he acted irresponsibly, except for his decision to back down and end the crisis.
It was irresponsible that he risked nuclear war by placing missiles in Cuba, and it was irresponsible to delay the resolution of the crisis by a day or two to try to force another concession from the United States.
Meanwhile, the United States and President Kennedy set the stage to try to destabilize the Castro regime and assassinate Castro.
Nikita Khrushchev's personal and political biography; Fidel Castro's personal and political biography; a closer look at Adry Stevenson's role in the crisis.
Brother Kennedy's cooperation in resolving the crisis; the role and power differences between the Soviet union and the United States supreme leader; the history of attempts to get hold of the expansion of nuclear power.
The state of CubaUnited States relations today; Excom; U-2 incident; the end of the Cold War.
Write a review of the film that discusses the tension and seriousness of the situation, as viewers who have experienced considerable crises, such as September 11, may appreciate it.
Write a checklist proposal for the steps and decisions that must be made before the United States engages in war.
Consider the key factors for those facing the Cuban missile crisis and for the modern interconnected world.
Teachers are encouraged to review certain criteria to ensure that all standards are met over time.
Fog of War, a documentary about an interview with Robert McNamara directed by Errol Morris.
John A Touras, Assistant Professor of Political Science, La Grange College, La Grange, Ga., to Alexander Frieden for the help and proofreading and commenting on the early drafts of this study guide.
John A Touras, assistant professor of political science, La Grange College, La Grange, Ga., to Alexander Frieden for help and proofreading and commenting on the early drafts of this study guide.
