NATO, Marshall Plan, Truman Doctrine, domino theory, McCarthyism) Soviet sphere of influence (e.g.
The operation, although planned during the Eisenhower administration, was a great embarrassment for the new President, John F Kennedy.
Berlin Airlift, 1948-1949 American and British response to the Soviet blockade of the western sectors of Berlin.
Berlin Blockade, 1948 As retaliation for the introduction of the Deutschmark into the 3 western-occupied zones of Germany, the Soviet Union blockaded all land routes from the west into Berlin.
The subsequent airlift of supplies into Berlin by the Americans and British proved successful and the blockade was lifted in May 1949.
Berlin Wall, 1961 Built by the East Germans in August, the wall surrounded the City of West Berlin, thus making escape to West Germany by East German citizens much more difficult.
The wall became the symbol of the Cold War, and its removal, beginning on November 9, 1989 symbolically signalled the end of the Cold War.
Its primary function is obtaining and analyzing information about foreign governments, corporations, and persons, and reporting such information to the branches of the Government.
The third function of the CIA is as the hidden hand of the United States government, by engaging in covert operations at the direction of the President.
This last function has caused most controversy for the CIA, raising questions about the legality, morality, effectiveness, and intelligence of such operations.
Despite serious tensions that occasionally resulted in proxy wars, the United States and USSR never engaged in war.
COMECON ―The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance , 1947 –– 1991, was an economic organization of communist states and a kind of Eastern Bloc equivalent to——but more inclusive than——the European Economic Community.
The military counterpart to History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List 2 the Comecon was the Warsaw Pact, though Comecon's membership was significantly wider.
Cominform Communist Information Bureau established in 1947 with the purpose of coordinating communist party activities in both Eastern and Western Europe.
The Bureau was dissolved in 1956 by Khrushchev as part of his peaceful co-existence policy.
Containment US foreign policy from the Truman Doctrine of 1947; purpose to contain spread of communism throughout the world.
After considerable negotiating, Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on condition that the United States promised never to invade Cuba.
Kennedy`s handling of this most serious crisis of the Cold War greatly enhanced his prestige as a statesman. de-Stalinization ―When he became leader, Khrushchev declared an amnesty for some serving prison sentences for criminal offences, announced price cuts, and relaxed the restrictions on private agricultural plots.
De-Stalinization also spelled an end to the role of large-scale forced labour in the economy.
This move by the British, French and Americans angered the Soviets and led to the Berlin Blockade of 194849.
The term is also used historically by Latin Americans to show their disapproval of the role that the US government and United States corporations have played in using economic, diplomatic, and military power to open up foreign markets.
History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List 3 Eisenhower Doctrine ―The Eisenhower Doctrine, given in a message to Congress on January 5, 1957, was the foreign policy of United States President Dwight D Eisenhower.
The doctrine stated that the United States would use armed forces upon request in response to imminent or actual aggression to the United States.
Furthermore, countries that took stances opposed to Communism would be given aid in various forms.
The military action provisions of the Doctrine were applied in the Lebanon Crisis the following year, when America intervened in response to a request by that country's president.
In the global political context, the Doctrine was made in response to the possibility of a generalized war, threatened as a result of the Soviet Union's attempt to use the Suez War as a pretext to enter Egypt.
Coupled with the power vacuum left by the decline of British and French power in the region after their failure in that same war, Eisenhower felt that a strong position needed to better the situation was further complicated by the positions taken by Egypt's Nasser, who was rapidly building a power base and using it to play the Soviets and Americans against each other, taking a position of ""positive neutrality"" and accepting aid from the Soviets.
It was here that United Nations amphibious forces made a successful landing in 1950 in order to outflank North Korean forces that invaded South Korea.
Iron Curtain Term used to describe the dividing line between Soviet controlled Eastern Europe and the West.
A military coup in Latin America would often install a ruling junta, so the term acquired the specific English meaning of military junta.
Military dictatorship, a form of government wherein the political power resides with the military.
In 1948 the Organization for European Economic Cooperation was set up to administer a recovery plan for western European nations.
The total aid package between 1948 and 1952 amounted to USD 17 billion.
Massive Retaliation Keystone of United States Cold War foreign policy beginning in 1950s, based on the assumption that any nuclear attack from the Soviet Union would be countered with an equal or greater nuclear weapon response.
McCarthyism ―Term describing a period of intense anti-Communist suspicion in the United States that lasted roughly from the late 1940s to the late 1950s.
The term is named for United States Senator Joseph McCarthy, a Republican of Wisconsin.
During this time many thousands of Americans were accused of being Communists or communist sympathizers and became the subject of aggressive investigations and questioning before government or private-industry panels, committees and agencies.
The primary History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List 4 targets of such suspicions were government employees, those in the entertainment industry, educators and union activists.
Suspicions were often given credence despite inconclusive or questionable evidence, and the level of threat posed by a person's real or supposed leftist associations or beliefs was often greatly exaggerated.
Many people suffered loss of employment, destruction of their careers, and even imprisonment.
Most of these punishments came about through trial verdicts later overturned, laws that would be declared unconstitutional, dismissals for reasons later declared illegal or actionable, or extra-legal procedures that would come into general disrepute.
The United States planned to stay neutral in wars between European powers and its colonies.
However, if these latter types of wars were to occur in the Americas, the United States would view such action as hostile.
In 1952 Turkey and Greece joined the alliance, followed by West Germany in 1955 and Spain in 1982.
It consisted of 19 members in 2001, including former members of Warsaw Pact Poland, Hungary and Czech Republic.
They represent nearly 2/3 the United Nations's members and comprise 55% of the world population.
Its primary purpose was to provide a system of early detection of a Soviet bomber or rocket attack.
Organization for European Economic Cooperation Created in 1948 to administer and coordinate the use of aid provided by the Marshall Plan to rebuild war-torn Western Europe.
Ost-politik See Willi Brandt Peaceful Coexistence Term used by Khruschev in 1956 to describe how he thought the Soviet Union and the West, despite their ideological differences, could co-exist in a peaceful manner.
Chinese communists did History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List 5 not agree with Khrushchev’s approach and consequently this policy helped bring about Soviet-Sino split.
The last of the conferences of war-time leaders, attended by Stalin, Truman and Churchill who was replaced by newly elected Prime Minister Atlee.
Sputnik First unmanned satellite in space, launched by Soviet Union in 1957.
Soviet initiative prompted the Americans to attempt to catch up and pass the Soviet Union in the space race.
Twelve years later the United States proved its success by landing on the moon.
Test Ban Treaty, 1963 A treaty signed originally by the US, the USSR and Britain agreeing not to test nuclear weapons in the atmosphere.
Elements of Titoism are characterized by policies and practices based on the principle that in each country, the means of attaining ultimate communist goals must be dictated by the conditions of that particular country, rather than by a pattern set in another country.
This decision to provide military and economic aid was prompted by the threat of the spread of communism into Greece and it formed the cornerstone of United States foreign policy for the next forty years.
Thirty-eighth Parallel The demarcation line in Korea agreed upon by the Soviet Union and United States when they withdrew their forces from the Korean Peninsula in 1947.
In 1953 this line again became the demarcation line between the two countries.
Trizonia, 1948 A joining together for economic purposes of the French, British and American zones of occupied Germany.
This configuration led to the establishment of the state of West Germany in 1949.
U2 Incident 1940 An American U2 spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960.
Khrushchev demanded an apology from President Eisenhower and when he did not receive one he decided to leave the Paris Summit Conference between the two leaders.
History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List 6 United Nations An organization established after the Second World War to provide collective security to its members.
Warsaw Pact Established as a military alliance in 1955 by Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Rumania, and Soviet Union.
Albania withdrew from the pact in 1968 and the organization formally dissolved in 1991.
The only joint military action of the pact was the 1968 intervention in Czechoslovakia.
This situation lasted until 1990, when the two states were reunited as the German Federal Republic.
Yalu River The river that forms the border between North Korea and China.
It became famous during the Korean War because, as UN forces approached, the Chinese decided to enter the war.
Leader of the country during the ―economic miracle‖, the integration of West Germany into NATO and the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961.
Chiefly responsible for the creation of harmonious relations with Germany’s old enemy, France.
Batista, Fulgencia Cuban president who established himself in power after a coup in 1952.
He ruled as a dictator until he lost support in late 1958 due to the revolution led by Fidel Castro.
As Foreign Minister and Chancellor, he worked towards better relations with East Germany and the other Soviet bloc countries.
His ―ost-politik‖ resulted in treaties with the Soviet Union, Poland, and East Germany that recognized the post-1945 borders.
He led a successful guerrilla campaign against the Batista regime from 1956 to 1959.
The subsequent boycott by the United States government encouraged Castro to form very strong ties with Soviet Union.
Dulles, John Foster US Secretary of State 1953-59 responsible for the creation of SEATO, the strengthening of NATO and the Eisenhower Doctrine in Middle East.
His domestic policy aims of civil rights and social reform were mainly not achieved during his short presidency.
He developed a strategy of island hopping which eventually resulted in the United States Air Force being able to bomb Japan.
He was made commander-in-chief of UN forces in Korea in 1950, but publicly objected to Truman’s orders regarding not attacking China, so was relieved of his duties.
His death from falling out a window may have been a suicide or may have been organized by communist agents.
History 12 Unit IV The Early Cold War Prescribed Learning Outcomes and Vocabulary List 8 Nagy, Imre ―A Hungarian politician, appointed Prime Minister of Hungary on two occasions.
Nagy's second term ended when his non-Soviet-backed government was brought down by Soviet invasion in the failed Hungarian Revolution of 1956, resulting in Nagy's execution on charges of treason two years later.
He became the communist leader of Yugoslavia in 1945 but pursued a policy independent from the Soviet Union.
The highlights of his time in office include the decision to use atomic bomb, the Truman doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the formation of NATO, and the decision to send troops to Korea in 1950.
