MARCTRACHTENBERG Over the past few years we have learned a good deal about the Cuban missile crisis.
Soviet sources, even in this era of glasnost, have not provided us with much hard evidence.
This I think is on the whole true even of Bemd Greiner’s interview with Sergo Mikoyan.
When Mikoyan said something that I already believed, I thought to myself, “Yes, that’s true.
But when he said something I did not agree with-his claim, for example, that Khrushchev’s fall had nothing to do with the missile crisis-it was easy to dismiss the remark out of hand.
He was essentially expressing his own opinion, and there was no way to know how much information his conclusions were based on.
The most important passages were those in which he provided us with some new factual detail.
But the m m general observations simply reflected his own personal point of view, and as such did not carry much evidentiary weight.
Even with all the new American evidence, there is much that we do not understand about the missile crisis.
Indeed, this evidence has had the effect of raising many new questions and opening up some old ones.
Presumably the reference here is to the hardening of the Soviet terms for a resolution of the crisis-the adding of a demand on 27 October for withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for a withdrawal of their own missiles from Cuba.
But a comment by CIA Director John McCone in the ExComm discussions on 27 October leads one to question this sort of interpretation.
The conventional interpretation of the missile crisis has changed dramatically over the past decade.
For many years, it had been argued that the Kennedy administration's handling of the crisis-its ability to calibrate the level of tension and thus to strikejust the right balance between firmness and flexibility-had demonstrated that there was a kind of art of crisis management.
But by 1987it had become clear that the standard inteq'etation had changed.
The argument now was that crises between nuclear powers are inherently unmanageable.
The missile crisis, it was claimed, was a good deal more dangerous than people had realized.There were so many things that did go wrong, and so many more things that could have gone wrong, especially once military action had begun, that the crisis could very easily have gotten out of hand.
This was certainly the view of certain key officials of the Kennedy administration who gathered on a number of occasions to look back and reflect on the crisis.
Former Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, for example, argued repeatedly that no one can with any confidencepredict how events in a nuclear crisis would unfold, especially if military f o m is actually used.
It was therefore ""not possible,"" he said, ""to manage a crisis in the nuclear age,"" in the sense of being able to exercise strong control over how the confrontation works itself Out.
The same sorts of arguments were made by other commentators on the crisis-by Raymond Garthoff. for example, and by Daniel Ellsberg and Seymour Hersh.
I am grateful to Meg Vaillancourt of WGBH for giving me a copy of the videotape the station made of some of those sessions.
Even Dicier Than We Knew,"" Newswee&,26 October 1987,34, listed a number of ""close c d s "" that he rays might have ""tipped the balance toward war during Ihe missile crisir."" -our Hersh.
This new interpretation did not take shape as people tried to come to terms with the new evidence on the crisis that became available over the past decade.
The most important point to emerge from these new sources was that President Kennedy was much more willing to compromise on the issue of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey than had previously been th~ught.
This was, however, only the most important of many new findings that pointed-or should have pointed-to the basic conclusion that the risks were not as great as people had thought.
It is widely assumed, fxst of all, that if Cuba had been attacked, and especially if Russian lives had been lost in the process, there would have been a retaliation, probably against the Jupiter missile sites in Turkey; the Americans would have been forced to respond, and the conflict in all likelihood would have escalated to the point of general war.
But the new evidence suggests quite strongly that if things had reached the point of a Soviet attack on the Jupiters, an American retaliation would have been far from automatic.
This, however, was not nearly as dangerous as we have been led to believe.
It is clear from the transcript of the 27 October ExComm meetings that the American response to these attacks was not to order a counterescalation.
Cuban antiaircraft fire was instead leading the United States to pull back.
Low-level reconnaissance probably is on its way When one studies these events at this level of detail, one does not detect a process of escalation spiraling out of control.
There is one important empirical argument, developed mainly by Daniel Ellsberg and Seymour Hersh, that is offered in support of these general claims.
The Americans, this argument runs, felt during the crisis that they had to maintain surveillanceof Cuba.
To protect the reconnaissance aircraft, the American government would have to react militarily if these planes came under hostile fire, and especially if any of them were shot down.
The calculation that the risk inherent in such a policy was tolerable was based on the assumption that Khrushchev, a responsible statesman, exercised control both over Castro and in particular over the surface-to-air missile sites.
Khrushchev did not control all the SAM sites, and indeed the Cuban government itself might have taken over one of these installations with military force during the crisis.
Because an American retaliation could have set off an escalatory process that might well have culminated in general thermonuclear war, the American policy, rooted in a misperception about who was calling the shots in Cuba,was extremely dangerous.
As some of Greiner‘s comments show, this argument is now in the process of being accepted even by professional historians.
There are first of all a number of problems relating to the factual accuracy of their account.
The idea that the United States had unknowingly “passed the trigger” to Castro is based on the assumption that Cuban troops controlled at least one of the S A M sites; the United States government certainly already knew that the Cubans controlled the antiaircraft batteries that were a threat to low-flying reconnaissance aircraft.
But what sort of evidence is there that Cuban %arianu of this argument are found in the Hersh.
Nothing in these intercepts indicated that the attackers were Cuban government troops, and not, for example, anti-Castro guerrilla forces.
Nor did the intercepts in any way indicate that the attack on the Soviet base had been successful.
The most the NSA analysts had been able to conclude was that the possibility that this SAM site “may not have been fully under Soviet control when the U2 was shot down” could not be ruled out.s This was the only real basis for Hersh’s claim that the clash had “apparently” been with Cuban government forces; Ellsberg’s conclusion that the Cuban regime had probably taken over the site also relied mainly on this source.
Hersh had not actually seen the 27 October transcript, the ultimate source for these claims, when he wrote his article; he relied instead on what he was told by people who had read it.
Khrushchev, for example, was never singled out by name as the individual responsible for the downing of the plane.
President Kennedy did comment in passing that the attack was “an escalation by them,” but neither he nor anyone else elaborated the point in the way that Hersh suggested and argued that the attack had been ordered for bargaining purposes.
Putting the issue of factual accuracy aside, one can pursue the basic question a bit further.
Suppose the Cubans really had been responsible for shooting down the U-2, but that the United States government had blamed the Soviets instead.
The more isolated the Cubans were, the more their Soviet protector could be presumed to have been alienated by Cuba’s hostile behavior, the more likely the Americans would have been to judge that the risks were low and thus to retaliate.
But for these commentators, the assumption is that an American retaliatory attack could have set off the avalanche and led to a full-scale war.
We now know, however, that the U-2 was almost certainly shot down on the orders of the Soviet commander at the S A M base acting on his own authority.
The giving of such an assurance might be expected to reduce the probability of an American reprisal; it also reflects a Soviet eagerness to avoid provocation that should be taken into account in an overall assessment of the risk of escalation.
But even if the United States had chosen to retaliate, our new knowledge that the Soviet government did not order the attack should lead us to reduce our estimate of the probability of a Soviet counterretaliation.The Soviet leadership had clearly expected a SAM attack of this sort to be dangerous.
A U.S.reprisal was more likely to be “understood”and accepted, given that the attack was the result of a decision by the commander in the field, than if the strike had actually been ordered by the Kremlin.
The Cuban crisis began with an act of deception, when the Soviets deployed missiles on the island while saying, or at least strongly implying, that this was something they would never do.
It was also ended by an act of deception, On 27 October, when the Kennedy administration was looking for a way out of the crisis, none of the normal diplomatic alternativesit explored seemed at all attractive.
It cut the Gordian knot by issuing what was in effect an ultimatum combined with secret “assurances”regarding the withdrawal of the missiles from Turkey.
President Kennedy, it was said, would never have considered anything of the sort.
It was the administration’s skill in crisis management, the argument went, that had brought about a resolution of the crisis.
We are, however, now well on the way to trading it in for a new set of myths, equally remote from reality, about the ease with which things can spin out of control in a crisis.
We will be doing our job as historians only if we maintain a certain critical distance and refrain from accepting these new myths too quickly.
It would be counterproductive to pretend that the mere expression of opinion, unsupported by factual detail, even by those who have fusthand knowledge of these events, carries any real evidentiary weight.
