Read excerpts from interviews with historians, journalists, and analysts.
Her interviewees had much more to say than could fit in a two-hour program.
Read these excerpts from interviews with historians, journalists and analysts.
You have the generation that fought the first war of independence against Spain in the 1860s and '70s.
The second revolutionary generation that fought against Spain beginning in 1895, led by Jose Marti.
You have then the generation of '33, which overthrew Machado, but had their revolution cut short by United States intervention.
So there's this long tradition in Cuba of revolutionary generations, of each generation defining itself in a way by overthrowing a dictatorial regime.
When Castro says, this is going to be a real revolution, in 1959, I think he's referring to the aborted revolutions of 1898 and 1933.
I think he wants to carry those revolutions through to their promise -or to what he thinks their promise was, which is in particular... reforms that will address the economic and social inequalities of Cuban society.
And those are reforms which even the republic of 1940, even though it was democratic, did not address.
I think my generation was used as a test dummy for the revolutionary process.
The first uniforms were worn by my generation; it was like trying to convert Cuba into an arm of China.
We were put through every type of experiment possible in order to convert us into ""the new man""-that's exactly what we are, a generation with many socially inadapted people.
I would talk to them -it was fairly open -from Guatemala, from Nicaragua, from Salvador, from Vietnam, from Central Africa.
He wanted -there is no question in my mind -he wanted to be a real world military power, and he saw himself as standing up to the United States.
Khrushchev was capable of responding pragmatically to a progressive movement, but what you see in this attachment to Cuba is something quite different.
This was not like his relationship with Egypt, his relationship with Iraq, or his relationship with Guinea.
They seemed to be a spontaneous movement that shared Moscow's ideas and was willing to take Moscow's guidance.
In summer of 1960... the entire United States intelligence community judged that there was a good likelihood that one or more other Latin American countries would fall under the sway of revolutionary regimes sponsored and supported by Cuba within the next year or year and a half.
So the Kennedy administration was being told that other Latin American countries were going to fall to communist revolutionary regimes with the help of Fidel Castro.
If it was exaggerated in retrospect, I think it was only slightly exaggerated.
The Cuban revolution is an example, an inspiration for young people, especially in Latin America but even beyond Latin America, in the United States and in Europe, during the 1960s because of the kind of idealism and promise that it represents.
It's a revolution that promises to deal with the inequalities of underdeveloped Latin America.
It's a revolution that promises more openness and freedom on the cultural front initially.
It's a revolution, that promises to get beyond the corruption that's been so traditional, not just in Cuba but in many Latin American countries.
It's a revolution that promises to try to solve all those problems by finding a third way between socialism and capitalism.
It is a time when the human rights discourse was not yet internationally developed, the way fortunately, it is today.
Because the American image in Latin America was not good and they were sort of conscious of this... the idea began to take shape, we've got to get rid of him and make it look like somebody else is doing it.
Well the somebody else that they came up with were Cuban exiles that they would train and lead ashore at the Bay of Pigs.
We did not envision an invasion supported by American planes, American tanks, American marines.
We'd already bombed the airfields, knew that there was a task force off the coast... he announced, for the first time, that this is a socialist revolution.
This was a transparent effort on his part to get the Soviets to come to his support.
Well, certainly, he didn't expect that we were going to put 1,200 exiles ashore and leave it at that.
He expected the first and second Marine divisions to come in right after them.
He defeated the American, the CIA effort without any difficulty on his own.
Nonetheless, from that point forward, from having said this is a socialist revolution, he then began to convert it into a Soviet-style system with a party-state government apparatus.
In the days immediately preceding, during and right after the Bay of Pigs in mid April of 1961, the repressive machinery of Castro's government the security and the internal police and other intelligence services, rounded up many thousands of Cubans -real and imagined opponents of the regime.
Held them, incarcerated them, held them in detention, fearing that that they would become involved with the exile brigade and offer them assistance.
This broke the back of the internal resistance of the unorganized opposition to Castro at that time.
And it was very large, the opposition to Castro, organized or not, in the spring of 1961.
It is the possibility of beheading all of the opposition with a single blow.
Hundreds of thousands of people are detained in Cuba at the moment of the invasion.
The political opposition is left without leaders and at the same time the opposition suffers a demoralizing defeat.
I think we didn't realize it but the possibility of defeating Cuba militarily ended in April of '61.
There's a famous conversation that takes place in South America in November of 1961 between Che Guevara and Richard Goodman, who's a White House speechwriter for Kennedy.
And Guevara walks across the room and shakes Goodman's hand and says, Mr Goodman I would just like to thank you for the Bay of Pigs, thank you very much.
The Bay of Pigs provided the perfect pretext for Castro to say, ""I am a socialist and I've always been a socialist,"" to declare the Cuban revolution a socialist revolution -all this takes place in that context -and also, to do something very risky, which was to roll up the whole internal resistance movement, to round up somewhere between 50,000 and 100,000 people and put them in stadiums and put them in stockades.
Risky because there was still a civil war going on inside Cuba at this point.
But the Bay of Pigs, to the Americans, this little dinky thing that happened, 1500 guys that went ashore, 72 hours later they're either dead or running around in the jungle or most of them are being marched up to Havana for a show trial.
It might have looked like that to the Americans, and it was kind of a humiliation, it didn't really affect our security much, but what it provided Castro -Playa Girón, April 1961, is the primal event to which he always goes back when there's ever any question of whether we should trust the Americans or whether we shouldn't trust the Americans.
After that, the hostility, the enmity in the relationship is guaranteed.
In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, the immediate aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, and the Cuban military victory over the exile brigade, Castro's credibility, his strength in Cuba and throughout Latin America, was enormously enhanced.
His revolution at that moment was more consolidated than it had ever been before.
He had done what no Latin American leader before him had ever done and that was to defeat a really significant challenge --military kind of challenge -mounted by the United States.
And his credibility on the island, in Latin America, soared and whatever remaining opponents he had on the island, they were cowed and intimidated, because Castro was no longer the David fighting the Goliath; he was a Goliath of a different sort, in his own realm.
The Bay of Pigs invasion so closely associates opposition to the revolution with the United States, that Castro is able to wrap himself in the Cuban flag and declare the revolution socialist.
It's not a coincidence that he declares the revolution a socialist revolution at the time of the Bay of Pigs, because he now he can wrap the socialist project in Cuban nationalism.
I think that the minor damage was the Bay of Pigs and the biggest contribution that Kennedy made was stopping any further action at that time because, if the United States had acted, Cuba would have been like Vietnam.
The idea for deploying missiles in Cuba, nuclear missiles in Cuba, was Khrushchev's.
In the spring of 1962, Khrushchev began thinking about what to do about several problems at once.
One of them was that the Soviets had a very inferior missile battery, missile capability.
Their missiles didn't fly often, they didn't go straight, the bombs didn't explode -a classic Soviet problem.
Most of the missiles that were launched in Siberia wound up exploding somewhere in Siberia.
But one way around that problem was pointed out to him by his generals, which is, it might sound strange Nikita, but if you put them in Cuba, it's like putting them in Florida.
What he wanted were defensive conventional weapons to defend his country against an attack that he assumed would occur, perhaps, in 1963, or 1964.
The Soviets, themselves, did not expect an attack until just before the Kennedy reelection of 1964.
The assumption was that John F Kennedy would have some kind of October surprise in 1964 so that he could be reelected.
So the Cuban request was for tanks, surface-to-air missiles, and for some, perhaps some, Soviet soldiers, but, really, to train the Cuban army to be ready for the attack in 1964.
The missiles came as a surprise to Fidel... his reaction was, well, I'll take them, but you know we don't need them.
I will take them for the sake of socialist unity, but for Cuban defense, we don't need them.
He suggested, why don't you just let us sign a collective security agreement.
Later on, Nikita Khrushchev would talk about this as a defensive measure to protect Cuba, but in the very beginning, the Soviets were talking about this as an offensive strategy to apply pressure to the United States in the game of 1962.
When Khrushchev raised the possibility of putting these missiles in to defend Cuba, Castro understood immediately that the real purpose was to improve the balance of power somewhat for the Soviet Union because the United States had far more intercontinental missiles than the Soviet Union did.
So if they placed these missiles in Cuba, that strengthened the hand of the Soviet Union.
Castro said he would do it to as his support for the socialist bloc, but that it wouldn't really defend Cuba because if the Americans had not decided to invade before the missiles came in, they certainly would invade once they knew the missiles were coming in.
So the best thing to do was to do it openly, sign a new mutual defense agreement and as part of it, have the missiles in.
Then, if the Americans didn't like it, there was a possibility of negotiating and maybe the Soviets could bring about the withdrawal of the American Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
And they might even get the United States to give some pledge not to invade Cuba, if the Soviets wouldn't put the missiles in.
There was no way that the Soviets could get those missiles in secretly.
Construct the site, bring the missiles and the warheads to the ports, truck them up to the sites, raise the missiles, mate the warheads to the missiles with all the paraphernalia involved. had U2s going over periodically, P-4 reconnaissance planes sucking up all the radio messages inside the island, absolutely no way that that could be done.
Many issues came to the fore immediately when the Soviets began arriving in the summer of 1962.
The Soviets said, we're going to put the missiles here, and they'd clear away an area.
And as the CIA later discovered, what they actually did was to create a missile site with the pad and the bunkers and so forth, that was identical to the ones they had in Siberia.
So the idea was to take this hilly, thickly forested terrain, bulldoze it, and turn it into a more humid, warmer version of Siberia.
This was one of the problems for the Cubans because if the truth had gotten out about the contract that they signed, sort of a treaty, what it really did was to grant the Soviets four pieces of property a little bit like Guantanamo, which the Americans occupy and have occupied since 1903.
The Russians arrived -this is one of my favorite stories about Soviet cleverness -43,000 arrived by the time the missile crisis erupts in October, and in order to disguise themselves they all wear striped shirts so as not to be seen, and then they march in formation.
Fidel wanted to tell Khrushchev, that if the Soviet Union had to use nuclear weapons to defend the socialist world and if that meant that Cuba might be sacrificed, that's OK -that the Cuban people were dedicated to socialism and would sacrifice themselves for the greater good of the socialist commonwealth.
In fact, Khrushchev, who was an optimist, was pessimistic only about nuclear war.
The only thing he felt that could disrupt the development of socialism worldwide was a nuclear war.
If you ask any of the Americans who were involved in this the most critical mistake that the Soviets made, it was to lie about it.
Because Kennedy's speech -7:00, 22nd of October -he came on and told the American people what was going on.
Seven times he says they're lying, they're deceptive, and in a superpower this is intolerable.
You cannot tolerate a nuclear superpower that doesn't play by the rules of the game and therefore, these things are coming out on principle, as well as for all kinds of strategic reasons.
In addressing Fidel as an enemy, the United States has to realize that you are dealing with an individual who is obsessed with his place in history.
And very few rulers are so indifferent to the well being of their peoples as Fidel Castro is.
This was dramatically shown at the time of the Missile Crisis in 1962 when Fidel tried to get the Soviets to launch a nuclear attack on the United States, a preemptive attack, realizing very well that this will result in a response on the part of the United States that will wipe out Cuba.
And he didn't care, because he had never worried about the Cuban people's well being.
When the Soviets decided to withdraw the big missiles, Castro hoped that they would not withdraw the short-range missiles, the tactical missiles, that his people could use against American invasion.
He very much wanted to tell the world that Cuba had a nuclear defense on its beaches.
Initially, the Soviets were prepared to share those missiles, to give those missiles to the Cubans.
But after Fidel Castro's behavior, Moscow realized that it was too risky to let the Cubans have nuclear weapons and so they decided to withdraw them.
Cuba was the port of entry to the Americas for Spain, and its main source of sugar.
And Cuba's independence came very late, in 1902, 80 years after... most of the Latin Americans had their independence.
The Spaniards held onto Cuba much tighter than almost any other country.
At one point there were 200,000 Spanish troops in Cuba, as much as in all the rest of Latin America together.
The United States put as a condition for withdrawing American forces from Cuba in 1902 that in the Cuban Constitution there would be an amendment saying that the United States had the right to intervene in Cuba.
This was abolished by President Roosevelt in 1933, but it was part of the history of the Cubans trying to get this blemish off the independence and sovereignty of Cuba through all those years.
Today, perhaps, 1933 is very far away, but not for the people of my generation.
It peaks in the 1920s, and then gradually declines from the 1920s to the 1950s.
The United States owned and operated the majority of Cuba's sugar mills, and certainly the most efficient ones, through the first quarter of the 1920s.
In the second quarter of the 20th century, the proportion of the sugar harvest accounted for by United States farms declines.
United States banks control the Cuban financial system in the first quarter of the 20th century.
Their control of the Cuban financial system declines during the second quarter of the 19th century.
In subject after subject, the effective power of the United States over Cuba declined from the first to the second quarter of the 20th century.
The role of the United States in Cuba begins in important ways in 1898 with the Spanish-American War, when the United States sends troops to Cuba to fight Spain, but really is intervening in Cuba's war of independence.
Of course, rather than immediately turning the government over to Cuba, we install a military governor who governs for a number of years.
We impose the Platt Amendment on Cuba, which, in effect, constrains Cuba's rights as a sovereign country to have dealings with other countries, gives the United States the right to intervene in Cuba whenever we find it convenient.
And the United States then does, in fact, intervene in Cuba several times over the next decade.
And it becomes clear, as the old saying went, that the United States' ambassador was the second most powerful person in Cuba, behind the president himself.
The United States intervenes again in 1932-33 in the midst of a revolution against the dictator Machado.
The United States imposes a solution on that situation, and overthrows a very popular nationalist government that gets rid of the Machado regime in 1933.
So there's a sense for Cuban nationalists in which every time Cuba is about to seize control of its own destiny -in 1898, in 1933 -the United States steps in and takes control of Cuba and moves Cuba in a way that's consonant with the interests of the United States, rather than the interests of Cuba.
And that's why Fidel Castro is so adamant in 1959 about seeing to it that the United States doesn't control his Cuban revolution.
Since our independence, that was one of the constant factors in Cuba politics, the support of the United States government for a particular political figure, or a president.
It was constant participation and involvement in political matters in Cuba.
The American occupation signified, from the economic point of view... a positive thing.
One can't forget that in 1952, the United States recognized Batista immediately because at that time it was American policy to recognize dictators.
So all the elements mixed in with the idea of an unfinished revolution, and mixed in with this conflict, which had diminished the Cuban nation, were found in all the unrest that Fidel Castro stirred up marvelously in the Sixties.
There are two ways to think about the impact of the United States on the course of the Cuban revolution at the end of the first quarter of 1959.
One has been very common, and it is the argument that the United States government pushed Fidel into the arms of the Soviet Union, the communists, and radicals.
In January, February, March, early April of 1959, the United States undertook a variety of initiatives to try to reach out to the Cuban government and to discuss, professionally and effectively, a number of ways whereby the United States government could help the Cuban government.
And on the Cuban government's side, including Fidel Castro's own words, there are a number of instances that he thought, at least for a short period of time, a few weeks in early 1959, that there could be this kind of constructive, mutually beneficial relationship with the United States, that included accepting international assistance and foreign investment.
The second way to think about the impact of the United States on Cuba in 1959 is the long legacy of United States presence, the role of United States firms, the salience of the United States way of life on Cuban society.
And at some point in February, March, and early April of 1959, Fidel Castro comes to the decision that there could not be a revolution in Cuba, that he could not build the Cuba that he wanted unless he extirpated the United States from Cuba.
And at that point, there was very little the United States government could do to shake that conviction.
So that when Fidel Castro comes to the United States in April of 1959, and the Eisenhower administration tries to open up discussions on foreign aid and other means of international cooperation, Fidel instructs his economic team not to ask for aid, not to accept aid, not even to discuss it.
The reason it has maintained itself is because of its encounters, and nearness to the United States... they have made an aberration out of the hate towards the United States and have canalized their hostility by supporting Fidel Castro.
They think that by doing so they're driving the Americans nuts, but the truth is nobody in the United States cares about it.
But the objections to United States policy come about because from 1898 until 1959, the United States controlled Cuba.
There is something odd about the sense of Cuban nationalism that is perhaps summarized by the fact that Cubans today and over time, for a long time, consider that one of the national drinks is rum and Coke, cuba libre as it is called in Spanish.
Rum and Coke is rum, a Cuban drink, and Coca-Cola, a United States product.
Cuba and the United States have been intertwined for at least a century, and perhaps more.
It is not possible to be a Cuban without in some sense incorporating the United States into that sense of being.
First of all, I think Fidel Castro awakens a deep anthropological curiosity -he's the bearded man dressed in military costume with a heroic history, and he militarily defeated a dictatorship.
The legendary image that he constructs is assisted by the fact that there are very powerful feelings against the United States, the capitalist economy, and he is looked upon as a hero.
The Latin American leftists perceive him as a hero that battles against adversity, and even though on occasion he has erratic behavior, his untamable character is more important than anything else.
The illogical result of that is that he has been able to exculpate himself, to remove himself morally from virtually all of consequences of his actions.
It's not him as an individual acting, it's historical forces that are compelling him to act.
Through his entire career, beginning with Moncada and maybe going back even to the student activist days, he has been able to absolve himself.
That was what he said, that was the closing line, the main theme of his speech in self-defense when he was tried in 1953 after the attack on the Moncada barracks, which launched the Cuban revolutionary process.
I may have engaged in this violence against the Batista dictatorship, we may have attacked this military barracks in Santiago, the Moncada, but what we did was right.
He lives by his code and on that basis he decides that his ideas are correct and what he does is the right thing to do.
If you don't follow that way of thinking then you're out of his code, you're punishable, condemnable -you lose everything.
When you're with him, in his circle of power, you have influence, but if he, as they say, ""lets go of you,"" then you turn into nobody, it's over and everyone finds out that you're no longer under Fidel Castro's protection.
He almost never gives a speech without making reference to earlier struggles.
From the very beginning, he said that the revolution in 1959 was not a separate revolution, but was a continuation of the struggles that began against Spain and continued throughout the twentieth century.
He really has a feel for the icons of Cuba's political culture and its history of struggle for independence.
I didn't know very much about him except that he was up in the Sierra Maestra and that people pinned their hopes on this man.
In my family, my immediate family, my uncles and my grandfather, everyone went out once the revolution came to power to pay their back taxes, because now there was going to be an honest government in Cuba.
Fidel Castro not only came with the legend of Sierra Maestra but also from having defeated the Americans at Playa Girón -that was magnified.
I think even during the struggle against Batista, Fidel Castro was motivated by two sets of important values.
He saw the terrible discrepancies between rich and poor, urban and rural, men and women, black and white, and he felt compelled to do something about that.
The second set of principles had to do with Cuba's relationship to the United States.
He saw the history of Cuba being dominated by United States power, both economic and political, and he had as an objective of the revolution to free Cuba from that United States dominance.
I'd put Ho Chi Minh probably in there, I might put Lenin, I might put Churchill.
But Fidel Castro is in some ways even more interesting, because he leads a country that is 1/87th the size of his principal mortal enemy and he not only gets away with it, but he does it with flair.
He has co-opted the United States in so many ways, including getting, I would say, even now, the majority of nonUnited States citizens on his side.
But has been able to slip between this alliance and get out of that one, to bring back tourism that he said he wouldn't, to survive the collapse of the Soviet Union when everybody said he wouldn't.
And then I found a document from 1959, '60 written by Paul Nitze -it said six months.
Fidel Castro was able to stay in power for so many years and after so many challenges, particularly the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, because he was so incredibly clever -and usually much, much more clever than the people who were against him.
Also a lot of people weren't paying that much attention to him, and he was attending very carefully to the United States.
He knew how to reach our young people, how to appear to be the romantic hero, and by the time people sort of got onto him in the '80s and more into the '90s, there was nobody who was going to overthrow him.
Learn More // ads googletag.cmd.push { // interior side ad googletag.display }); Now Streaming Flood in the Desert Explore the 1928 dam collapse, the second deadliest disaster in California history.
Related Features Fidel Castro | Article Filmmaker Adriana Bosch In this interview, Cuban-born filmmaker Adriana Bosch describes working on Fidel Castro.
Fidel Castro | Article Views on Cuba There are almost as many views about Cuba's past, present, and future as there are individuals.
Fidel Castro | Article Fidel Castro For the leader of a small Caribbean nation, Fidel Castro's impact on the latter half of the twentieth century has been inordinate.
