They help explain some of the frustrations of Cuban leaders that other documents in this chapter address.
October 26, 1962 Dear Comrade Khrushchev, In analyzing the situation that has arisen through the information at our disposal, it seems that aggression in the next 24 to 72 hours is almost inevitable.
The most likely one is an air attack on certain installations, with the aim of destroying those installations.
A less likely, but still possible variant is a direct invasion of the country.
I believe that the realization of this variant would require large forces, and that this may hold the aggressors back; moreover such an aggression would be met with indignation by global public opinion.
You can be sure that we will offer strong and decisive resistance to whatever form this aggression may take.
The morale of the Cuban people is exceptionally high, and will face the aggression heroically.
Now I would like to express in a few words my deeply personal opinion on the events which are now occurring.
If an aggression of the second variant occurs, and the imperialists attack Cuba with the aim of occupying it, then the danger posed by such an aggressive measure will be so immense for all humanity that the Soviet Union will in circumstances be able to allow it, or to permit the creation of conditions in which the imperialists might initiate a nuclear strike against the USSR as well.
I say this because I believe that the aggressiveness of the imperialists is becoming extremely dangerous.
If they initiate an attack on Cuba — a barbaric, illegal, and amoral act — then in those circumstances the moment would be right for considering the elimination of such a danger, claiming the lawful right to selfdefense.
However difficult and horrifying this decision may be, there is, I believe, no other recourse.
You have been and remain a tireless defender of peace, and I understand how difficult these hours are for you, when the results of your superhuman efforts in the struggle for peace are so gravely threatened.
However, we will keep hoping up to the last minute that peace will be maintained, and we will do everything in our power to pursue this aim, but at the same time— we are realistically evaluating the situation, and are ready and resolved to face any ordeal.
I once again express our whole country’s endless gratitude to the Soviet people, who have shown such brotherly generosity towards us.
We also express our admiration and deep thanks to you personally, and wish you success in your immense and crucial endeavor.
Our message of 27 October to President Kennedy makes it possible to normalize the situation to our advantage, and to protect Cuba from invasion and war.
Kennedy’s response, which you appear familiar with, provides a guarantee that the USA will refrain from invading Cuba not only with its own forces, rut with those of its allies as well; the President of the USA responds with agreement to my messages of 26 and 27 October 1962.
I will not give you a lengthy account of it, since you will become familiar with the text that is being broadcast now by radio.
In connection with this we would like to recommend to you now, at this critical moment, not to yield to your emotions, to show restraint.
It must be said that we understand your indignation over the US aggressions, and their violations of the basic guidelines of international law.
But at present it is not so much the law at work, as the recklessness of certain military figures in the Pentagon.
Now that an agreement is beginning to take shape, the Pentagon is looking for an opportunity to undermine that agreement.
You shot down one such plane yesterday, although you had never shot them down before when they flew over your territory.
Such an action will be exploited by the aggressors for their own purposes.
Of course if there is an invasion, then it will be necessary to repel it with all the forces at your disposal.
But do not let yourselves be provoked, since the frenzied military men in the Pentagon now, at the very moment when an elimination of the conflict is taking shape to your advantage, by including a guarantee against the invasion of Cuba, seem to want to undermine the agreement and provoke you to actions which could then be used against you.
And we for our part are doing everything we can to stabilize the situation in Cuba, to protect Cuba from invasion, and to safeguard for you the possibility of the peaceful building of a socialist society.
We send our greetings to you and to all your administrative collective.
Khrushchev ___ October 28, 1962 Dear Comrade Khrushchev, I have just received your letter.
Our government’s position on the issues you raised is laid out in our declaration made today, the text of which is certainly familiar to you.
I want to explain to you a few things concerning the measures we have taken by way of anti-aircraft defense.
Earlier there had occurred random violations without definite military goals, so that those flights did not represent real dangers.
We have thus decided that we should not sit back with our arms folded, since the suddenness of attack, in circumstances in which the radar system was still not operational and in which planes with impunity were flying with potentially aggressive goals, could lead to the complete annihilation of those targets.
We believed that after our expenditures of money and effort we should not allow that to happen, and that moreover it would weaken us from the moral as well as the military point of view.
With regard to this, Cuban armed forces have on 24 October of this year mobilize from their reserves 50 anti-aircraft batteries for the defense of these Soviet targets.
Since we did not want to run the risk of sudden attack, it was necessary to order the artillery to open fire.
The Soviet military leadership can provide you with additional information on how the plane was shot down.
In the past, violations of air space have been carried out secretly, without any attempt to justify them juridically.
But yesterday the United States government tried as before to find juridical justification for the right to the violation of our air space at any hour of the day or night.
We cannot accept this, since to do so would be a renunciation of our sovereign prerogatives.
However, we agree to avoid incidents, especially now, since they could pose obstacles to negotiations.
With this in mind, we will give the Cuban batteries instructions not to open fire, but only for the period in which negotiations are being conducted, and without altering our decision, published yesterday in the press, to defend our air space.
At the same time we should take into account the gravity of the fact that, in the current tense situation, incidents can arise by chance.
I want to inform you as well that we are generally opposed to the inspection of our territory.
I highly appreciate the efforts you have made to maintain peace, and we are in full agreement on the necessity of fighting for this goal.
If we are successful in reaching a just, stable, and conclusive peace settlement, it will be an invaluable service to humanity.
Khrushchev,” October 26, 1962, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian Federation ; “Letter from Khrushchev to Fidel Castro,” October 28, 1962, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian Federation ; “Letter from Fidel Castro to Khrushchev,” October 28, 1962, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian Federation (AVP RF), all available at digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org.
