No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A British Library CIP record is available.
The Harry Allen Memorial Lecture commemorates a pioneer in the field of American Studies in Britain, who was the first director of the Institute of United States Studies.
Previous scholars who have delivered this public lecture include Richard Carwardine, Peter Parish, Richard Crockatt and Steven Lawson.
A reworking of my doctoral dissertation, it examined the roles played by a number of key figures in the coming and handling of the October 1962 crisis.
It was followed a year later by Missiles in Cuba, which was aimed at the undergraduate market.
In both these works, I utilised the available primary sources, including the transcripts of the meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council that had been secretly taped by John F Kennedy using concealed microphones.
For my 1996 book, these transcripts were available only for the ExComm meetings held on 16 October 1962, the opening day of the missile crisis, and on 27 October, the penultimate day.
For my 1997 study, I was able to use the very rough transcripts that had become available for a couple of additional ExComm meetings.
For other ExComm discussions, myself and other scholars were dependent on the laconic minutes that had been taken.
In 1997, however, Ernest May and Philip Zelikow’s The Kennedy Tapes was published.
This paper aims to utilise these transcripts to reflect on the Kennedy administration’s handling of the most dangerous episode in the Cold War era, an appropriate endeavour in 2012, the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis.
In doing so, I will make use of a good deal of primary source material that was not available when I wrote my two books on this subject.
Much of what scholars have said on this subject has been influenced by Attorney General Robert F Kennedy’s posthumously-published memoir of the missile crisis, Thirteen Days, which — it was later revealed — had been edited by JFK’s speechwriter Theodore C Sorensen.
What Thirteen Days claimed was that, along with his elder brother, Robert Kennedy was the hero of the missile crisis.
He was the man who had the courage to oppose the administration hawks, who were recklessly recommending a United States attack on Cuba, by proposing the more moderate strategy of imposing a naval blockade around the island to prevent the Russians from deploying any more nuclear weapons.
He was the one who conceived the vivid Pearl Harbor metaphor — the idea that a United States military strike on Cuba would be repugnant because of its moral equivalence to Japan’s assault on America’s Pacific outpost in 1941 — that was crucial in making credible the argument that a United States blockade was preferable to a strike on Cuba.
He was the one, Thirteen Days further suggested, who devised the brilliant strategy at the denouement of the missile crisis of accepting the proposals contained in Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev’s 26 October letter to JFK, but rejecting the less conciliatory ones articulated in his message the following day — an approach that ended the crisis, thereby moving the world away from the precipice of nuclear destruction.
From the extravagant criticisms of Thomas Reeves and Seymour Hersh to the measured critiques developed by Herbert Parmet and James Giglio, so much of the general historiography on the Kennedy presidency over the past 40 years has involved scholars attempting to extricate the debate on JFK from the powerful ‘Camelot’ myths propagated by court historians such as Sorensen and Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., and the general cult of John Kennedy that emerged in the wake of his tragic assassination.
As former Kennedy Library historian Sheldon Stern has used the tapes to provide his own refinements to the ExComm transcripts, I have utilised his work when the textual changes made are significant.
The ExComm tapes expose the hyperbole surrounding Robert Kennedy’s role in the missile crisis, evident in both Thirteen Days and in many subsequent histories of the event.
The ultimately successful United States effort to defuse the missile crisis was a collaborative one in which Robert Kennedy’s role was significant but in many instances less so than his ExComm colleagues.
In all of these respects, there were ExComm officials whose contributions were more important than Robert Kennedy’s.
A qualification to that assertion relates to the fraternal closeness of Robert Kennedy to the president and the correspondingly greater influence he had on JFK’s thinking than that exerted by other ExComm officials.
Bobby Kennedy was the president’s most intimate adviser, and his purview extended far beyond the usual domain of an attorney general.
Following the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion in spring 1961, that domain included foreign policy, and — in particular — Cuba.
Unquestionably, the ethos of intense familial loyalty promoted by patriarch Joseph P Kennedy ensured that JFK and RFK’s relationship was exceedingly close.
Indeed, there was no closer relationship between president and adviser in 20th-century American history.
In that sense, Robert Kennedy’s views were more important than other advisers’ because his access to and potential influence over the president were greater.
However, the ExComm records raise the issue of whether Bobby Kennedy’s views were largely dependent on the ideas expressed by other officials.
McNamara in the early days of the missile crisis, as revealed by the ExComm tapes, sheds light on the attorney general’s role and its limits, as well as the importance of McNamara in managing the missile crisis.
As with JFK and most other senior US officials, McNamara and Bobby Kennedy were informed of the Soviet missile deployment in Cuba on Tuesday 16 October 1962.
Both participated in the first two ExComm meetings, convened that day by JFK to frame his administration’s initial response to the Russian challenge.
Shocked by the reality of Soviet nuclear weapons 90 miles off the coast of Florida, most United States officials, including the president himself, advocated a retaliatory American attack on Cuba.
The supporters of that approach focused on the idea of a United States air strike on the Caribbean island that would destroy the Soviet missile sites.
There was also a ‘superhawk’ position of proposing a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
Contrary to his reputation as always being central to the ExComm discussions, Robert Kennedy was generally taciturn in those first two meetings held on 16 October.
A good deal of the discussion that day was about whether a strike on the missile sites in Cuba, or a more general strike, would be the more appropriate response.
The thrust of Robert Kennedy’s comments was that his brother should probably plump for the more drastic alternative of an invasion of the island.
I would say that you’re dropping bombs all over Cuba … dropping it on all their missiles.
You’re going to kill an awful lot of people, and we’re going to take an awful lot of heat on it … you’re going to announce the reason that you’re doing it is because they’re sending in these kind of missiles.
Well, I would think it’s almost incumbent upon the Russians, then, to say, “Well, we’re going to send them in again.
Robert Kennedy was suggesting that because Khrushchev could respond to an American air strike on missiles in Cuba by sending in more nuclear weapons, it would be better to invade the island and replace the Castro regime with a pro-US government that would not accept further Soviet missile deployments.
Taylor to clarify how long it would take to carry out an invasion of Cuba and take control of the island.
In the evening ExComm meeting of 16 October, the attorney general continued to focus on the invasion option.
When the president reduced the alternatives for the United States to an air strike on the missile sites in Cuba or a more general strike, Bobby Kennedy reminded his brother of the invasion alternative.
He also speculated on pretexts that could be used to justify a United States invasion, on “whether there is some other way we can get involved in this, through Guantanamo Bay or something.
In other words, a similar incident to the one that led to the Spanish-American War in 1898 would help make another invasion of Cuba seem necessary in 1962.8 There were probably two reasons why Robert Kennedy’s views were so hardline on 16 October.
One was the anger he felt at the way Khrushchev had deceived JFK by giving assurances that he would not send offensive missiles to Cuba whilst secretly doing precisely the opposite.
For Robert Kennedy, it was a case of Khrushchev damaging not only American national security interests but his family as well.
Moreover, from the inception of JFK’s anti-Castro covert programme Operation Mongoose in November 1961, in which Robert Kennedy was assigned a leading role, his basic aim was to fashion a truculent United States policy towards Cuba that would lead to Castro’s overthrow.
At the start of 1962, in fact, he had told other United States officials that ousting the Cuban leader was the Kennedy administration’s top objective.
Once the missile crisis began those hardline sentiments continued to shape Robert Kennedy’s thinking, at least initially.
McNamara’s assessment of the situation on the opening day of the missile crisis was more wide-ranging and impressive than Robert Kennedy’s.
He discussed the issue of the location and storage of Soviet warheads in Cuba, encouraged JFK to sanction more extensive surveillance of the island, and speculated that Republican and Democratic politicians, and perhaps the press, would find out about the missiles in Cuba within a week.
Kennedy, II, 416; transcript, ExComm meeting, 11:50m., 16 October 1962, Kennedy Tapes, 74.
Later in the meeting he reminded his colleagues of the blockade alternative, though he made clear he was not yet endorsing it.
By introducing the idea of a blockade of Cuba into ExComm’s deliberations, McNamara made a vital contribution to the Kennedy administration’s successful management of the missile crisis.
Prior to that point, the ExComm debate had been, for the most part, over different ways of attacking Cuba.
McNamara converted the discussion from an evaluation of the military alternatives to an assessment of the potential effectiveness of those military options in comparison to a naval blockade.
That was crucial because the prospect of a severe, military Soviet response, one that could bring about war, was less likely with a blockade than with a United States air strike on or invasion of Cuba.
The rest of what McNamara said on 16 October strengthened the argument for the blockade and against an attack on Cuba.
He maintained that the Russian missiles on the island were of political significance — they were “primarily a domestic political problem” — but had little bearing on the Soviet-American military balance.
In the ExComm meeting, which convened two days later in the late morning of Thursday 18 October, McNamara again promoted the blockade in a way that Robert Kennedy did not.
Towards the end of this discussion, the attorney general agreed with McNamara that the blockade had emerged, along with a military strike, as one of the two main alternatives.
However, he did not indicate his unequivocal support for the quarantine.
Indeed, at one point he indicated his scepticism towards this approach, telling his brother that “the argument against the blockade is that it’s a very slow death.
And it builds up, and it goes over a period of months, and during that period of time you’ve got all these people yelling and screaming about it, you’ve got the examination of Russian ships, shooting down the Russian planes that try to land there.
Put another way, a major drawback with the blockade was that it would not bring about a speedy resolution of the crisis.
ROBERT KENNEDY: What are the chances … You’ve got to say to him : “They can’t continue to build these missiles.
In this way, McNamara presciently identified the path that led to the ending of the missile crisis.
This emphasis on the importance of negotiations squared with the analysis provided by McNamara just prior to this exchange with Robert Kennedy when he discussed with Dean Rusk and National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy how Khrushchev and North Atlantic Treaty Organisation would respond to either a United States blockade of or military strike on Cuba.
With the strike option, the secretary of defense argued, Khrushchev would probably retaliate by destroying American missiles in Turkey and Italy, and NATO would fracture over such drastic US action against Cuba.
With the blockade, NATO unity would be preserved and the Kennedy administration would need to agree to the removal of its missiles from Turkey and Italy in order to persuade the Soviets to withdraw their nuclear weapons from Cuba.
A compromise settlement, following the imposition of a blockade, would be, McNamara suggested, an acceptable resolution of the missile crisis.
A villain on Vietnam policy, to be sure, the secretary of defense played a vital role in October 1962, one for which he has received insufficient credit.
McNamara was not the only Kennedy adviser to extol the virtues of the blockade at an early stage in the ExComm discussions.
Former American Ambassador to the Soviet Union Llewellyn E Thompson expressed his support for it, as did Assistant Secretary of State Edwin M Martin, at a meeting of senior officials (that JFK did not attend) on 17 October.
When JFK asked how to remove the missiles already in Cuba, Thompson replied that the US would need to maintain surveillance of the island and in the end might be compelled to carry out a strike on the missile sites.
But, he implied, the blockade at least had the potential to end the crisis peacefully whereas a military strike on Cuba did not.
McNamara and Thompson, therefore, played key roles in the first week of the missile crisis.
McNamara originated the idea of a blockade, converting a debate on the various military options to a discussion of the pros and cons of military action and a blockade.
They had been influenced by those few ExComm officials who had championed a blockade from an early stage, notably McNamara but also Thompson.
Deputy Director of the CIA Marshall S Carter and Undersecretary of State George W Ball also helped convince the Kennedys that a military strike would be an unpalatable United States response and that the blockade was the better approach.
They did this by bringing into the discussion the Pearl Harbor comparison that served to discredit the military-strike alternative on the grounds that it was akin to the nefarious Japanese attack in 1941.
Again because of Thirteen Days, it is a line of argument that has been associated with Robert Kennedy.
To be sure, the attorney general did come to embrace and articulate in ExComm discussions the Pearl Harbor analogy, and the comparison between that 1941 assault and a prospective United States attack on Cuba was important in turning him against the notion of a military strike.
Perhaps influenced by what Carter had said, Ball noted in a memorandum shortly afterwards that, “We tried Japanese as war criminals because of the sneak attack on Pearl Harbor” and hence a surprise strike on Cuba would diminish America’s moral authority in the world.
Most significantly, Ball made the Pearl Harbor comparison in the ExComm meeting on the morning of 18 October in a way that struck Robert Kennedy powerfully and so altered his thinking.
If the United States did attack Cuba without warning, that would be “like Pearl Harbor.
We’ve talked for 15 years that the Russians being the first strike against us, and we’d never do that.
There were two differences between Robert Kennedy’s use of the Pearl Harbor analogy and George Ball’s and Carter’s.
Firstly, it was not a comparison that could be considered by other ExComm officials, as it was made in a private note and not a group discussion.
Secondly, it was meant literally at a time when Robert Kennedy was proposing an invasion of Cuba and the consensus in ExComm was for military action.
It was not, as Ball and Carter had used it, a comparison made to castigate those who were calling for a hasty and dangerous strike on the island.
It was only after reflecting on George Ball’s argument in that 18 October ExComm meeting that Bobby Kennedy began to reject the idea of a military strike on the grounds that its resemblance to Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor would damage America’s moral standing in the world.
In particular, he must have worried about the impact of a Pearl Harbor-type strike on his brother’s reputation, both at the time and historically.
In a meeting with JFK, former secretary of defense Robert A Lovett and a few other officials on the evening of the 18th, Robert Kennedy made clear that he now supported the blockade.
He did the same in an ExComm meeting the following day, making the Pearl Harbor comparison to condemn the belligerence of the administration hawks.
By the 19th, then, Robert Kennedy was playing the role that he described in Thirteen Days.
Had it not been for McNamara and Ball, however, it is questionable whether he would have done so.
Though Robert Kennedy’s contribution was important and generally commendable, it was not as impressive as he himself later claimed.
JFK’s United Nations Ambassador Adlai E Stevenson, like McNamara, emphasised during the early days of the missile crisis the importance of diplomacy.
The following day he furnished JFK with a memorandum in which he again advised against military action, warning that it could lead to nuclear war.
This was a clear reference to United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, which — Stevenson pointed out — many nations would view as comparable to Soviet missiles in Cuba.
On the second day of the missile crisis, then, Stevenson urged Kennedy to consider the diplomatic possibilities for ending the crisis.
The position he came to adopt was that JFK should implement a blockade but then move rapidly to a diplomatic settlement in which the United States should make concessions to induce Khrushchev to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Later in the meeting he also mentioned United States missiles in Italy as something Kennedy should be willing to forfeit.
Stevenson’s point on ceding Guantanamo was unrealistic from a domestic political point of view, as it would have left the president open to charges of appeasement.
JFK, unsurprisingly, was quick to refute Stevenson’s argument on surrendering the Guantanamo base.
But he acknowledged that he would be prepared to discuss the removal of United States missiles from Turkey, albeit at a later point in the crisis.
Along with McNamara, Stevenson had impressed upon the Kennedys and other ExComm officials the importance of diplomacy and a willingness to compromise in order to bring about the withdrawal of nuclear weapons from Cuba and an end to the crisis.
John Kennedy’s response to Stevenson’s recommendations on 20 October demonstrated the change in his views since the opening day of the missile crisis when he had favoured an air strike as the best response to the Soviet challenge, a view he still held the following morning, 17 October, when he spoke with CIA Director John A McCone.
By the climax of the crisis on 27 October there was no United States official more determined to end the confrontation over Cuba by diplomacy rather than force.
This development is linked to a broader theme of the Kennedy presidency, namely his increasingly progressive outlook, in both domestic and foreign affairs.
The John Kennedy of 1961 sanctioned the Bay of Pigs invasion and Operation Mongoose to oust Fidel Castro, authorised an enormous peacetime increase in military spending at a time when the United States enjoyed roughly a 17-to-1 advantage over the Soviet Union in nuclear weapons, and was wary about promoting civil rights.
He may also have begun to develop doubts about America’s role in Vietnam.
In particular, the draconian police repression of the Birmingham protests in spring 1963 gave Kennedy a more vivid understanding of the severity of racial oppression in the South, and in foreign affairs it was his responsibility for pulling the United States and the world back from the nuclear precipice in the Cuban missile crisis that impressed upon him the dangers of the Cold War and the concomitant need for him to craft a more conciliatory approach towards the Soviet Union.
Hence, the maturation in JFK’s thinking during the missile crisis was the start of a longer process in which he reshaped his views on politics and international affairs.
A shift away from his initial belligerence in the missile crisis was evident on the third day, 18 October.
On the other hand, JFK’s switch from an air strike-advocate to a backer of the blockade merits praise.
It showed his open-mindedness, the flexibility of his thinking; and this enabled him to make the sound decision of rejecting the risky military option that he and the majority of his advisers originally espoused, in favour of a blockade alternative that put pressure on Khrushchev whilst furnishing a window of opportunity for the superpowers to negotiate a peaceful settlement.
JFK’s ability to reflect and change his mind in the Cuban missile crisis stands in stark contrast to the sort of dogmatism exhibited by George W Bush when considering whether to go to war against Iraq in 2003.27 JFK also impressed by exploring at an early stage how diplomacy could end the missile crisis; and by displaying the resilience needed to stand up to his relentlessly hawkish military advisers.
Although speechwriter Theodore C Sorensen recalled that Stevenson’s 17 October memorandum calling for give-and-take negotiations had vexed the president, the following day in ExComm JFK showed an understanding of how diplomacy and mutual concessions might play a role in defusing the crisis.
When discussing the air strike option, for instance, he speculated on whether it would be worth warning Khrushchev that a United States attack on Cuba was imminent but to use a carrot as well as a stick by saying if he withdrew his missiles from the island, the US would take its Jupiter missiles out of Turkey.
It was clear from this ExComm discussion that Kennedy now viewed the military alternatives as representing but one of two options, the other being a blockade; and later that day it was the blockade that he came to prefer.
As he mulled over the situation on the 18th, the issues that were of particular concern to him were maintaining NATO solidarity, decreasing the likelihood of drastic Soviet reprisals against Berlin and preventing a superpower nuclear exchange.
The following morning, Friday 19 October, Kennedy’s preference for the blockade led to a brutal encounter with the Joint Chiefs who were strongly in favour of military action against Cuba.
When Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Maxwell Taylor informed him of their support for an air strike to be carried out on Cuba without warning, JFK explained that his reservations to that approach related to his fear of escalation, particularly in Berlin.
The irascible General Curtis E LeMay disagreed, arguing that a blockade constituted something close to appeasement.
Admiral George W Anderson likewise asserted that the blockade would be ineffective.
Kennedy, in robust fashion, countered that if he sanctioned an attack on Cuba, Khrushchev would be compelled to retaliate, and the most likely target would be Berlin.
And by stating that, “The argument for the blockade was that what we want to do is to avoid, if we can, nuclear war by escalation or imbalance,” Kennedy tried to induce a degree of restraint on the part of his military advisers.
The dangerous belligerence Kennedy was faced with from his own military was apparent from what the Joint Chiefs said, with the tape still recording, once Kennedy had left the room.
In a scene that would not have looked out of place in Stanley Kubrick’s 1964 cinematic masterpiece Dr.
For all the implausibilities of Oliver Stone’s 1991 film JFK, one theme it developed that was credible was the tension between Kennedy and his own military.
Kennedy’s ability to withstand that considerable pressure reflected well on his leadership, and was a key part of the campaign he waged within his administration, from 18 October onwards, in favour of the blockade.
While ordering his military advisers to further their plans for an attack on Cuba, in case he subsequently felt obliged to order one, he made clear he was receptive to the idea of negotiations leading to United States withdrawal of its Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy as part of a final settlement.
He did not want to offer their removal — only to be ready to do so if the Russians raised the issue.
Along with Stevenson and McNamara, Kennedy explored the notion of trading the Jupiters more thoroughly than any ExComm official during the first week of the missile crisis.
Early in the second week of the missile crisis, therefore, Kennedy concentrated on the mechanics of establishing the blockade and, like his advisers, said little on the vital question of what step he should take next if the Russians respected the blockade but did not remove their missiles from Cuba.
When he did consider that issue he indicated a preference for the extension of the blockade so as to prohibit petroleum, oil and lubricants as well as weapons from reaching the island.
That would ultimately bring the Cuban economy to a standstill and so increase the pressure on Khrushchev and Castro.
He remained preoccupied with Berlin, considering how to respond should the Soviets insist on inspecting United States convoys there, deciding to put the hero of the 1948–9 Berlin crisis, General Lucius D Clay, on standby to be sent to the city, and concluding that any US invasion of Cuba would provoke Soviet seizure of West Berlin.
By Thursday 25 October, JFK still viewed the extension of the blockade so as to include POL as his likely next step, as he informed British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan in a telephone conversation.
McNamara, to his credit, disagreed, arguing that vigorous United States surveillance over Cuba would be sufficient to display American resolve for a few more days.
The following morning, however, he spoke in favour of the POL initiative as his next course of action, not the air-strike idea his brother had entertained.
At that morning’s ExComm meeting on Friday 26 October, there was a definite sense, with the United States having just boarded the Marucla, that the first phase of the second week of the crisis was over, namely that the blockade had been successfully enforced, and that the second phase had begun, one in which the Kennedy administration would need to decide on an additional course of action should the Soviets maintain in Cuba the missiles already deployed.
Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon argued that a United States air strike on the missile sites would be better than an intensification of the blockade.
When some of his advisers said they were wary about considering a settlement that would leave Castro in power for the foreseeable future, he said that his administration’s priority had to be the removal from Cuba of nuclear weapons, and not Castro.
In other words, the administration’s longstanding objective of ousting Castro should not be allowed to prevent the fashioning of a reasonable settlement to the crisis.
Furthermore, when Adlai Stevenson predicted that in any settlement Khrushchev would demand a US no-invasion pledge regarding Cuba, as well as the dismantling of United States missiles in Turkey and Italy, JFK defended him from McCone’s criticism by suggesting that Stevenson, in emphasising the use of negotiations, had identified one of only two methods that could actually bring about a withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba, the other being military action; the blockade, or an intensification of the blockade to cover POL, would not by itself prove efficacious.
The following day, Saturday 27 October, was of decisive importance in determining the outcome of the Cuban missile crisis.
Famously, after mulling over the issue with his advisers, John Kennedy responded by sending a letter to Khrushchev embracing his proposals of 26 October, not the 27th.
He also dispatched Bobby Kennedy to Anatoly F Dobrynin to tell the Soviet ambassador in Washington that the United States would withdraw its Jupiters from Turkey but that this would have to be a clandestine part of the settlement.
This approach worked, for on the following day Khrushchev agreed to back down and order the removal of Russian missiles from Cuba.
Robert Kennedy claimed for himself the lion’s share of the credit for devising the wise strategy that ended the most dangerous crisis of the nuclear age, and specifically for hatching the plan to ignore Khrushchev’s more hardline message of the 27th and to embrace his more conciliatory letter of 26 October.
The transcripts for the ExComm meetings held on 27 October expose that claim as a self-serving chimera.
Before Robert Kennedy came to back the approach of ignoring Khrushchev’s second proposition and agreeing to his first set of proposals, several ExComm officials voiced their support for that strategy, notably Pentagon official Paul H Nitze, McGeorge Bundy, Sorensen and Stevenson.
John Kennedy, however, was immensely impressive in ExComm on 27 October.
JFK depended on advisers such as McGeorge Bundy and Ted Sorensen who grasped that he could write back to the Soviet leader accepting his proposal of the 26th rather than the 27th; and he did initially express reservations about Khrushchev’s 26 October offer on the grounds that its provision of a United States pledge not to invade Cuba represented a guarantee that Castro would stay in power.
However, Kennedy’s wariness over the use of American force to end the crisis was commendable, particularly as Maxwell Taylor and other military officials were pushing him towards an air strike on Cuba two days hence, to be followed by an invasion.
The decision JFK ultimately made — to accept in writing Khrushchev’s 26 October proposal of a United States no-invasion pledge in return for removal of the missiles from Cuba, while dispatching his brother to tell Dobrynin of their willingness to withdraw the Jupiters from Turkey as long as it remained a clandestine component of the settlement — was manifestly effective in ending the missile crisis.
Moreover, Kennedy’s consideration of what has become known as the Cordier ploy, first revealed by Dean Rusk in 1987, suggests that JFK in the final analysis might well have plumped for a publicly-made concession on the Jupiters to end the crisis if Khrushchev had rejected the notion of a secret Jupiter deal.
In addition to the light it sheds on the roles played by leading United States officials, the ExComm tapes bring into focus some general themes of importance.
One is the interrelatedness of the Cuban crisis and the Berlin situation.
It is easy to think of those issues as linked but essentially separate.
But in fact the threads of the crisis in Berlin were tied to the strands of the crisis in Cuba to form, from Kennedy’s perspective, a single tapestry.
Kennedy and his advisers consistently viewed the Cuban missile crisis in a Berlin context.
Khrushchev’s missile gambit in the Caribbean, ExComm officials concluded, was due in large measure to a desire to strengthen his position in Berlin.
The respective merits of a blockade of Cuba and a military strike on the island were to be gauged to a great extent by the sort of Russian reprisals each would provoke in Berlin.
By the climax of the crisis on 27 October, JFK was still factoring Berlin into his analysis of the situation.
The ExComm tapes also add to our understanding of the Kennedy administration’s policies before the missile crisis as well as during the crisis itself.
Those policies were designed to do everything possible, short of a direct attack on Cuba by American forces, to oust Castro.
They included the Bay of Pigs invasion, covert pressure in the form of Operation Mongoose, economic sanctions, and diplomatic isolation by engineering Cuba’s expulsion from the Organization of American States.
Even the assassination of Castro was planned and attempted, though the extent to which JFK and his civilian advisers had been briefed about and endorsed these plots has been disputed.
In a brilliant 1990 article in Diplomatic History, James Hershberg even presented sufficient evidence to pose the question of whether in the autumn of 1962, prior to the missile crisis, Kennedy was seriously considering an attack on Cuba.
The declassified ExComm tapes reinforce the point that United States military preparations were underway, even before JFK was informed about the missiles in Cuba, so that Kennedy could sanction an attack on the island at short notice.
TAYLOR: I thought we were hoping last night that we would get the collapse of Castro… BUNDY: I believe that Castro is not going to sit still for a blockade and that that’s to our advantage.
I always thought … It never occurred to , I just think, his demon is self-destruction and we have to help him to that.
Arguing that the United States should help Castro with his own “self-destruction” seems to be a reference to an effort to assassinate Castro.
All of this highlights the importance of a continued assessment of the Kennedy administration’s policies towards Cuba before the missile crisis.
Around two decades ago scholars had added to the ongoing lively debate on the events of October 1962 by examining the origins of the missile crisis.
Historians such as Thomas Paterson and Michael Beschloss made the argument that JFK’s policies — such as the Bay of Pigs invasion, Operation Mongoose, assassination plots, threatening military manoeuvres in the Caribbean, economic sanctions and diplomatic pressure — influenced Khrushchev’s decision in spring 1962 to deploy missiles in Cuba; and that in this way, JFK bore significant responsibility for the onset of the missile crisis, which is not the same thing as saying Khrushchev’s missile gambit was justified.
In his 2008 study of the missile crisis One Minute to Midnight, for example, Michael Dobbs started his narrative on 16 October 1962.
To skim over the question of causation would be, in a historiographical sense, a regressive step.
In future, monographs on the missile crisis should proceed along the twin tracks of the origins of the crisis and the crisis itself, as they tended to in the late 1980s and 1990s.
If this occurs, a consensus might crystallise around the idea that, when it came to Cuba, Kennedy’s record was something of a curate’s egg — unimpressive before October 1962, but commendable during the crisis itself.
With JFK’s handling of the missile crisis, the bottom line is that he succeeded in bringing about the withdrawal of nuclear weapons from Cuba and so ending the crisis without triggering a superpower war and without having to proffer concessions that were excessively generous.
What the full ExComm tapes reveal are the precise contributions made by JFK and his advisers.
In so doing, they make clear that Robert Kennedy was not the hero of the missile crisis.
He did not hatch the plan for the blockade, originate the powerful Pearl Harbor metaphor in ExComm discussions, or devise the plan at the climax of the crisis that dealt effectively with Khrushchev’s two different sets of proposals.
Kennedy, II, 568; Stern, Averting ‘The Final Failure’, 115; United States Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, interim report, S.Rept.–465, 94th Congress, 1st session, Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, passim.
At the same time JFK, though initially supportive of the air-strike option, grasped at an early stage the necessity for negotiations and mutual concessions, and showed no little fortitude in resisting the trigger-happy proclivities of his military advisers.
A number of other officials, notably McNamara, Ball, Stevenson and Thompson, merit considerable praise.
Paradoxically, it was McNamara, forever maligned by association with the Vietnam War, whose contribution to the management of the Cuban missile crisis was the greatest of any of John Kennedy’s advisers.
Works written on the missile crisis in the past decade, such as those by Michael Dobbs, Sheldon Stern, and Don Munton and David Welch, have failed to highlight McNamara’s crucial role.
The Institute for the Study of the Americas promotes, co-ordinates and provides a focus for research on the Americas — Canada, the Caribbean, Latin America and the United States.
The Institute was officially established in August 2004 as a result of a merger between the Institute of Latin American Studies and the Institute of United States Studies, both of which were formed in 1965.
The Institute publishes in the disciplines of history, politics, economics, sociology, anthropology, geography and environment, development, culture and literature, and on the countries and regions of Latin America, the United States, Canada and the Caribbean.
ISA runs an active programme of events — conferences, seminars, lectures and workshops — in order to facilitate national research on the Americas in the humanities and social sciences.
Full details about the Institute’s publications, events and other activities are available on the web at www.americas.sas.ac.uk.
Utilising declassified materials, he provides a fresh interpretation of the roles play by John Kennedy’s team of advisers.
In particular, the contributions made by Robert McNamara and Robert Kennedy are re-evaluated.
Meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , 29 October 1962 Cecil Stoughton.
