Whether you're toting a noisy tribe of youngsters to a Fourth of J uly pienic or just heading off by yourself with nothing but a cargo of summer breezes frolicking between you and the roll-down rear window, these new Chevrolets are beautifully, dutifully built to suit your needs.
You have your choice of five wagon models with the widest seating, widest cargo area and widest selection of engines and transmissions in the low-price field.
Check your dealer and see how convenient he can make it for you to be in one by vacation time.
Pride-pleasing style (combines good looks with good sense New Economy Turbo-Fire V8 (makes friends fast by getting up to 10°; more miles on a gallon), Shift-free Turboglide* — Chevy's the only car in its field with an aniomatic transmiasion that eliminates even a hint of a shift.
Cherrolet Division of General Motors, Detroit 2, Michigan ” Air Conditioning—temperatures made to order —for all-weather comfort.
A baseboard along the walls carries a Nickel alloy resistance wire that transforms electricity into heat right in the room.
In fact, Nickel alloys made electrical heating practical in the first place.
In almost everything in your home that uses electricity for heat— range, clothes dryer, hot water tank — Nickel plays an important part.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 The International Nickel Company has worked closely with the electrical industry in helping to develop efficient heating elements.
This cooperation extends to promotional activities as well as to product development, research, and technical service.
Right now, Inco’s national advertising is telling millions of homeowners about the advantages of electric heating.
Nickel in alloys for strength and corrosion resistance; Nickel in stainless steel for rust-free beauty; Nickel plating for gleaming protection.
Burns Panatelas, with Smooth Smoke* binder, a lighter wrapper and fine Havana filler.
G } Sanatda de Lane 2 for 27¢°—or in the handy 5-pack Robt.Burns 5 popular shapes— 2/25¢ to 25¢ straight.
LETTERS —_—————E—————— Khrushchev & the Presidency Sir The best answer Americans can offer to Mr Khrushchev’s attempt to dictate to us the choice of our next President is to nominate and elect Mr Richard Nixon.
Furthermore, in view of Mr Nixon’s excellent qualifications, any other course by the Republicans, including the supporters of Mr Nelson Rockefeller, would constitute a tragic blunder, C JoHN GREGORY Boston Sir For those who are worried about Jack Kennedy’s Roman Catholic faith, let us remind them that it should be a good reason to vote for him for the presidency.
While reading your coverage of the infamous U-2 incident in the May 30 edition, I became highly incensed at your rather partisan coverage of the political implications.
I feel sure that Governor Stevenson and others of his party were not simply throwing American unity to the wind for the sake of pure political advantage.
I suppose that it is too much to expect Time to be fair to Adlai Stevenson; but more balanced journalism would surely have pointed out that the remarks ascribed to Governor Stevenson by Robert Boulay | June 6] correspond to nothing anyone else has ever heard Stevenson say publicly or privately.
Governor Stevenson is fully and explicitly on record on the question of Berlin.
It might conceivably strain the credulity even of Time to suppose that he would sudFrench newspaperman views on Berlin which are incompatible with everything clse he has said on the subject.
Cambridge, Mass G Time is glad to learn that Historian Schlesinger knows “what anyone else has ever heard Stevenson say publicly or privately.” —Eb.
When I came upon a photograph of another statue of Moses which also displays horns. my _ curiosity deepened.
No one I have asked can answer my question, AMELIA WESTON Los Angeles @ The Scriptures underwent many changes at the hands of the early scribes, so much so that in the 4th century, Pope Damasus commissioned the Bible scholar Jerome to do a definitive version.
While scholars have since determined that Moses was not literally horned but rather surrounded by luminous rays, pre-Renaissance and Renaissance artists generally depicted him with horns.—Eb.
Many thanks for the May 30 cover story of Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky and especially for Tite's “timely” reporting of Paris Reporter Blunden’s 17-year-old notes.
I am now looking forward to your staff's coverage of Abe Lincoln's assassination.
Re the article in the May 30 edition on Hong Kong: please explode the myth that any tailor in Hong Kong can get out a wellmade garment for $25 or less in 24 hours.
Of course, there are those who will do it, but the majority here prefer more time, charge more, and produce, consequently, better quality goods.
You mentioned that the King and Queen of Nepal had to be accommodated in a third-class hotel.
Chicaro 11, Ill, Second-class Volume LXXV June 20, 1960 postage paid at Chicago, Illinois and at additional mailing offices.
This year, let a diamond gift make memorable that special anniversary, or important birthday, a debut, the birth of a child, or any significant event.
A trusted jeweler can help you choose a lovely diamond gift from stock—a pin, earrings, a dinner ring or bracelet.
Whether you spend $100, $500, or more, diamonds give your gift significance, enduring value.
A NORTHWESTERN MUTUAL POLICY OWNER Mr Nugent has a total of 15 policies with this company.
A report of special interest to young men by CHARLES A NUGENT Financial Vice President, Stokely-Van Camp, Inc.
I have seen in my own experience how the cash values build up over the years, thus providing a really sizable nest egg. and I don't that the original reason most men get life insur“However, I never forget think anyone else should ance is to protect growing families.
I found the cost of this protection extremely low when I compared the actual cash value with the total premiums paid.
Yet | have heard some authorities estimate that as much as 85°, of all the money that men leave their families comes from life insurance.
Latest available figures show the rate of return from Northwestern Mutual's investments to be above the average of the 14 other largest life insurance companies.
Modern electronic equipment enables fewer Northwestern Mutual employees to give prompt, personal attention to more income needed for operating expenses is about haif of the average for the 14 other largest companies.
The percentage of Northwestern Mutual men selling over a million dollars of life insurance a year is fen times greater than the average of all life insurance agents.
And almost half of all Northwestern Mutual policies are sold to old customers coming back for more.
Ae | Rn naa | Express Co., which handled the King and | Queen’s world trip, accommodated them on one floor of the Peninsula Court, the best hotel in the colony.
Sterling Moss is no more obsessed with danger than Time's editors are obsessed with deadlines.
Danger is only a factor in his profession, and not to him by any means the biggest factor Moss is simply a complete professional— and incomparably the best driver living — whose primary concern is unattainable perfection, If Moss is ever obsessed with anything connected with motor racing, I think it will be with that idea, But I can assure you that he does not love danger best; he does not love danger at all.
I never expected to be sorry that our children read Time when it comes every week, but after seeing the picture of Anita Ekberg in the May 30 issue, and reading the article about the Cannes Film Festival, it seems that even Time needs expurgating.
Sir I'm convinced the slogan should more correctly be “Movies are bedder than ever These films which pleased the critics and “the professional cinema crowd” were based on sex and sex alone.
I'm certainly no puritan, but I think we've reached the saturation point with this sort of thing.
The quotation about the recruiting of scholars is out of context and the inference made is completely erroneous.
They are also justifiably proud of the scholastic achievements of their university and its continuous quest for academic excellence Jep JOHNSON Jr.
Re your May 23 story about the i portance of dreams to health: I've often pondered why, after a night of answering the children’s intermittent needs, I feel as though I have been up all night even though the time spent out-of-bed-and-awake only totals ten or 1s minutes.
Extracting one’s groggy self from a warm bed is maddening enough but when one fails to get to the last page of half a dozen or more dreams, small wonder that a mother’s sanity is threatened.
William Dement has discovered another contributing cause of the Tired Mother disease.
Send old address (exactly as imprinted on mailing label of your copy of Time) and new address allow three weeks for change-over.
Timu INc also publishes Lire, Forrune, Sporrs ILLUSTRATED, ARCHITECTURAL Forum and House & Home.
Je THE “LITTLE CLUMP OF TREES,""* OBJECTIVE OF PICKET EROIC CHARGE, STILL STANOS ON THE BATTLEFIELD, High tide of American valor “Gettysburg was an act of fate: a three-day explosion of storm and flame and terror, unplanned and uncontrollable.
The 2500 acres of Gettysburg Battlefield comprise one of our largest government-owned shrines.
Five observation towers give you an excellent bird’s-eye view of the most terrible battle of our most terrible war.
More importantly, you will stand at Gettysburg with your eyes closed, and your mind will be touched by the hand of history, and your spirit will feel the inspiration that gave Lincoln his finest speech.
Millions of us have forebears who fought on one side, or the other, hotly defending their own ideas of liberty.
This great “THIS HALLOWED GROUND,""* DOUBLEDAY & CO battlefield, so beautifully preserved by our National Park Service, is a tribute to the men who fought here.
FREE TOUR INFORMATION Plan now to visit Gettysburg or some other Civil War Battlefield.
Baker, Louis Banks, Robert W Boys Jr., Champ Clark, George G Daniels, William Forbis, Henry Anatole Granwald, James Keogh, Hillis Mills, Joseph Purtell.
Hartshorn, Edward L Jamieson, Cranston Jones, Theodore E Kalem, John Koffend, Louis Kronenberger aban Norton Leonard, Robert’ Mclaughlin, Richard lahan Jr.
Marion Pikul, Madeleine Bittel Richards, Miriam Rumwell, Deirdre Mead Ryan, Frances Stevenson, Strong.
Joan Titus, Fortunata plead Frapeeh Mary Vanaman, Gayle Williams, Rosemarie Tauris Zadikov.
United States AND CANADIAN NEWS SERVICE Richard M, Clurman , Harry Johnston, Robert Parker.
Robert Ajemian, Murray Gart, Dudley Doust, Leon Jarofi, Mark M Periberg, Edwin M Reingold.
FOREIGN NEWS SERVICE ions Boyle , Martin O'Neill, obert E Jackson, Clara Applegate, Eileen MacKenzie.
Kobert Manning, Honor Balfour, Monica Dehn, Michael Demare James L Greenfield, Herman Nickel.
Donald S Connery, James Shep HonG Kone: Stanley Karnow, Toxyo: Alexander Campbell, Frank Iwama.
Harvey Rosenhouse, Rafael Delgado Lozano, PANAMA Ctry: Bruce Henderson.
The Associated Press in exclusively entitled to the use or tepublication of the local telegraphic and cable news Published herein, originated by Time, The Weekly NewsMagazine or obtained from The Associated Press.
Time Associate Editor Jesse Birnbaum, his wife Elizabeth and their two children—David, 9, and Daniel, 4—live in a well-mortgaged, brick and shingle split-level in the seven-yearold Lakeville Estates development in East Meadow, L.I., 30 miles east of Manhattan.
While Writer Birnbaum had the advantage of this firsthand source, he was also provided with the extensive research of 21 TIME correspondents, who roamed the suburbs encircling 21 United States metropolitan centers from Philadelphia to San Francisco, Portland, Me. to Dallas.
Still, perhaps the most vividly revealing tableau of suburban housewifein-action came right at home while Jesse Birnbaum was writing the cover story.
Wife Beth was waiting for admission to a Manhattan hospital for a minor operation.
In the last hours before she took to a hospital bed, while running a fever from a throat infection, she went through a schedule that would have exhausted a Pilgrim’s wife.
She gave two music lessons, did a week's marketing, and decorated the den for an evening recital of one of ee a SUBURBAN WIFE BETH BIRNBAUM her viola students.
The next morning Beth dropped Jesse at the Merrick, L.1. railroad station, returned home to chauffeur the children to a cub-scout jamboree at nearby Mitchell Air Force Base.
On her way back, she stopped to pick up one of her students, arrived home in time to answer the phone.
She proceeded to give the music lesson, sped back to the base, which she had to cover from end to end in the rain before she could locate the children.
She took them home, fed and dressed them, packed, loaded them in the station wagon and drove the 30 miles to Manhattan where she was met by her husband and her suburban—New Jersey sister-in-law, who took command of the children.
Then, having made sure that she could take the time, Beth checked into the hospital.
Birnbaum was happily back at home in East Meadow, ready to cast a knowing eye at what her husband had written about the suburban wife.
TIME THE WEEKLY NEWS SMAGAZINE June 20, 1960 NATIONAL AFFAIRS THE PRESIDENCY On to Tokyo Dwight Eisenhower said his farewells briskly to the United States officials and foreign diplomats who clustered around the ramp at Maryland’s Andrews Air Force Base.
After 74 years and 95,000 miles of presidential diplomacy, his leave-takings had become fairly routine.
Tokyo’s police chief flatly announced that he could not “guarantee Eisenhower's safety” when the President arrives next Sunday.
Nevertheless, he felt a ‘compelling responsibility . . . within the American mission of free-world leadership . . . neither to postpone nor to cancel my visit If the trip now ahead of me were concerned principally with the support of a regime or a treaty or a disputed policy, if it were intended merely to bolster a particular program achieve a limited objective, such a journey would have no real justification.
Colonel John Eisenhower, and John’s wife Barbara climbed aboard the sleek orange-andsilver jet.
With a final wave, Ike was off for the first leg of his 22.795-mile trip, to Anchorage, Alaska.
Seven and a half hours later, he touched down in Anchorage to a welcome by Governor William Egan.
Then he hustled off with Press Secretary Hagerty, who had flown in from Tokyo, for a lengthy conference.
All week long the State Department had pondered the wisdom of Ike’s going to Japan.
Coincidentally, the President’s three-day visit will begin on the day the new U.S.-Japanese mutual-defense treaty becomes effective.
In recent months, Communist-directed leftists have launched a frenzied drive to topple Premier Nobusuke Kishi’s government and torpedo the treaty.
To retreat before the agitation of a Communist-led minority would be certain to weaken proUnited States forces in Asia, perhaps bring the downfall of the Kishi government and the treaty too.
The State Department’s Far Eastern experts predicted that the rough treatment of Hagerty would rally pro-Western Japanese and shame the police into more effective action against the rioters.
They also pinned hopes on the traditional—if waning—Japanese respect for Emperor Hirohito, who will meet the President at the airport and accompany him on the ten-mile drive to town.
Canceled was Ike’s round of golf with Kishi, but he still planned to give his scheduled speech to the Diet.
Notified only two weeks ago that Manila would be added to Ike’s schedule, the city has feverishly refurbished the presidential palace as the President's headquarters, erected a bamboo arch and “Mabuhay Ike” banner, and planned a crowded schedule of ceremonial wreath-layings, speeches and state dinners in the sweltering heat.
Paul, Ike will go from Manila to Formosa for an overnight stay in Taipei as the guest of Nationalist China’s Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek.
Ike will report to Chiang on the summit blowup, go the course in speechmaking and _ wreathlaying.
During his visit, state-owned railways will let passengers ride free to Taipei from any place on the island.
Against a likely backeround of Communist shelling of the offshore islands, the Nationalists may press the President for long-range guarantees of Formosa’s position in United States defense plans.
Ike will address the National Assembly and confer with Acting Chief of State Huh Chung during a fast-paced day.
Doubling back to Japan the same night, he will stop long enough to change planes, then head east on a nightlong flight across the Pacific to Hawaii, an enormous aloha and several days of rest in the sunshine.
That afternoon at a Manhattan press conference Rocky tossed his firecracker.
Nixon moved in fast to quiet the Republican howling (“Remember November’’) by setting a soft-answer tone in his own reply to Rockefeller.
Since Rockefeller disagrees with some Administration policies, said Nixon at a tense and crowded press conference in Camden, N.J., it is right for him to voice his disagreement publicly.
As for his own views on national issues, Nixon went on, he has set them forth in detail.
Pundits and politicians pondered, came up with a collective bagful of answers.
Rocky is an earnest and patriotic man who feels compelled to provoke debate on the nation’s growing problems.
Rockefeller still cherishes a hope of wresting the Republican nomination away from Nixon in 1960.
He has announced that he would accept a draft, considered for awhile last week a proposal to announce his open candidacy.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 Rockefeller is harboring thoughts of a third-party bolt in the style of Theodore Roosevelt’s 1912 Bull Moose revolt.
Right-leaning Columnist David Lawrence and left-leaning Columnist Murray Kempton, who rarely agree on anything, both detected a scent of Bull Moose in the air, pointed out that no Republican presidential hopeful has openly attacked a Republican Administration since T.R. blasted William Howard Taft in 1912.
At week’s end, Rockefeller’s icy tone toward Nixon melted into proper smiles when the two men met at the opening of the British Exhibition in Manhattan’s Coliseum and _ exchanged what may have been the most insincere greetings of the week.
At that point it seemed that Nelson Rockefeller’s firecracker, having made everybody jump, had left not a tremor behind.
By Emmet he meant Emmet John Hughes, his own Speechwriter during the 1952 and Campaigns.
Emmet Hughes, 39, wrote most of Governor Rock1956 TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 efeller’s manifesto—and has written many of Rocky's other major speeches and statements since last autumn.
And if it is remarkable that a man who wrote Eisenhower campaign speeches should write a Rockefeller statement sharply criticizing the Eisenhower Administration’s record, it is even more remarkable that he is a Democrat (a “dissident” or “wandering” Democrat, he specifies), who, under the President's auspices, delivered a major address to the 1956 Republican Convention.
Handsome Emmet Hughes, son of a New Jersey judge, always had a way with words.
Raised a Roman Catholic, he published his first book, The Church and the Liberal Society, a few years after his graduation, summa cum laude, from Princeton in 1941.
He spent the war years at the United States embassy in Spain, doing three-hatted tasks for the State Department, the Office of War Information, and United States Army Intelligence.
Hughes went to work for Time Inc. as head of its Rome bureau in 1946, served as head of the Berlin bureau during the airlift, later became text editor of Lire.
During the 1952 campaign, feeling that Dwight Eisenhower could provide the foreign-policy leadership that Hughes believed the nation needed, he got a leave of absence from Time Inc. to write speeches for Ike.
After serving as an Eisenhower assistant during the first year of the new Administration, Hughes returned to Time Inc.
In 1957 he became chief of correspondents of Time Inc.’s Foreign News Service.
Last November he published his third book, America the Vincible, a sharp attack on Eisenhower-Dulles foreign policy as a tangle of contradictions, myths and catch phrases.
Hughes himself strongly urged continuous negotiations with the Russians.
Dwight Eisenhower, slashing away with a red pencil, read it with mounting anger.
They set out in search of a keynoter who would be 1) a Midwesterner, 2) with evident maturity and 3) enough stature in foreign affairs to personify a cold-war tough line.
Judd then sailed to China as a medical missionary for the Congregational Church, was almost killed by malaria and by Communist rebels.
He came back to the United States in 1938 to preach of the peril of Japanese expansion, made 1.goo speeches in two years urging the United States to stop sending supplies to the Japanese.
After Pearl Harbor, he was elected to Congress by Minneapolis neighbors who raised his funds and ran his campaign.
In the capital he championed the cause of Nationalist China's Chiang Kai-shek when it was highly unpopular—a stand for which the Cowles-owned Minneapolis Star and Tribune still persistently belabor him.
He thundered against the perils of the Chinese Communists, recently helped get statements Irom 7,000 Protestant clergymen backing his stand against United States recognition of Red China.
Judd was surprised to be chosen to make the keynote speech but not at a loss for words.
Which means that Walter Judd knows why he is a Republican, why he calls himself a “progressive conservative,” and why he thinks Republicans are the best folks to entrust with the management of the nation’s domestic and foreign affairs.
POLITICAL NOTES View from the Summit Regardless of their political preferences, United States voters do not blame the Republicans for the summit failure.
Not one of the voters he interviewed, reports United Feature’s doorbell-ringing Pollster Sam Lubell this week, is shifting his vote to the Democrats.
A 5 to 1 majority of all voters praised Ike’s “dignity” in the face of the Khrushchev tirade, and three out of four were in favor of larger defense expenditures.
Most people were sticking to their original, presummit choice for the presidency; Vice President Nixon, because of his experience, got a “‘small boost” out of increased concern about war.
Kennedy Nixon Don‘t Know 37% 49% 14% Stevenson Nixon Don’t Know 35% 51% 14% Who's for Whom @ In California’s primary elections, Richard Nixon trotted into the winner's circle with more votes than his Democratic rival, Governor Edmund Brown.
Unopposed on the G.O.P. ballot, Native Son Nixon nevertheless attracted 59% of the registered Republicans to the polls for a rousing 1,475,595 vote of confidence— despite an attempt by Rockefeller outriders to encourage a “silent” stay-away vote.
The Democrats polled 53% of their registered vote, but Brown found nothing very cheering in his 1,327,245 vote tally or the fact that his Democratic rival, Old-Age Pension Promoter George McLain, registered a surprising 634,950 total.
Harvard's Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and John K Galbraith, Amherst’s Henry Steele Commager and Washington Lawyer Joseph Rauh, onetime chairman of Americans for Democratic Action.
In Manhattan, a regiment of eggheads closed the gap in their ranks UPI ELeEANoR & ““ELEANOR™* A sign from a queen mother. with a Draft Stevenson Committee, signed a loyalty pledge supporting their favorite candidate.
Poets Carl Sandburg and Archibald MacLeish, Authors John Steinbeck and John Hersey, Theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, Critic John Mason Brown, Playwright-Producer George Abbott, Composer-Conductor Leonard Bernstein.
After 1956 charges that he had % On location at Hyde Park for Sunrise at Campobello with Actress Greer Garson, who plays the young Eleanor Roosevelt, been an influence peddler around Washington, Murray Chotiner abruptly retired from Nixon’s life, campaigned for Congress this spring with glacial silence from Nixon, lost to a soft-hitting wealthy cilman, Alphonzo E Bell Jr.
In the Republican primary, former Congressman Orvin B Fjare was chosen to oppose Metcalf in a tight battle in November.
U Johnson, Divided Honors From solons to saloonkeepers, every wag had his political gag as the election moon waxed bright.
Q Father Joe Kennedy sits down for a man-to-man talk with his son, Jack.
The good Lord came to me and, in a blaze of white light, he told me he was going to make me President.
Maybe so, but I don’t remember talking to either of you guys last night.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 HOW THE DEMOCRATS STAND Four weeks before the Los Angeles convention, the battle for the Democratic presidential nomination seemed to go underground as the contenders, their aides and strategists were busier than an ant colony in their quests for delegates and deals.
So far, 84 votes have declared for Johnson, 7 for Georgia’s Richard Russell (probably ultimately for Johnson), and 14 for Symington.
Uncommitted, with 14 votes each for Johnson and Symington, 3 votes for Kennedy and 3 for Stevenson, but a voluntary unit rule could tip it either way at pre-convention caucus.
Unless there are unmistakable noises of a bandwagon, the delegates will split wide open on the second ballot, with Kennedy picking up the biggest boodle—at least 44 votes.
Favorite Son George Smathers on the first ballot, with Johnson carrying about 20, Kennedy 5, and Symington 4 thereafter.
A Dixiecrat movement to back Favorite Son Herman Talmadge is under way, but the unit rule should carry the state for Johnson.
No commitments yet, though Kennedy is the preferred choice of 15 delegates with } vote each, Johnson of 6, Symington of 3.
Unit rule becomes effective on the second ballot, should throw the vote to Kennedy.
The traditional split is forecast, with Chicago Mayor Richard Daley shepherding 52 delegates into the Kennedy fold, most of the downstate strays going over to Symington.
Daley, boss of Cook County, should hold his two-thirds of the delegation through the second ballot; if the bandwagon breaks down, Symington will find easy pickings.
All first-ballot votes for Kennedy as a result of his primary victory; perhaps 8 or 10 for Symington on the second. lowa : First-ballot bow to Goyernor Herschel Loveless, a Kennedy supporter and vice-presidential hopeful.
On the second ballot Kennedy has a rockbottom count of 20, Symington of 6.
Under unit rule, Kennedy-leaning Docking could carry the state for Kennedy thereafter, though strong Symington support makes the balance close.
Johnson counts on 22 votes, Kennedy 3, Symington and Stevenson 2 or 3 apiece.
Johnson on the first ballot, though a wildcat Dixiecrat movement might change the voting order.
Committed to Kennedy on first ballot by primary vote; Johnson and Symington could pick up a few on subsequent ballots.
Governor G Mennen Williams has “pledged” the state to Kennedy but the delegates are not bound to follow him, and Walter Reuther, a major power, has so far held off a formal endorsement of Kennedy, Current guess: Kennedy, 40 votes on the first ballot, the rest for Symington and Stevenson.
The delegation will go where Humphrey takes it, and best guessing is that he will climb on the Kennedy bandwagon.
Kennedy looks good for 10 on first ballot, with Symington, Stevenson and Johnson splitting the rest.
Sentimentally disposed to give 8 votes to Kennedy, 6 to Johnson, 1 to Symington.
Governor Robert Meyner is desperately trying to maintain his favorite-son status, but Kennedy now has at least 32 votes, may sweep the delegation by convention time.
Presumed to be Johnson’s own until last fortnight’s state convention, the delegation will now give at least 4 votes to Kennedy.
In second place was Lyndon Johnson, with 4104 votes, grounded on the rock of the Solid South.
If the voting goes into a second ballot, Kennedy’s indicated strength should carry him over the finish line with 7654 votes.
But if the Kennedy bandwagon should be wrecked, Stuart Symington, with widely scattered support all over the nation, probably stands to gain the most. of such powers as the Kings and Bronx County chairmen, and despite the preferences of such erstwhile kingmakers as Eleanor Roosevelt , James Farley and Carmine De Sapio , no one else can approach Kennedy’s total.
Johnson should win 32 votes, with Stevenson and Symington getting 2 apiece and Kennedy a single vote.
Committed to Kennedy, who took Governor Mike Di Salle into camp last January.
Symington has 6 votes and so has Kennedy, but the majority of the delegates are still awaiting a signal from Governor David Lawrence and Philadelphia Boss Bill Green.
Symington and Kennedy worth 44 votes each and Johnson getting the rest.
Pledged to Johnson, Washington : Something for everybody, with Kennedy getting 74 votes and Stevenson 7.
Although Kennedy won the bloody primary, he has just 12 votes, with Johnson second, with 8 votes, and Symington and Stevenson sharing the rest.
Kennedy, 204; Humphrey, 104, with powerful state leaders determined to lead most of Humphrey’s strength to Kennedy on second ballot.
It weaves through the hills beyond the cities, marches across flatlands that once were farms and pastures, dips into gullies and woodlands, straddles the rocky hillocks and surrounds the lonesome crossroads.
But it has its roots in such venerable names as Salem, Greenwich, Chester, Berkeley, Evanston, Sewickley and Rye.
In those towns and hills and groves last week the splendor of a new summer seemed, as always, to give a new lilt to life.
In the old towns, the giant oaks and elms threw rich new shade across the white colonial mansions and the square, peaked-roofed clapboard houses.
School buses headed toward the season's last mile; power mowers and outboard motors pulsed the season’s first promise.
Fragrance of honeysuckle and roses overlay the smell of charcoal and seared beef.
The thud of baseball against mitt, the abrasive grind of roller skate against concrete, the jarring harmony of the Good Humor bell tolled the day; the clink of ice, the distant laugh, the surge of hi-fi through the open window came with the night.
For better or for worse, Suburbia in the 1960s is the U.S.’s grass-roots.
In Suburbia live one-third of the nation, roughly 60 million people wood, Park Forest who represent every patch of democracy’s hand-stitched quilt, every economic layer, every laboring and professional pursuit in the country.
Suburbia is the nation’s broadening young middle class, staking out its claim across the landscape, prospecting on a trial-and-error basis for the good way of life for itself and for the children that it produces with such rapidity.
If Suburbia’s avid social honeybees buzz from address to address in search of sweet status, Suburbia is at the same time the home of the talented and distinguished Americans who write the nation’s books, paint its paintings, run its corporations and set the patterns.
Golfer Bobby Jones ; Boston Symphony Charles Munch, Milton ; United Fruit Co.
President William Allen, The Highlands ; Supreme Court Associate Justice Hugo Black, Alexandria TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 matt ‘ge os ime cous _> t 25 mi a BELLEVILLE Y sometimes march into frantic acwith rigorous unison, they march for such causes as better schools, churches and charities, which are the building blocks of a nation’s character.
Suburbia is a particular kind of American phenomenon, and its roots lie in a particular kind of American heritage.
In a casual, ill-planned way it is the meeting ground between the growing, thriving city and the authentic United States legend of smalltown life.
I think there's idealistic about the search for a home in the suburbs, Call it a return to the soil.
WI France’s Charles de Gaulle saw San Francisco’s suburban Palo Alto on his trip to the United States six weeks ago, he hailed Suburbia as “magnifique.
Man has been moving to the suburbs ever since he invented the school (consomething urbs.
And small wonder, for the towns and walled cities of Europe, from ancient times TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 15 CLEVELAND 25 mi through the Middle Ages and beyond, were airless, fetid places choking with humanity.
In England lonely voices cried out against the grime and stench of the cities.
Masterman was perhaps the first of a urban critics to draw a bead on it.
Late Sé Char Grosse Pointe Hamtramck® Lake Ense TIME Maps byR.M.Chapin,Jde their hands.
Long before England’s Masterman had his say, Philadelphians and Bostonians were moving to the outskirts of town.
At first the countryside communities A New Litt ro Lirt Leviton—Atlonta Den Moruer & Cus Scouts IN SANDY SPRINGS, Ga. leafed and budded with the homes of the well to do, who could afford to come and go by the seasons.
By the turn of the century, United States Suburbia was flowering with permanent residents.
Freed from the city by the trolley and rapid-transit services, and then by the automobile, hoisted gradually by a strengthening economy, the new middle-income families swept beyond the gates to buy homes of their own, from which they could commute to their jobs.
When World War II ended, the sweep to the suburbs turned into a stampede, The veterans came home, the legion of war workers burst out of crowded city quarters, and in battalions they set out to find homes where the land was greener and cheaper.
New settlements spread across acre upon acre; small. sleepy old towns were inundated by newcomers, and the suburban way of life became the visible substance of what a hard-working nation was working so hard for.
The key figure in all Suburbia, the thread that weaves between family and community—the keeper of the suburban dream—is the suburban housewife.
In the absence of her commuting, city-working husband, she is first of all the manager of home and brood, and beyond that a sort of aproned activist with a penchant for keeping the neighborhood and community kettle whistling.
She takes her peanut-butter sandwich lunch while standing, thinks she looks a fright. watches her weight (periodically), jabbers over the short-distance telephone with the next-door neighbor.
She keeps the checkbook, frets for the day that her husband’s next raise will top the flood of monthly bills —a tide that never seems to rise as high in the city as it does in the suburbs.
She wonders if her husband will send her flowers , shoos the children next door to play at the neighbor’s house for a change, paints her face for her husband’s return before she wrestles with dinner.
Spotted through her day are blessed moments of relief or dark thoughts of escape.
Harry Red Mitt VALLEY, CALIF. tination is just beyond sensible walking distance.
If the theory of evolution is still working. it may well one day transform the suburban housewife’s right foot into a flared paddle, grooved for easy traction on the gas pedal and brake.
As her children grow less dependent on her, Suburbia’s housewife fills her newfound time with a dizzying assortment of extra-curricular projects that thrust her full steam into community life.
Since Suburbia was conceived for children (and vice versa), the Suburban housewife is the chief jungle fighter for school expansion and reform.
Only recently, after the Montgomery County manager whacked $11 million from the 1961 school budget, the county council was invaded by an indignant posse of 1,000 P.T.A. members.
The council scrambled to retreat, not only restored the cuts, but added a few projects of its own for good measure.
The tax rate jumped s¢ per $100 valuation as a result, but there was scarcely a whimper.
With husbands away at work and hampered by long commuting, women can share and contribute more.
With a little prodding from his wife, the suburban husband develops a big yen to mix in Government affairs at the local level.
The result is that Suburbia often shines with the kind of topnotch talent that makes troubled big-city fathers wince with envy.
In Kansas City’s suburban Prairie Village, for example, the $1-a-year mayor is a lawyer with a growing practice, the president of the city council is a Procter & Gamble Co. division manager and the head of the village planning commission is assistant to the president of a manufacturing firm.
In Philadelphia’s suburban Swarthmore, the town council includes a Philadelphia banker, a Du Pont engineer, the president of a pipeline company and a retired executive of Swarthmore College.
Biggest of the problems that such people face is Suburbia’s growing morass of overlapping services and functions cially in counties that have experienced a big building rush.
In the 17 towns that comprise Denver's four-county suburespeTIME, JUNE 20, 1960 Ben Martin Levittown, L.I. ... to believe that they should be unhappy. ban area, for example, there are 27 school districts, 5 water districts, 59 sanitation districts.
And the granddaddy of them all is the megalopolis of Los Angeles which is fish-netted with 72 separate governments and an uncounted array of districts, authorities, and floating unincorporated communities.
But suburbanites, more than their urban or rural brethren, tend to want to get things fixed.
Lakewood, Calif., 22 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, was just another boondock of 5,000 people ten years ago when the boom thundered.
A development group poured $200 million into 17,000 homes and a big shopping center.
As residents took hold, the sense of frustration that came from long-distance county rule and the absence of locally administered services flashed into a new, self-starting energy.
Lakewood, with a present population of 75,000, incorporated itself in 1954, sank its own home-nurtured political roots and fashioned an identity of its own.
Then, while running its own affairs, it devised a method of contracting for police, road maintenance and building maintenance to the county government.
The “Lakewood Plan” was later copied by many other California communities.
So ably has Lakewood fashioned its living pattern to suit itself that many Lakewood families who might have moved on to more expensive, status-setting locales, have decided to stay where they are.
The suburbanite has been prodded, poked, gouged, sniffed and tweaked by armies of sociologists and swarms of cityside cynics, but in reality he is his own best critic.
Organized suburban living is a relatively new invention and already some of its victims are wondering if it has too much organization and too little living.
The pressure of activity and participation in the model suburb of Lakewood, for example, can be harrowTommy Webe Huntincron, L.1. ing.
In season, the leagues play 5 boys’ and 30 men’s basketball teams, 77 football teams, all coached by volunteers, while other activities range through drama, dance and charm classes, bowling, dog-training classes, “Slim ‘n’ Trim” groups, roller skating, photography, woodcraft, and lessons in how to ice a cake.
The parental press to keep the youngsters busy has created an image of an Organization Child, or Boy in the Grey Flannel Sneakers.
The thriving Cub Scout movement is a wondrous machine of 1,822,062 beanie-capped boys who visit fire stations, make kites and tie knots, all en masse, and the Little League has more than a million little sports who are cheered on by an equal number of overexuberant daddies.
I think people are so bored, they organize the children, and then try to hook everyone else on it.
In those suburbs where families, income, education and interest are homogenized, suburbanites sometimes wonder whether their children are cocooned from the rest of the world.
The all-weather activities often center on frenzied weekend parties in the “den,” attended by neighbors, who each in his turn will throw a potato-chip and cheesedip party on succeeding weekends.
In Kansas City’s suburban Overland Park, three jaded couples formed an “Anti-Conformity League” to fight groupthink, disbanded it soon afterward because, explains ex-Schoolteacher Ginger COMMUNITY * ® CHURCH & SUNDAY MorNING IN Mitt VALLEY, CAuir.
For some, the suburban euphoria often translates itself into the suburban caricature.
Though suburban wife-swapping stories are the delight of the urban cocktail party, immorality in the suburbs is no more or less prevalent than it is in the cities.
Suburbia's clergymen tend to be most keenly aware of Suburbia’s disappointments and Suburbia’s promise.
So many of the people are on approximately the same level economically and socially.
They tend to be new in the community and they're unstable and insecure.
When they see someone else fail, in work or in a family relationship, they themselves feel a rung higher, and this is a great reason for gossip.
I think socially we're flying apart—we don’t meet heart to heart any more, we meet at cocktail parties in a superficial way.
I think we're seeing a documentable rebellion going on against the postwar idea of mere belongingness and sociability.
The fact surrounding all the criticism and self-searching is that most suburbanites are having too good a time to realize that they ought to be unhappy with their condition.
At week’s end, as they nursed their power mowers down the lawn, Suburbia’s men paused here and there to enjoy a spell of nothing more salacious than wifewatching.
In the patios, the amateur chefs prepared juicy sacrifices on the suburban Buddhas —the charcoal grills.
Mint-flavored iced tea or tart martinis chilled thirsty throats, and from across hedgerows and fences came the cries of exultant youngsters and the yells and laughter of men and women engaged in a rough-and-tumble game of croquet or volleyball.
Thus the suburban counterpoint leaps forward in optimistic measure, creating a new framework for the American theme.
True, as in every place, every suburban husband wishes he earned more money, every mother with young children wishes she had more help, small boys wish there were fewer days of school, small girls wish there were fewer small boys, and babies all wish there was no such thing as strained spinach.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 ToKyYO DEMONSTRATORS STANDIN The passi JAPAN Ordeal by Mob The plane bearing Press Secretary James Hagerty was not due until 3m. but by midday, 20,000 people had converged on Tokyo's International Airport.
On the terrace of the terminal buildIng were gathered middle-aged men and kimono-clad women clutching United States and Japanese flags.
The signs were in English, and clearly intended for United States photographers and. eventually, the United States public.
United States Ambassador Douglas MacArthur II landed at the airport in a green Marine H-13 helicopter.
Asked if he and Hagerty would take the helicopter or a car into Tokyo, MacArthur said, “What the hell we will drive, of course.
As Hagerty’s Lockheed Super Constellation touched down from Oki30 minutes late, a wild melee broke out on the terrace between the right-wing and the left-wing toughs.
Some 2,000 police surged forward to separate the com batants while the sedate elders looked on in dismay.
Ambassador MacArthur wel comed Hagerty and his companion, Ap pointments Secretary the three paused brietly for photographs and then hurried to the ambassador's offi cial black Cadillac.
It sped off. followed by two Fords carrying six United States Secret sedately small banners and 1,500 students squatted in a a spot rises nawa Thomas Stephens TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 on was organized, di Servicemen.
Just nine days later, President Dwight D Eisenhower was scheduled to drive the same route with Emperor Hirohito by his side.
All three cars bowled along at high speed, but as the Cadillac emerged from the underpass and ascended the curving rise.
MacArthur's Japanese chauffeur saw the students squatting en masse on the road and braked sharply.
The Cadillac swerved to the right and stopped; the two Fords halted bumper to bumper behind it.
They beat on the car with fists and hammered its body and kicked the locked Glass cracked in the windshield The mob began rocking the car in rhythpoles doors.
Thousands of other students who had been snake-dancing and marching near by rushed to join in.
A Socialist member of Parliament, wearing a red sash, looked on approvingly from the sidelines and puffed at a cigarette.
Obediently, the mob ceased rocking the car and began singing the /nternationale.
The six Secret Servicemen pushed their way through and ranged themselves around the Cadillac, facing the singing, shouting crowd.
The student leaders obligingly helped linking arms to keep their followers from like fish in a fishbowl, several helicopters went round and round in the watery sky.
When the Marine H-13 helicopter roared low over the car, the crowd hurled stones and broken poles at it.
Each time the heli copter tried to land alongside the road way, the crowd rushed forward so that the chopper had to veer upward or risk injuring the demonstrators.
Behind the car's closed windows James Hagerty smoked a cigarette and took pictures of the gibbering crowd with After a quarter of an hour, the 2.000 policemen who had been left behind at the airport terrace came marching slowly across the wearing white cotton gloves and carrying yellow guidons marked with their squad numbers.
The police forced open a path through the mob and the Cadillac inched forward, and then. as more and more students squatted in front of it halted again, surrounded by swirling red flags.
Finally the police managed to clear a grassy space by the roadside, and the Marine helicopter dropped 19 pressing too close.
Overhead composedly a small Japanese camera. grass down only so feet from the stranded Cadillac.
In the order of their seating, MacArthur, Stephens and Hagerty emerged from the car.
Secret Servicemen tried to hurry Ambassador MacArthur toward the waiting helicopter, but he ordered them to walk, not run.
The instant Hagerty was aboard, the chopper rose like a whirring pheasant.
The takeoff was so fast that the last of the Secret Servicemen tumbled from the open door and fell six feet to the ground.
The rescuing Marines landed Hagerty, Stephens and MacArthur at Hardy Barracks, where a waiting embassy car whisked them the 14 miles to the ambassador’s residence, taking them in the back way to avoid thousands of demonstrators crowded around the front gate.
At 8 that evening, still without having dined, Hagerty pugnaciously faced a microphoneladen table and a clutch of United States and Japanese reporters.
In his prepared statement, Hagerty said that the demonstration was obviously “carefully planned by a group of professional organizers.
The mobs’ spearhead is the Zengakuren students’ federation which claims to represent half of Japan's 677,000 undergraduates.
Mainstreamers are so far out politically that they consider Khrushchev a “traitor” to the proletariat.
As a result, Communist students are considered “moderates” by the Japanese press in contrast with the club-swinging mainstreamers.
But it was the Communist “moderates” who besieged Hagerty’s car at the airport.
Zengakuren’s leadership has become extraordinarily efficient at organizing riots, equips picked agitators with whistles and megaphones to direct the mobs, pays them $1-1.s0 a day for their efforts.
The question that most bothered the newsmen was one that Hagerty could not be expected to answer.
Next day, the leftists filled Tokyo's streets with 150,000 demonstrators.
With 8,000 police looking on, they stopped a bus bearing 20 of Kishi’s Liberal Democrats, poked sticks through the windows, dragged out three of the legislators and roughed them up.
Some 4,000 students laid siege to Premier Kishi’s suburban home to prevent his leaving to keep an appointment with Jim Hagerty—an appointment Kishi denied having.
Jim Hagerty spent the day indoors at the home of Foreign Minister Aiichiro Fujiyama.
He met for several hours with Foreign Office aides and at dusk left quietly for the United States airbase at Tachikawa, west of Tokyo, catching only a fleeting glimpse of the lantern parade as he departed.
As Hagerty flew off to Alaska to meet Eisenhower , he left behind him an exultant anti-Kishi coalition, which seemed confident that it had the government on the run.
Should Eisenhower now visit Japan, cried the Socialists, it could only be for the purpose of propping up the tottering power of Kishi, and that would represent an interference in the internal affairs of Japan.
There were also ominous signs of a weakening of nerve among non-Communist Japanese.
Three former Premiers— ex-Imperial Prince Naruhiko Higashi-Kuni, Tetsu Katayama and Tanzan Ishibashi— urged that Kishi resign and the Eisenhower visit be postponed, and that the question of the U.S.-Japanese security pact be decided by a new government after a national election.
Big businessmen of the Japan Employers Federation felt that Eisenhower should still come, but with the reservation that after the ratification of the U.S.-Japanese treaty (scheduled for June 19, the day of Ike’s arrival), Premier Kishi should resign and call new elections.
There were indications that factional leaders within Kishi’s own party were sharpening their knives in order to dispose of the Premier and take his place.
But at week’s end, Nobusuke Kishi was at last exhibiting some of the resourcefulness for which he has long been noted.
The 25,000 police will be augmented by 50,ooo pro-Kishi students who will guard the road to the airfield.
Kishi hopes that the presence of the Emperor at Ike’s side will be an added protection.
But the worry was not over, for the demonstrators were no frenzied mob carried away by fury or passion.
Instead, all week long they reacted on cue from their leaders, and every blow seemed as stylized and dispassionate as a Kabuki play.
And it will be just as violent—or as mild—as the leitwing strategists choose.
RUSSIA Dirty Rain The heart of Nikita Khrushchey’s oftproclaimed intention of lifting the Russian standard of eating to the United States level lies in a vast expansion of grain production—grain being the raw material of meat, dairy products and poultry.
For weeks past, huge dust storms originating in the Soviet Union and sweeping westward into Europe have announced to all and sundry that Khrushchev’s food program is in serious trouble.
The storms began in early April, when hot, dry winds off the Central Asian plateau, melting the skimpy snow cover, swept across a 1,500-mile belt extending from the Caspian Sea through the Caucasus, southern Ukraine and Crimea to Moldavia.
But after dust and sand began falling on Bulgaria, Rumania, and even Yugoslavia and Poland, Radio Moscow guardedly began reporting “dirty rain” around Kiev.
Making the best of a bad situation, /zvestia deTIME, JUNE 20, 1960 scribed how 17 “heroic collective farm workers” had shoveled four feet of dust offi a hog-farrowing shed near Krasnodar, then stayed around to play midwife to the sows.
Last week Radio Moscow admitted that moisture conditions in the Caucasus and southern Ukraine were the worst since 1928, conceded that in places a third of the winter wheat was destroyed and would need to be replanted for even a partial harvest.
But the prospect is that they are in for another year of the same old bread-and-cabbage diet.
THE PHILIPPINES Cleanup in Manila For no nation does the United States feel such direct responsibility as for the 14-year-old Philippine Republic.
A half-century of United States colonial tutelage, generously administered and gracefully relinquished, has left the Philippines a heritage of universal suffrage, widespread education, press freedom, managerial know-how, and a dedication both to the higher principles and some of the lower practices of American democracy.
When he took over after the death of able, incorruptible Ramon Magsaysay in 1957, Garcia’s regime became conspicuous chiefly for its influence peddling, nepotism and economic mismanagement.
Last fall, after losing off-year senatorial elections in the cities even though his Nacionalistas bought a majority in the countryside, Garcia awoke to the fact that government corruption had been the major popular issue against him, shrewdly concluded that he had better change his party’s ways before the 1961 presidential elections.
When Aytona bluntly replied that reform was necessary, Garcia named him Secretary of Finance, in charge of customs, internal revenue and import licensing—the three major areas of political gravy.
He warned ministry employees to stay away from race tracks, cockpits, casinos and especially Manila’s thriving new “dayclubs,” a collection of cabarets complete with B-girls catering to men who found it easier to get away from their jobs in the afternoon than their wives at night.
Aytona’s drive has already boosted tax and customs revenues by 20% over last year, and he is now trying to change tax laws to catch wealthy tax dodgers who, he claims, cheated the government of $65 million last year—enough to pay for a year’s education for 1,000,000 Filipino children.
His biggest reform was to institute a “‘controlled decontrol” of the peso designed to create a free currency market within four years.
Under his new regulations, importers of “essential goods” get their dollars at more favorable rates than those who bring in Cadillacs and air conditioners.
Already the Philippines’ foreign exchange reserves have been built up to a healthy $180 million, and Aytona hopes that his cleanup will lure back United States investors, who have been so leary of the Garcia climate of investment that they did not put a single new dollar into the islands last year.
Though he says he has only scratched the top of the dirt, Aytona’s work has silenced Garcia's political opponents, and there is some talk that Garcia plans to select him as his vice-presidential running mate in 1961.
The handshakes would be for Garcia, but the admiration would go mainly to that rising young Filipino, Dominador Aytona.
FRANCE The Little Cats An enterprising Parisian pimp named Pierre Sorlut set out two years ago to corner the nymphlet market.
Pierre recruited his pubescent charmers among girls aged 12 to 18, first by seducing them and then by arranging dates with wealthy clients with infantile tastes.
Pierre’s particular prey were the pouting little imitators of Brigitte Bardot, with puffball hairdos and ambitions to become starlets or models.
Pierre would say as he collected the earnings of Janine, Colette and Monique.
If a girl proved difficult, Pierre would speak musingly of vitriol and its effects on a pretty face.
Flashing his outof-date police card (Pierre was once a police chauffeur), he would add; “You see.
Personable Pierre drove a blue Oldsmobile, dressed nattily, talked of his glamorous past as an Air Force pilot and a Resistance fighter.
At least one mother was dazzled to learn that her 13-year-old daughter, appropriately named Rose, whom Pierre was looking after “like a little sister,” had been introduced to André Le Troquer, 75, then president of the National Assembly.
Pierre was arrested last year in a complicated affair involving the shakedown of a businessman by a brace of phony policemen.
In jail, Sorlut soon began singing, gave the police a score of names of prominent Parisians to whom he had supplied young girls—politicians, manufacturers, department-store directors, a hairdresser, a fashionable tailor, an art curator, a restaurateur, a countess.
At the trial, mothers came—or were pushed—forward with selfrighteous complaints about the corruption of their daughters.
Newsmen learned that there had been striptease parties, involving young girls and boys, at the Villa Butard, a onetime royal hunting lodge that was Le Troquer’s official out-of-town residence as president of the National Assembly.
Le Troquer denied everything except that he was acquainted with Pierre Sorlut.
Abruptly the entire affair went off the record, and the hearings were closed to the press and public.
Last week, after more than a year of hearings in chamber, the court made known its verdict.
As for André Le Troquer, he was fined $600 and given a one-year suspended sentence.
In some places, it was impossible to register a birth, take out a marriage license or even obtain a permit to bury the dead.
Because of falling water pressures, many tenants on upper floors of apartment buildings had to forgo washing.
Millions of unscrubbed schoolchildren obtained an extra bonanza in the form of a holiday from school; teachers were on strike.
Behind the nationwide one-day strike of government employees, from postmen to customs inspectors, lay the dissatisfaction of lower-income Frenchmen at the steady upward creep of consumer prices.
Though France has 30% more cars on the road this year than last, and the longabused French franc continues to gain strength in relation to gold and the dollar, the new prosperity fostered by Charles de Gaulle has not trickled down to the lowest-paid classes.
Even conservative newspapers concede that the pay of government employees, traditionally a pace setter for clerical workers generally, is disgracefully low.
Only 14% earn $200 a month, while more than a fourth receive under Sroo.
De Gaulle had hoped to combat the rising cost of living by an all-out overhaul of France's antiquated food distribution system, under which nearly every vegetable or farm animal produced in France must be shipped to Paris’ Les Halles market for sale or reshipment to the provinces.
But the reform has been put off because of the cost of prosecuting the Algerian war.
At week's end 10,000 marching strikers tied Parisian auto traffic in angry knots.
ISRAEL Sovereign Wrong At first, Argentina protested just as a matter of form.
Trae Correspondent Piero Saporiti had reported that Nazi Adolf Eichmann had been run down by Israeli agents in Buenos Aires and whisked out of the country in an Israeli plane.
But last week Israel's Premier Ben-Gurion replied with one of the most undiplomatic notes in diplomatic history—and the Argentines wished they had not asked.
Instead of the expected diplomatic evasion, old Ben-Gurion admitted that Eichmann had indeed been tracked down in Argentina and surreptitiously taken to Israel.
To compound this admission, the Israeli Premier then proceeded to add some flagrantly unbelievable details.
Having first announced that Eichmann had been found by “Israeli security services,” he now insisted that the Nazi’s captors were merely “volunteers,” with no official status.
When the volunteers found Eichmann, said the Israeli note, he had “spontaneously” agreed to go to Israel to stand trial.
Argentines got the feeling that not only had their sovereignty been flouted in the eyes of the world, but that Israel was treating them like gullible fools.
Nor were they pleased by a gratuitous reference in the Israeli note to “numerous Nazis” living in Argentina, It is true that ex-Dictator Juan Perén had granted asylum to many Nazis; the present government does not enjoy being reminded of the sins of its predecessors.
Once Israel returned Eichmann, Argentina would consider a formal request for his extradition—but only from West Germany or some international tribunal.
But Eichmann would probably not go back; Israeli feeling against the Nazi murder expert runs so high that Ben-Gurion would scarcely dare to return him, even if he wanted to.
If he does not, Argentina promises to hale Israel before the United Nations, where it is likely to have plenty of support from other Latinand Africanbloc nations.
GREAT BRITAIN Host to Rebels Through the fogs and damps of London drift thousands of Africans, a long way from the sunlit ease of their homelands.
They live in bleak, crowded rooming houses in Notting Hill and Paddington, find their entertainment in smoky cellar nightclubs that are loud with West Indian steel bands, bongo drums and maracas.
They are genuinely puzzled when the Jumbles object to the noise and the dawn revelry.
But London has another meaning for Africans than just a place to work and play.
It is the city where Mazzini plotted the independence of a unified Italy, where Karl Marx labored through 34 years to create Communism, where Sun Yat-sen planned the death of the Manchu Empire and the birth of the Chinese Republic.
Historically, London has always given asylum to political exiles and revolutionaries, and the Africans are no exceptions—even though much of their plotting is in effect against Britain itself, or at least against the British colonial rule of their countries.
Two basement rooms in Gower Street TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 Ty .¢ > are headquarters for the Committee of African Organizations.
Working at tiny desks, surrounded by trestle tables loaded with duplicating machine, proofs and pamphlets, each African concentrates on his job regardless of the surrounding conversation, loud argument and clatter of machines.
At headquarters one morning last week were representatives from the Southern Rhodesian Congress Committee Abroad. the Revolutionary Front for National Independence of Portuguese Colonies, the Tanganyika Students Association, the National Association of Socialist Students’ Organizations and South Africa’s African National Congress.
West Africans, who number about 7,000 in London, center on the dreary red brick building of the West African Students Union in Warrington Crescent.
East Africans throng the tall, modern Georgian building near Marble Arch called East Africa House, a combination university hostel and West End club.
East Africa House is subsidized by the individual colonial governments, but members also pay an annual subscription, The different nationalities generally group together.
In the pleasant bar, Moslem Somalis sit in one corner drinking Coca-Cola; a group of Kenyans sip martinis, Tanganyikans have their whiskies, and a Uganda engineer drinks beer by himself.
All the talk is of politics, both international (a majority held that Khrushchev was right and Eisenhower wrong on the U-2 question) and domestic.
The political talk is largely left-wing, and nationalism is still the main subject.
Privately, and to British friends they can trust, they sound off like a series of rockets on every aspect of South African life.
Family members band together to send the brilliant one to London to study and improve himself.
I’m in a lawyer's chamber in Middle Temple in TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 the day.
Adumah has made several visits to Communist Czechoslovakia, where he has been warmly entertained by his Red hosts.
He contrasts those visits with life in London, where he has lived for six years.
Dozens of British do-good organizations dabble at improving race relations, and individuals give their time to help run ALGERIA Boom Town Amidst Rebellion From 6m. on, the morning air is blue with exhaust fumes and the imprecations of traffic-jammed motorists.
A continuous ribbon of new and half-finished apartment houses, new factories, assembly plants and used-car lots flanks the 13-mile road between the airport and town.
Hotel space is at such a premium that many a visiting industrialist is glad to find a cot in the bathroom of any rooming house.
Algiers, a city once chiefly celebrated in romantic French novels for its hauntingly mysterious Casbah and flyspecked poverty.
Just before Parliament rose, Labor's Sir Leslie Plummer introduced a bill making it an offense to discriminate against colored people.
Most London Africans, who will one day be members of the ruling class in their native lands, share either the bonedeep bitterness of Adumah or the puzzled frustration of the girl from Nigeria.
But the real thing that will solve these problems of prejudice is the independence and progress of our African countries.
Only by our achievements as free nations will we earn your respect and friendship.” in metropolitan France can match.
The first whiff of prosperity came when France increased its Algerian army first to 200,000, then to 500,000 men to fight the F.L.N. rebels.
Most of the new troops were reservists drawing far higher pay than the ordinary conscript rate, and produced unheard-of business for Algiers’ bars, restaura and shops.
And with an army to supply, farmers, vintners and the purveyors of a hundred-and-one small items of supply started piling up fortunes.
At the same time, wildcatters made their first major oil strikes in the Sz hara.
The big oil companies landed in Algiers, soon followed by dozens of smaller repair shops, equipped specialists and transport firms.
So many new jobs opened up that any skilled workman among the Moslems could pick and choose from two or three openings.
Vane, Nt, FRR ay ae aie gen o er Agi. month started asking—and getting—$7o a month.
In the spending splurge, rents went up—4soo% in some parts of the city.
Simca auto sales jumped from 3,000 in 1954 to 14,500 in 1959, will hit 20,000 in 1960.
Monoprix, France’s largest five-and-ten store, expanded from two to nine stores.
The number of stores selling radios, refrigerators, household equipment has increased fivefold.
What started as a war and oil boom is gradually changing into something more permanent.
Starting in 1958, under De Gaulle’s Constantine Plan to encourage the Algerian economy, dozens of new industries have moved across the Mediterranean to Algiers to take advantage of low government loans (3% interest on up to 40% of the required capital ), a ten-year tax exemption, and cash payments for every new job created.
Michelin, Renault, Unilever) have made the journey— so many that government officials worry about overcrowding in the city.
But it is safer and more pleasant in Algiers than out in the sticks, and Frenchmen have the feeling that whatever else happens, Algiers will grow increasingly French.
Algiers still has its beggars, and seven out of every ten Casbah residents have tuberculosis.
What makes the city bustle is its newly moneyed middle class, mostly of French, Corsican, Italian or Spanish descent, though many Arabs have done well too.
But there is little of the raffish night life of the typical boom town; Algiers’ one luxury nightclub is half empty on week nights.
INDONESIA Home Is Where Trouble Is After junketing around the world for 64 days, Indonesia’s President Sukarno finally returned to his land of customary turmoil last week.
Rebel and bandit fighting continued in Java, Sumatra, the Celebes and Borneo.
The monetary reform so am26 is a John Titchen—Honolulu Star-Bulletin Hostess An You & SUKARNO Nine decorations, five degrees, two girls. bitiously decreed last year was a total failure.
Commerce had slowed to a near standstill; in central Java only 50 sugar mills were operating (v. prewar), and some 200,000 mill workers were unemployed.
Shiny new Czech tractors proved useless in the flooded rice fields; some 30% of a 100,000-ton Swedish shipment of cement had turned to rock because no one thought to bring it in out of the rain.
In the past Sukarno has always been able to push ahead as he liked with his “guided democracy,” because his opponents were hopelessly fragmented among some 27 different parties.
But Sukarno came home to find many of his old opponents united for the first time.
In three months the league has mushroomed into 60 chapters throughout the archipelago, plans to present Sukarno with a petition of several hundred thousand signatures demanding reinstatement of the elected Parliament.
Whether or not the league becomes a force depends largely on the army and its strongman army chief of staff, General Abdul Haris Nasution, 41.
Though Nasution has consistently supported Sukarno, one of the league's charter parties is the Indonesian Independence Upholders Union, formed several years ago by General Nasution himself.
Significantly, military commanders in most areas have allowed the league to recruit members and hold meetings.
Shortly after his return last week, Sukarno had lunch and a long talk with General Nasution, emerged conceding that the new Parliament needed “some improvements” before it was installed later this month.
With that, the man who describes himself as “the voice of the Indonesian people” got set to leave his troubled capital once more, this time for a sojourn at the government guest house at Tampaksiring in Bali.
CAMBODIA Free Choice Whatever title he chooses to hold, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, 37, runs Cambodia.
Then he served as Premier, but gave that up for the sixth time when his father died two months ago.
Just now he holds no official position at all, but nobody questioned it last week when he asked Cambodians to vote on the proposition of whether they liked him and his policy of neutrality in foreign affairs.
The first bore the prince’s picture; the second a picture of a rival leader now living in exile in Thailand; the third was printed in red to signify approval of Communism; the fourth, marked with a question mark to indicate no opinion.
In order to show that the vote would be free, Cambodia invited journalists from Southeast Asia and everywhere else.
Of Cambodia's often quarrelsome neighbors, the South Vietnamese (who have just claimed some Cambodian islands) refused politely, the Thailanders not so politely, and the Laotians declined because they have no foreign correspondents.
Wild Phnong tribesmen rode their elephants down from the hills; babytoting women in sarongs streamed into dusty towns; saffron-robed Buddhist monks padded through the silent ruins of Angkor Wat.
With this conclusive evidence of his people's affection, Prince Sihanouk announced that he was off to Paris for a much needed rest in a nursing home, and probably to decide whether he should become King, Premier, or perhaps both.
Mitt tires THE HEMISPHERE er ee ae ere ee ae CUBA The Marxist Neighbor Warm spring thunderstorms flicked lightning across the sky, crackled, then poured soft rain on Havana’s tree-shaded streets.
Sea birds screeched and wheeled. and lovers ran to cover from the concrete sea wall along Malecén drive.
Most of the prostitutes and pimps that used to degrade the city were gone, cleaned out by Fidel Castro's moralistic revolution.
In eastern Santiago, teen-agers danced in the streets to the latest Afro-Cuban rhythm, a hip-buster called the pachance, Cuba's outward tranquillity, however, was being synthetically inflamed by Fidel Castro, who was crying that the United States planned to do him harm.
He almost seemed to be trying to taunt the United States into intervening—and most Cubans thought a United States attack to be a live possibility.
For the second time in less than a week, the United States protested Castro’s “slander’ —specifically a propaganda pamphlet charging the United States with blowing up a munitions ship in Havana harbor last Marc At week's end Castro seized the Hotel Nacional (managed by a subsidiary of Pan American World Airways, Inc.) and the Havana Hilton, which Conrad Hilton operated for its owner, a Cuban labor union.
The hotels have been losing $100,000 a month since United States tourists began staying away.
Castro accused the American management of not doing enough to stir up United States tourist trade.
As Castro waxed more frantic against Yankee imperialists,’ he grew ever friendlier to Russia.
In Moscow. his henchman Antonio Nuifez Jiménez presented a Castro Minitra at DriLe Behind a clearly pro-Soviet line, seething 30 Cuban flag to the top Russian of them all, and soon Nikita Khrushchev will visit Cuba.
The jargon in Castro's speeches and in his captive press these days is increasingly Marxist.
The man most responsible is Major Ernesto Guevara, 32, an Argentine physician, Castro's best field commander, and a Red.
One big part of what has happened is brainwashing— sometimes subtle, oftener crude.
Yet, though not free to criticize home-grown Communists, the influential weekly Bohemia frequently plays up historical, deadpan articles on the NaziSoviet pact and the Khrushchev butchery in Hungary.
The daily Combate is currently charging that the Chilean earthquakes were caused by United States underground nuclear explosions.
Under the pretext of preparing for an invasion by United States Marines and “gangsters” from “that decadent democracy,” the government crowd is herding Cubans into mass institutions—militias, cooperatives, government youth groups, and labor unions.
The man in charge of collectivizing the economy is Che Guevara, head of the National Bank.
A slender asthmatic with an unLatin habit of curtness, he mastered the complexities of banking in a few months on the job, is all the more feared by antiCommunists for his efficiency.
Guevara has concluded a twelve-year trade treaty with Russia calling for $100 million in Soviet aid, has sold a million long tons of sugar to Russia, 130,000 to Communist China, 60,000 tons to East Germany and 150,000 tons to Poland.
He ordered Esso, Texaco and Shell to start processing 900,000 tons of Soviet petroleum arriving regularly aboard Russian tankers.
The oil companies, whom Cuba owes $60 million for previous shipments from Venezuela, refused, and Castro threatened last week to nationalize them.
By ignoring foreign obligations that now total $125 million, Che has built up his exchange reserves to $196 million.
Che's money has gone largely to finance the National Institute of Agrarian Reform , which now owns almost half of Cuba—13,246,800 acres out of its 28 million acres.
Last week 605,333 head of contiscated INRA cattle grazed on 2,091,600 acres of confiscated pasturelands.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 TIME Fad 2G jal Every day we move another ip clo8 r to Bis ete using the natural resources of other planets Air Force space studies aimed at cracking military problems also reveal potential civilian benefits Progress in space research is so rapid that consideration must now be given to projects you’d have scoffed at a few years ago.
For instance, development of a nuclear rocket could drop that it would be economically worthwhile to import rare materials from other planets.
These ansWers are seen in action every time a Douglas-built Thor boosts another payload into space. 3 since Development of nuclear power, utilized in space ships lik Douglas concept, will speec day when man will travel in outer space and use its resources, DOUGLAS ow own business BACKSTAGE AT BUSINESS WEEK Thanks-but-no-thanks.
We didn’t either, until we ran across the book that the Census Bureau uses to classify people.
Business Week has its own definitions of management and technical executives.
A snake charmer, no matter how charming, is still a snake charmer to us.
And you'll never find Business Week in your bird doctor's waiting room.
Last year, we politely refused subscriptions to nearly 11,000 people — an astonishing practice in the publishing business.
But it means BW is going to people who really can use its contents in business.
BUSINESS WEEK A McGraw-Hill Magazine You advertise in Business Week when you want to influence management men 32 19-story Havana headquarters, complete with piped music and two offices for INRA President Fidel Castro, INRA is running 1,392 collective farms, 2,000 “people’s stores,” 1,215 new schools, 15 fishing coops, 80 sewing schools, 1,000 “‘alphabetization centers” for adult illiterates.
INRA’s work, spearheaded by idealistic young army officers, zealous female social workers and, as of last week, at least 70 Russian technicians, is having a deep effect.
But knowing that the step is a big one, party headquarters displays not a portrait of Lenin but one of Fidel Castro.
A rash of opposition groups have | Sprung up, all taking anti-Communism as their theme.
Nine small guerrilla bands are operating in Cuba’s mountains— though a government patrol last week claimed the capture of the most publicized insurgent, ex—Castro Captain Manuel Beaton.
Encouraged by a Cuban Roman Catholic pastoral warning of Communism “within the gates,” the rebels expect Castro’s headlong reform to collapse, bringing the regime down with it.
It is a remote prospect; in the predictable future, the United States apparently will just have to get along with, without giving in to, the truculent neigh| bor who now presides over a people the United States once thought its good friend.
THE AMERICAS Familiar Faces Voters in two backward Andean countries last week brought back a pair of ex-, Presidents to office.
José Maria Velasco Ibarra, 67, was the only one of Ecuador’s four candidates who correctly sensed the sharply heightened appeal of learning, land, and a thicker slice of the national economy in an agricultural nation where nearly half of Foto Pacheco PRESIDENT-ELECT VELASCO IBARRA Double comeback in the mountains. the people are illiterate and the annual per capita income is $172.
Bolivia has no treasury reserves, is almost wholly dependent on the U.S., whose $150 million subsidy has kept the country going for the past seven years.
Per capita annual income has fallen 10% since 1956; the tin mines that Paz Estenssoro nationalized in 1952 are now losing Bolivia $9,000,000 a year, cannot fill their quotas under the international tin agreement even though they employ more men than ever.
But his incoming Vice President and revolutionary comrade, Juan Lechin, the Lebanese-descended onetime auto salesman who bosses the miners’ union, will stand squarely in his way; Union Boss Lechin opposes firing unnecessary workers or demanding more production.
Sooner or later, if he is to achieve his aims, Paz Estenssoro will presumably have to clash with Lechin—and Lechin has behind him the miners’ militia, the country’s best armed force.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 a hand in things to com Giving strawberries their place in the sun Strawberries grow rich and ripe in the sunshine, but they do need spe cial care.
Berries that touch the earth can develop ground rot, and the sun itself bakes moisture from the soil.
Today, many farmers solve these problems with some thing you can try in your own garden—black polyethylene film from Union Carbide.
Easily rolled out in long strips, this mulch protects the berries from ground rot, helps keep the earth warm and moist, and smothers troublesome weeds in darkness Tomatoes, melons, peppers and many other fruit and vegetable plants—set in the ground through the film—grow with spectacular results . earlier harvest. yielding a richer and Acres of plastic film are being used on the farm in many other ways Sheets of vinyl, another Union Carbide plastic, serve as a lining in ponds and irrigation ditches to prevent seepage.
Silos of polyethylene film can be set up right in the field as a convenient way to preserve animal feed.
And, anyone can use transparent polyethylene, stretched over a wood frame, to make a low-cost, do-it yourself greenhouse.
These BAKELITE and VISQUEEN brand plastics, which are helping to bring you a better supply of food, have sprung from a constant search for new and unusual materials.
In Canada, Uni arbide Canada Limited, Toronte The term AKELIT nd VISQuE are registered trade marks of Unior roe Corporation UNION CARBIDE ...ahand in things to come Gin, Mine te Mit if pine BUILT-IN QUALITY OF BODY BY FISHER Take a rainy-day drive in a General Motors car and you appreciate the Exclusive Extra of Body by Fisher.
Even with the windows closed, the air you breathe is changed over two times a minute, enters through a windshield-high grille where it’s fresher and freer of fumes.
MagicMirror Finish Sound Barrier Build + Vista-Panoramic Windshield Safety Plate Glass All Around + Vault-Solid Doors Contour-Molded Carpets and Mats.
Last week Her Majesty, 60, winged in from her Polynesian archipelago to Sydney, Australia, to have a historical ball in that city’s famed Cape Mitchell Library.
She pored over papers dating back to 1797, examined the journals of Circumnavigator James Cook, who first saw Tonga in 1773, duly noted that Explorer Abel Tasman, discoverer of Tasmania, had paid a visit to Tonga way back in 1643.
Fascinated, the Queen is now undecided as to whether the royal treasury would be strained more by the cost of microfilming the records in Australia or by dispatching a scholar to Sydney for a year’s work.
When Cuba’s ousted Dictator Fulgencio Batista, supposedly foresightedly, put up $82,500 in 1957 for a large pink stucco hacienda in Daytona Beach, Fla., many of the locals began speculating about what sort of effect he might have, as a neighbor, upon real estate values.
After Batista fled Cuba on New Year’s Day, 1959, he wound up in the Madeira Islands, where most of his household has since joined him.
Batista has apparently given up hopes of taking up exile in the United States soon.
Seventy-three years have passed since a young teacher in Alabama held her little pupil's hand under a flowing pump spout and manually spelled out the word “water” upon the palm of blind, deaf Helen Keller.
After a month of occasional running in the U.S., Australia’s shaggy-maned Herb Elliott, 22, world’s fastest miler , flew back Down Under and got his first haircut since he had left.
The first woman to fly at the speed of sound, Aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran, 54, wanted to be the first to travel at twice the speed of sound.
Last April, Jackie visited a North American Aviation Inc. plant in Columbus, expressed a hankering to ride in an A3-] Vigilante, a Navy fighter-bomber now being tested.
She soon learned that the line of would-be passengers, including several admirals, formed to the right.
Last week, after turning her persuasive talents on some top Pentagon brass, Jackie climbed into the rear cockpit of a Vigilante, was off for a 57-minute run during which the plane hit a speed of Mach 2.2.
Several years after he won four gold medals in Hitler’s Berlin in the 1936 Olympic Games, lightning-legged Track Whiz Jesse Owens lent them to a Harlem exposition that was celebrating the Negroes’ advancement in the United States He never saw them again; they were either lost or stolen in the return mail, uninsured.
Recently Owens, now a 46-year-old grandfather, mentioned his loss to an American Olympic Committee member, who wrote to Karl Ritter von Halt, head of the German National Olympic Committee.
Von Halt acted quickly, had four exact duplicate medals struck off, had them relayed to Owens in Chicago, refused to hear of being reimbursed for them.
All the chaps I met there were warm, happy, fit and well in the picture.
I promised the Devil that I would tell everybody what a good show Hell was.
Harry Guggenheim also was born rich; heir to a mining and minerals fortune, he headed two of his family’s multimillion-dollar foundations served as United States Ambassador to Cuba.
In 1939, Harry and Alicia were married and set up light housekeeping in a 30-room Norman chateau at Sands Point, Long Island.
Alicia’s new paper was Newsday, and Editor Patterson was born for her job.
Breaking all the mossbacked rules of suburban journalism, she made Newsday a paper for all Long Island, a lively and irreverent daily that could always find a local angle to apply to the news of the nation and the world.
The owner of Cain Hoy Stables, one of the U.S.’s top moneywinning horse barns , Guggenheim spends much of his time following his thoroughbreds, is rarely seen Tue GUGGENHEIMS Adlai and Dick came between them. 36 around Newsday’s offices, and is generally content to let Alicia run the Newsday show.
It is in the area of politics that Newsday President Harry Guggenheim and Newsday Editor Alicia Patterson part editorial company.
Newsday was only a few months old when, in 1940, its co-owners split politically for the first time.
Alicia published an endorsement of Franklin Roosevelt; Harry, a deep-dyed Republican, countered with his own announcement in support of Wendell Willkie.
The Guggenheims were agreed in favoring Republicans Thomas E Dewey in 1948 and Dwight Eisenhower in 1952.
And Harry good-naturedly kept his peace in 1956, when Alicia switched to Adlai Stevenson.
But in Election Year 1960, the Guggenheims are again airing their political differences.
Fortnight ago, Editor Patterson again announced her support of Adlai, whom she has admired for more than 30 years and whom she accompanied on his 1957 tour of Africa.
Last week Guggenheim replied in a signed announcement opposite Newsday’s editorial page.
In explaining his difference of opinion with Alicia, Guggenheim was amiable enough.
In short, any time Newsday Co-Owner Alicia Patterson tries to tell Co-Owner Harry Guggenheim how to vote, Husband Harry can be counted on to put in his extra two per cent’s worth.
Deal in Denver Into Denver's mile-high sunshine last week stepped the fastest-growing newspaper publisher in the United States In one hand he carried a battered 13-year-old briefcase bulging with the blueprints of a big deal.
Newhouse is a publisher who has devoted himself less to the profession of journalism than to the buying of newspapers as business properties.
Beginning with the Staten Island Advance in 1922, he has spent 38 years and $50 million building an empire of 14 papers with a circulation totaling 2,000,000*—rank% The Advance, Jamaica (N.Y Long Island Press, Newark Star-Ledger, Long Island City Star-Journal, Syracuse Herald-Journal, PostStandard and Herald-American , Harrisburg Patriot and News, Jersey City Jersey Journal, Portland Oregonian, Birmingham News, Huntsville Times, St.
Newhouse has collected these newspaper properties as another man might collect sculpture.
In 1939 he paid $1,900,000 for two Syracuse papers after a single telephone call from a broker.
Newhouse paid $5,250,000—cash —for the Portland Oregonian without ever seeing the plant.
Newhouse’s cash reserves are so plentiful, his acquisitiveness so indefatigable, that last year he bought a $5,000,000 controlling interest in Condé Nast Publications, which publishes Vogue and five other magazines, as a surprise anniversary present for his wife Mitzi.
Once having purchased a paper, Newhouse is interested mainly in making it pay—as 12 of the 14 Newhouse papers do.
Editorial policy and the practice of journalism are matters he leaves to his editors, who do not even have to carry his name on the masthead and are free to endorse any cause.
The Birmingham News is rabidly segregationist; in Syracuse, the Democrat-leaning Herald-Journal and the Republican PostStandard carry on a constant editorial feud.
Two new developments from Machlett Laboratories, a subsidiary of Raytheon, enable your doctor to study the action of the heart over and over on film.
He can also consult with other doctors, even in distant hospitals, via closed circuit television.
One of these Machlett devices is an x-ray tube that eliminates unwanted radiation without affecting the diagnostic quality of the exposure.
This x-ray tube, combined with a new “image amplifier” tube, reduces exposure to harmful radiation by 90% for both patient and doctor, and makes x-ray movies and televised x-rays a practical reality.
The result can often be an earlier and more accurate diagnosis of heart disease than was previously possible.
Medicine is one of many fields of activity that progress through Raytheon’s continued leadership in electronics.
Industry’s need for increasing quantities of the two basic acetyl chemicals—acetic acid and acetaldehyde —is being met here at the Celanese petrochemical complex.
Acetic acid is an important raw material for many products such as cellulose acetate, vinyl acetate and acrylate esters.
These, in turn, are basic ingredients from which fibers, chemical intermediates, and plastics are produced.
Celanese UCER OF ACETIC ACID acetic acid, made from petroleum gases by a unique Celanese oxidation process, is also widely used in pharmaceuticals, polyurethane foamed plastics, synthetic lubricants, paints and coatings.
Supplying the growing demands for acetic acid is one of the many ways in which Celanese, through its expanding chemical programs, is serving industry.
Be that as it may, Sam Newhouse picked up a slice of a famed newspaper.
A struggling trontier-town daily until 1895, when it was bought by Harry H Tammen, a onetime Denver bartender, and Frederick G Bonfils, who reaped an $800,000 fortune by fleecing Kansans in a lottery, the Denver Post bloomed under their cultivation into the wildest flower in the Wild West.
Despite an impressive contingent of ord crack newsmen—among them Damon Runyon, Courtney Ryley Cooper, Burns Mantle and Gene Fowler—the paper read like a circus flyer.
For an editorial page Tammen and Bonfils substituted invective, raked up so much scandal—a good deal of it true—that they kept a loaded shotgun in their office to discourage reader complaints.
As the Post grew in power and prosperity, its proprietors branched into other fields; the Post became the first and last United States daily ever to own a circus , run a burlesque house and sell coal.
But after Bonfils’ death in 1933, the Post began to resort to the all-too-imitable.
In 1946, Bonfils’ heirs hired a new editor Edwin Palmer Hoyt, from the Portland Oregonian, where he had risen in twelve years from the copy desk to publisher.
Sweeping out vestigial traces of the circus makeup, Hoyt gave the Post its first real editorial page, completed the Post’ conversion into a sober, dependable and stodgy newspaper.
Bonfils and Tammen had scattered their estates among a handful of bank-administered trusts and Bonfils’ two daughters, Helen and May.
Lacking effective leadership, the Post, which had netted more than $1,000,000 a year under Tammen and Bonfils, fell on lean times; of late it has been paying stockholders—Bonfils' daughters and the bank trusts—less than a 3% return.
This combination—low yield, diversified ownership is just the situation that Newhouse likes to exploit.
He has had an eye on the Post for five years, but paid his first visit to Denver only two weeks ago.
He offered $24 1 share 1 total of $3,600,0c00—for the 15% block held by Bonfils’ daughter May—now Mrs.
Stanton and her husband, a Denver interior decorator, found irresistible.
Other Post stockholders leagued to announce that Newhouse’s 15% invasion was as far as he would be allowed to go.
Louis last week, set down stringent new requirements for Catholic attendance at non-Catholic colleges and universities.
In this spirit, Archbishop Ritter declared that no Catholic student may attend a non-Catholic institution unless written permission is obtained from the archdiocese.
Such permission will be granted only “for just and serious reasons,.”” where students promise to enroll in college Catholic activity and discussion groups.
Although Archbishop Ritter sternly warned that no Catholic student under circumstances is exempt f colleges,” from the provisions of his pastoral letter, Catholics are bound to this edict only as “a matter of conscience,” in deference to the spiritual authority of the archbishopric.
Louis. universities in the United States is an automatic guarantee that a Catholic student’s faith will be strengthened.
Harvard): ‘Sooner or later, boys are going to have to face the challenge of the unbelieving modern world.
Thomas Aquinas stated that an inadequate argument for religion invites the derision of nonbelievers.
If a boy at a Catholic college has the impression that his religious problems are not being honestly faced—that he is being provided merely with stock textbook answers— then he might conceivably be in a worse position than in an atmosphere of true inquiry.
The Catholic Church has always claimed that she has nothing to fear from the truth.
At Highland Park, both were presidents of their senior class, both were members of the National Honor Society and both were recipients of the top award given by the National Honor Society for all-round and extracurricular activities.
Last as they went off to relax on postgraduation leaves, Ensign Thompson and 2nd Lieut.
Each commanded his academy's undergraduate battalions. each was graduating class preseach led his both academically and in military standing.
Kudos United States colleges continued to honor a variety of professions and accomplishments.
America’s fourth largest national park, Glacier will be host in June to governors of the 50 states who will meet for their annual conference.
Paul 1, Minn, TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 HOLMES, This is an especially happy occasion for Great Northern Railway, which had an important role in the establishment of Glacier National Park.
There’s fun in store for you, too, in Glacier 50 years Park during its anniversary year.
Just match the needle, focus through the big rangefinder-viewfinder ... and 42 Sao covers the full range from | to 1/500 sec. plus Bulb.
You get perfect results with this great shutter, using any kind of flash.
ELECTRIC EYE new Anscoset GQ” automatic setting of all exposure controls shoot.
Ring-set flash control makes great flash pictures easy as reading your watch.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 Vauxhall is a family-size small car loaded with big-car features The British-built Vauxhall fits a one-car family with ease.
Its four big doors open onto stretch-out room for And in the rear there’s vacation-size luggage five, including bouney kids. space, Despite its trim compactness \ Vauxhall is, in ‘ every way, a family car.
Unlike most small cars, imported 4 or domestic, Vauxhall is austere only in economy.
So if vou’re thinking of a small car. think ol Vauxhall ~the fine small car with big car ideas.
ACROSS AMERICA Se | 2 Passage Island Lighthouse H nm Min © 4 Mi THERES NOTHING LIKE A Wim Ins A new car is sheer excitement on wheels —a nice new break from the old routine— even sitting in the driveway it does something for you.
All the ’60 models will liven your life—though, frankly, we feel our own GM cars for ’60 offer more zest than the rest found on Inte Royale It's about ""» Upper Penins Wonderful outdoor fun i al Park in Lake Su un Mie family, an exe I ula drive from home in a new 19 What a thrilling trip—in a new 1960 Pontiac Bonneville Custom Safart.
There are so many outstanding features in the GM line of fine cars that will add zest to your summer vacation—and for a long time to come.
Best of all, you're sure to find the car that meets your family’s requirements.
Spacious station wagons, high-styled sedans, eyecatching convertibles—and your selection of sizes.
Nothing you vill return so much over so long a time as endly General Motors dealer can quickly it is to own one.
Well, we can’t, but he can get to a lot more places in a Beechcraft than with any other trans portation available.
Head room, hip room, leg room and luggage room A money-making flying office that can pay for itself over and over Get the facts now about low-cost Beech financing and leasing plans 4, 2 ym.
New bigger, roomier Travel Air cabin is 19 inches longer for 1960, now seats 5 in luxuriously comfortable individual reclining chairs.
Large baggage compart ment, easily accessible in flight Write for free booklet, “The Dollars and Sense of Business Flying, to Public Relations Dept., Beech Aircraft Corp., Wichita 1, Kansas, U.S.A eechcraft BEECHCRAFTS ARE THE AIR FLEET OF AMERICAN BUSINESS MUSIC Der Jazz The idea of a stolid German at a jam session seems at first glance as unlikely as an Irishman at a temperance meeting or a Laplander in the bull ring.
Nevertheless. jazz has come to Germany in such a big way that the Germans are now recognized by many as Europe's most frenzied buffs.
The most popular groups at both festivals bore nostalgic, New Orleansstyled names.
The winning band at Berlin was called “Papa Kos Jazzin’ Babies,” and among the 23 bands at Frankfurt were the Riverboat Seven of Munich, the Diisseldorf Feetwarmers, Berlin's Spree City Stompers.
They belted out meticulous imitations of the legendary New Orleans bands of King Oliver, Jelly Roll Morton, Johnny Dodds.
Frankfurt’s Barrel House Jazzband, for instance, aped the disk of Dippermouth Blues with such studious care that they even mastered the ascending intonation of the famous cry, “Oh, play that thing.” near the record's end.
And a jazz singer named Inge Brandenburg., belted out her numbers with a phrasing and intonation that made her a dead ringer for Billie Holiday.
Although milder American pop music was played in Germany even during the Nazi years, jazz as such was suppressed by the Nazis as “artfremder Niggerjazz”; in Frankfurt a few musicians used to rent boats and row back into the swampland along the Rhine to hold their jam sessions.
Postwar jazz in Germany was fostered by United States Army bands and the Armed Forces Network, and there are now about so professional German combos and roughly 1,000 amateur jazz bands, many of them on high school and college campuses.
Other amateurs play in abandoned bomb shelters or in the “jazz-houses” erected by German cities to keep youngsters off the streets.
In some respects, jazz merely reflects the Germans’ traditional musicality through a new prism.
Germans are also inveterate collectors and joiners, and jazz gives them a whole new field to operate in.
Perhaps the biggest appeal of jazz is to TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 the German Griindlichkeit, or pedantic thoroughness.
The Cologne Conservatory now offers a two-year jazz course, partly conducted by a critic who writes under the name Dr.
German jazz buffs will write a dissertation at the drop of a flatted fifth.
The pedantic approach has so far stifled any real originality, but it has produced perhaps the most enthusiastic jazz audience in the world.
In her first album, British Cinemactress Dors, who is best known as a platinum-haired prowline, demonstrates surprisingly that she is also a_ singer.
Equipped with a clear, flexible voice and a natural knack for phrasing, she works her way with equal ease through ballads and rhythm songs (Come By Sunday), giving all of them a raffish and rueful charm.
With Singer Peterson bleating expressively through his tears, the record looks uncomfortably like a top seller.
Bandleader Sagle has a lot of fun with timbales, tamtams, glockenspiels, marimbas, etc., in a record clearly pitched to the neophyte stereo addict.
For the most part, the fun is more in the studio than in the speaker, but in some of the more fanciful numbers —Make Love to Me, High Society—the band crackles with a kind of auditory wit that suggests Spike Jones gone highbrow.
Brubeck and men, in warm and witty mood, return to the folk materials they have examined so successfully before.
Brubeck contributes some quietly capering choruses to When ZJt's Sleepy Time Down South and Jeannie With the Light Brown Hair.
Alto Saxophonist Paul Desmond offers a fine, wistful solo in Southern Scene, and the whole group swings with a loose, happy-holiday feeling.
Composer ArrangerPianist Previn offers some familiar thoughts (Love /s Here to Stay, | Wish I Were in Love Again) wrapped in a cobwebby basket of strings.
The best thing about the record is Previn’s own piano playing, which comes across dry, witty, and with a feeling for mood and invention that never falters.
All about a chippie named Cathy who treats her rejected suitor so scurvily that he feels like a $50-a-week circus performer.
The delivery of the Brothers Everly is, if possible, more adenoidal than ever, but their righteous bleats have placed Cathy well ahead of Elvis at the top of the charts.
The answer is they are right there in the jukeboxes, where they are providing the brothers with one of the most durable hits to come along in many a month.
The sound on this teary disk suggests nothing so much as four spooks whispering in a sarcophagus.
Alto Saxophonist Carter and Pianist Schaefer romp exuberantly, with the aid of assorted sidemen, through / Love Paris, Anything Goes, You're the Top, transforming these Broadway classics into a crackling bed of hot Coles.
The Actors Equity meeting had convened to ratify a settlement of Broadway's week-long theater blackout.
Prominent in arranging the settlement was manicured Moss Hart, who treated the combatants like the petulant children they were.
Surreptitiously, PlaywrightDirector Hart herded the negotiating teams into separate rooms at the Fifth Avenue Hotel (‘The producers had airconditioning and a view of the street,’ pointed out an Equity spokesman), lectured them gently, ran messages.
Terms of the Moss-backed compromise @ A weekly minimum pay raise of $7.50 for actors in the first year of a four-year contract, increasing $14 by Equity had demanded an immediate $11.50 boost.
Minimum rehearsal pay was raised from $75 to $82.50 a week, will reach $97.50 by q A six-year pension plan, with producers contributing 1% of the actors’ payroll in the first year, 3% by the third.
END OF VuUTs in Flor Go, aN OutLaw & Crivit War SCENE AT corn in lowa and cc fears by suggesting that increased costs could absorbed in current budgets without hiking already exorbitant ($9.90 top) ticket prices.
But this week, as theater marquees flashed on, ticket offices were swamped with orders, and cabs were be once again as scarce as Sunday matinees Elder Statesman Hart was strikingly pessimistic.
SPECTACLES Bizneyland In less than an hour, the customers can cross the Rockies in an ore bucket, cruise the Great Lakes in a stern-wheeler, crouch in a bunker at Cape Canaveral and watch the missile gap narrow with a perfect shot every six minutes.
Expecting at least §,000,000 visitors a year, Freedomland will ring with coin.
Half the West Side bursts into flame every 20 minutes and who is it but Mrs.
O'Leary there coming out of the heat with an actual cow—trained to moo at crowds, Spectators are called upon to help firemen squirt the blaze from a hand-pump engine.
Meanwhile, a cool operator in a fireproof booth turns up the hidden gas jets, then slowly turns them down as the fire subsides, leaving on view the pre-charred timbers of skeleton buildings.
Like newsmen in the 1860s, passengers ride to the battle lines in white, horse-drawn wagons, get caught in a blistering crossfire.
Plastic corpses—eight in grey, eight in blue—litter the battlefield; farmhouses burn; cannon balls seem to plop within inches of the customers.
In an elaborately built, indoor San Francisco, passengers ride cable cars through quiet, hilly streets.
Suddenly the earth rumbles, hinged buildings sway and shake, a house—built like a Venetian blind crumbles while-u-wait, a tall monument topples, is stopped just short of clobbering the spectators.
Riding a trapper’s bullboat through boiling rapids , tourists woofed at by bears, screamed at by wild (less correspondents’ favorite are cats, bellowed at by a bull moose that was shot in British Columbia, stuffed in Denver and wired in The Bronx for a total cost of $s, The boat passes a ghost town where skeleton miners are strewn around on the ground, a skeleton outlaw swings from a tree, and a skeleton fisherman sits on the river bank with a fish skeleton on the end of his line.
A peaceful drive through farmland suddenly turns into a daymare as the customer gets what he’s paid for.
Caught in the core of a twister he to barn bodies toilet seats, privy doors, cows, etc., whirling about his head in the howl and whoosh rhe illusion is com looks up see doors wind machine. the slowly across the interior of a huge drum that spins al 75 revolutions per minute.
Nonetheless, three staunchly anticapitalist preview visitors were impressed; they were reporters from the Soviet Union’s Tass news agency.
Last week the Kremlin announced plans for a Moscow amusement park—to be called either Wonderland or Pioneer Republic—built on a huge relief map of Russia.
HOLLYWOOD The Nicest Yet She’s the nicest girl Sinatra’s ever gone with— Nicer than Ava, Candy, Kitty, Sally, Shirley, Terri, Patti, Marta, Milly, Lana, Lulu, and Lady Beatty.
Lauren, Kim, Kyle, The tribute is echoed in various forms by many long-memoried observers all over Hollywood.
Featured in Fox's Can-Can and starred with Elvis Presley in a film now in production, she has about her a pouting full-lipped flavor that suggests an exercised, trim-figured Bardot.
Blues, Juliet writhed and swiveled through a German nightclub jazz dance in a flesh-colored skirt sliced in panels from hem to hips.
At a ringside table, a fat cat with slowly inflating eyes made an impassioned grab and caught the center panel, pulling her toward his lap.
Watching raptly off-camera, Elvis Presley also swiveled (“He would make a damn good dancer,” says Juliet.
Off the lot, Presley couldn’t so much as polish Juliet’s Thunderbird, for many good reasons, not the least of which is that Frankie got there first.
She was “terrified of him,” but soon she fell for the bony build. that dimpled chin, those big blue wisecracks.
He, in turn was more entranced than Khrushchev by her can-can, and—in another scene of the film—must have got ideas when she slid sensually down from the branches of the Tree of Life, dressed in blue-green moltable snakeskin, a big red apple in her hand.
A discreet girl with wisdom apparently beyond her 23 years, Juliet keeps her private life to herself, yet openly and offhandedly refers to her evening drives out to Sinatra’s Coldwater Canyon home.
As “the baby” of Johannesburg's Festival Ballet Company, she appeared at 14 in the corps of Swan Lake, Coppélia and Les Sylphides, Two years later she was the Queen of the Wilis in Giselle, had done well enough to continue her studies in London.
Switching to the musical theater, Juliet played Princess Samaris in the London preduction of Kismet.
Later, she moved on to an engagement at Paris’ La Nouvelle Eve, a nightclub distinguished for dancers, but a motor-scooter accident interfered with her appearance in that particular Eden.
In Italy, working in a sort of roving revue, Juliet met a quiet, handsome dancer named Sergio Fadini.
They fell in love, teamed up and toured the European nightclub circuit.
Ambitious for her, Fadini helped polish Juliet’s acting, her fine singing voice, her sinuous dancing.
They were in Spain last year when Fadini heard that Choreographer Hermes Pan was also there, looking for dancers to take back to Hollywood for Can-Can.
Costly, asbestos-covered electrodes had to be used to weld joints that, all too often, were erratic and of sub-standard quality.
Smith turned and shaped this temperamental technique into what is today the world’s most useful metalworking method.
Essentially a simple idea this development took the vagaries and the high cost out of electric welding.
Smith progress is continuing to make things happen in welding for the future.
Pppe pee iit THE BEGINNING, 1917 — With the world at war, it became impossible for our country to import the asbestos-covered electrodes that were, at that time, considered essential in the welding of aerial bombs.
Smith came up with an answer — electrodes wrapped in sodium silicate treated paper.
Smith's invention of the extruded electrode which ushered in the modern era of mass-production welding.
Smith’s continued development of a truly practical arc-welding electrode has grown an industry impossible to estimate in cash values.
Wide-spanning bridges, tall-reaching buildings and low-contoured cars all reflect this progress, with welded components providing strength where it is needed.
With science on the threshold of establishing a self-sustained fusion reaction to produce electrical power, the STELLARWELD becomes a Ic al next step.
The proposed fuel could be deu terium,the heavy isotope of hydrogen found in ordinary v With the tremendous energy release potential of a fu reaction, the problem is not one of gaining sufficient f § + ity, but rather one of scaling down this energy pote ) a size more conveniently handled in welding.
Smith Corporation, finding the “better way” in scores of products for industry, government, farm and home.
United States Medical Education Is Lagging N 80 medical schools this month, 7,000 graduates will don academic hoods and receive the degree of Medicinae Doctor.
After internship, the vast majority will be licensed to practice as physicians, swelling the nation’s total to almost 250,000.
But in fact, if the proportion of doctors in the community is to be kept from slipping dangerously during the population growth of the next ten to 20 years, the output must be upped by more than 40%—to 10,000 a year.
The United States is facing a crisis in both the quantity and quality of its medical care.
The twin problems are a shortage of manpower and a drop in its caliber.
Last week in Washington, the Association of American Medical Colleges gave a subcommittee data on shortages in manpower and money, offered a partial solution.
With the annual output of new M.D.s averaging 90 per medical school (the range is between 40 and 190), the goal of 10,000 a year by 1975 would require adding the equivalent of 30 new schools.
The gap is being narrowed by expansion of existing schools, and half a dozen entirely new schools are in the building or planning stages.
But the remaining shortage is equal to the capacity of 20 more schools—which as yet are not even a gleam in the eye of medical educators.
The Fogarty bill also proposes a $2 billion program to build 20 or more new schools, with the Government putting up two-thirds.
It takes at least three years to plan, build and staff a medical school, and there is a lag of five more years before its first graduates can hang out their shingles.
Besides the 80 schools in the continental United States producing M.D.s this year, there are four “junior colleges’ which teach the basic medical sciences for two years, then send their diploma-holding graduates to enter four-year schools as juniors.
This is a vital and valuable service to the four-year schools, Most of their dropouts, averaging 10% (but ranging as high as 19%, depending mainly on the thoroughness of their pre-admission screening), are in the first two years.
There were ten two-year schools before World War II, but several have become four-year schools.
West Virginia’s (Morgantown) graduates itself this year, will admit its first juniors in the fall.
Harvard's energetic, extravert Dean George Packer Berry invites all Dartmouth’s two-year men (recent classes have averaged 24) to apply for admission to Harvard as juniors.
Dartmouth has now become so secure in its role of primary supplier that it is undertaking a vigorous expansion program, is putting up a new $3,200,000 building, plans to double its enrollment to about 50 a year.
Two-year schools, say their advocates, offer the United States a bargain in medical education.
They can be put up for $7,000,000 to $8,000,000, or less than one-third the average cost of a fouryear school.
If there were enough of them, they could fill nearly all the upper-class vacancies.
But the idea of cutting more physicians’ training into two-year bites at two schools raises controversy about the basic aims of medical education and how to achieve them, The nation’s population is growing not only in numbers but in sophistication about medical matters, and is willing to pay increasing sums for more and better care.
The United States went through a similar soul-searching in the early 1900s, after the A.M.A, launched a crusade to put cheapjack, quick-quack medical-diploma mills out of business.
By chance, emergence of Hopkins as the model, backed by Rockefeller millions, coincided with the rise of modern scientifke medicine.
Applicants for the medical school had to have some years of college, including such “pre-med” courses as biology, physics and chemistry.
Such fundamental subjects as anatomy and physiology were taught in big, solid blocks in the first year, and pathology in the second.
Not until two years or more after he had dissected his first cadaver did the student get to see a breathing patient, and edge slowly toward the bedside.
With minor variations, the Hopkins white coat became a straitjacket in nearly all the most prestigious United States medical schools, Virtually all the deans and heads of departments now in office were mentally corseted in it.
For all its virtues and its undeniably great superiority over what had gone before, the Hopkins plan helped to saddle the United States with at least two generations of physicians and surgeons to whom the practice of medicine was more a science than an art.
The quality of medical care came to be judged by the number and complexity (and often the cost) of the batteries of laboratory tests that the doctor ordered.
A first-year Western Reserve student gets the anatomy, physiology and biochemistry of, say, the stomach, in a single block of time, and starts seeing gastritis patients at once.
He is also assigned to a family; through his four years, it is his duty to be in the clinic or at the bedside whenever any member of that family needs care.
Western Reserve finds it virtually impossible to take replacements from two-year schools for its upper classes, says its new dean, Psychiatrist Douglas D Bond, because, of necessity, they have been taught horizontally stratified basic medical sciences.
Bond insists that medical education in the future is going to be more nearly vertical.
If he is right, the vast majority of United States deans and professors who serve as department heads have not got the word.
Last week, one after another dismissed Western Reserve's experiment as too radical.
Some said that they could not afford to try it if they wanted to—which they did not.
Harvard's Berry, who can pick admissions from the top 5% of pre-med students, said that the Western Reserve plan was “far more extreme than necessary.” but took credit for it as the product of Harvardtrained professors.
Western Reserve now gets 1,100, “attracted by its exciting new curriculum,” for 80 places.
But the quality of the student and faculty is far more important than the curriculum.
A second, and almost universal, complaint has to do with academic achievement.
Each year, to fill 8,000 freshman places, more than 15,000 men and women make out 60,000 applications.
As recently as 1951, applications included 40% straight-A students, 43% B and 17% C averages.
In most of the U.S., and among most social groups. the medical profession and the physician himself have lost much of their old glamour.
The family doctor used to be an authoritarian but friendly figure, dispensing medicine that was more art than science and had (in its hieroglyphic prescriptions for compounding herbals) an important element of magic.
Today, though most Americans have a high regard for their own family doctor, the magic is gone.
They see the doctor more as a technician, making his diagnosis on the basis of lab tests, and prescribing a single wonder drug which they think they know all about—and which the druggist merely counts from a big bottle into a little bottle.
According to polls, the public sees the profession generally as still authoritarian, but less friendly and more aloof—and less interested in making house calls.
Educators find that youngsters are influenced deeply by current cultural heroes.
There has been a drop in applicants to medical schools since rocketeers and nuclear physicists have held the spotlight.
Other major factors dimming the attractiveness of a medical career are economic.
Doctors’ incomes used to be relatively better than they are today, when men in other professions can earn as much and with a far shorter education.
At least 75% of all United States physicians go through four years of TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 are undergraduate college, then four years of med school, plus at least a year's internship, before they can make a nickel.
To specialize, they need a hospital residency of two to five years, still with little chance to earn money.
At best they are nearing 30 before they can support themselves and a family.
In contrast to this prolonged apprenticeship and hardship, students of the physical sciences can make a fair financial showing by age 25, and big business unabashedly uses this bait to hook promising high school and college science students.
Overall, med schools report that an increasing proportion of students are from the better-heeled social strata, with 43% coming from the best-off 11% of the population.
But this varies widely between states and between different med schools.
Sixty percent do some outside work all year round, and 10% work a full 40-hour week on top of a crushing schedule of classes and clinics.
Virtually all state-supported schools enroll 90% of their classes from residents of the state.
Such foreseeable additions to the nation’s plants for producing physicians will not be enough.
This is a crude statistic, because thousands of doctors have given up practice, or are in fulltime jobs in drug and insurance companies, administration, or concentrating so heavily on research or teaching that they never treat a patient.
United States medical care is generally rated as good as any in the world and often proclaimed as the best.
It will not hold this rating, the experts warn, if the doctor-patient and G.P.-family ratios fall farther.
One plan for which he has high hopes is to develop the practice of “family medicine” itself into a specialty.
Pilot programs to do this are beginning, with A.M.A. backing, at Johns Hopkins, Indiana, Kansas and Northwestern.
The question is not one of increasing the number of either specialists or “generalists” at the expense of the other, Dr.
None of the panaceas proposed by selfappointed healers of the medical profession offer much hope.
Mechanization and automation with punch cards and computer diagnoses might help a physician to treat more patients, but not the way they want to be treated.
Darley, “is the most serious that medical education has faced since the Flexner Report.” 53 4 ws fae er en oe ee SPORT Struggle at Wimbledon For two long and bitter days they slugged it out, smashing serves with unladylike power, skirmishing boldly at the net, fighting off the cramps of fatigue and responding to mounting pressure by simply getting tougher.
When the battle was over at Wimbledon last week, the British girls had outlasted the Americans, 4-3, and won the Wightman Cup, but not before players on both teams had produced a caliber of tennis that was unmatched in years for sustained drama, The excitement began building with the very first match.
San Diego's petite Karen Hantze, 17, was within one game of upsetting Ann Haydon when she began overhitting in her eagerness, eventually lost 2-6, 11-9, 6-1.
Then Darlene Hard, a power-hitting ex-waitress from Montebello, Calif., increased the tension by coming from behind for a 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 victory over Britain’s 6-ft.
When Darlene and Karen needed just 45 minutes to humiliate Ann Haydon and Angela Mortimer in the doubles, 6-0, 6-0, the United States seemed well in command of play.
On the final day, with the United States leading 3-2, the cup appeared won when United States Team Captain Janet Hopps took the first set 8-6 from Angela Mortimer, led 4-2 in the second set.
Angela ran off nine games in a row to win 6-8, 6-4, 6-1, tie the score at 3-3, and put the cup up to a final match of doubles between Janet Hopps and Dorothy Head Knode for the United States and Christine Truman and Shirley Bloomer Brasher for Britain.
The Americans rippled off four quick games; the British girls fought back to take six in a row and the set, 6-4.
In the second set, the Americans won the first three games. only to have British WIGHTMAN Cup WINNERS* They got tougher under pressure. the British rally again to take the lead.
It was well past 8m. when the final shot gave the British the set, 9-7, the match and the Wightman Cup, a rose-filled gewgaw that had been tethered by a rope on a windswept sideline during the two days of struggle.
One glance told Jockey Bill Hartack, 27, that no horse was as full of running as his Celtic Ash.
But the horse that was coming—and coming fast—was not Disperse but Celtic Ash.
Moving into the stretch, Hartack took Celtic Ash to the outside, and then simply let him go.
Celtic Ash ran the legs off both Venetian Way and Tompion to win by 54 lengths.
Old Man of the Sierra By now he must be close to 80, but he will not admit it.
But Norman Clyde still has a face that is unlined and a handclasp that can crumple knuckles.
And he still knows more than any other man alive about the wilds and wonders of the Sierra Nevada, the giant wall of granite that links Nevada and California with some of the most rugged peaks on the continent.
As one of the nation’s most remarkable * Haydon, Mortimer, Captain Bea Walter, Brasher, Pat Ward, Truman TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 The First National Bank of Miami, one of our nation’s leading banks.
Burroughs—TM Burroughs Electronic Accounting Machines are busy producing results like these in banks and businesses across the nation.
The most comprehensive machines of their kind, Burroughs they're part of our advanced data processing line, ranging Burroughs from accounting machines to complete computer systems.
Meticulous attention to every detail is Jaguar's expression of pride in craftsmanship that might well be compromised on a typical assembly line.
THE MARK IX SEDAN Expressly designed in the tradition of specialized coach builders to please the uncompromising connoisseur.
Painstaking craftsmanship in the graceful low body; hand-finished cabinet walnut and British glove leather interior; watchmaker’s precision in the magnificent 6-cylinder power plant . . . all combine to earmark the Mark IX Sedan as a truly prized automobile for the owner who will accept nothing but the best.
Power steering, automatic transmission and 4-wheel disc brakes are fitted as standard equipment.
SEDAN The remarkable 5-passenger sedan that behaves like a sports car to bring fun and adventure back to family driving.
Racebred XK engine delivers phenomenal acceleration; uses only a minimum of its power-packed potential at normal highway speeds.
Other features include 4wheel disc brakes, level-ride suspension, Power steering and automatic transmission are available as optional extras.
He works as a guide only long enough to finance his own expeditions, and he can exist for months at a stretch in the Sierra.
Not only does it contain such essentials as dehydrated food and a three| quarter ax, but also shoe nails and a cobbler’s hammer, material to patch his pants, cameras, prepared breading mix for frying fish, and, to while away the twilight hours, copies of such classics as Cervantes in Spanish and Moliére in French.
What is more, Clyde is a self-trained naturalist who contributes scientific reports to the California Academy of Sciences, a pathfinder who has saved stranded motorists by skiing through blizzards with food strapped to his broad back.
He is so accurate with a slingshot that he rarely has to resort to his .22-cal. pistol to kill small game.
When search parties set out after a lost climber, Clyde usually hunts by himself, preferring to rely on his own knowledge of his mountains.
In the early ‘30s, he started after a lost lawyer by guessing that he would have headed for the highest minaret in the area.
Coming upon a pile of rocks of the sort climbers erect as trail markers, Clyde found fresh grass underneath.
Clyde reasoned that the missing lawyer had recently built the pile, had probably already climbed and descended the highest minaret.
Then I heard a buzzing sound above me and looked up, and there was a swarm of blueflies.
Mountain Man Clyde took the long way around getting to be top climber in the Sierra.
Son of a Presbyterian minister in Philadelphia, he graduated as a classics scholar from Pennsylvania’s Geneva College, but in 1909 he was lured to California by the writings of Naturalist John Muir.
Clyde put in a dozen restless years teaching school, then quit and took to the Sierra for good.
Last week, as the Sierra warmed under the June sun, Norman Clyde was getting ready to leave his winter base in a rundown ranch house outside Big Pine, Calif. and head once again for the uplands.
Despite his years, he plans to roam the Sierra Williom Blanchard MOowuntTAINEER CLYDE ""The pack that walks like a man.” indefinitely, He accepts the idea that some day he may fall.
I lost.” q Reviled by home-town sportswriters and nerve weary with defeat, Manager Billy Jurges first was ordered by doctors to take an extended rest, then was fired by the last-place Boston Red Sox.
Pinky Higgins, the old Detroit Tiger third baseman, who managed the Red Sox from 1955 until last July, when he was yanked off the job with the club wallowing in last place and made a special assistant to Owner Tom Yawkey.
California's 57-year-old John Dawson, who took his third straight title with a two-round total of 141.
In Pesqueira, Brazil, Landlord Joao Francisco da Silva was locked up for nonpayment of property taxes on the city jailhouse, which he owns.
In being told by an angry motorcyclist that a dog had bitten his tire, Policeman Robert Vaillancourt investigated, pigeonholed the complaint when he that the dog was toothless.
In Charleston, S.C. after finding no money in the cashbox of the Southern Seat Cover Co., a thief made off with five checks—all of which had been returned because they were uncollectable.
In Hamilton, Ont., while demonstrating the safety features of the Go-Scooter Vice President the Hamilton wheeled into a guard rail ft. embankment, suffered in a local shopping center, Clayton St.
Louis of Go-Scooters Association fell down a 12two broken legs We Wuz Robbed.
Near La Grange Ky., after finding $200 in cash and other belongings missing when they returned to their aa reg locker room following a game with the Kentucky State Reformatory baseball team, the visiting Fort Knox nine was told by Deputy Warden Porter Lady, “A lock doesn't much to some of our boys.” mean , its | Ve THE FOREMOST NAME IN SAWMILL EQUIPMENT FOR OVER 90 YEARS Outstandingly different Wo r’s Heap provides the kind of difference that really counts.
With Wo tr’s HEAD, you get smoother engine operation . . . fewer repair bills . . . add less oil between drains.
Tri-Ex refined three important extra steps . . . and scientifically fortified for superior premium quality.
WoLr’s Heap is tough . . . long-lasting . . . gives you more miles of complete protection per quart.
It is inevitable that none of us will always agree with, or like, all that magazines have to say.
But over the years, magazines have provided new ideas, brought fresh insight into old problems, shed light on new ones, and have served to inspire and advance our understanding and knowledge on many subjects—from the arts to finance, from government to science, from the individual to the world scene.
Yet, they play an extremely important role in offices” in their geographic areas are your guarantee of prompt e Hartford's service to you through its 34,000 agents. attention.
For particulars on Hartford Group services, call your Hartford Agent or insurance broker.
The press was at a loss too, for much of the “new art form” is a bewildering jumble of horrors; tortured junk and bric-a-brac, flattened tin cans and old clothes, or simply an old chair with its innards ripped out.
According to the more uninhibited of the new media boys, there is not much future any more to using only such oldfashioned tools as brush, chisel or paint.
They find their tradition in the burlapbag “paintings” of Italy's Alberto Burri, the childlike deformations of France's Jean Dubuffet, and the once shocking collages of Germany’s late Kurt Schwitters.
Just as Rauschenberg lets his “paintings” grow into environment, the newcomers seem to be trying to suck the environment in.
George Brecht, 30, of Greenwich Village has produced a Medicine Chest which is just what the title says it is—a medicine chest whose contents the viewer can rearrange and sniff at will, thus in theory entering into the artist’s special world.
Irving Kriesberg’s Lovers XI 1957 is a double frame of moving panels that the viewer can change and thereby create “paintings” of his own.
To make Grandmaw’s Boy, Allan Kaprow, 32, produced a collage of worn pieces of cloth that were glued next to the fading photograph of a boy.
The old cloth and the dated colors that a grandmother might well have picked for a slipcover or dress evoke the proper mood, even though they may puzzle the mind.
The new wave scours the nation’s rubbish heaps, junk piles and beaches to find its materials, for the ingredients of art are supposed to lie anywhere, if only the eye is gifted enough to see.
One artist found himself well supplied with old beams when his house was torn down, A favorite smock that has become too worn to wear can be dipped in glue and hurled against a door, and a generous helping of red paint mixed with bucket, cans and surgical gauze produces a grizzly montage called Cape Canaveral.
A 24-year-old Englishman named Anthony Magar has used burned and stained wood, stitched canvas and pounded metal to create a big picture that is as pleasing as an autumn landscape seen from the sky.
Whatever their artistic merits, “paintings” made out of coffee grounds, torn nylons and bits of paper are automatically stamped—PeRISHABLE, cy the ancient cultures that arose in Mexico long before bats and monsters the time of Columbus, the Maya is the most renowned. and But in the last decade scholars have become increasingly even toys as well as an array of dolls on wheels.
No people little animals whistles legends and gods, or entranced by the people who once lived around the village of Remojadas near the modern seaport of Veracruz.
In speaking of these people, archaeologists use the phrase “the smiling-face complex,” for almost every clay figure that is unearthed adds to a growing gallery of grins, chuckles, chortles and belly laughs.
Like their neighbors, they worshiped the great god Quetzalcoatl, “Precious Serpent,’ the lord of wind and sky.
And they created in red clay their share of legendary jaguars, frogs, have ever seemed quite so determined to record themselves in the joyful act of just being alive.
The small figures gather at carnivals, dance through the night, Even a venerable magistrate, his robes of office wrapped about him, cannot suppress his mirth.
A girl smiles with obvious pleasure, perhaps because of a new and unusual spit curl.
A boy swings wide his arms in innocent merriment, while another brings a tiny hand to his lips as if trying to hush his own irrepressible giggles.
With the slow decline of the great Mayan Empire, the lesser kingdoms of ancient Mexico were free to begin fighting in earnest among themselves.
What happened to the people of Remojadas—whether they were conquered or became tribute payers to a succession of aggressors—no one knows.
Contaflex Super, a world-famous 35mm precision instrument, made in Europe's greatest camera factory, sights through the Zeiss f/2. lens for brilliant full color image.
Omaha 2, Nebr the nicest things happen to people who carry > FIRST NATIONAL CITY BANK TRAVELERS CHECKS TIME world-wide circulation | is now Specially cut for PIPE SMOKING only EVELATIO SMOKING MIXTURE | is Leslie Caron.
The bushy-bearded Beat Generation is a collective hair farm that the average solid citizen does not dig.
Nevertheless, in this picture, which bears about as much relation to Jack Kerouac’s novel as Hollywood does to Endsville, Producer Arthur Freed attempts to sell the beatniks back to the mass culture they are desperately and often comically trying to escape.
The story is set in San Francisco, the holy city of hip, and describes how a young cube , who lives with his ever-loving mother and writes nothing novels, sees something sweet where the beat meet to eat.
In the book she is a pretty Negro, but in the film she I want every bit of life,” he announces.
So they go to her pad and really make the scene, and in the morning he drives her over to see her analyst.
Soon they are sharing the same toothbrush, but he wants to write, and one night he flobs off to somebody else’s pad.
She flips but good, and goes ankling down the main drag with nothing on but her epidermis.
In the end, though, she announces that she is pregnant, and he promises to marry her, get a job, straighten up and fly right back to bourgeois respectability.
LAUNDERED BEATNIKS IN Not “THE In short the film is basically just a remake of La Bohéme with a happy ending and bop instead of Puccini.
The Mountain Road (William Goetz; Columbia) allows James Stewart, as a United States Army major* wrestling with his first command, to explore the proposition that power not only corrupts, but embarrasses, confuses and dismays.
The casting is logical, since durable Actor Stewart has grown wealthy by relentlessly registering embarrassment, confusion and dismay on the screen.
It is 1944, his seven-man demolition team is the last garrison of an airfield in southeast China, and the Japanese are advancing 40 miles away.
Radioed orders pass the buck; the major may withdraw his men by plane, or blow up the airfield and retreat west by truck, destroying the area’s only road behind him.
Aviation is clearly the better part of valor, but Stewart chooses the hard way.
The demolition unit touches off the field and moves out with four trucks, a quantity of dynamite and—combat veterans will relish the realism here—a beautiful Chinese refugee girl.
As they rumble through menacing mountain country (ably portrayed by a forbidding chunk of Arizona ), Stewart shambles, stammers, scuffs his feet and advises the girl (played by Lisa Lu, a onetime Honolulu Advertiser reporter) that he finds China baffling.
The General * In real life Brigadier U.S.A.F, Reserve Stewart, SUBTERRANEANS” so hairy but just as dull.
At first, although the character of Chinese remains as egg yung to him, the major handles his command well enough.
When a bridge must be | blown up he blows it, although the action strands thousands of refugees.
In an overexplicit curtain speech, Stewart says contritely that he has learned the bitter lesson of power.
What psychological sense tains from the the opaque as foo | the film reTheodore White novel of the same name is waterlogged, if not drowned, by too much hokum and handwringing.
M-G-M), In this $3,000,000 Metrocolored musical based on her boff of 1956, Judy Holliday employs her limited vocal resources with showmanly style, supports them with a comic gift that is a major wonder of the entertainment world and with some skillful assistance from Director Vincente Minnelli manages to jog and jazz and jigger a merely midBroadway dling book and some fairly forgettable tunes into one of the year’s liveliest and wittiest cinemusicals.
Judy plays a switchboard spinster who works for an outfit called Susanswerphone and lives by listening in—and sometimes horning in—on the lives of the company's clients.
When destiny turns a deaf ear, Judy listens to the troubles (and the tunes) of a desperate dentist who aspires to be a songwriter and composes (“I love your sunny teeth’) on his air hose.
But she bestows her most tender loving care on Plaza oh double four double three , a playboy playwright.
Operator Holliday eventually makes a person-to-person connection and after several sorts of trouble with the vice squad (the detectives want to know what sort of calls Susanswerphone answers) manages to deliver the message (“I love you’’) and get a return ring.
The beauty of Judy Holliday’s talent lies not least in her meticulous control of it.
She knows her type to a tee-hee, and she is never for an instant out of character.
She plays both parts brilliantly in Bells, especially in the brief blackout that describes a disastrous blind date.
In a rapid succession of hilarious Freudian Judy bends the young man’s cigarette to a limp parabola, splatters his drink on his lap, butts him with her head and finally, as she brushes by a blazing dish of crepes suzette, goes up in slips flames.
It sparkles with plenty of overseas allure, but it’s unmistakably American in advanced design, gendary Japanese thoroughness, each Datsun is p.g. $1695,o.e.
At franchised dealers throughout U.S.A., or write nearest dist Honolu verton Motors, 5967 Lankershim Blyvc 1501 Clay St., Houston, Tex.
RELIGION The Cardinal & the Elections A slight, dark Italian prelate arrived in Manhattan without publicity, journeyed to South Bend, Ind. to receive an honorary LL.D. from Notre Dame (at the same time that Ike got his), then visited Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia and Washington last week before taking off for Brazil.
Everywhere he met United States cardinals and top members of the hierarchy; his reception ranged from Boston's outdoor banners and hi-fied hymns to a dinner given for him in Washington by the Most Rev.
Giovanni Battista Cardinal Montini, 62, Archbishop of Milan, one of the most influential cardinals, whose trip was partly connected with the United States elections.
Among Montini’s tasks in the U.S., went the Vatican talk, was to reassure the United States hierarchy that the recent editorial in L’Osservatore Romano , telling Catholics that the church “has the duty and the right” to instruct them on how to vote, did not really apply to the U.S., where Marxism is not an election issue.
Vatican satisfaction with Roman Catholicism’s growth of influence and acceptance in the United States seems to have been dampened by the possibility that Catholic Jack Kennedy’s candidacy might provoke anti-Catholic sentiments.
Evidently to avoid any chance of “furor” last week, there was a significant omission from the guest list at Apostolic Delegate Vagnozzi’s dinner.
Though it included Democratic Senators Thomas Dodd and John Pastore, as well as Democratic Representatives Peter Rodino Jr. and John Rooney, absent was Senator John F Kennedy.
Excommunication in Moscow The tough, bulletheaded little atheist who calls on God to witness that his hands are clean and his heart is pure has recently been giving the church in Russia a hard time.
A more flexible kind of anti-Christian than Stalin, Khrushchev put new life into Russian atheism, began recruiting renegade churchmen instead of party hacks to wean Russians away from the temptations of religion.
In major cities the priests earn between 4,000 and 6,000 rubles a month—equal to the pay of a university lecturer.
Western churchmen last week had striking new evidence that Moscow’s Patriarch Alexei has far more leverage against the government—and willingness to use it— than most Westerners realize.
The Moscow Patriarchate had its hand strengthened in the United States last week by a unanimous Supreme Court decision that Manhattan's Orthodox St.
Nicholas Cathedral, completed in 1903 as the seat of Russian Orthodoxy in North America, should be returned to the control of the Russian hierarchy.
HEART AS TOUGH AS ALL OUTDOORS The heart of any gasoline-powered product is its engine . . . source of power and stamina.
Outboard Marine has exactly the right engine for the job each of its products must do and the conditions under which it must perform, The water isn’t always fine Take the waters of the Far North.
There, Arctic water taken in for cooling the engine did its work too well.
Never got a chance to warm up to efficient temperatures... until Outboard Marine developed thermostats to control water temperature.
Other Outboard Marine motors found themselves at work in milehigh mountain lakes and streams.
So, Outboard Marine developed its own carburetors that function efficiently on the thinner air of high altitudes, as well as at sea level.
Therefore, Outboard Marine made each component part be tough enough to stand the impact of hitting a log at a speed of 35p.h.
All the best reasons why Outboard Marine put a lot of muscle and stamina underneath the handsome styling.
There’s no coddling in a lumber camp Lumberjacks are a tough and rugged breed, and their tools have to match them.
Because it’s no stranger to icy Northern winters or steaming jungle forests, Outboard Marine’s Pioneer® Chain Saw needs the best in carburetion.
The chain saw is unique in that it operates far from service facilities.
Since loggers and pulpwood cutters get their pay based on the feet of lumber cut, a trip to a repair shop can cut seriously into their earnings.
So, you can field strip a Pioneer Chain Saw with just a screwdriver and a simple wrench.
Now, add the need to operate when held at an angle, or even upside down.
It has to be a compact lightweight gasoline engine tailored to the conditions which the Pioneer Chain Saw must face.
That’s why Outboard Marine spent years testing the Pioneer Chain Saw in the big woods country, before putting it on the market.
Then attach to the arms power mowers from Outboard Marine’s Lawn-Boy Division.
That's only one way in which Lawn-Boy engineers put their power mowers through their paces.
Lawn-Boy® engines must be able to operate uphill and down dale, over flat and uneven terrain, and through stands of grass of varying thicknesses.
Power must flow to the cutting blade so that it cuts at exactly the rightp.m.
All of this calls for an engine tailored to power mowing, rather than one plucked off a shelf.
The harder they are to please, the more Outboard Marine products improve.
Their restlessness has resulted in small gasoline engines . . . tougher and better than ever... that have made work and play easier for millions of Americans.
To a shoe manufacturer, it’s enough foot-miles per year to walk from here to Mars and back.
To a utilities expert, it’s a population expanding so fast it needs the equivalent of several Hoover Dams each year to meet the additional power requirements.
To meet this pyramiding demand, America’s power lines are weaving an ever-increasing network of lifegiving electricity across the face of our nation.
Today the electrical power that courses through them is derived from coal, oil and water power—but a new power source for America’s lifelines is on the way...the Peaceful Atom.
One of the first companies to collaborate with the Atomic Energy Commission in the development of the peaceful atom was the Atomics International Division of North American Aviation.
Today a reactor of each type is being installed in a central power station under AEC programs.
A Sodium ORGANIC POWER REACTOR developed by NAA offers guaranteed performance using existing familiar materials.,500 KW unit is for Piqua, Ohio.
NUCLEAR POWERED SHIP was a study project at NAA for Atomic Energy Commission.
Graphite Reactor producing 75,000 KW is being installed at Hallam, Nebraska.
An Organic Power Reactor of 12,500 KW capacity is being built in Piqua, Ohio.
These are true atomic power plants — among the first large-scale applications of the peaceful atom for the benefit of mankind.
It is a reliable, low-pressure system economically favorable for large or small power requirements.
Meanwhile A.I. is developing a third type of reactor known as the Advanced Epithermal Thorium Reactor.
This project was undertaken for a group of private utilities, the Southwest Atomic Energy Associates, intent on making advances in the atomic field.
Indeed, it is becoming apparent to utility companies everywhere that their ability to meet tomorrow’s power requirements depends on the steps they are taking today in the nuclear field.
As the Age of Electrical Living continues to unfold, it is evident that nuclear energy is mankind’s next great power source...and A.I. is constantly at work to make sure that this power is available when needed.
SODIUM GRAPHITE REACTOR for 75,000 KW station at Hallam, Nebr., is another NAA concept proved by successful pilot plant in California.
AT WORK IN THE FIELDS OF THE FUTURE THROUGH THESE SIX DIVISIONS LOS ANGELES los Angeles, Canoga Pork and Downey, California; Columbus, Ohio; Neosho, Missouri; McGregor, Texas AUTONETICS MISSILE ROCKETDYNE COLUMBUS ATOMICS INTERNATIONAL FR"" 5 “ ate att es eS BUSINESS WALL STREET Biggest Rally The stock market last week made the biggest one-week rally in its history, rolling up a spectacular gain of 25.90 on the Dow-Jones industrial average.
The market advanced steadily through the week, was turned back slightly at week's end by profit taking after the sixth successive rise.
It ended the week at 654.88 on the industrial average, highest since Jan., adding nearly $10 billion to the value of stocks on the exchange.
The business picture had changed little. but Wall Street's psychological mood had obviously changed, and the bulls roamed the Street with little resistance.
All this was embarrassing to the Dow theorists and to others who had been predicting a big bear market.
They had based their predictions on the fact that the industrial average in February broke through its previous low and had been followed by the rails breaking through their lows, the theorists’ signal for a bear market.
If they break through, the chartists will be ready to concede that the present “bear’’ market is over.
The big institutions and mutual funds were coming back into the market in force, giving the hitherto neglected blue chips a handsome advance, along with the glamour stocks.
But not all stocks were going up, and the 30 stocks in the DowJones average did not accurately reflect the fate of many depressed stocks that are still down.
Even during last week there was a sizable number of new lows for the year.
Many traders believe that before the market can sustain its advance, more stocks will have to participate in the rise, and new highs will have to outnumber new lows by a bigger margin.
AVIATION The Coveted Seat An Eastern Air Lines pilot called in one day last week to say that the plumbing in his house was leaking and he had to stay home to fix it.
Another rang up to say that his garage door was jammed and he could not get to work.
Whatever their expressed reasons for not going to work, Eastern Air Lines pilots crippled the nation’s third largest airline last week.
Behind all the flimsy excuses is the fight of President Clarence N Sayen of the Air Line Pilots Association against Federal Aviation Agency Boss Elwood Quesada.
Ever since Quesada took over the agency last year, he has cracked down on sloppy flying, particularly in jets, told his inspectors in planes to keep a sharp eye out for violators.
He even tried to have FAA funds earmarked for inspector training shifted to other uses.
Directly behind the captain’s seat in the cockpits of DC-8s and Boeing 707s is the forward observer's seat.
The FAA maintains that its inspectors must use this seat in order to observe the crew properly.
Last year after bitter wrangling with the airlines, A.L.P.A. got the right to have a third pilot sit in this seat on American, TWA, Eastern and Pan American jet planes; it was the union's way of ensuring that jobs for pilots do not decrease too drastically as the swifter, larger jets cut down the number of individual flights.
A.L.P.A. does not want to see the third pilot replaced even temporarily by an inspector, for fear it might weaken the union’s argument that a third pilot is essential to the safe operation of the jetliners.
But the FAA believes that two pilots are sufficient for safe operation.
The first flare-up in the latest round started at Miami International Airport.
Following his latest A.L.P.A. instructions, Hudgins refused to take off.
To avert more cancellations, Eastern went to a federal court in Miami, got a temporary restraining order requiring Eastern pilots to give the forward observer's seat to FAA inQuesada, stung by what he termed A.L.P.A.’s “arrogant defiance of the Government,” rushed through an spectors.
New Mercury will be built on a Ford body shell but have its own styling.
Ford follows lead of Dodge Dart, which is built on a Plymouth chassis, is now Chrysler's best-selling car.
United States WILL SPEND $2. billion in road building during fiscal year starting July 1, about $173 million more than last year, owing to increased revenues from federal gasoline tax.
AIR-MAIL SWITCH of military mail between Europe and United States will be made from Military Air Transport Service to American commercial airlines.
Move will bring lines about $4. million more annually, is first in planned series to turn more of MATS business over to civilian carriers.
United States GOLD LOSS, which at one time reached $2. billion a year, is down to trickle.
In first quarter nation lost only $50 million, lowest since drain started in 1958, as exports rose and foreigners invested cash in United States in high-interest government notes, ADDIS ABABA HILTON will be built in the Ethiopian capital for government and operated by Hilton hotels.
VOLKSWAGEN SALES in first quarter were 68% higher than same period last year.
West German-made car now accounts for 29% of total foreign-car sales in United States INVESTMENTS IN CHILE of $250 million over next four years are being planned by Anaconda and Kennecott copper companies.
Since copper production helps finance government's expenses, the money will aid in restoring Chile’s earthquake-damaged economy.
For pilots who balk, Old Pilot Quesada laid down the penalty that hurts most—suspension ofa pilot’s license.
Rather than disobey the court order and the new FAA regulation, Eastern pilots effectively grounded the flights by not showing up.
Although Sayen disclaims any responsibility for the stay-away strike of Eastern pilots, he still refused to withdraw A.L.P.A.’s advice to pilots on TWA, American and Pan American not to fly this week if the FAA inspector demands the forward observer's seat.
STATE OF BUSINESS Through the Barrier Employment, the most worrisome statistic of the United States economy, is showing marked improvement.
In May, 1,049,000 found jobs, a better-than-seasonal rise that brought total employment to 67,208,000, reported the Labor Department this week.
Unemployment dropped seasonally by 201,000—to 3,459,000 pushing the number of unemployed in the United States work force below the 5% barrier for the first time in a year.
Even more encouraging, the chronic sore spot of unemployment—those jobless for 15 weeks or more—fell 300,000 to about 900,000 in May; nearly half of those now seeking work have been out of jobs less than five weeks.
Despite the continuance of worried talk about the future among businessmen, industry was scheduling outlays for plant and equipment at close to the high level predicted three months ago.
With private spending in the first quarter at $35 billion and plans for the rest of the year reduced only slightly, the Government announced TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 Machinery was better than Scotch. that it now expects 1960 plant and equipment expenditures to total $36.850,000,coo, the $37,016,000,000 earlier expected, That figure would be 14% above last year and close to 1957's alltime record of $37 billion.
A surprising factor in the economic picture was an unexpected drop in retail sales.
The Commerce Department reported that retail sales in May fell 3% from their April record of $19. billion, a larger-than-usual drop for the month.
The decline hit most major goods, including autos, though it took little of the gas out of Detroit’s spring upsurge.
May sales of more than 565,000 cars were nearly 7% above May of last year, represented the best daily-average selling rate since September 1955.
Within the next fortnight, the United States auto industry expects to turn out its millionth compact of 1960.
The industry last week scheduled a rise in production from 60.6% to 62.3% of capacity, the first increase in seven weeks and the biggest one-week gain since December.
FOREIGN TRADE The Princely Sales Pitch Four trumpeters of Her Majesty’s Royal Horse Guards blew a fourfold fanfare.
Down green-carpeted steps in Manhattan’s Coliseum walked Britain's Prince Philip past unicorns draped in silks and tartans.
Never before has Great BritRotts-Royce Jet Encrne At British EXHIBITION Ben Martin Fox-HuntTiInG OvuTrFIT ain staged such a large show abroad.
Along with a replica of a 17th century cofiee house, where Lloyd's of London first began writing ship insurance, and an English pub, the exhibition has on display machinery and merchandise worth at least $200 million.
Although Britain's economy is booming and exports last year reached a_ record $9,676.800,000 $6,317.000,000 in 1950), Britain faces serious dollar difficulties.
Great Britain has opened a drive to increase sales to the United States to avert a return to the unpopular import restrictions.
To boost sales in the U.S., which last year passed the $1 billion mark, Britain is depending principally on the tried and tested.
On display is the Rolls-Royce Conway by-pass jet engine, already powering newer models of both the DC-8 and Boeing 707.
Sales of nonelectrical machinery jumped last year to $125 million, replacing Scotch as Britain’s second largest export item to the United States Machinery manufacturers, trying harder than ever, were showing an extremely wide range of machines at the Coliseum from those that counted currency to those that made cigarettes.
London Silversmith Gerald Benney, designer of the ciborium for Coventry’s new 73 N the burgeoning missile industry, dominated by oldtime planemakers, George Maverick Bunker is a wingless newcomer.
But he did know how to deal with trouble—and he found plenty of trouble at Martin.
The company had lost $22 million in 1952, and its future looked even darker.
Last January, after the Titan had had so many failures that its future was in doubt, Bunker moved his headquarters from Baltimore to the missile headquarters in Denver and took over personal direction of the project.
This week, after twelve Titan shots without a failure, the Air Force put its stamp of approval on the job Bunker did.
It is ready to give Martin its first contract for a new Titan II, which will eventually bring the company another half billion in defense contracts.
Most important, it will be the first United States ICBM to use storable liquid fuel.
But the fact is that the Titan program had grown so huge that it had no strong central guidance.
Bunker consolidated three divisions into one, switched executives around, tightened up missile checking procedures.
He got an engineering degree from M.I.T. during the Depression, took his first job with Campbell Soup Co. at 38¢ an hour, switched to 74 MAVERICK BUNKER Troubleshooting Missileman the Wilson meat-packing company as an engineer in 1934.
Kearney Co., a management engineering firm, moved on to become manufacturing vice president for Cincinnati’s Kroger Co., in 1948 took over as president of Trailmobile.
In two years, he doubled Trailmobile’s sales to $52 million, boosted the stock value 400%, sold the company to Pullman Inc.
When investment bankers backing the Glenn L Martin Co., the oldest United States plane manufacturer, decided that the ailing company needed new management, they sent in Bunker to take over from Founder Glenn Martin.
UNKER’S biggest contribution to Martin was his early recognition that there was little future in planemaking, especially for Martin, which lagged well behind.
He began to shift Martin into missiles and electronics ahead of most of the industry.
He got a name around Washington as a man who knew how to land a contract—and the name was not always admiring.
He became so adept at it that the Hebert congressional subcommittee investigating undue influence on Pentagon officials took a critical look at his methods, publicizing the fact that a roll call of Pentagon brass had gone on Martinpaid vacations to a plush Eleuthera Island resort in the Caribbean.
Martin also came under heavy criticism for the early failures of the Vanguard missile, but has since put the three highest United States satellites into orbit.
Bunker still flies back to Washington once or twice a month to keep up contacts, mingles with VIPs over golf, An adventuresome fellow who has been married three times, he lives in the Denver suburbs with his present wife, still keeps a home in Washington.
Besides his $150,ooo annual salary, he personally owns 73.741 shares of Martin stock worth $3,281,475, the largest individually held block of stock.
Harry Hall Ltd., outfitters for sportsmen, has the latest foxhunting outfit for men, including riding whip, for $163.
For example, Wedgwood sells a five-piece setting of bone china for $13.75.
Autos, Britain’s chief export item to the U.S., which last year accounted for sales of $275 million, are being hard hit by the United States compacts.
To help offset the competition, some British automakers are concentrating on small vans that can be outfitted as land cruisers.
Rootes Motors’ Commer Caravan, a station wagon with stove, sink, bed that sleeps four, and a roof that pushes up to give 6 ft. of head room, Price: $3,655.
RETAIL TRADE Integration & Profits Caught in the midst of the South’s battle over integrating lunch counters, Southern store owners often fear that they will be boycotted by the Negroes if they do not integrate, boycotted by white customers if they do.
Last week a report by the Southern Regional Council, an interracial group formed to promote better race relations, sought to calm at least one of their fears.
Merchants in eight Southern cities that have desegregated their lunch counters—Austin, Corpus Christi, Dallas, San Antonio, Galveston; Nashville, Tenn.
BUSINESS ABROAD Brazil's Wild West Americans have always dreamed of the great frontier, where the wind blows free— and land is cheap.
Last week many a landhungry United States citizen thought that he had found a frontier where land is so cheap that a few cents buys an acre.
The new frontier is in Brazil, where a giant land development push is rivaling the rough days of the American West.
Along with Brazilians, Japanese and Germans, hundreds of United States investors have bought cattle and coffee ranches, speculated heavily in still-uncleared jungle lands along the route of projected highways and railroads.
Spurred by Brazil's great push to develop its interior, 15 United States companies are peddling land in Brazil.
A Georgia square-dance caller who wanted a plot of land wrote directly to United States Ambassador John M TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 Another example of Addressograph-Multigraph cost-cutting How Butler Brothers creates good “customer impressions” Butler Brothers, large Chicago wholesale firm, is the sole supplier of merchandise to Ben Franklin and Scott Variety Stores throughout the country.
Orders pour in daily to Butler warehouses for widely varied quantities and assortments.
For each order, identical information must be written on a multiplicity of forms ... shipping labels, bills of lading, statement lists and other records.
Each “customer impression” must be accurate and highly legible, to avoid errors in shipping and billing.
Butler Brothers has found Addressograph Methods ideal for this repetitive writing job.
Cutting costs is our business All documents for each order are speedily ond accurately imprinted from Addressograph plates in one low-cost operation.
And, most importantly, customers are favorably impressed by the speed and accuracy of the system.
This is just one of many ways Addressograph Methods save time, cut costs and insure accuracy in business operations.
Ask your nearby Addressograph office to demonstrate how they can do the same for your business, large or small.
Swenson, owner of the Ben Franklin Store in Geneva, Ohio, has been dealing with Butler Bros, for over 21 years.
It's a typical customer impression created by Butler Brothers’ efficient system.
Addressogr ph-Multigraph © PRODUCTION MACHINES FOR BUSINESS RECORDS SERVING SMALL TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 BUSINESS ° BIG BUSINESS EVERY BUSINESS Saray A STRIKING BOSTITCH B12 STANDARD DESK STAPLER If you choose desk accessories with an eye to looks as well as to function, the Bostitch B12 Standard Stapler should merit your interest.
Like any great speculation, the Brazilian boom has attracted its share of swindlers and shady companies.
Convicted Texas Swindler BenJack Cage once promoted a land development company that is now in more reputable hands, has sold nearly 200,000 acres to Americans for more than $1,000,000.
Only 50 miles from Brazil’s new $500 million inland capital, Brasilia (Tre, April 25), Singer Mary Martin and her husband Richard Halliday have a 1,200acre ranch where they raise coffee, sugar and chickens.
Many United States buyers have already done well on their Brazilian land speculations.
Pan American Airways Vice President Humphrey Toomey bought 1os5 acres just outside Brasilia for $1,800 six months ago.
TIME Map by V:Puglisi veloper Mike Borman bought 36,000 acres northeast of Brasilia for $15,000 two years ago, is selling it off in 25-acre “Texas Ranches” for $10 down and $10 per month.
The impetus for the boom is the recent opening of Brasilia and the continued growth of railways and highways in the interior under the sponsorship of Brazil's hurry-up President Juscelino Kubitschek.
Paved highways have increased from 6,000 miles to 10,000 miles in the past four years.
One woe-begotten speculator complained to the United States embassy in Rio that he had bought, from a group describing themselves as California missionaries, 2,000 eroded acres that proved to be a dirt road instead of a highway, and had a dry gulch in the middle instead of a gushing stream.
For those willing to take the risk, rewards can be sizable, since Brazil has low capital-gains and inheritance taxes.
A change to Bostitch may result in delivering your product to your customers in better condition, saving the annoyance of arrival damage, too.
Look up “Bostitch” in your phone book and call your Bostitch Economy Man.
Fasten it better and faster with BOSTITCH STAPLES STAPLERS AND TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 Live fish are packed in stapled liners and containers, three times faster than with former method. 65-pound ejector pumps travel safely in cartons made up and sealed with Bostitch staples.
Gas heaters are shipped in stapleclosed cartons, saves 40 per cent in labor costs over glue and tape.
Grouped separately you'll find your bonds listed first, then preferreds, if you own any, then each of your common stocks classified according to industry.
The Schedule shows just which securities you own, the current value of your individual holdings at recent prices, and the income in dollars you can expect them to pay.
The Schedule ends with a breakdown summary showing just what percentage of your assets are in stocks, bonds, savings, and available cash.
If your own investment program seems muddled a bit in your own mind, if over the years you've bought a little of this, a little of that—and you're not quite sure what it all adds up to now, just ask for a portfolio review.
Whether you're a customer or not, there’s no charge, no obligation, and we think you'll find that Schedule I is well worth keeping as a matter of record alone.
Beyond that, you'll probably get something called Schedule I[—the best Suggestions Research can make to improve the performance of your present portfolio, But only if they're really called for.
Only if they're supported by what seem to be sound and sufficient reasons thoroughly spelled out.
Last year Byington sold $1,000,000 worth of 60-acre sites for coffee farms at $35 per acre.
In the northern Mato Grosso lands of Gleba Arinos (named for the adjoining river), a German-Brazilian family, incorporated as Coromali, is developing 750,000 acres, selling guaranteed titles for $2 per acre.
In the past five years United States private investments in Brazil have doubled to more than $1. billion.
Although there is wild inflation, land values have risen faster than the cruzeiro has depreciated.
ATOMIC ENERGY Roadblock to Progress A major roadblock to the nation’s private atomic power program was raised last week by the United States Court of Appeals.
In a 2-to-1 opinion, the court ruled that the Atomic Energy Commission must suspend a “provisional” construction permit for an $83 million, 100,000-kw. nuclear power plant near Monroe, Mich. because “it has not been positively established” that the plant can be operated safely.
The AEC license to the Power Reactor Development Co.—a combine of Detroit Edison Co., 17 other utilities and seven manufacturing firms—was challenged by a group of unions led by Walter Reuther’s | United Auto Workers.
While they raised the issue of safety, their more important aim was to push the cause of public atomic power.
Private-powermen say the unions want to force the plant to be shifted to a remoter area, where industry could not afford to build it, thus the Government to do so.
The plant, on which AEC is spending only $4,500,000 of the cost, has been under construction since 1956 and is schedforce be the first big United States plant with a fast| uled to be completed this fall.
It would breeder reactor, the type most likely to or two pants suits The better way is Santa Fe No matter what you ship call the nearest Santa Fe Traffic Office and let the longest railroad in the U.S.A. go to work for you.
TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 THIS SPIDERY SPHERE, a bold home of tomorrow, perches high above glittering, sprawling Los Angeles.
Rather it is a metropolis rapidly growing more cohesive and now expected to accommodate an increase of a whopping six million people in the next 20 years.
With Copyflex, you reproduce all documents in systematized paperwork — order-invoice, purchasing-receiving, accounting, etc.—from one original translucent form.
Copyflex flexibility lets you add, block out, or change information on the original form whenever desired, make copies of the revised or changed form or any part of it as desired.
Stete___ 80 produce competitively cheap atomic power, since it produces more atom fuel than it consumes, At AEC hearings. a group of top scientists, led by Professor Hans A Bethe of Cornell, testified that the plant could be operated without undue risk to the public.
AEC is expected to appeal the three-man court’s decision to a nine-man court of appeals or the United States Supreme Court.
REAL ESTATE Texans in Hong Kong In Hong Kong’s New Government Building, the bidding session was tense and sweaty.
Suspense mounted until the 110th bid was made, Then, while little groups huddled together to see if they should raise their bids, the gavel banged down decisively.
Complete authorization means that Leo Corrigan, who flew to Hong Kong to oversee the bidding, is his own boss.
He has built up a real estate empire worth more than $sco million by buying up choice pieces of real estate and holding on to them.
He rarely takes on partners , will take complete charge of the Hong Kong property, give Wynne half the profits.
On the property, site of the old Hong Kong parade ground, Corrigan and Wynne plan to build a luxurious, $12 million, 25-story hotel to take advantage of Hong Kong’s drastic shortage of hotel space.
The hotel will have 1,040 air-conditioned rooms, elevators and escalators, a shopping center and bazaar, a permanent exhibition hall, and an all-glass roof under which diners and dancers can gaze out upon one of the world’s loveliest bays.
The Texas partners hope to get back their investment in three to five years.
Leo Corrigan has built his fortune by getting back his investments from property, then putting them to work again.
Louis after the fifth grade to help with the family finances, got into real estate when he was 28 by buying a drug store, soon began building neighborhood stores, paying off his mortgages with the rent.
But Corrigan found that his tenants liked the shopping convenience, ever since has tried to build shopping centers into every development.
By steadily acquiring more property with the help of long-term loans (“Longterm credit never hurt anyone.
It’s shortterm credit that breaks people”), Corrigan rode the countrywide real estate boom.
Among his properties are the Emerald Beach Hotel in the Bahamas, the 1,660-room Biltmore Hotel in Los Angeles, the 1,500-room Adolphus Hotel in Dallas and the Bank of Georgia Building now under construction in Atlanta.
Some Texans feel that Leo Corrigan moves too fast; a prominent banker confided to him a few years back that every year for 15 years he had been predicting that Corrigan would go broke within the next twelve months.
He points out that he has so many blue-chip tenants—banks, telephone companies, etc.—that “if they should go, everything would go, including the mortgage companies.
If you're not, here’s an idea that might help you collar some extra coin.
Consolidated, as the world’s largest enamel printing paper specialist, offers finest quality for less.
Specifying Consolidated Enamels for booklets and other printed material can save him money without sacrificing quality.
This is published on behalf of only such of the undersigned as are registered dealers in securities in the respective States.
Incorporated A $10,000 MISTAKE A Wall Street Journal Subscriber's Experience After years of slow progress, I decided to broaden my outlook by finding out more about what goes on in the business world One thing I did was to subscribe to The Wall Street Journal, Believe me, it has paid off.
The reports in The Journal come to me daily, I get the facts in time to protect my interests or seize a profit Last year I earned $5,000 more than the previous year.
You can get a Trial Subscription for 3 months for $7, Just send this ad with check for $7.
Anna Maria Mussolini, 30, the late Duce’s fifth and youngest child, a $192-per-month pensioner who has been partially crippled from polio since childhood; and Giuseppe Negri, 24, nightclub M.C.; in Ravenna, Italy.
Yaltah Menuhin, 38, pianoplaying sister of Violinist Yehudi Menuhin and Pianist Hephzibah Menuhin; and Joel Ryce, 27, also a concert pianist; she for the third time, he for the first; in Sterling, Ill.
Walter Linse, 50, West Berlin lawyer and official of the Investigating Committee of Free Jurists, private intelligence organization, who was kidnaped by East German agents in 1952; of an unexplained cause; in a Soviet prison on Dec., 1953.
Miron Semenovich Vovsi, 62, one of 15 Russian-Jewish physicians charged in 1953 with the “doctors’ plot” against Soviet leaders, who was cleared after Stalin’s death and rehabilitated in 1957 when he received the Order of Lenin; of a heart attack; in Moscow.
Robert Whitehead, 62, for 18 years a member of Virginia's House of Delegates and an articulate liberal critic of the conservative Byrd organization, who stayed out of the 1957 Democratic gubernatorial race in order to avoid a bitter party split that threatened the eventual election of a Republican; of a heart attack; in Lovingston, Va.
Tommy Touhy, 67, Capone-era Chicago gangster who once boasted that his more notorious brother, Roger, “got the blame for a lot of things I did’’; of cancer; in Chicago.
Joshua Ringle, 69, roofing contractor for Manhattan’s Hayden Planetarium, St.
Patrick’s Cathedral and Grand Central Terminal, and a New Jersey Republican leader who in 1953—after three losing campaigns against the Democratic Hague machine—became one of the first members of his party to be elected to the Jersey City Commission; after a long illness; in Jersey City.
Lawrence, Willa Cather and Mabel Dodge Luhan; | of bronchial pneumonia; in Albuquerque. 159g5 TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 For the newest of the new see your plumbing contractor Helping you to plan your new bathroom is an important service of your plumbing contractor.
He knows how to plan for the needs of your family .. . to provide ample space for storage, and plenty of room to groom.
He knows the newest and best fixtures and accessories for smart, modern beauty and functional performance.
He knows, too, that when he recommends and installs bathroom fixtures by Universal-Rundle you will possess the world’s finest . . . incomparable style and quality.
Universal-Rundle is happy to salute the oe Universal 4 Rundle nation’s plumbing contractors on the occasion of the Annual Convention of the ein f mise ft MAKER OF THE WORLD'S FINEST BATHROOM FIXTURES National Assoc iation of Plumbing ConGeneral Offices, New Castle, Pennsylvania.
This is a three-generation novel in which the generation is ceaseless, the dialogue deathless, and the drink strong at all times.
Novelist Robinson populates his pages with gamblers, gypsies, whores, cutpurses, counterfeiters, country maidens, Mafia men, Harvard professors, necrophiles, lesbians, and good, honest Indiana farmers.
He afflicts them variously with lust, greed, chronic childbirth, madness, lung surgery and death by water, gunshot, prolonged beating and Addison’s disease.
As it is customary for costume novelists to concern themselves with a certain amount of factual information—the politics of Lorenzo's court, or the intra-igloo mores of Eskimos—Robinson acquaints his readers along the way with the history and techniques of the United States whisky industry from 1840 till Prohibition.
Between seizures of hot blood and high deeds, the heroes—one for each generation make corn squeezings.
They are artists who operate the pot still as if it were a pipe organ, mixing corn and small grain with boiling water, adding yeast, and from this wort—which is what the mash is called—distilling clear ethyl alcohol.
Redistilled to remove foul-tasting fusel oil, aged for color and character in charred oak casks, the alcohol becomes whisky.
Robinson is so explicit that an attentive reader with no fear of federal agents could try it himself.
The real villains of the novel are the unscrupulous distillers—-who make cheap whisky by adding prune juice to grain neutral spirits—and the temperance wowiuthor writes of malefactors with great eloquence and contempt accusing the mankind for profit and the latter of sexual also sers.
The land he de scribes contains no skinny women or frail all sexual union is of seismic sity, heroes rise to wealth and power but men intenpay with fearsome personal tragedy.
Once these are accepted—and they are not really much harder to swallow than Moliére’s convention that all husbands are cuckolds or Homer's that all heroes above the rank of lieutenant colonel enjoy godly guidance Robinson's book is entertaining enough.
Obviously the author, who wrote a muchadmired exegesis of Finnegans Wake (with Joseph Campbell) as well as a bestseller tbout a clerical Organization Man called The Cardinal, knows that his throbbers are nonsense.
Unlike Taylor Caldwell. for instance. who writes the same sort of novel with more earnestness and less skill, he stops every few chapters and snickers at himself with a pun or a Dos Passosian aside.
The English are said to dearly love a lord, and the second Lord Redesdale is there to prove that they dote on a dotty peer—especially if he has six daughters, mostly zany, mostly blonde.
An impressive photograph of the six Honorable Misses Freeman-Mitford, in their ironclad British tweeds, appears in this autobiography by one of their number.
The one glowering on the left would be Unity Valkyrie Freeman-Mitford, usually described in the tabloids as Hitler's girl friend.
That would explain why she is standing, as Hitler did when he was not saluting, with her hands clasped just below her midriff.
Next, Deborah, scowling prettily in jodhpurs, would be the Mitford who married a duke—not just any duke, but the Duke of Devonshire who still swings a lot of weight in England.
The next one emerges from her tweeds with a less sympathetic expression.
Diana married one of Britain’s mighty brewers —Bryan Guinness, stout feller—but got divorced and married English Fascist Sir Oswald Mosley.
Jessica, the one with the sly-boots expression, married a Red, Esmond Romilly, but then, he was a nephew of Sir Tue Mirrorp Grr_s & BrotuHer Tom (193 Christopner Robin read Karl Marx.
The Mitford on the far right, Pamela, was so fond of horses she married a sometime jockey.
The one with the dog married (and divorced) Peter Murray Rennell Rodd, whose business she described as “sailing small boats”; today she is the most famous member of the family.
Nancy writes novels and biographies, and invented the U-game, by which it can be determined who is out of, and who is not out of, the top drawer.
The dim male figure smiling uneasily in the midst of these splendid figures is a male Mitford of whom nobody has ever heard.
Having passed or flunked a Mitford quiz along these lines, the reader may find any residual curiosity about the family amply answered in Daughters and Rebels, Jessica's sprightly chronicle.
Even before this and other events in his daughters’ lives had given him cause, David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford, second Baron Redesdale (“Farve” to his girls), had the reputation of being a slightly gaga aristocrat.
Hitler took him seriously as a Fascist sympathizer, but few others took him seriously on anything.
You can't see the difference but your jeweler can tell. ae Unseen molecular structures make an all-important difference in quality and value.
Ordinary Motor Oil or RomILty TENDING Bar The witches turned out to be real.
He was against it—on the grounds that the proposals struck at the foundations of Christianity.
Even the Conservative press laughed at his views, as did his six daughters.
As a parsimonious peer bringing up six daughters in a diminishing series of houses where the plumbing had not been much improved since the Black Death, his lordship knew how inconvenient females can be.
The reader who feels at this stage that he has wandered into an early Evelyn Waugh novel will not be far wrong.
Waugh might indeed have written another Decline and Fall based on Jessica’s chronicle, There is even a Waughlike Mitford uncle who was the author of one book, a privately printed volume of his letters to the London Times and other publications, notably on the subject of manure; his notion was that the greatness of Elizabethan England was due to the widespread use of sheep droppings in producing an organically based diet and thus a sound society.
But more than the shortage of sheep droppings is needed to explain the anemia of English society between the general strike of 1926 and World War II, and the madcap Mitford story charts some of the more alarming symptoms of a class in deep trouble with history and itself.
They even had a private language, examples of which are mercilessly given.
Nature's MIRACLE MOLECULE in Pennsylvania motor oils assures superior lubrication.
WIGISIS SIMMONS INVENTS A NEW MATTRESS— BACK CARE WITH BUILT-IN BEDBOARD This is the mattress that Simmons created after consulting a group of doctors.
The doctors knew that no mattress can cure a backache due to injury or spinal ailment.
But they figured Simmons could do something about backache caused by a mattress that sags.
The mattress that won the doctors’ approval is Back Care With Built-In Bedboard.
The board, made of impregnated natural fibers, is in the middle of the mattress and runs the entire length.
Even the hardest mattress can develop sag, and a bedboard is ineffective under a sagging mattress.
Boud took to scratching swastikas on the window (she had a diamond, of course), and Decca just naturally scratched hammer-andsickles over them.
There is something magnificently arrogant about the way Boud and Decca extracted the last yard of mileage out of their hyphens as they joined forces— Fascist and Communist—dedicated to the destruction of aristocracy.
Boud, before she met Hitler, insisted on taking her pet rat to debutante balls.
With Philip Toynbee , Decca raided Eton College chapel and decamped with a carload of top hats.
Symbol and hero of all the infantile leftism of that class and generation was Esmond Romilly, who ran away from school to publish Out of Bounds, an anti-prefect, proCommunist magazine which reached a circulation of 3,000, largely in Britain's most exclusive schools.
Have him she did, for a fringe existence in proletarian Rotherhithe (a tough Thameside district of London), sharing twilight jobs, semi-spivery and endless left-wing talk at bottle parties.
Jessica's autobiography is really a more touching story than its surface goofiness would suggest.
Soon after the Romillys’ baby died in 1938, they moved to the U.S., where the same pattern continued— they were guests of the “liberal” rich, pets of the left-wing intelligentsia.
After a worried interval while he decided whether the imperialists would really fight against Fascism, he volunteered in Canada and was killed in action in 1941 at the age of 23.
His widow leaves the story at that point, but there are a couple of footnotes.
It seems that Jessica, married to Hungarian-born Lawyer Robert Treuhaft of Oakland, Calif., had called their son Tito, but renamed him for Lenin after Yugoslavia was expelled from the Cominform.
Look, look, what wonderful larks: Christopher Robin is reading Karl Marx.
It is hard to see why some publisher has not established a Graves-of-the-Month Club.
The British man of letters can produce a book of high quality in the time it takes an ordinary author to write a letter asking his publisher for an advance, and the range of his comfortable erudition is bewildering.
His present book is, like its predecessors, unlike its predecessors—a 86 translation of a tragicomic roth century Spanish tale of high deeds, broken hearts and bloody deaths.
The territory is strange to the modern reader, but Graves, both as translator and author of the introduction, is an effective guide.
Pedro Antonio de Alarcén, who lived from 1833 to 1891, was a member of a penniless aristocratic family and, in succession, a crusading young liberal editor and atheist, an unsuccessful playwright, a successful politician and, toward the end of his life, a conservative, well-to-do author and defender of the faith.
The information is necessary because, Graves believes, Alarcon wrote The Jnfant with the Globe as a bantering, ironic commentary on his own youth, Alarcén’s hero is an impossibly noble, handsome and athletic young caballero NOVELIST DE ALARCON Mockery within the melodrama. named Manuel who is thwarted in his desire to marry Soledad, the daughter of the town moneylender.
This pinch-souled Shylock, whose exactions drove Manuel's father to his death, not only blocks Manuel’s marriage but informs him that part of his father’s huge debt is still unpaid.
In the best Andalusian tradition, Manuel leaves town to seek his fortune, vowing to return, pay the debt, marry Soledad—and throttle any man who has looked at her.
Manuel returns seven years later rich as Cortes, but Soledad, to escape a nun’s life, has married.
At first the village priest persuades the blighted lover to set vengeance aside, but at last Manuel forces an ending so bloody—and romantic—as to put Carmen to shame.
This is more than melodrama, Translator Graves easily persuades the reader.
His gentle irony is aimed partly at the lofty aspirations of youth, and also, less obviously, at the easy compromises of age.
The author's characters, particularly those that are, in part, selfcaricatures, are drawn with accuracy and wit.
But the variation on the theme—how in shoring up the fragments she found a little of herself as well—is, in Novelist Pierce’s skilled hands, made almost new.
For “Miss Ellen” Gray, the well-bred widow who is the wispy heroine of Pierce’s story, self-discovery is not easy.
She spent her prewar life in an indolent dreamworld as soft and sheltered as a cotton boll, with endless maids and mammies to tend every want that a dutiful husband and son could not fulfill.
The war killed both, and drove Miss Ellen from the family plantation to live with relatives in Raleigh; even then the protective cocoon of her gentility was scarcely damaged.
In June 1865 she returns home with her widowed daughter-in-law, “Miss Lucy,” and her grandson Garrett, intent on recapturing the past; it is as if the March through Georgia had been no more than some annoyingly loud parade.
Miss Ellen finds it hard to understand why her plantation fields are untilled and weed-crested, her mansion ransacked, her retainers gone or too old to work.
Under Miss Lucy’s direction the house begins to live again, but Miss Ellen withdraws to the calm solace of memories.
In time she learns that a widowed war veteran has helped Miss Lucy hire labor for the field, that the estate may have to be sold for taxes.
She learns, too, that for her sake Miss Lucy has rejected the man’s proposal of marriage.
At novel's end, in the one great loving act of her sheltered life, Miss Ellen prepares for a visit to Raleigh from which she will never return, setting Miss Lucy free.
Compared with The Plantation (Time March 2, 1953), Author Pierce’s impressive first novel, On a Lonesome Porch suffers from literary jerry-building.
What saves it is its subtle, flexible prose, which can gallop in tense, comma-strewn sentences when Northern cavalry slashes through the Carolinas, or laze through a hot summer afternoon with three plaintive, motherless Negro children.
And when Pierce softly traces Miss Ellen’s genteel footsteps, he enlivens in a rare, vivid way the mind of the Old South.
No wonder reefer operators are getting aboard the new Autocar “lightweights’’—the ‘‘A’’ series models that cut up to 25 % off chassis weight while retaining every ounce of strength and “go” power.
This A7564T diesel is virtually an all-aluminum structure from frame to roof of cab—yet it’s rugged.
Autocar “World's Finest” Hauling perishables or anything else, each Autocar is custom-engineered for its job and built the Autocar way for trouble-free performance.
A Lesson in Love, Smiles of a Summer Night), the war between the sexes rages in full fury, with the female proving, to Bergman's obvious delight, the far more cunning and vigorous specimen.
Diamond) packs a sharp moral without stooping to moralizing, as it traces the rise of an organization man (Jack Lemmon) who turns his Manhattan apartment into a walk-up tourist cabin for his lecherous bosses.
Plunging into the garbage-choked stream of neurotic consciousness, the camera eye follows a Los Angeles divorcee’s futile quest for love, savagely exposes her mind's myths but forgets to respond to her heart.
Love redeems even the horror of acres of charred and moaning humanity in this New Wave that rises with atomic power and breaks with poetic beauty.
Thurber’s The Cathird Seat is transposed into a grand piece of sustained nonsense, with Funnyman Peter Sellers as the bookkeeper with a double-entry personality.
Sellers again, this time as a union shop steward who will make a speech at the drop of an aitch, in a film that takes a cracking good satirical look at labor-management relations in England.
A program of American folk songs from colonial times to the ‘30s includes a thorough anthology of the blues; talkin’, big-city, and barrelhouse.
End of the Line is a title worthy of the program's narrator, Edward Roscoe Murrow.
Including interviews with West Germany’s Chancellor Konrad Adenauer and West Berlin's Mayor Willy Brandt, Murrow examines the 15-year history of West Berlin.
Rod Serling’s The Mighty Casey tries hard not to strike out, features a mechanical robot who pitches for the Hoboken Zephyrs.
From Denver's Cherry Hills Country Club, NBC's cameras watch over the 16th, 17th and 18th holes during the climactic round.
Fight Fan James Cagney interviews the two heavyweights on the eve of their return bout; films of Johansson’s earlier victory over Patterson are technically analyzed by Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney.
Shelley Berman is seen again in the episode about a nightclub comic who hires Gunn to protect him from his wife.
The TV cousins of Hollywood's Oscars are presented in a package that salves both losers and viewers with guest entertainment by Comedians Bob Newhart, Elaine May and Mike Nichols.
For the first time in history, Japan’s classical, all-male acting company is performing in the U.S., providing a rich—if necessarily academic— experience for American audiences.
Off Broadway The Connection, Playwright Jack Gelber makes a devastating assault on theatrical illusion, presents a pad full of junkies in a formless, utterly naturalistic play that has sporadic distinction.
Lee Pockriss’ engaging music grafts smoothly onto Oscar Wilde's The Importance of Being Earnest, in an adaptation that is careful not to shatter the original's cut-glass dialogue.
Despite a title that would embarrass Oscar Hammerstein, the most phenomenal off-Broadway success since The Threepenny Opera is a reminiscent farce that parodies the sugarglazed operettas of yesteryear’s Kerns and Frimls.
The flamboyant French airman who wrote Wind, Sand and Stars and The Little Prince is worth reading about in this biography by an old flying comrade, even though the book is flawed by grandiloquence.
The author, drawing on her own experience as the wife of a Kenya gamekeeper, gives a detailed and fascinating solution to one of the least urgent problems of the century —how to bring up a lion as a pet.
This book of aphorisms shows the intense spiritual longing of modern Greece’s most noted writer; for Humanist Kazantzakis, God was, essentially, the search for God.
A Saroyanesque merry-go-round, spinning to music not always merry, about Italian immigrants in West Hoboken—the scene of the author's famed first novel, Christ in Concrete.
There may be nothing very new in this collection of Auden's recent poems, but at 53 the poet is still shrewd, amusing, and prodigiously talented.
With torrents of prose, marvelously antic characters and more than enough plot, the author follows the capricious hero of two earlier novels (Brotherly Love, In the Time of Greenbloom) on a calamitous expedition to Ireland.
The author later found it advisable to become a docile party-liner, but in the 1920s, when he wrote the short fiction pieces in this paperback collection, he was one of Communism’s most caustic satirists.
Although his form ranges from essay to lecture to story, the poet's wryly cantankerous wit and charm remain the same.
Trustee from the Toolroom, Shute The Constant Image, Davenport Ahwh— 6.
Hollywood Rajah, Crowther * Position on last week's list TIME, JUNE 20, 1960 he Ee ae Another adventure in one of the 87 lands where Canadian Club is “The Best In The House” 1.
I got set for the crash, Then | saw the I'd never reach the surface again and | began to skipper waiting at the rail to intercept me.
What’s more, Canadian Club is lightest of Canadian Club has a flavor so distinctive, them all.
Of the world’s great whisin cocktails before dinner, highballs kies. the lightest are Scotch and Canadian. aller, Try it tonight.
