Kennedy and the Cold War When Kennedy took office, he faced the spread of communism abroad and the threat of nuclear war.
He led the nation through the Cuban missile crisis, negotiated the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, and helped the United States win the space race.
Kennedy’s New Frontier Kennedy’s domestic agenda called for equality and educational and economic opportunities for all.
Though a conservative Congress stalled many of his proposals, he initiated some programs to defeat poverty and extend Social Security benefits.
Johnson’s Great Society Johnson carried out Kennedy’s legacy — and created his own — through the programs of the Great Society.
While Johnson was President, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act and the 1964 Economic Opportunity Act and created Medicare and Medicaid.
TheThe Kennedy and Cold War Johnson Years Begins Chapter 25 Chapter Review Section 1 Channel Awesome The Kennedy and Johnson Years TheThe Kennedy and Cold War Johnson Years Begins Chapter 25 Chapter Review Section 1 Chapter Review The Kennedy and Johnson Years QuickTake Test Know It, Show It Test TheThe Kennedy and Cold War Johnson Years Begins Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 Objectives • Explain the steps Kennedy took to change American foreign policy.
When Kennedy took office, he faced the spread of communism abroad and the threat of nuclear war.
His enthusiasm and commitment to change offered hope that the challenges of the Cold War could be met.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 John F Kennedy won a close presidential election in 1960, defeating Richard M Nixon.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 Kennedy launched a new Cold War strategy.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 As ambassadors of American goodwill, the Peace Corps sent American volunteers to developing nations to assist with such services as education and healthcare.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 The sudden threat of Castro and Communism in nearby Cuba led to two major confrontations.
Bay of Pigs invasion Cuban missile crisis The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 In April, 1961 the United States invaded Cuba’s Bay of Pigs.
Conceived by the CIA to overthrow Fidel Castro, the invasion involved Cuban exiles who had fled Castro’s rule and settled in the United States.
The President said, however, that he would Kennedy took responsibility continue to resist efforts for the mission’s failure. by the communists to control other countries in Western Hemisphere.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 The missiles at these Cuban sites threatened major cities in the United States.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 To resolve the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy worked In Public Behind the Scenes In a television address, Kennedy told the Soviets that Kennedy blamed Khrushchev the United States would for reckless action that remove United States missiles from threatened world peace.
Turkey and Italy if the Soviets Kennedy initiated a United States removed their missiles from naval blockade of Cuba.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 After six tense days, the Soviets backed off.
Nikita Khrushchev agreed to honor the blockade and removed the missiles.
They set up a hot line between Washington, D.C. and Moscow to improve communication.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 In 1963 the United States, Great Britain, the Soviet Union, This treaty ended and thirty-six above-ground other countries nuclear testing. signed the first Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 Disagreement over Berlin led to the building of the Berlin Wall.
Khrushchev insisted the United States end its military Kennedy refused. presence in West Berlin.
Khrushchev ordered the building of the Berlin Wall separating East and West Berlin.
The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 In response to Khrushchev’s actions, Kennedy requested a large increase in military spending.
The Berlin Wall became a symbol of the gulf between the democratic West the andcommunist the communist East East The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 1 Section 1 Section Review QuickTake Quiz Know It, Show It Quiz The Cold Kennedy War Begins and the Cold War Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 Objectives • Evaluate Kennedy’s domestic policies.
He succeeded in making some domestic policy changes regarding poverty and racial discrimination and spurred interest in the space race.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 President Kennedy had a special style that made him seem different from other politicians.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 Kennedy promised America a New Frontier.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 Some of President Kennedy’s New Frontier proposals succeeded.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 Kennedy made • Increased military spending several • Tax credits for business and proposals tax cuts for the middle class related to the • Deficit spending to stimulate economy. the economy Kennedy’s economic initiatives led to tremendous economic growth in the late 1960s.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 Civil rights marches and demonstrations took place all across the country Kennedy introduced a civil rights bill in 1963.
He also proposed to strengthen civil rights in response to the violence in the South.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 Kennedy recognized the need for the United States to beat the Soviet Union in the space race.
Congress gave generous funding to NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 In July, 1969 an American flag flew on the moon.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 In November, 1963, while riding in a motorcade in Dallas, Texas, President Kennedy was assassinated.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 After Kennedy’s death, Vice President Johnson was sworn in as the new President.
The nation moved to resolve the economic and equality issues Kennedy had identified.
Johnson also appointed the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination of President Kennedy.
The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 2 Section 1 Section Review QuickTake Quiz Know It, Show It Quiz The ColdKennedy’s War BeginsNew Frontier Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 Objectives • Evaluate Johnson’s policies up to his victory in the 1964 presidential election.
The ColdJohnson’s War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 After Vice President Lyndon Johnson was sworn in as President, he worked for the same goals Kennedy had championed.
Johnson was a seasoned politician who built consensus in Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The ColdJohnson’s War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 • outlawed discrimination in voting, education, and public accommodations • established the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to fight discrimination in hiring • prohibited discrimination on the basis of a person’s sex in public accommodations and in hiring The ColdJohnson’s War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 President Johnson convinced Congress to pass a big tax cut for the middle class.
He also established the War on Poverty to promote job training, education, and healthcare for those in need.
The ColdJohnson’s War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 Johnson’s Great Society • created Medicare and Medicaid • provided funds to impoverished school districts • passed legislation to improve air and water quality • passed the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 to lift immigration quotas • created the National Endowment for the Arts and Humanities The ColdJohnson’s War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 During Johnson’s presidency, the Supreme Court decided many cases involving controversial social, political, and religious issues.
Called the Warren Court after Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Supreme Court supported civil rights, civil liberties, voting rights, and personal privacy.
The ColdJohnson’s War Begins Great Society Chapter 25 Section 3 Section 1 The Warren Court ruled on many significant issues.
