Kennedy’s Irish ancestors had immigrated to Boston and his grandfather, Patrick J Kennedy, was a Boston political leader as well as a successful businessman and saloon keeper.
The Kennedy’s lived in a modest but comfortable frame house, but as the family grew, so did their father’s fortune.
Joseph Kennedy had become quite wealthy by the time he was 30 making his fortune in stock-market speculation, motion pictures, shipbuilding and real estate.
He also would hold several appointive positions in the federal government during the Roosevelt administration, and his driving ambition was to put a son in he White House.
On October 7, 1914, Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald married Joseph Patrick ""Joe"" Kennedy, Sr. after a courtship spanning seven years.
They couple first lived in a home in Brookline, which is the birth home of President John F Kennedy, which is now the John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site.
John F Kennedy, born on May 29, 1917, was the second son of nine children.
Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy Kennedy’s childhood was happy, even though he was always in the shadow of his older brother Joseph, who dominated family competitions and was a better student.
Young Kennedy also was a frail child, with prolonged illnesses that kept him from school.
At 13, young Kennedy attended the private Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut.
He became ill and never returned, graduating from Choate Preparatory School in Wallingford, Connecticut in 1935.
Kennedy made two more trips to Europe in 1937 and in 1939 when his father was serving as the United States Ambassador to Great Britain.
In the spring of 1941, Kennedy volunteered for the Army, but was rejected because of his degenerative back problem that had plagued him for years.
During that summer, he underwent a series of back-strengthening exercises, and in September the Navy accepted him.
He sensed that if he did not participate in World War II, he was not going to have much of a public life in this country, and he wanted in.
To have a man with such frail health as Kennedy’s as your commander could be dangerous and Kennedy should never have been there.
On the night of August 2, 1943, his boat was rammed by a Japanese destroyer in the waters off New Georgia in the Solomon Islands.
Kennedy was thrown across the deck onto his back, the boat being sliced in half and two of the twelve men aboard were killed immediately.
Kennedy rallied the survivors and they clung to the wreckage for hours, hoping for rescue.
Giving up hope for an immediate rescue, they swam three miles to a small island, with Kennedy towing a wounded crew member, clenching the strap of Pappy McNulty’s life jacket between his teeth.
The men remained on the island for four days, with Kennedy swimming daily along a water route that the American ships used, hoping to find a rescue ship.
He finally encountered friendly natives on Cross Island that took a message for help, carved on a coconut shell, to the United States infantry patrol.
The men were rescued and Kennedy was awarded the Purple Heart and the United States Navy and Marine Corps Medal for heroism.
The ordeal had aggravated his back and he contracted malaria so he returned to the United States for medical treatment.
Kennedy’s father had groomed his first son, Joseph, for politics – Joe was going to get the Kennedy’s into the White House.
But young Joe was killed in action in 1944, and after working as a reporter for the Hearst International News Service, Kennedy decided to enter politics himself.
His opportunity came early in 1946, when he announced his candidacy for the Democratic nomination for the House of Representatives seat for the 11th Congressional District of Massachusetts.
He ran against nine other candidates and won the primary with 42 percent of the votes.
In November, he defeated his Republican opponent and became a congressman at the age of 29, winning reelection in 1948 and 1950.
In 1952, Kennedy decided to run against Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., defeating him by more than 70,000 votes, in a campaign the entire Kennedy family took part in.
Caroline Bouvier ; John Fitzgerald, Jr. ; and Patrick Bouvier, who died less than 48 hours after his birth on August 7, 1963.
Due to the fact that Kennedy suffered from Addison’s disease, the surgery had to be preformed in two separate procedures in October 1954 and again in February 1955.
During his long convalescence, he occupied himself by writing Profiles in Courage, which was published in 1956 and received the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1957.
Kennedy returned to the Senate in May 1955 and by the beginning of 1956, he aimed toward higher office.
During he Democratic National Convention of that year, he almost was nominated for the vice presidency running with Adlai Stevenson, but he lost on the third ballot to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee.
In 1958, Kennedy was reelected to the Senate, winning by the largest margin ever recorded in a Massachusetts senatorial contest.
He spoke frequently throughout the country and in January 1960 he formally announced his candidacy for President.
By the time of the Democratic National Convention, he had already won seven primary victories, overcoming opposition that a Roman Catholic could not win in a predominantly Protestant state.
He won the nomination and the Kennedy/Lyndon B Johnson ticket narrowly defeated their Republican opponents, Richard M Nixon/Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. at the November elections.
John F Kennedy as President-Elect, Criticizing Liberals Autograph letter signed “Jack” to William S White, journalist, biographer and friend of Lyndon Johnson.
White had sent Kennedy some press clippings and Kennedy returned this note with his thanks.
Sunday Dear Bill: Many thanks for your thoughtfulness in sending the clippings.
They have to themselves become imprisoned in the intense world of automatic responses.
All things look brighter here in the sun Best regards, Jack Kennedy was the first Roman Catholic and at the age of 43, the youngest man ever elected President.
Theodore Roosevelt was a few months younger than Kennedy when he took office after William McKinley was assassinated in 1901, but Kennedy was the youngest elected President.
He was sworn in on January 20, 1961 and his inaugural address was widely acclaimed.
In his inaugural address reflected confidence that his administration would chart an historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs.
Willard Wirtz Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Abraham A Ribicoff Anthony J Celebrezze February 23, 1961, visit of Attorney General Robert.
Kennedy and Director of FBI J.Edgar Hoover to see the President at the Oval Office.
In April 1961, Kennedy supported a failed mission by anti-Castro Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs.
The next year, the Soviets put nuclear missiles in Cuba, but withdrew them after Kennedy imposed a naval blockade.
Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed begun to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, originally conceived by Adlai Stevenson in his 1956 presidential campaign.
In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September.
John F Kennedy The Cuban Missile crisis revived new interest in a Nuclear Test Ban agreement.
In July 1963, Kennedy sent Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets.
The introductory sessions included Khrushchev, who later delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko.
It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections that would verify compliance.
France was quick to declare that it was free to continue developing and testing its nuclear defenses.
During the Eisenhower administration, as a follow-up to Project Mercury, the Apollo program was conceived and planned.
Eisenhower'opposed a manned mission to the Moon and while his successor, John F Kennedy, had an open mind despite his advisers maintaining that a Moon flight would be prohibitively expensive.Kennedy appointed Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, who had worked diligently in the United States Senate to create NASA, chairman of the United States Space Council.
Kennedy, in his January 1961 State of the Union address, proposed Soviet and United States cooperation in space but Premier Khrushchev declined holding Russian rocketry and space capabilities cards close to his vest.
Three months later, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space demonstarting that in space technolgy, the United States was fare behind the Soviet Union.
Full text Wikisource has information on ""Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs"" February 15th, 1962, meeting with World Council of Churches Delegation.
Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation many never come again.
The following month in a cabinet meeting with NASA administrator James E Webb Johnson assured the President that lessons learned from the costly space program would have important scientific value.
The projected $40 billion cost of the Apollo program, Johnson also maintained, was not just an expenditure just to enhance United States international prestige but would be of great military value.
Despite Johnson wanting to keep the program in house, Kennedy was still interested in a joint venture Apollo program with the Soviet Union.
On September 18th, 1963, the President met briefly with NASA Chief James Webb.
Kennedy told him that he was thinking of pursuing the topic of cooperation with the Soviets as part of a broader effort to bring the two countries closer together.
What he sought from Webb was the assurance that there would be no further unsolicited comments from within the space agency.
Late on the following day, Bundy called Webb to tell him that the President had decided to include a statement about space cooperation with the Soviets in his United Nations address.
The President's proposal for a joint expedition to the moon was intended to be a step toward improved Soviet-American relations.
Moscow and the Soviet press virtually ignored the United Nations address.
In the U.S., the public remarks either strongly supported the idea of a joint flight or equally forcefully opposed it.
On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedy's death, Apollo 11 landed the first manned spacecraft on the Moon without any help from the Soviet Union.
John F Kennedy with Caroline Kennedy Halloween in the Oval Office Tensions eased somewhat with the Soviets with the 1963 nuclear test ban treaty, although the “space race” continued.
Kennedy was a strong supporter of the arts, while being mindful of the disadvantaged.
He and his wife attempted to make the White House the cultural center of the nation.
He was an avid reader and was particularly interested in what the press had to say about his administration.
He founded the Peace Corps and proposed wide-ranging civil rights legislation, but never lived to see its enactment.
Joseph P Kennedy and President Kennedy at the Statler Hilton Hotel, Washington, D.C Civil Rights Movement In the spring of 1963, the Rev.
Fred Shuttlesworth and Martin Luther King, Jr., launched a civil rights mass protest in Birmingham, Alabama, which King called the most segregated city in America.
While in was jail eight clergyman wrote him a letter criticizing his work as unwise and wrong.
King responded to the clergymen in an open letter, written on April 16, 1963.
This ""Letter From A Birmingham Jail"" is now one of the most celebrated documents in United States history.
Meanwhile, James Bevel, one of King's young lieutenants, summoned black youths to march in the streets at the beginning of May.
The Birmingham City Commissioner Eugene ""Bull"" Connor used police dogs and high-pressure fire hoses to put down the demonstrations.
The violence was broadcast on television to the nation and the world and the ""Letter from Birmingham Jail."" received national media attention.
Invoking federal authority, President Kennedy sent several thousand troops to an Alabama air base, and his administration responded by speeding up the drafting of a comprehensive civil rights bill.
This unique, historic, limited edition print is the perfect collectible for any history and/or sports fanatic.
The 1000 special edition “Path to Freedom” prints are only available as a gift, limit one per patron, for tax-deductible donations of $100.00 or more placed at www.SpecialEdition.us King's ""Letter from Birmingham Jail."" ignited the protest efforts of his fellow activists all across the nation, which culminated in a March on Washington For Jobs And Freedom, in Washington D.C., on August 28th, 1963, to support civil rights legislation.
The march was organized by a coalition of several civil rights organizations that had different approaches and different agendas.
The ""Big Six"" organizers were James Farmer, of the Congress of Racial Equality ; Martin Luther King, Jr., of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference ; John Lewis, of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ; A Philip Randolph, of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters; Roy Wilkins, of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ; and Whitney Young, Jr., of the National Urban League.
The stated demands of the march were the passage of meaningful civil rights legislation; the elimination of racial segregation in public schools; protection for demonstrators against police brutality; a major public-works program to provide jobs; the passage of a law prohibiting racial discrimination in public and private hiring; a $2 an hour minimum wage; and self-government for the District of Columbia, which had a black majority.
More than 200,000 Americans of all races celebrated the centennial of the Emancipation Proclamation by joining the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.
Key civil rights figures led the march, including A Philip Randolph, Roy Wilkins, Bayard Rustin, and Whitney Young.
But the most memorable moment came when Martin Luther King, Jr., delivered his ""I Have a Dream"" speech from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.
In the fall, the comprehensive civil rights bill cleared several hurdles in Congress and won the endorsement of House and Senate Republican leaders.
It was not passed, however, before the November 22, 1963 assassination of President Kennedy.
The Civil Rights Act was left in the hands of the new President, Lyndon B Johnson.
President Johnson's 20 years of experience as a Texas Congressman and a United States Senator enabled him to capitalize on his connections with his fellow southern white congressional leaders.
On November 22, 1963, while on his way to make a luncheon speech in Dallas, Texas, Kennedy and his wife sat in an open convertible waving to the crowds who had gathered to greet him.
Suddenly, as the motorcade approached an underpass, an assassin fired several shots, striking the President in the neck and head.
Betraying the Constitution... , A rare inflammatory handbill, written by Robert A Surrey and printed surreptitiously by an employee at a Dallas lithographic printing firm.
According to later testimony to the Warren Commission, some 5,000 copies of the handbill were printed and distributed on the streets of Dallas, Texas, beginning a few days before Kennedy's scheduled visit which ended in his assassination.
He was pronounced dead at Parkland Memorial Hospital, never regaining consciousness.
The bullets that killed Kennedy were fired from the window of a nearby warehouse.
Dallas police arrested 24-year-old Lee Harvey Oswald for the President’s murder.
Two days later, on November 24 in the basement of the Dallas police station, Oswald was fatally shot by Jack Ruby, a Dallas nightclub owner, as millions watched on television.
John F Kennedy Funeral Protocol Instructions, ten pages Courtesy of The United States Presidency & Political Hospitality John F Kennedy Funeral Motorcade Instructions, six pages Courtesy of The United States Presidency & Political Hospitality One page typed letter signed by Sarah T Hughes on United States District Court letterhead recounting swearing in Lyndon B Johnson “With regard to the swearing-in of President Johnson, after I had heard that Kennedy had been assassinated I went home, because there did not seem to be anything to do at the courthouse.
I was called by my office and was told that Mr Johnson was on the other line asking if I could come out to the airport to the presidential plane and swear him in.
I drove my car to the air field which took about ten minutes from my home.
When I arrived, I was handed a Bible and the oath and the swearing-in took place.
On November 29, President Johnson appointed a commission to conduct a thorough investigation of the assassination headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren.
However, in 1979, after two years of investigation, the House assassinations committee concluded that Oswald probably was part of a conspiracy that might have included members of organized crime.
As a leading national exhibitor of primary sources, many of our clients have benefited from our historic displays that are designed to entertain and educate your target audience.
Naomi and Stanley Yavneh Klos, Principals Naomi@Historic.us Stan@Historic.us Primary Source exhibits are available for display in your community.
The costs range from $1,000 to $35,000 depending on length of time on loan and the rarity of artifacts chosen.
Presidents Peyton Randolph Henry Middleton Peyton RandolphJohn Hancock Continental Congress United States Presidents John Hancock Henry Laurens John Jay Samuel Huntington Constitution of 1777 United States Presidents Samuel Huntington Samuel JohnstonElected but declined the office Thomas McKean John Hanson Elias Boudinot Thomas Mifflin Richard Henry Lee John Hancock Nathaniel Gorham Arthur St.
Political Scientists who make the assertion claim that because Zachary Taylor refused to be sworn in on a Sunday, March 4, 1849, and both the President and Vice President's term ended on that date the President pro-tempore of the United States Senate, David Atchison, therefore became the President under 1849 Presidential succession law.
