QNI—The NTS Newsletter Pick up a book cover ing telecommunications history and one will often obtain the impression that technology is mutually exclusive.
For example, people are always shocked to hear that Morse telegraphy was still in commercial service into the 1980s.
People are often shocked to hear that the telephone did not render the telegraph obsolete.
The phone company was a major user of telegraphy, providing not just circuits for “private wire” services, but also for its own use.
In the era before microwave carrier, copper long-distance circuits were very valuable commodities.
AT&T “composited” telegraph circuits onto long-distance voice circuits, allowing the latter to remain in revenue service while internal company communications was conducted in the background using the old reliable telegraph key and sounder.
Mysteries of the Date-Time Group 9 A Traffic Experiment 10 Telephone Company Telegraphy 1 Final Details Released—Cascadia 13 When the World Stopped 2 Rising and NTS Talking Using Bulk Traffic to “Ping” the NTS 15 “Ham Radio Now “ and 4 Journalistic Integrity The Good Ol’ Days 17 FLMSG and Radiograms 7 Traffic Totals during the “Golden 17 Age” QNI Mission Statement QNI is an independent newsletter contained herein do not reflect throughout North America.
We dedicated to promoting NTS and the policies or opinions of the operate on the premise that genuine emergency ARRL, the National Association Amateur Radio public service communications preparedness. for Amateur Radio, nor those of volunteers should be, first and any particular NTS net or foremost, communicators and Our newsletter is independently emergency communications technicians.
If you share this published and distributed free of organization. vision, please support QNI. charge to the Amateur Radio Submit your news and articles and emergency management Our mission is to provide a for publication. community.
The opinions forum for NTS volunteers 1 Telephone Company Telegraphy When the World Stopped Talking The Assassination of JFK Telegraphy also offered significant economies of scale.
Wire and cable in the outside plant environment is one of the major cost factors for a telecommunications common This first-person account of a momentous day in history has been in carrier.
Before the Internet era, telegraphy offered sigmy files for many years.
Unfortunately, the name of its author is nificant multiplexing advantages.
If you know who wrote it , please centrator circuits and similar technologies facilitated very let me know and we will ensure credit is given in the next issue of efficient use of wire circuits.
Dozens of telegraph circuits ""QNI."" could be multiplexed onto a single circuit, which could ———————————————————–—— accommodate only one voice channel.
It was the coldest part of the ""Cold War,"" with momenThe fact that Western Electric continued to manufacture tous events leading to that time.
America's move toward telegraph instruments into the 1960s should the ""Camelot Years"" had seen, in addition to actions on the speak volumes about the long-lived history of telegraphy.
The abortive Bay of Pigs invasion operators seeking a license complain that they shouldn’t October 1961: The construction of the Berlin Wall have to use a “100-year-old” technology.
The meon the way. dium may be telegraphy, but the technology that supports John Kennedy had ended it by forcing Khrushchev to trade it is decidedly 21st Century. those ICBMs aimed at America's underbelly for 15 antiquated Jupiter missiles.
That permitted Khrushchev to save Telegraphy may be around for many more years.
It is some face, but it was obvious both he and the Soviet Bloc simply the ideal hybrid between the natural, spoken lanworldwide smarted from an obvious loss. guage of human beings and the printed world.
Fidel Castro had his own reasons for wanting to get rid of John Kennedy.
NTS Operators should be preSo far as anyone in the communist orbit was concerned, the pared for the upcoming Kennedys in Washington were certainly a duo sent straight from the very Devil himself.
Both were dangerous people “Cascadia Rising” disaster exerand leaders of the most powerful opponent in the World; the one that had produced weapons and power on a scale no cise to take place June 10, 11 previously known on earth.
It was obvious that any number of groups wanted not only to stop that power, but to cut off and 12, 2016. its leadership in hope that the balance of power would somehow equalize.
Despite that growth, delays ranging up to three days to get a call completed to some nations were During that time, life at AT&T's Fort Lauderdale Overseas not unusual.
In the case of many nations, the called party Radio Stations was in a bustling stage of expansion.
It was did not even have a telephone, so it would be necessary to the last burst of expansion before the age of satellites and ""book"" the call in advance, whereupon the telephone submarine cables would burst forth to provide transoceanic company in the other nation would send out a messenger, and intercontinental telecommunications capacity that was often on a bicycle, to summon the called party to a teleto offer a means to knit nations and businesses together in phone booth in order to have their conversation.
Fort Lauderdale was one of the Similarly, the paucity of international telephone channels three ""plant gateways"" that AT&T, operating as the sole made it necessary that the historic ""hotline"" between long distance telephone company in the US, had for Washington and Moscow not be a telephone circuit, but providing telephone circuits to other nations using highrather a teleprinter circuit.
For the user, Fort Lauderdale was known cy, the first hotline was in fact, an encrypted teleprinter as the ""Miami Overseas Operator,"" located some 25 miles circuit operated by ITT World Communications under away in the Southern Bell Building in downtown Miami. contract, with classified United States encryption equipment located in Washington, D.C. and at the United States Embassy in Moscow.
Both carried the signals in paralvery few channels that the earliest transatlantic telephone lel, and on occasion, one might carry the transmissions cable carried, all international calls were carried on one way, with the other carried the return signals, altshortwave.
The ""plant gateways"" operated 24-hours per hough both were full duplex channels.
The government day, seven days a week, working at the task of launching would never remove the cryto gear, even refusing to send high-powered multi-channel radio waves at ionized layers the ""Fox"" test messages in the clear, which gave ITT perof the upper atmosphere, and receiving the same from dissonnel fits trying to find the section of the circuit that tant stations.
As far as the public was concerned, the vast might have garbling on it.
In fact, the quality of channels provided, even in the solar low years, was good enough that, This telegraphic hotline was the environment in which combined with the rather lossy characteristics of domestic JFK negotiated with Khrushchev, writing out messages, lines, users didn’t perceive anything unusual.
What many having them sent, decrypted at the Moscow Embassy, didn't even know was that there was no such thing as a dial then hand delivered by courier to Khrushchev.
The operators wrote ""toll tickets"" just chev's messages were similarly written out, taken by hand as had been done since the 1920s, and serial numbered to the Moscow Embassy, then typed in and encrypted for each, exchanging full details with their counterparts in the transmission to Washington.
This allowed each country to have a coming to put JFK on the phone with Khrushchev, simply getplete record for billing at the paying end and settling for ting the connection might have taken more hours than their respective portion. were available for the more cumbersome means of encrypted teletype.
Weekends, evenings, and holidays, there were filling and re-explaining what was known, while the morfewer circuits opened up, but even at night, there was at tally wounded John Kennedy was being taken to Parkland least one working channel to every distant nation…and the Hospital. one nighttime circuit was often almost constantly occupied.
So there we were, finding out for the first time about the November 22, 1963 was just another balmy semi-tropical shooting of John Kennedy from someone in another counday at Fort Lauderdale, with routine normal business day try, 1,200 miles away, across the Gulf of Mexico.
We traffic and stable solar conditions making all scheduled cirwere, of course, as the rest of the US, in a momentary cuits available and occupied with traffic.
There was an occasional their usual white and green lights meaning ""circuit availa""Pirate of the Caribbean"" that might pop-up on a channel ble and engaged by traffic,"" all the speech volume indicahere and there to cause interference, thus the order wire tors had stopped moving.
Despite the charges of United States 3circuits from Miami operators would ring from time-todollars per minute, it seemed the whole world was in a time requiring our intervention.
About fifteen years later, in a totally different terference cases tended to be those that showed up for a job, I made a marketing call on the Vice President of TRT while and then went away.
We'd measure their frequency Communications, the later name for Tropical Radio, and other signal characteristics, and identify them if possiwhich still had its headquarters in Boston at the time.
On ble to make an observation for filing with the FCC (which entering the VP's office, I was introduced to none other reported our findings to the International Frequency Registhan Franco Codoy, the voice I'd spoken to daily for severtration Bureau in Geneva). al years and the man who'd first told us about JFK's assassination.
It was another experience at how small the world In the midst of this rather ordinary time of busy circuits, of global telecommunications once had been. the order wire for my ""tour"" of circuits rang.
I said ""thanks"" and plugged a headset into the terminal for GuateHam Radio Now and Journalistic Integrity mala 3.
After some time of working on these circuits, I By James Wades, WB8SIW knew the faceless voice on the other end would be Franco Godoy of Tropical Radio at Guatemala City.
Simply grab an inexpensive video pleasantries would be exchanged, but not this time.
The result is not greater clarity, but an ambient information  ""It's now three weeks later and the message has arnoise level, which makes it difficult for even the most intelrived."" lectually honest amongst us to discern fact from fiction.
The issues of the day quickly become shrouded in bias, hidden  ""It's not Pony Express; it's a little faster than that."" agenda and other forms of media distortion.
Toss in the interview and it should be clear to the viewer that he has no lack of peer review in the form of editors and publishers, intention of honestly covering NTS issues.
A good reporter can inject critical The interviewer, Gary Pearce, KN4AQ, begins the interquestions into an interview in order to arrive at the truth. view by feigning a brief nap while on camera, thereby signalHowever, this should be done in a balanced way.
It might ing to the viewer that NTS is either a boring subject or, be wise for him not to qualify himself as an expert as well. more likely, an object of ridicule.
An individual with media experience,  ""Some have complained about long delivery delays for such as a politician, actor or professional athlete would have some radiogram messages.
Unfortunately, the era of cellular data networks and robust telecommuniNTS volunteer being interviewed did not have this experications capabilities.
You will note that this style of question injects the necesMaking matters worse, Pearce attempts to qualify himself as sary criticism while nonetheless allowing the subject of the an expert.
He never discloses who ""we"" Even when dealing with a ""reporter"" who is also a radio might be.
As if this wasn’t enough, Pearce plays the role of comedi A reporter is not necessarily your friend.
A smile and friendenne by portraying a caricature of the transmission of a radily handshake does not reveal hidden agenda nor does it ogram.
This is yet another signal to the viewer that NTS reveal the reporter's character. can't be taken seriously.
It is also another big red flag indicating that the sole purpose of the interview is entertain In our brave new social media world, the line between ment as opposed to responsible news gathering.
Hidall press coverage and interviews with the Public Inden agenda, political bias, intellectual dishonesty or simformation Officer for the agency with whom you are ple incompetence driven by a failed university system cooperating. tends to push the narrative of the interview in a direction designed to promote a reporter's prejudice or polit Only comment on subject areas in which you have ical agenda. real expertise.
Do not speculate on other aspects of your field or a broader activity in which you simply  The average reader or viewer has little patience for facts play a role. or technical details.
Every ARRL Section should have an active volunteer Public Information Officer.
Even if one minimum, seek out his advice and use his services to desimply postpones an interview for a half hour, this alvelop talking points in order to prep for the interview. lows one to take the time necessary to prepare what he An ARES group or radio club can also assign a PIO, but wants to say. only if the skills are available within that particular group.
Weave your fundamental message into your ability to develop direct, personal relationships with local scripts.
Politicians have “talking points” for a reason. reporters and news media outlets.
These personal relaTalking points ensure they get their point across without tionships tend to mitigate the tendency of some reporters the media introducing bias in the form of leading questo manufacture controversy at the expense of an individual tions or through their selection of questions. in whom they see little relationship value.
As in the case of the ""Ham Radio Remember; dealing with the media is an art.
If there is evidence the reporter is not interout training and experience.
Likewise, one should avoid ested in fair play, simply minimize your answers to the dealing with the media unless he has at least some training point where the content becomes unusable.
An attempt to do otherwise may result in ""yes"" and ""no"" answers or other very minimal responses ""crash and burn."" result in boring content.
Boring content doesn't sell and The “Ham Radio Now” interview should be a case study therefore, the reporter goes away.
By minimizing one's exemplifying what can go wrong when well-meaning and responses, one also ensures he won't let out sufficient even very competent people venture onto unfamiliar turf. rope to hang himself.
It also exemplifies a disturbing cultural trend in which  Avoid such phrases as ""no comment,"" or ""I can't reopinion has replaced journalism.
More often than not, these latter 30 responses and their associated question will be edited out of the interview.
Coordinate 6 An HTML output that produces a properly formatted, FLMSG and Radiograms printable form using a browser.
We The program ""flmsg"" was briefly mentioned in Kate Hutton’s passed a few radiograms on the VHF digital net using “Abuse of the Message Format” in the September 2015 issue of flmsg but it didn't really catch on.
Being a huge fan of flmsg, I would like to explain a little when I posted to one of the NBEMS Yahoo groups that bit about it and how some of us are using it in Maine. we were doing radiograms on our Maine digital nets.
Fldigi is the sound card modem program and nets. flmsg is a forms composition tool.
Flmsg includes about two dozen forms inrelationship between some of the operators.
The process cluding various ICS, Red Cross, weather reporting, MARS on this side is that I get a message from the UK addressed and, of course, the ARRL radiogram.
We have also passed radiograms on our nightI began using fldigi and flmsg in 2010 when I started our ly VHF chat net; the Knox Co.
ARES/RACES net, and Maine VHF and HF NBEMS nets, the former on the KQ1L also via the Maine Section phone net, through my BBS, linked repeater system that covers a large portion of Maine. via Winlink and, sometimes via email.
NBEMS has become a standard set of software for many communications functions, and many ARES/RACES operators are One relatively new ham who has gotten hooked on this is now familiar with it.
Eva lives on the island of Matinbe used to create forms that may be sent by any means that icus.
At 22 miles, Matinicus is the most remote island off of our coast that has a full time population.
I’ll use one of her radiograms to  BPQ BBS Greg as an example of how flmsg works.
You can ignore the mode and transmission time – those are related to use with fldigi.
At our Knox County EOC, the staff has flmsg on their computers where they can create or receive messages.
GREG MOSSOP G0DUB CHESTER GBR BT MATINICUS ISLAND 22 MILES FROM MAINLAND X VISITED BY NATIVE AMERICANS UNTIL MID 1700S X FIRST WHITE SETTLER EBENEZER HALL X HE WAS TROUBLE X 73 BT EVA KC1BBH OPNOTE REPLY VIA KB1TCE ATSIGN NTSME 04854 AR Needless to say, the “HE WAS TROUBLE” spurred some additional exchanges.
Eva responded that, if born on Matinicus, they get elected to municipal Flmsg will compute the check sum and will correct some office.
For mainlanders, the judge might give them a choice formatting errors such as replacing a period with an X, quesbetween jail or time on Matinicus. tion mark with QUERY, putting 5 groups per line, etc.
However, the operator really has to know the essential elements The other flmsg output is the HTML view.
One has to learn those little niceties. with ARL numbers, the ARL text is printed on the form.
It generally takes only a couple of meetings with my Of course, this all has a purpose beyond sending notes training surrogate to get things right.
We are trying to establish a core of NTSthis on the VHF net is especially useful as it’s mixed voice knowledgeable operators in our ARES/RACES group who and digital and instant feedback can be given. can handle welfare traffic should some serious event like When I pull a radiogram off of NTSD/Airmail, it’s a fairly the ice storm of 1998 hit Maine.
This is part of a new comsimple task to transfer the fields to the flmsg form.
Also, more trained traffic handlers within our team will be valuable, should welfare radiograms from disasters elsewhere arrive in Maine.
Beyond the radiogram form in flmsg, the ICS-213 has also been adjusted to make it fully compliant with the FEMA form.
That’s another story but, for those who might be interested, look up NTS-007, the document that describes the use of flmsg to embed ICS-213 messages into ple get more familiar with the format, they can just dispense a radiogram for digital transmission.
What happens if message A is misplaced or date or origin to be placed in the preamdelayed in the EOC environment for an ble of a radiogram.
The answer is, of course, the radiogram is first entered into an ARES or NTS net""yes."" work.
This temporal context allows officials to quickly place their decisions in An outgoing message is drafted in an Emergency Operathe proper context during a rapidly evolving, dynamic situtions Center and transferred to the message router.
The ation. message router then transfers the message to the radio operator for transmission via an Amateur Radio NTS or The same concerns apply to ""automatic date time ARES circuit.
It is common to hear hams argue that the radiogram format is not needed because their preferred digital There are several possible factors, which must be considmode automatically appends a date and time of origin to a ered here.
The date and time of cision makers to be able to place data within a temporal origin, like the ""place of origin,"" are associated with context.
They must be connected to the time at must be placed against a time-line in its proper sewhich the radiogram was drafted and presented for transmisquence.
The radio operator or technology is simply a teleor emergency response operation is altered.
This would, of course, also apply to ICS9 213, military message traffic or similar operational record parameters of a particular set of circumstances. message traffic.
There is always discussion regarding what exactsage was drafted and presented for origination.
Yet, withthe time at which the message first enters the radio netout this traffic, the word ""lonely"" comes to mind.
I, for one, appreciate the effort extended by those who take the time to generate this -30bulk traffic; the upside of which is the critical role it plays in keeping the NTS and NTSD fed.
The down side of A Traffic Experiment– A Measure of these bulk messages is that some of those who disdain them also tend to handle them with something less than a sense NTS Accuracy of urgency.
Yep, we’ve all heard it and of these, I just receive them and throw them away.” or said it at some point in our amateur radio discussions.
With all that sages containing bad phone numbers also work against foscommunications technology in all those hands, it sure tering good operating practice in traffic handling.
While I makes for a large pile of folks getting very used to having do recognize the difficulty in harvesting good contact inforinstant access to friends and family.
I wonder how they will react when all of that mobile phones, the fact remains that some of these factors stops working suddenly and for a protracted time.
As with associated with bulk originations work against NTS. most things; fuel; food; housing, and so forth; when It is within this environment that I decided to embark on “demand” goes up or “supply” goes down, the value my experiment.
This experiment entails the handling of skyrockets. daily net reports from several NTS nets in Florida, with The National Traffic System might be able to answer some subsequent routing and delivery to me, the net manager, of this demand.
It is alive and well in most areas of the while staying in Ohio. country.
The former is a local VHF North America, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Island and net based in Daytona Beach and operating on the 147.150parts of Europe.
The latter net is an HF sideband net operatThe NTS consists of two components, the NTS and NTSD ing on 3940 kHz, covering all of Florida.
Some claim NTSD, these nets, one of my duties is to collect reports from each which is all radio-frequency based without Internet innet control station after every net session.
Of course, Normally, I receive net reports direct from the net control it is also the human element that makes NTS work. operators in Florida on the associated net because my perOne rap against the NTS and radiogram traffic has been manent home is in Edgewater, Florida.
However, my vaaccuracy, or the lack thereof, and the amount of time from cation home is in Ohio, on Catawba Island in Lake Erie. origination to delivery.
My goal in the experiment deThis year, because of unusual circumstances, our visit to scribed here is to evaluate these claims, at least within the Ohio was late in the year and protracted, from mid-August 10 through Thanksgiving.
In past years, I have had others the message will move from 4RN to EAN and then 8RN gather reports and either email or telephone them to me. from which it will be distributed to the Ohio Section.
If However, this year’s situation afforded me the opportunithe message stays within Cycle 2, the Ohio rep will bring ty to use the NTS and NTSD along with email and or dithe report to the Ohio Single Side Band Net , rect monitoring via HF to obtain data verification and evalwhich meets on 3972. kHz three times per day at 10:30 uation of NTS accuracy and timeliness.
Typically, the 8RN rep carrying this traffic would be checking into the OSSBN at 4.15Let’s talk a bit about the path the messages in this experiPM where the traffic can be delivered directly to me or ment have taken.
The net reports are formatted as radiograms and then listed as outgoing traffic.
As can be seen, there are all sorts of variations in the proSeveral paths are available for this radiogram traffic.
Radiograms may flow through different nets and the path is via NTS Cycle 4.
In this case, the radiogram is number of times the messages might be passed from station passed to the QFN representative. to station varies.
From there it is transferred through and Digital or various combinations of all.
Almessage routed via NTSD, a radiogram picked up by a ternatively, the TFN report could be passed to the NTSD Digital Relay Station and injected into the network follows Digital Relay Station , who would inject the message a similar, albeit automated, path.
The message is transmitinto the automated NTSD system via the Fourth Region ted via HF PACTOR directly to the Regional MBO where automated MBO . it is automatically routed to the MBO in the destination From there it would be automatically routed through area, without any manual net operation being involved.
As yet an additional alternaHowever, a DRS in the destination Section will be retive, some net reports could move from TFN or VCTN to quired to poll the Regional MBO and download the traffic the Florida Phone Traffic Net, which meets at 6:55 AM on for his locality based on the zip codes he has set up for 3940 kHz, or the Florida Midday Traffic Net, which meets download.
That traffic is then transferred into the regular on 7242 kHz at …..wait for it…..midday.
Ultimately, what I am attempting to lay out the Cycle 2 Fourth Region Net Rep would achere is the fact that there are systems in place with procecept the outgoing message and inject it into the Cycle 2 dures for moving messages over great distances.
Most of nets. the Amateur Radio stations involved in this process have emergency power capabilities and redundant equipment For those unfamiliar with the detailed functioning of the resources.
This of these sections sends a rep to Cycle 2 4RN, which meets system affords a reliable resource for moving messages on twice per day on 7242 kHz; first for up cycle at 1:45 PM any given day to any given place within the system regardduring which traffic moves out of its originating sections, less of the availability of a specific operator.
It utilizes thouand again at 3:30 PM for the down cycle, during which sands of trained volunteer operators with highly capable traffic moves into its destination sections. communications equipment.
It uses standardized methods and procedures to ensure proper network management In the case of an outgoing message; once the radiogram has and servicing throughout the system and it is regularly reached 4RN, it will be passed to the Eastern Area Net. exercised.
The United States and Canada are divided into three NTS Areas, these being the Eastern, Central and Pacific Nets.
Each of This experiment started in mid-August with 40 and 75 methese Area Nets, encompass their respective region and ters during the summer doldrums.
For example, the Eastern Area Net conthe strongest solar events in recent history, yet it worked sists of regions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 8, as well as Eastern Canada. well.
It works because some very dedicated people show In the case of a radiogram travelling from Florida to Ohio, up to do this every day in both good conditions and bad.
The majority of these messages were copied diTFN OCT 14 QNI 10 rectly by listening in the background as they were passed to QTC 1 QND 7 88 the 4RN representative on the Florida Phone Traffic Net at 6:45 AM each morning.
Using my phased quarter-wave DIANE WB4RJW vertical array from Ohio, I can regularly participate in that net.
These mes8 2015 X STATIONS 8 sages yielded a total of 6,134 “words” or data points.
Yes, I know day they were originated into the NTS. that Q signals should not be used in voice operations, but here they are being used within the context of a message to It is worth mentioning some of the challenges to accuracy ensure brevity and are therefore appropriate.
I have already discussed standard format for most net reports, used throughout the some of the propagation issues encountered.
There were system, the goal of which is to convey to the net manger also some interesting little traps inadvertently built into the the date of the net, the number of stations checking in, the various messages.
As a net manager, I do not dictate the number of messages passed during the net, and the amount specific message text format to be used by my net control of time the net was in session, the combination of which stations.
I only require that they convey the net name, date indicates net efficiency.
Some nets also report the call signs of net, number of check-in stations, traffic volume and of check-ins and other liaison functions as well. time.
Sometimes, the format used by a particular station varies, Design of Experimental Process depending on the net.
One of the weekends included during the analysis fell on the same day as the Ohio SET exercise,  Selected NTS operators within the ""disaster area,"" which is quite intense and which often places Ohio in the will be provided with preformatted inject messages in top five in SET statistics. sealed envelopes.
These envelopes will indicate the time and date on which the envelope is to be opened Having a professional background in engineering evaluation, and the messages originated via NTS networks.
I was careful to not allow it to be in general knowledge that accuracy performance statistics were being kept.
This was  The exercise messages will be addressed to three pridone to preclude any extraordinary effort.
There were many, in  The FEMA National Response Coordinating fact most errors, that were “inconsequential” to the meaning Center of the message, yet, they were nonetheless scored as errors.
I am sure there are areas within the  The State EOC in which the simulated disassystem that would not do as well and there may well be areter report originates. as that would do better.
My only hope is that we can work  Some additional message flow, which originates with together to make it as good as it can be.
There are some the NRCC will return to the Cascadia Region via simple things we can do to mitigate the majority of message NTS facilities. errors, which I feel are the result of assumptions made when a receiving operator didn't get the radiogram correct The inject messages will be designed to trigger a spely.
While listening in to many of these messages being cific decision or response within the exercise.
A simple solution for this could scale emergency management exercise, messages are be to implement a policy in which the handling of emergeninjected against a time-line to drive the scenario and cy, priority or welfare traffic should require the receiving elicit decisions and actions from the exercise players. station to read back the message to a third party who has been asked to copy along.
This is in essence what is being Of course, for an exercise to be meaningful, it must also done when a message requires relay. be realistic, objective and measureable.
After additional meetings with the Federal exercise will be built into the exercise.
The  Message serial number control to facilitate NTS exercise design team is now putting together the spethe tracking of messages through the NTS cific exercise components, along with the necessary evaluasystem. tion tools needed to support this exercise.
These operators will  Control copies of all inject messages will be also be responsible for providing the detailed administrative retained by the exercise evaluation team for data required to track, account and catalog incoming mescomparison and scoring against messages consage flow. veyed in the field.
As this issue of ""QNI"" is being released, the exercise design NTS leadership within the Cascadia Region will soon be team is contacting NTS officials to begin lining-up personreceiving a network management overview document along nel to support this phase of the exercise.
Of particular imwith a network topography flow-chart and frequency maportance is the identification of vetted and qualified NTS trix.
This will fill in some of the specific details regarding volunteers within the states of Washington, Oregon and the upcoming exercise.
Section Traffic Managers should be coordinating with their Net Managers to assemble a list Throughout April and May, NTS staff will be working of these qualified individuals.
Name Once all exercise participants in the Cascadia Region have Call Sign been identified, each participant will be mailed a packet Address containing their inject messages, data collection forms and Telephone number other evaluation materials.
After the exercise, these mateE-mail rials will be returned to the exercise evaluation team along with copies of all message traffic so that a detailed analytical report can be developed.
Conclusion: James Wades NTS Central Area Staff In reality, the same networks and skills used for routine Cascadia Rising Project Manager NTS operations will simply be applied to this exercise.
Message flow within the exercise scenario will encompass This exercise does drive home the fact that NTS is entering several NTS layers.
The lessons learned from this exercise  The Region 7 Cycle 2 and Cycle 4 Networks will undoubtedly identify a variety of operational areas re NTSD resources quiring improvement.
Once the exercise is complete, the next priority will likely be improved member recruitment and preparation for addiAll traffic will flow across-country via RF-only.
The goal of NTS will be to offer a home will not be delivered to the NRCC until which time they for the “quiet professionals” within the Amateur Radio Serreach the Eastern Area.
This will demonstrate the capacity vice who want to support a meaningful EMCOMM mission to provide long-haul connectivity in the event of a wideat the national level that reflects the value of their time and spread Internet outage and other telecommunications comeffort. mon-carrier disruptions. 30 14 arriving, so I’ve not included these in my statistics.
This article should also be of interest to all the SVC traffic that did come back is very patchy.
The of us who care about the level of quality and service ofgeographic distribution seems to indicate that the data has fered by the NTS. more to do with the activity or non-activity of various Sections than it does about the actual delivTwo questions have always been in the back of my mind as ery of the messages.
One; what happens to all my traffic, and two; what percentage of the There is a tendency for large “batches” of traffic sent via telephone numbers that I look up on the Internet are accuNTSD to generate few or no SVC messages.
After keeping careful records for some period of I am uncertain of the reason for this lack of response.
One time, I may now be in a position to answer both of these possibility is that some batches of traffic are not getting questions. through at all.
It is also possible that bulk traffic is being igI have been sending “welcome to amateur radio” messages nored in some areas.
With no SVC feedback or access to to new hams in call sign areas 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 0 for some NTSD records, it is impossible to determine. time.
I was thinking that the delivery of the radiogram place generating a reply message or indicating that the addressee had no reply. might be the ONLY direct exposure to the NTS that any of the new hams would ever get.
Indicating a disconnected, outNEW AMATEUR RADIO LICENSE ASK of-service or wrong phone number DELIVERING HAM OR GOOGLE ARRL NATIONAL TRAFFIC SYSTEM TO LEARN ORANGE: Indicating some other telephone relatABOUT THIS MESSAGE 73 ed problem, such as no answer, voice mailbox full, etc.
Radiograms are routed through the manual nets or NTSD, depending on the traffic load.
I was surprised at how many 15 GREEN SVC messages there were, considering that they I was particularly interested in the information about bad were generally optional.
Some people I knew who became silent keys a few years ago are still listed.
More data may be provided, but there is still no indication of how out-of-date the listings are, or even which of  Between GREEN, PURPLE and BLUE (total 61% of several numbers is the most up-to-date.
Telemarketers serviced messages), more messages are getting may have a secret source that is unknown to me. through than are service negatively.
In conclusion, I am happy to learn that some of the new  The telephone look-up services are out-of-date, but I hams were being exposed to the NTS first-hand.
I was afraid they would be worse py to see some delivering operators going above and bethan the data showed. yond the call of duty required by HXE when servicing messages.
I am happy to have a ballpark figure on how bad  Many operators would rather ignore a message than the telephone look-up services are.
I am not so happy to service it as “NO OUTLET.” observe the disappearance of large chunks of traffic.
I hope that, when we are really needed, performance will  Two thirds of the messages are being lost somewhere. be better.
If the NTS staffing and net/NTSD infrastrucThere is no way to determine if any of them were deture isn’t there, however, it might not happen. livered or not; but my guess is that they were not delivered.
The NTS The Hammarlund HX-500, originally introduced in 1960 at the cost of $695, was probNewsletter ably over-priced for the Amateur market.
Kate Hutton designed for specialized military applications, such as intercept operations.
I occasionally tune in Israeli Naval Intelligence and copy some CW traffic in the usual five character cipher An Independent groups.
With its quiet noise floor and excelThere is no doubt that we live in the “good lent sensitivity, it sometimes seems like the NTS Newsletter old days” of ham radio, at least in terms of signal originates in Maryland rather than in —— technology if not in terms of operating the Middle East. standards.
QNI is published Yet, in terms of flexibility, features, size and quarterly...or more Rack-mounted in my shack is a Hammarcost versus performance, even today’s lowlund HX-500 transmitter and SP-600 (Rend transceivers offer an amazing value that often when the Editor 274B) receiver.
Traffic Volumes during the Golden This publication may be distributed unmodified and in its enAge of Amateur Radio tirety free of charge to the Amateur Radio Community.
Yet, it’s easy to forget how dominant traffic handling was during These samples are fairly typical of the the “golden age” of Amateur Radio.20s reports.
As one can see from the data, Amateur Radio activity during this era For example, the Department of tended to peak in the winter months and Commerce in slow during the “static” season of July and 1928 reported an Amateur Radio August.
This is not a surprise considering population of approximately 17,000 the fact that most activity was licensees.
Compare this against the concentrated in the 1. to 3. mHz range. approximately 730,000 licensees today.
Imagine what could be done in an era of These 17,000 radio amateurs handled modern solid state transceivers, fantastic an amazing amount of traffic.
