Curriculum FET TELEMATICS HISTORY 2017 GRADE 12 TERMS 1 – 3 1 SESSION 1: 7 MARCH 2017 Cuba THE ORIGIN OF THE COLD WAR CONTAINMENT AND BRINKMANSHIP: THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 1962: SOURCE-BASED QUESTION Historical concepts: TASS: Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union which controlled all international and domestic news in the Soviet Union.
Bay of Pigs fiasco as USA supported Cuban rebels against Castro; mission a failure.
American U-2 spy planes photographed Russian nuclear missile bases on Cuba.
Intervention by Robert Kennedy – assured Khrushchev that USA will remove missiles in Turkey.
He agreed to dismantle and withdraw missiles from Cuba on condition that America did not invade Cuba.
Both sides realised how close they had brought the world to the brink of nuclear warfare.63 a hotline was established between the Kremlin in Moscow and the White house in Washington.
Kennedy appeared the hero while Khrushchev was ruined and dismissed from office in 1964.
August 1963 America, Britain and the Soviet Union signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
In a speech of extraordinary gravity, he told the American people that the Soviet Union, contrary to promises, was building offensive missiles and bomber bases in Cuba.
The President had decided on a direct confrontation with and challenge to the power of the Soviet Union.
One was the direct thrust at the Soviet Union as the party responsible for the crisis.
Explain why you think Cuba became a 'mere pawn' in the Cold War conflict between the superpowers.
Comment on whether the cartoonist gives an accurate portrayal of events.
Both Khrushchev and Kennedy have their fingers ready to press a button.
SYNOPSIS The learner should explain Mao’s commitment in attempting to move China towards becoming a world power.
MAIN ASPECTS Introduction Candidates must refer to Mao’s commitment to develop China towards economic independence.
Candidates need to make reference to Mao’s policies to support their line of argument.
Information was falsified to show that increased production was taking place.
Benefits enjoyed by town workers were abolished and teamwork was encouraged resulting in the collapse of social services such as transport.
Communism is a political and economic system whereby the state takes full responsibility for its citizens.
Centrally controlled economic and political system which is an alternative to capitalism.
State takes partial control of the means of production but allows for some private ownership.
A political system in which all citizens are free to elect representatives to establish a multi-party government.
Neo-colonialism paradoxically Africa with its rich resources enriched foreign powers in a one-sided relationship which favoured the former colonial powers.
African nations were given political independence but did not attain economic freedom.
Dictatorship – An individual ruler who takes total control of all state power.
Often results in the creation of a personality cult through the use of security forces to eliminate all forms of opposition.
African Nationalism An intense commitment to liberate Africans from colonial rule.
How Africa was drawn into the Cold War African decolonization occurred during the Cold War.
Oil, diamonds, gold, uranium, copper + fishing industry – a very desirable colony and ally.
NP’s policy of destabilisation in region to stop spread of communism; to destroy SWAPO bases.
Received aid from USA, UNITA raided Zambia to pillage resources; Angolan refugees; Benguela railway line closed – hampered exports.
With the approach of the 25th anniversary of the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale, the controversy over who won this pivotal engagement in southern African history is being revisited.
But the repulse of its subsequent frontal attacks on well-fortified positions at Tumpo proved a decisive setback in the SADF's bid to capture Cuito Cuanavale and its airstrip.
The stalemate was broken by a Cuban force which outflanked the SADF and advanced on Namibia's southern border.
The loss of the South African Air Force's superiority meant that the ground forces had to withdraw or face the prospect of incurring heavy losses during a disorderly dash south … 11 SADF apologists invariably cite statistics to 'prove' that its enemies at Cuito Cuanavale sustained far greater losses in personnel and material than it did.
Black nationalists believed that the use of force was justified in order to gain social, political and economic power for African Americans.
It grew out of the Civil Rights Movement but was not a formal movement as it had no central leadership.
The Black Power Movement aimed to accelerate the process of change so that African Americans had the same opportunities as whites.
Roles of Stokely Carmichael and Malcolm X Stokely Carmichael  He was motivated to join Civil Rights Movement when he saw bravery of those involved in a sit-in.
Meredith was shot and wounded in Mississippi and Carmichael decided that SNCC members should complete his walk.
Upon reaching Greenwood Mississippi, Carmichael made what has become known as his ‘Black Power” speech.
He was in favour of African dress and Afro hair styles and wanted African Americans to recognise their heritage.
He was a member of the Nation of Islam , a Muslim group which taught that white society was deliberately preventing African Americans from empowering themselves.
Separation between black and white Americans was necessary so that black people no longer depended on whites.
Having been suspended from the NOI, Malcolm X founded the Organisation of Afro-American Unity in 1964.
He became less militant and adopted views that were not popular with black nationalists.
Black nationalists, angered by Malcolm X’s change of heart assassinated him at a party meeting in Harlem on 21 February 1965.
The life of one of the most influential African Americans had been cut short, but he is still remembered for raising the self-esteem of African Americans and fighting for their rights.
Included a unique African-American culture in music , fashion, hairstyles , literature, art and even food.
Source 1A: This excerpt deals with issues that motivated the Black Power Movement.
By the end of the 1960s the position of blacks had improved substantially due to the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
They lived in worse houses and were more likely to be unemployed or in low paid jobs.
Some blacks felt that peaceful agitators like Martin Luther King Junior had achieved very little and that much more radical and violent protests were needed.
Groups such as the Nation of Islam and the Black Panthers were opposed to cooperation with white liberals.
During the mid and late 1960s riots were common in black areas throughout the USA, especially during the hot summer months.
These were often spontaneous, although militant groups were also partly responsible.
It seemed at the time as if the whole American way of life was under threat.
Adapted from People and Events in the Modern World by N Tate, 1989, Oxford.
Comment on the usefulness of the cartoon to a researcher writing about Steve Biko's influence in South Africa’s liberation struggle.
From Robben Island we followed with immense interest the movement led and inspired by Steve Biko … The driving thrust of Black Consciousness was to forge pride and unity amongst the masses of our people and confidence in their ability to throw off their oppression.
For its part the ANC welcomed Black Consciousness as part of the genuine forces of the revolution.
We understood it was helping give organisational form to the popular upsurge of all the oppressed groups in our society.
That intervention came at a time when the political pulse of our people had been rendered faint by banning, imprisonment, exile, murder and banishment.
Repression had swept the country clear of all visible organisation of the people … 1.3.
Comment on the words in the cartoon, 'THE TRICK IS TO SHOUT SO LOUDLY THAT WE START TO LOOK LIKE VICTIMS', in the context of human rights atrocities that were committed during the apartheid era.
