For those too young to remember the only direct nuclear confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union, Mr Frankel's short and graceful account is an excellent introduction to a vital part of our recent past.
For those already steeped in missile crisis lore, Mr Frankel offers new insights based on his personal memories and newly available archives.And for those wondering about the relevance of a cold war crisis, consider some of the many contrasts with Iraq, which, while never mentioned by the author, jump out of his narrative:*In 1962, unlike 2003, there really were weapons of mass destruction.
High-altitude photographs found and identified the missiles before they were deployed.
But within hours after the missiles were discovered by a U-2 overflight on Oct., 1962, President Kennedy decided that the deployment of such weapons was unacceptable.During the first week of the crisis, no one but a small group of advisers known as the Executive Committee, or ExCom, knew about the missiles.
With great self-control, the 44-year-old president absented himself from many of the ExCom meetings to allow freer debate, but he was kept informed by his brother Robert, then attorney general, and by Theodore C Sorensen, his brilliant alter ego, who drafted many key public statements and private messages during the crisis.Importantly, the secret held -with an assist from The Washington Post and The Times, which both figured out what was going on a day or two before Kennedy was scheduled to make his address to the nation.
They both agreed, after personal requests from Kennedy, not to print the story.
It was, given the stakes, the correct decision.From material that has become public since the cold war , it is clear that, once he was caught red-handed, Khrushchev realized that the Soviet Union would have to back down.
This concerned the removal of 15 Jupiter medium-range missiles from Turkey.
By the time they were installed in early 1962 they were already obsolete; President Dwight D Eisenhower said they should have been dumped at sea rather than sent to Turkey, and American nuclear submarines made them superfluous.
But a public ""trade"" of the Soviet missiles in Cuba for the American Jupiters in Turkey would have constituted a substantial propaganda victory for Khrushchev and, Kennedy feared, encouraged future Soviet blackmail.So Kennedy set out to construct a fully deniable ""non-deal deal"" on the Jupiters.
On that darkest day of the cold war, a Soviet missile team in Cuba shot down a U-2, killing its pilot; the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended immediate military retaliation; and Castro asked Khrushchev for urgent help against an invasion he expected within hours.
Worst of all Khrushchev sent President Kennedy a letter -his second in two days -that deeply alarmed Washington.
It was far more threatening than the first, and, worse, the Soviets broadcast its full text on Radio Moscow.
Kennedy told him that the president needed a commitment by the next day that the bases would be removed.
When Ambassador Dobrynin asked about Turkey, Kennedy replied, using a clever formulation devised by Rusk, that the Jupiter missiles were not an ""insurmountable obstacle"" but that, if removed, they could never be linked publicly to the missiles in Cuba.
And it would require four to five months and full consultations with America's NATO allies.The original records of this conversation were carefully edited to remove any hint that there was a connection, and Moscow never mentioned the issue publicly.
Many observers suspected a deal from the outset, but it was only decades later that the full story emerged; the Americans had the necessary deniability.President Kennedy's deft combination of threats and harmless fig leafs worked.
The next day the Soviets issued a public statement that effectively ended the crisis.
There is no certainty that other presidents would have handled history's only nuclear confrontation between superpowers with such coolness and skill.
There were, Kennedy said, generals, and not only generals, \""itching for a fight.
