Boomers remember the Cuban missile crisis as an October 1962 event, an event that grew from a simple announcement into the shuddering fear of nuclear apocalypse.
What follows is a chronologically simplified list of the various events that preceded the crisis, the crisis itself, and its aftermath.
President Kennedy accepted “sole responsibility” following the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba and in November he authorized an aggressive covert operations against Fidel Castro.
Operation Mongoose’s goal was to remove the communists from power to “help Cuba overthrow the Communist regime,” including its leader Fidel Castro.
Fidel Castro informed visiting Soviet officials that Cuba would accept the deployment of nuclear weapons.
United States Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone stated at a high-level meeting that circumstantial evidence suggested that the Soviet Union was constructing offensive missile installations in Cuba.
Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed with McCone, arguing that the build-up was purely defensive.
Twelve days later, on August 29, a high-altitude U-2 surveillance flight provided conclusive evidence of the existence of missile sites at eight different locations in Cuba.
Its assessment, stated that some intelligence indicates the ongoing deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba.
Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós spoke at the UN General Assembly: “If … we are attacked, we will defend ourselves.
Four days later, on October 18, President Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, who claimed the weapons were for defensive purposes only.
Not wanting to expose what he already knew, and wanting to avoid panicking the American public, Kennedy did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile build-up.
President Kennedy announced the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and ordered a naval blockade.
This low level photo of the medium range ballistic missile site under construction at Cuba’s San Cristobal area.
Added since October 14, were fuel trailers, a missile shelter tent, and equipment.
President John F Kennedy spoke before reporters during a televised speech to the nation about the strategic blockade of Cuba, and his warning to the Soviet Union about missile sanctions.
At the United Nations, ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin in an emergency meeting challenging him to admit the existence of the missiles.
The Soviets responded to the blockade by turning back 14 ships presumably carrying offensive weapons.
Meanwhile, B-52 bombers were dispersed to various locations and made ready to take off, fully equipped.
The message offered a new trade, that the missiles on Cuba would be removed in exchange for the removal of the Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey.
Cuba shot down a United States U2 plane with surface to air missile killing the pilot, Rudolf Anderson.
United States Army anti-aircraft rockets sat, mounted on launchers and pointed out over the Florida Straits in Key West, Florida.
Nikita Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the removal of Soviet missile bases in Cuba.
Rudolph Anderson’s body interred in Greenville, South Carolina at Woodlawn Memorial Park.
It consisted of one full-time duplex wire telegraph circuit, routed WashingtonLondonCopenhagenStockholmHelsinkiMoscow, used for the transmission of messages and one full-time duplex radiotelegraph circuit, routed WashingtonTangierMoscow used for service communications and for coordination of operations between the two terminal points.
President John F Kennedy signed the documents of ratification for a nuclear test ban treaty with Britain and the Soviet Union.
That same day, Ambassador William Attwood, a Kennedy delegate to the United Nations, secretly called Castro’s aide and physician, Rene Vallejo, to discuss a possible secret meeting in Havana between Attwood and Castro that might improve the Cuban-American relationship.
Attwood had been told by Castro’s United Nations ambassador, Carlos Lechuga, in September 1963, that the Cuban leader wished to establish back-channel communications with Washington.
He said that as soon as Attwood and Lechuga could agree on an agenda, the president would tell him what to say to Castro.
Kennedy had settled the Cuban crisis, in part, by pledging that the United States would not invade Cuba; however that pledge was conditioned on the presumption that Castro would stop trying to encourage other revolutions like his own throughout Latin America.
Standing in the Cabinet Room near windows overlooking the darkened Rose Garden, Helms brandished what he called a “vicious-looking” rifle and told the president how its identifying Cuban seal had been sanded off.
Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * Email * Website Δdocument.getElementById.setAttribute ).getTime ); This site uses Akismet to reduce spam.
