After participating in a mock air-­‐raid, students will listen to the actual speech President Kennedy gave during the Crisis to address the Soviet threat coming from Cuba, and discuss the implications for American citizens during the period.
Finally, students will compose a letter to Khrushchev from the perspective of the President, indicating how they believe a resolution could be reached.
Grade 11 North Carolina Essential Standards for American History II • AH2.
Additionally, students should have a basic understanding of the communist ideology and how it differs from democracy.
Once all students have entered the room and taken their seats, tell them not to be scared, but as a security measure, all schools are required to have periodic “air raid” drills to properly prepare students in the unlikely event of an attack by terrorist groups.
Tell them that when they hear the alarm, they are to get under their desks, put their heads between their legs, and fold their arms over their heads to shield themselves against debris.
Once you have explained the procedure sound an alarm and have them practice.
Tell students it is for their own good, it is only practice, and ask them to please participate in the drill.
After students have assumed the position, turn off the alarm and have them return to their seats.
Ask probing questions about their thoughts and feelings concerning the drill.
Share the following background information with students before showing the video; • “Duck and Cover” was a social guidance film produced in 1951 by the United States federal government's Civil Defense branch shortly after the Soviet Union began nuclear testing.
The movie states that nuclear war could happen at any time without warning and thus U.S. citizens should keep this constantly in mind and always be ready.
Tell them that if they are over the age of 56, then they lived through this period.
If their grandparents are older than 61, it means they were old enough to go to school during the early 1960s, it is very likely that they had to participate in similar drills or even worse.
Present students with the attached picture of an actual public school drill from the 1950s.
Point out that while they might have felt foolish “hiding” under their desks, at least they did not have to go out in the hallway and lay on the ground face down.
The communist government of the Soviet Union wanted to convert other countries to communism.
The US pledged to support free countries so they could resist communism.
Both countries had nuclear weapons and were capable of launching a nuclear war.
Many Western European countries sided with the US to form NATO (National Atlantic Treaty Organization) in 1949.
Many Eastern European countries signed the Warsaw Pact and formed an alliance with the Soviet Union.
Cuba, located only 90 miles off the coast of Florida, sided with the Soviet Union after Fidel Castro came to power in 1959.
With the push of a button on either side, a nuclear weapon capable of destroying entire cities could be deployed.
As soon as a weapon was deployed, the other side would inevitably retaliate, leading to a full-­‐scale nuclear war and possibly even nuclear annihilation.
Many people who lived during the time feared that if one side launched a nuclear weapon, the entire planet could be virtually destroyed, if not from the destruction caused directly by nuclear weapons then by the nuclear fallout which would make huge areas of land uninhabitable for extended periods of time.
Explain to students that many people worried about the possibility of nuclear fallout and thus took precautions to protect themselves.
Project the attached images of an air raid shelter and a fallout shelter and ask students to guess what they think they are looking at.
Once students have discussed, explain that one such precaution some people took during the Cold War was to build a fallout shelter, which is an enclosed space designed to protect occupants from radioactive debris, or “fallout,” that results from a nuclear explosion.
Once a nuclear weapon had been fired, in the months after the explosion this radiation would be deadly to anyone coming into contact with it.
Thus, fallout shelters were designed to allow their occupants to minimize exposure to harmful fallout until radioactivity has dissipated to a safer level.
These shelters were generally built below ground, at depths where radiation would not seep.
To enrich the conversation, project or handout the attached primary source images from a 1960s handbook on fallout shelters.
Read aloud as a class, taking time to address the “take-­‐away”/discussion questions following each brief section.
Instruct them to listen carefully and answer the guided listening questions as they hear them addressed.
After students have had an opportunity to listen to the speech, discuss their answers to the guided listening questions.
Therefore, the Soviet government cannot instruct captains of Soviet ships bound for Cuba to observe orders of American naval forces blockading this island.
Our instructions to Soviet sailors are to observe strictly the generally accepted standards of navigation in international waters and not retreat one step from them.
And, if the American side violates these rights, it must be aware of the responsibility it will bear for this act.
To be sure, we will not remain mere observers of pirate actions by American ships in the open sea.
We will then be forced on our part to take those measures we deem necessary and sufficient to defend our rights.
Inform your students that this excerpt was taken from an actual letter written to President Kennedy from Khrushchev.
Then, as a writing exercise, have students assume the persona of President Kennedy and compose a letter in response to Khrushchev.
Additional Activities • Have students interview parents/grandparents or an elder community member about what it was like to be alive during the Cold War, and present their findings to the class.
Ask the guest to talk about how the fear of nuclear war manifested itself in day-­‐to-­‐day school life.
Discovery of the Missiles The crisis began on October 14, 1962 when photographs taken during a reconnaissance flight over Cuba by a US U-­‐2 spy plane revealed that the Soviet Union-­‐-­‐America's Cold War adversary-­‐-­‐had secretly started building bases for medium-­‐range ballistic missiles on the island, located less than 90 miles from the U.S. coast.
Scholars still debate why the Soviet Union took this confrontational step.
Some argue that the Soviets wanted to protect their ally Cuba from the United States, which had tried various times to topple Fidel Castro following his assumption of power.
Kennedy learned the news two days later and met with his top advisers-­‐-­‐later dubbed the Executive Committee of the National Security Council-­‐-­‐to decide how to respond.
Since the missiles, if operational and equipped with nuclear warheads, could quickly destroy targets within the United States, Kennedy and his advisers agreed that the weapons presented a grave threat and needed to be removed.
At first, Kennedy and the ExComm favored a military response, with options ranging from airstrikes on the missile bases to an all-­‐out invasion of Cuba.
The military alternative lost favor, however, as ExComm members became more and more concerned that it could provoke a Soviet response that might lead to a full-­‐scale war.
Such worries gained greater credence when the Central Intelligence Agency reported that some Soviet MRBMs in Cuba were already operational, probably armed with nuclear warheads, and capable of reaching targets in the United States.
The Doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction Mutual assured destruction is the doctrine of military strategy in which a full-­‐scale use of nuclear weapons by two opposing sides would effectively result in the destruction of both the attacker and the defender.
It is based on the theory of “deterrence” which basically says that simply having weapons (or even making the enemy think you do) can threaten the enemy and prevent them from using the very same weapons.
The strategy must be employed by both sides to avoid the worst possible outcome—nuclear annihilation.
The Quarantine Ultimately, Kennedy elected not to strike the missile bases in Cuba.
The President, during an ExComm meeting held on October 20, instead chose to surround Cuba with a naval blockade, called a “quarantine,“ which technically was a violation of international law.
The blockade, designed to prevent the Soviet Union from introducing more weapons or warheads into Cuba, offered several advantages over a military strike.
While signaling the United States’ determination, it was flexible, offering Kennedy and his advisers the option of increasing pressure on the Soviet Union to remove its missiles if need be.
The crisis and the White House response remained secret until October 22, when President Kennedy, in a nationally televised address, informed the American people about the missiles and announced the quarantine of Cuba.
The public waited as the world seemed poised on the brink of nuclear war.
How do you think the Soviet leader felt about the blockade, which as technically illegal.
The Crisis Averted Answers came two days later, October 24, when several Soviet ships turned back from the quarantine line.
Then, the Soviets, through numerous channels, including a letter from Khrushchev to President Kennedy on October 26, proposed a solution.
The Soviet Union would remove its missiles if the United States lifted the blockade and pledged not to invade Cuba.
Meanwhile, a U-­‐2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba and its pilot killed, one of several events that threatened to escalate the crisis.
In an October 27 letter to the Soviet Premier, President Kennedy deliberately ignored Khrushchev's second letter and accepted the terms outlined in his first-­‐-­‐removing the missiles in exchange for lifting the blockade and issuing a non-­‐invasion pledge.
On October 28, Khrushchev replied positively to Kennedy's letter, thereby peacefully ending a potentially catastrophic crisis.
Kennedy and his advisers responded cautiously but firmly to the Soviet emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba, opting for a flexible blockade rather than a potentially escalatory military alternative.
While that characterization is accurate in many respects, evidence about near misses, accidents, and unauthorized actions recently has come to light suggesting that the crisis came dangerously close to spinning out of control.
Given the tensions of October 1962, the downing of a U-­‐2 over Cuba or the straying of a U.S. aircraft over Soviet airspace-­‐-­‐ both of which actually happened-­‐-­‐could have been interpreted by either side as a deliberate provocation requiring a military response.
In any event, the superpowers pulled back from the nuclear brink in the wake of the crisis.
Within a year, Kennedy and Khrushchev signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the first international agreement on nuclear weapons.
And the superpowers installed a ""hotline"" to improve communication between the White House and the Soviet Union.
Guided Listening Questions Directions: Listen carefully to the first 11 minutes of President Kennedy’s speech and answer the following questions as you hear them addressed.
