As a news report from the day the events took place, I was able to tell the information is reliable.
Through my own separate research I found the information proved valid, finding that such meetings did take place and met with a large amount of success.
This report confirmed that the missiles in Cuba were indeed being dismantled, as well as confirm that they were being sent back to the Soviet Union shortly afterward.
It also put forward the fact that the United States continued to watch Cuba to make sure that they were not lying about dismantling the missiles, and would need to confirm it with more satellite pictures.
I can tell this source is reliable because the discussion taking place includes the voices of members of the cabinet and Kennedy, as well as the fact that they were released by the Kennedy library.
These tapes gave me bundles of information including the personality of the discussion, and its degradation from logical process to paranoia and confusion.
This information let me provide an excess of accuracy in my report, as well as the kind of tone that would be used after such a trying time.
As being part of a college's site, the information is very reliable, and is not questionable.
This article in particular, helped me understand more what people thought about the crisis because it contained the results of surveys that showed what people thought the reasons and consequences of what could have happened.
Using that tone helped me construct my article easily, due to understanding more forcibly the kind of relief that was widespread when the crisis ended.
It has statements of what they had planned and how it would have been executed.
It’s scary to think that at some point in time there were a handful of men who day in and day out, talked over this document and knew they couldn’t tell anyone and if it went through would have to keep it a secret or face charges of treason and worse.
It explicitly says in the document to not forward it to anyone basically.
It references an ‘Operation Mongoose’ which was another operation involving intervention in Cuba, on a much less aggressive level.
What this article contains is a great piece by piece breakdown of what happened in the early days of the Cuban missile crisisk.a the declaration of war.
Also since I am working on the moral complications also it talks about his meeting with his Advisors and their views on what the United States should do.
This is a picture of the uncrating of IL-28 bombers and the thing that led the United States of America to know that they were allied with the Soviet Union.
This photograph was a catalyst to what happened with the declaration of war.
Without this photograph and further analysis there would be no cuban missile crisis.
This source is also a great reference for my part of the project where I discuss John F Kennedy and Gromyok's meeting.
I write that it adds another layer of moral complication and here it shows the distrust of the soviet union by saying this statement is false twice.
This is a motivation for us attacking the Soviet union but we dont, instead we just advance with our blockade and do what we said we would do earlier, which is stopping new things coming into Cuba.Memoir of a General who was in a navy ship during the cuban missile crisisThis source was helpful in providing a different perspective in the war.
As the article is still only focused on the American side this essential in showing moral complications.
This was because after reading this they seemed more human to me and not the people causing a problem.
Without this source it would be just like only getting one side of the story and that would not be a complete investigative journal or report.
They talk about the times the quarantine was in effect and the debate over the usefulness before JFK signed the order.The Red Threat.
This primary source was useful because it reports the event of The Invasion of the Bay of Pigs.
Prior to the invasion, the CIA had Cuban exiles trained to invade their homeland, in an attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro’s government.
Reported in many newspapers, foreign and American, the Cuban government were forewarned of this invasion and were prepared for it.
When it had happened, news radio broadcasts told of the invasion as a success, but within 3 days, it had been over because of the forewarning.
This takes place on April 21, 1961, two days after the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Although the transcript is lengthy, only two to three questions focus on the situation of Cuba.
When asked about the training of Cuban refugees, the President assures the public that the facts would come out in due time, though newspapers had already reported the incident and confirmed it to be true, from when President Eisenhower had ordered the CIA to start training Cuban exiles to eventually invade their home country.
According to him, Cuba joined the Soviet Union AFTER they were invaded.
Also, if the Soviet Union did not protect this “very small, useless land” surrounded by hostile territory, the Soviet Union would lose its reputation because of the possible fact that they did not protect their allies, so their allies would never trust them.
The composer shows his sympathy for the prisoners, and wishes that they come home in time for Christmas , but holds the honor of the United States nation more strongly.
He is also informed, through newspaper headlines, that if the payment were to be given, it would come out of United States taxpayer dollars.
Gerald Ford also urges the President to inform the public about the exchange at hand.
Reporting similar information to the Palm Beach Post, but with less speculation and with minimal speculation about the training of Cuban rebels, they also note the actions of Fidel Castro and gives more of a perspective from the Cuban side.
They say that Castro was in a town that was bombed, close to the invasion.
Subsequent to the invasion, the United States had declared its motives to overthrow the Communist regime.
Cuba gave a state of national alert and arrested Eduardo Roza Masvidal, who was accused of hiding cash and medicine for the Cuban rebels.
