July 22, 1890 Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald is born in Boston to local politician John F Fitzgerald and Mary Josephine Hannon.
J Kennedy helps to organize the Columbia Trust Company, Boston's only Irish-owned bank.
July 1912 Joe begins his banking career as a clerk for Columbia Trust Company; two years later he will organize resistance to a takeover bid, and become president of the bank at age 25.
Nine months later they start their family when Joseph Patrick Kennedy Jr. is born on July 25, 1915.
October 1917 Joe Sr. opposes World War I He becomes assistant general manager of Bethlehem Shipbuilding's Fore River Plant in Quincy, Massachusetts, and is able to avoid active military service.
Within her first year, it is apparent that she has serious learning disabilities.
June 1919 Joe Sr. joins the Hayden, Stone and Co. brokerage firm in the heyday of the unregulated stock market.
July 10, 1921 Joe and Rose Kennedy's third daughter, Eunice Kennedy, is born.
February 20, 1928 Joe and Rose's fifth and youngest daughter, Jean Ann Kennedy, is born.
Anticipating problems, Joe Sr. has already liquidated his substantial long-term investments.
Joe will later deny, then admit, that he continued to make money in the stock market by selling short while the market fell.
He will be the last of Joe and Rose Kennedy’s nine children; oldest brother Joe is nearly seventeen years old.
July 2, 1934 FDR appoints Joe Sr. chairman of the new Securities and Exchange Commission, charged with regulating the manipulation of stock prices that Kennedy had mastered decades earlier.
Yet after 14 months of service, even critics will concede that he has served well.
September 1934 After a year spent studying in London, Joe Jr. enrolls as a freshman at Harvard.
October 1935 Jack enrolls at Princeton, having withdrawn from the London School of Economics and Political Science with an attack of jaundice.
April 1937 Joe Sr. is appointed head of the newly-established United States Maritime Commission.
He publicizes his achievements successfully enough to be featured on the cover of Fortune magazine.
January 5, 1938 After intense lobbying, FDR nominates Joe Sr. ambassador to Great Britain.
Two months later, Joe Sr. will arrive in London, followed soon after by Rose, Kick and the four youngest Kennedys.
Joe Sr.'s pique at not being offered an honorary degree from the university prevents him from attending his son's graduation.
October 19, 1938 Ambassador Kennedy argues for co-existence with dictatorships in a speech at the Trafalgar Day dinner of the Navy League.
Jack travels through Germany, Poland and Russia on the eve of World War II, reporting to his father on the imminence of war.
August 23, 1939 Germany and the Soviet Union sign a ten-year non-aggression pact.
With Arthur Krock, he reworks his senior thesis, ""Appeasement at Munich,"" into a book published as Why England Slept.
October 1940 Joe Sr. returns to the United States, asking to be relieved of his ambassadorial post.
November 8, 1940 In an interview with The Boston Globe, Joe Sr. reiterates his views on staying out of the war for an American audience.
Joe Jr. is sent to flight school; Jack is commissioned as an ensign, joining the Office of Naval Intelligence.
Without consulting Rose, Joe Sr. arranges for Rosemary to have a frontal lobotomy.
The operation leaves their daughter in worse condition, and she will be institutionalized for the rest of her life.
Jack begins an affair with Inga Arvad, a married Dane falsely suspected of being a Nazi spy.
January 1942 Jack is transferred from Naval Intelligence to the Navy shipyard at Charleston, South Carolina.
May 6, 1942 Joe Jr. receives his naval wings -with his father in attendance.
Despite being stranded in the middle of the Pacific, he manages to save the rest of his crew.
October 5, 1943 Just shy of his eighteenth birthday, Robert Kennedy enlists in the Naval Reserve.
August 12, 1944 Joe Jr. dies on a secret mission flying over the English Channel.
September 9, 1944 William Cavendish is killed in battle against the Germans.
November 1945 Joe Sr. buys Chicago’s Merchandise Mart, the largest privately-owned building in the world.
April 1946 Jack announces that he will run for Massachusetts' 11th Congressional district seat, left vacant by once-again-mayor James Michael Curley.
His grandfather, John ""Honey Fitz"" Fitzgerald, who held the seat a half-century earlier, campaigns with him.
Once Kennedy wins the primary, he is a shoo-in for the seat in Democratic Boston.
He is diagnosed with Addison's disease, a hormonal disorder that causes fatigue and compromises the immune system.
May 1951 Ted is caught cheating on an exam and is expelled from Harvard.
Jack wins a place in the United States Senate, unseating the descendant of a Boston Brahmin family, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
January 1953 Robert Kennedy becomes assistant counsel to the Senate Subcommittee on Investigations chaired by Joseph McCarthy.
During his convalescence, he will write Profiles in Courage, published in 1956.
August 1956 Adlai Stevenson throws the choice of a running mate to the Democratic convention.
August 23, 1956 Jacqueline Kennedy gives birth prematurely to a stillborn daughter.
As a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Jack Kennedy argues for the independence of Algeria from France.
November 11, 1957 Daughter Caroline Bouvier Kennedy is born to Jacqueline and Jack Kennedy.
The viability of a Catholic candidate is tested in state primaries throughout the year.
July 1960 Jack Kennedy wins the nomination for president at the Democratic convention in Los Angeles.
September 26, 1960 Kennedy debates Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the first of four televised meetings.
November 8, 1960 John F Kennedy is elected the 35th president of the United States He is the youngest president ever to be elected -and the first Roman Catholic.
November 25, 1960 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. is born to Jacqueline and Jack Kennedy.
At a time of deep Cold War fears, Jack is counseled on a counterinsurgency plan against Fidel Castro’s Communist government in Cuba.
March 1961 President Kennedy signs into law the creation of the Peace Corps.
May 25, 1961 President Kennedy announces his goal to land a man on the moon and return him to earth before the end of the decade, and before the Soviets do.
May 29, 1961 President Kennedy meets Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna.
August 1961 The Soviets build a dividing wall in the German city of Berlin.
He is paralyzed and will remain unable to speak for the last eight years of his life.
March 1962 Ted resigns as assistant district attorney in Suffolk County and announces his candidacy for his brother Jack's unexpired Senate seat.
May 19, 1962 At President Kennedy's 45th birthday party at Madison Square Garden, Marilyn Monroe sings a breathless ""Happy Birthday"" to the president.
On orders of attorney general Robert Kennedy, three hundred federal marshals accompany Meredith; a deadly riot breaks out.
October 1962 The discovery of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba engulfs the presidency in crisis.
The Soviets will remove their missiles, and the United States will remove similar missiles from Turkey in the near future.
November 6, 1962 The people of Massachusetts elect Ted Kennedy to the United States Senate.
June 1963 President Kennedy calls for a moratorium on nuclear weapons tests.
August 8, 1963 A third child, Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, is born to the President and First Lady; he will live only two days.
Vice President Lyndon Baines Johnson takes the oath of office on Air Force One.
November 29, 1963 Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren chairs a commission established to investigate the death of President Kennedy.
June 1964 Senator Ted Kennedy's back is broken in a plane crash that kills his aide and the pilot.
September 24, 1964 The Warren Commission report concludes that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the assassination of President Kennedy.
November 3, 1964 Lyndon Johnson is elected president; Robert Kennedy is elected to the Senate.
April 1967 Traveling through the Mississippi delta, Robert Kennedy is confronted with extreme poverty in rural America.
March 1968 After much deliberation, Robert Kennedy announces his candidacy for the presidency.
Although late to the race, he wins primaries in Washington, D.C., Indiana, Nebraska, and South Dakota.
June 5, 1968 After winning the California primary, Robert Kennedy is shot in Los Angeles; he dies the next day.
The Los Angeles Police Department determines that Sirhan Sirhan, a deranged Palestinian, acted on his own.
July 1968 Eunice Kennedy Shriver convenes the first Special Olympics for people with mental retardation in Chicago's Soldiers Field.
July 18, 1969 Following an appreciation party for volunteers on Robert Kennedy’s campaign, Senator Ted Kennedy drives his car off a bridge at Chappaquiddick, Massachusetts.
July 25, 1969 Ted Kennedy delivers a national television address to explain his actions at Chappaquiddick.
November 3, 1970 Ted Kennedy is reelected to the Senate, but loses his post as Majority Whip.
November 1979 Ted Kennedy announces his candidacy for the 1980 presidential election.
August 1980 In an emotional speech to the Democratic national convention, Ted withdraws his bid for the presidency.
December 1982 Ted Kennedy announces he will not run for president in 1984.
December 1985 Ted Kennedy announces he will not be a candidate for President in 1988.
He will serve until 1999, when he steps down to run the Citizens Energy Corporation, a non-profit organization negotiating affordable energy for the poor.
January 18, 1995 Robert Kennedy's oldest child, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, is sworn in as lieutenant governor of Maryland.
January 22, 1995 Family matriarch Rose Kennedy dies, just a few months short of her 105th birthday.
July 16, 1999 En route to the wedding of cousin Rory Kennedy, John F Kennedy, Jr. and his wife Carolyn Bessette Kennedy die in an airplane accident off the coast of Massachusetts.
He will survive over a year, passing at the family compound in Hyannis Port on August 25, 2009.
Trailer A preview of The Kennedys, a saga of ambition, wealth, family loyalty and personal tragedy.
The Kennedys | Image Gallery The Kennedys at Hyannis Port Browse this gallery of Kennedy family photographs taken at the Hyannis Port compound, the setting for Kennedy family gatherings over many years.
