In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union appeared to be sliding inexorably toward a nuclear conflict over the placement of missiles in Cuba.
In his hour-by-hour chronicle of those near-fatal days, Dobbs reveals some startling new incidents that illustrate how close we came to Armageddon.
Here, for the first time, are gripping accounts of Khrushchev&#8217;s plan to destroy the United States naval base at Guant&#225;namo; the accidental overflight of the Soviet Union by an American spy plane; the movement of Soviet nuclear warheads around Cuba during the tensest days of the crisis; the activities of CIA agents inside Cuba; and the crash landing of an American F-106 jet with a live nuclear weapon on board.
Dobbs takes us inside the White House and the Kremlin as Kennedy and Khrushchev agonize over the possibility of war.
Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Top 50 New Customer Reviews Sort reviews by: NewestOldestHighestLowestWrite a Review Write a Review Your Name: Rating: 1 star2 stars3 stars4 stars5 stars Comment : Please enter maximum 5000 characters.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" I'm working through this thing right now.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" An amazing work, bringing forth facts heretofore missed or suppressed.
Dobbs rather sartorically points out that of all the players in the drama, Castro outlasted them all.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" finally, i made it through this one. every time i tried to give up, something else interesting came along. this book would be waaay better with a ruthless editing job, but otherwise, good.
While a lot has been written over the years on the Cuban missile crisis, I think this book doesn't falter from a lot of the biases prevalent in many of the other works on the subject.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Really well-told tick-tock of the famous ""13 Days"" with lots more insight into the Soviet military deployment on Cuba.
Mainly written from the United States perspective, but still many details from the Soviet side too.
Very dramatic at times and some very exciting details about the decision making and tactics at that time.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Lots of technical info ... hard to read.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Good book that was interesting to read.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Fascinating book about the Cuban Missle Crisis.
Dobbs went back to original sources and has new data and revelations about those crazy days.
Lots of implications for our current and future international dealings.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Brilliant, though I expected a little more at the end.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Never knew just how close we were to nuclear war.
I was involved with a crash of an F-106, brought back memories and made me research the crash.
I love the way it never mentions the future, so you see things as they unfold, as it would have been seen at the time.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Literally one of the scariest books I've read.
I knew we got close to all out wwiiii but didn't realize how close or how it could have changed in an instant.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Interesting play by play description of the Cuban missile crisis.
Dobbs explores the personalities of the men calling the shots and otherwise swept up in this momentous series of events that brought the United States and USSR to the brink of nuclear war.. stars.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" this is a must read if you're interested in the cold war. very well researched and entertaining.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" I think I've read just about everything on this crisis and this is an excellent, gripping summary of the time the world stood still.
Read this and the book with the transcribed tapes and you will have an excellent understanding of the event.
Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Excellent book, most informative , highly recommended "" Mikebradbury, 12/21/2010 Overall Performance: Narration Rating: Story Rating: "" Amost everything you think you know about the Missile Crisis is wrong.
Very well written, tense, and made me try other books written by this author.
He has worked at the center of British politics for Margaret Thatcher, John Major, and now David Cameron.
He is the author of more than a dozen thrillers, including House of Cards, which became a hugely successful television drama, and three previous Harry Jones thrillers.
About the Narrator Bob Walter is a producer, director, and audiobook narrator.
He is best known for his work as a music producer and sound effects designer for the movies Halloween, The Little Brave Toaster, and Apocalypse Now.
