Cuba had recently undergone a revolution led by Fidel Castro, who had overthrown the dictator, Fulgencio Batista.
However, facing American political opposition, and ideological pressure from his more radical brother, Raoul, and Che Guevara, Castro slowly came to accept Soviet offers of aid.
Following the failed Americansupported invasion by Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, Soviet offers of military and economic aid, once a trickle, became a torrent.
Rumors of invasion and provocative military moves by Washington convinced both Havana and Moscow that an invasion was likely.
At the same time, the CIA was ordered to begin a program of assassination, subversion, and sabotage against Castro, called Operation Mongoose.
The chance for mutual annihilation lay in the constant chance for a misunderstanding or miscalculation in the respective command structures that could force an all-out war.
Both sides nearly lost control of events because of ill-considered actions by subordinates.
On 28 October, the Soviets shot down a high-altitude photoreconnaissance U2 over Cuba.
And during the middle of the crisis, another U-2 flight strayed over the northern USSR, an incident that could only be interpreted as provocative by Moscow.
Kennedy's steadiness in the face of constant calls for an assault on Cuba by conservative politicians and the military, and his willingness to bargain away the Soviet missiles in exchange for outdated United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey were critical elements.
Khrushchev's rational choice to back off from the confrontation early in the crisis and seize the offers for an exchange made by Kennedy proved equally crucial.
With the currently available information, from both classified and unclassified sources, this question can be answered more accurately than before.
This latter question, previously unapproachable, can now be answered somewhat in light of records releases by various Russian ministerial archives.
A fourth posting will review the general effectiveness of American SIGINT during the crisis.
A number of reasons have been put forward to explain why the Soviets installed the missiles in Cuba.
These include a Soviet desire to settle the status of Berlin, then a city occupied by the forces of the Soviet Union, United States, Great Britain, and France; to achieve a more favorable worldwide ""correlation of forces""; and to protect Cuba from an American invasion.
While these reasons explain why the Soviets might put missiles in Cuba, they necessarily do not answer why they finally did it.
Khrushchev was more aggressive and confrontational with the West than Stalin was.
He realized both the danger and usefulness of nuclear weapons in Cold War policy, and how, with them, he could press an advantage or control the West's reactions.
Using recently released records from numerous Russian archives, including those of the Russian foreign ministry, the Office of the President of Russia, and the foreign and military intelligence services, we now know that in early 1962, Khrushchev was convinced that the political and military situations were dangerous for Moscow.
He believed the President Kennedy meant to invade Cuba (JFK actually was considering various invasion options at the time) and that he would not negotiate a settlement on the status of Berlin.
What Khrushchev wanted was some way to threaten the United States the same way the United States threatened the Soviet Union.
On 21 May 1962, Khrushchev first proposed the plan, known eventually as Anadyr, to the Soviet Presidium, which approved it.
The Cubans were informed as early as 29 May by a special Soviet delegation, which flew to Havana.
This force would be under the command of Soviet General Issa Pliyev, a former cavalry officer who was known to follow the toughest orders.
The Soviets also dispatched nuclear-armed battlefield missiles, including the FROG-3.
At the same time, Moscow contemplated building a submarine base to service early ballistic missile submarines, either the Hotel-class SSBN or the Golf-class SSB, both of which carried the SS-N-5 missile.
The captains of the merchant ships were given secret orders to be opened in the presence of the ship's political officer.
Many were told that if they were in danger of being boarded by foreign forces, they were to take ""all measures"" to protect the personnel and sink the ship.
Since late 1961, there had been a steady increase in the number of Soviet merchant ships sailing to Cuba.
However, over the next two months certain curious aspects of the Soviet shipping to Cuba caught the eye of analysts.
For one thing, many of the merchant ships were carrying loads well below their capacity in some cases only 25 percent.
In fact, all American intelligence reporting pretty much··. '· outlined the huge conventional buildup occurringin Cuba.
However, contrary to implitit suggestions made in publications such as the recent Year in Defense Review, none of this SI GINT re ortin even hinted at the resence of the ballistic missiles.
The strands of·.• · evidence ...__~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---~~---' were une away m e e uge o reports.
Even the odd behavior of thetwo ships that transported the nuclear warheads fot\ the missiles, the Soviet icebreaker Indigirka and the freighter Alexandrovsk elicited ho···. s ecial attention in the SIGINT re orts.
In fact, one NSA re ortincluded en, Ill rea ity, t . .• was carrying Pliyev and about 2,500 Soviet troops.
Meanwhile, the technical research s ·. 1p, the USS Oxford, patrolling off the coast of Cuba, did not monitor any communications related to the missile construction.
I ti,lthough reported, were not construed as unusual by the SIGINT analysts.
Instead, NSA reports compared these periods of dormancy to similar stretches of inactivity that occurred in the late 1950s.
On 11 September, the Soviets were responding to President Kennedy's 7 September call-up of 150,000 reservists to active dut for 12 months because of the ""international situation."" was, in reality, a large-scale exercise in the Far East that began before 14 October and lasted until 19 October.
In early October 1962, the consensus in the American intelligence community was that the Soviets would not risk installing ballistic missiles in Cuba.
