Obviously I have no direct recollections of those days in the fall of 1962, although I have since become aptly aware of “just how close we came,” as the tagline of this movie says.
With reconnaissance pictures clearly showing the presence of medium range missiles being installed in Cuba, President Kennedy has few choices.
The most obvious is to go in with force and attack the island—a full invasion and the favored option of Kennedy’s military aides.
But certainly this decision would ignite retaliation from Cuba’s ally with global nuclear war the very likely result.
Fortunately Kennedy sees another option that involves diplomacy, a firm resolve, and the most precious commodity of all—time.
Even though we know how the story ends, watching the events unfold that led Kennedy to enact a blockade on all USSR ships bound for Cuba, was a riveting emotional experience.
The inclusion of many profanities and terms of Deity are the movie’s only shortcoming.
While it is probable a few coarse words were uttered in those back rooms, most of the “private” dialogue in this movie is dramatized, and could have been scripted to allow this movie to find its way into more homes and schools.
Political historians note that Thirteen Days does use artistic license, especially in the role of Kenny O’Donnell.
However, everyone agrees the movie is still very effective at providing a sense of just how serious this situation was.
Updated July 17, 2017 About author Rod Gustafson Rod Gustafson has worked in various media industries since 1977.
He founded Parent Previews in 1993, and today continues to write and broadcast the reviews in newspapers, on radio and on the Internet.
His efforts also include writing and researching media in all its forms and observing how it effects society and culture.
B+ Aside from the profanity, this movie clearly illustrates to future generations the dangers of conflict and nuclear war.
It also illustrates how poor communications can lead to disastrous results.
BBesides the tension of the crisis including heated moments in meetings and the theme of war, we see one plane get shot with no injuries, while another plane is hit by a missile resulting in the death of the pilot.
D+ At least 1 extreme profanity , 18 moderate profanities, 22 mild profanities, and 19 terms of Deity used as expletives or profanities.
Home Video The most recent home video release of Thirteen Days movie is November 12, 2013.
Thirteen Days Release Date: 12 November 2013 Thirteen Days re-releases to home video in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of President John F Kennedy’s death.
Kennedy, which occurred about one year later , is dramatized in the movie Parkland.
A New Age MPAA Rating: PG Overall: AGreenland MPAA Rating: PG-13 Overall: B+ Love and Monsters MPAA Rating: PG-13 Overall: B The Midnight Sky MPAA Rating: PG-13 Overall: BAll My Life MPAA Rating: PG-13 Overall: B+ The Croods: A New Age MPAA Rating: PG Overall: AGreenland MPAA Rating: PG-13 Overall: B+ Toys of Terror MPAA Rating: R Overall: D Love and Monsters MPAA Rating: PG-13 Overall: B The Midnight Sky MPAA Rating: PG-13 Overall: BFamily movie reviews, movie ratings, fun film party ideas and pop culture news — all with parents in mind.
