In this drawing from the Washington Star, the have blown up in Kennedy's face.
Bay of Pigs is portrayed as a giant chicken which has come home to roost, causing new troubles soon to hatch out for Kennedy.
Although it is not the only film of the shooting, it has been called the most complete.
On December 10, 1963, a group of Catholic schoolchildren were sprinkling the temporary flame with holy water.
The cap came off the bottle and water poured onto the flame, putting it out.
In August 1967, an exceptionally heavy rain extinguished the permanent flame.
A nearby electrical transformer flooded as well, depriving the spark igniter of power and preventing the flame from being relit.
Two of the gravesite's flagstones had to be removed to access the transformer and repair it.
Ohio Congressional District 13 Gerrymandering How Gerrymandering can influence electoral results on a non-proportional system.
Magenta party wins the urban district, while G party wins the 3 rural/suburban districts — the result expresses and enhances the fact that G is the state-wide majority party.
Creating 4 mixed-type districts can yield a 4:0 win to G — a disproportional result considering the state-wide reality.
With classical Gerrymandering techniques it is even possible to ensure a 1:3 win to the state-wide minority M party.
Rights of the Accused • Warren Court rulings expand rights of people accused of crimes: – Mapp Ohio —illegally seized evidence cannot be used in court – Gideon Wainwright — courts must provide legal counsel to poor – Escobedo Illinois — accused has the right to have an attorney present when questioned by police – Miranda Arizona —all suspects must be read their rights before questioning Miranda Arizona • Origins of the Case—In 1963, Ernesto Miranda was arrested at his home in Phoenix, Arizona, on charges of kidnapping and rape.
After two hours of questioning by police, he signed a confession and was later convicted, largely based on the confession.
He claimed that his confession was invalid because it was coerced and because the police never advised him of his right to an attorney or his right to avoid selfincrimination.
