The event, first held during the city's 1988 bicentennial year, celebrates the Queen City's river history.
Steamboats never plied the Great Miami River, but those on the Ohio River were vital to Butler County's economy for several decades in the 19th century.
Their major accomplishment was hauling more freight and mail and at a greater speed than their predecessors, the horse-drawn wagon and stagecoach and crude flatboats.
When the Miami-Erie canal opened between Middletown and Cincinnati in November 1827, it combined with the Ohio River, via Cincinnati, in expanding markets for the county's agriculture bounty and the output from mills and factories in Hamilton, Middletown and other canal ports.
Canal boats and steamboats rapidly replaced risky flatboats in transporting local products.
Long, dangerous one-way trips over the Great Miami, Ohio and Mississippi rivers on crude craft were no longer necessary for local farmers and merchants.
In 1811 the first steamboat on the Ohio River started at Pittsburgh and visited Cincinnati, Louisville and other points before entering the Mississippi and completing its slow trip at New Orleans.
But the War of 1812 and technical obstacles delayed the start of regular steamboat traffic.
According to one report, in 1820 the passenger fare was $25 for an eight-day, 1,480-mile down stream trip from Cincinnati to New Orleans.
In the early 1820s, the Miami Canal promised several advantages over the shallow Great Miami River.
Because its mouth was on the Ohio River at the Ohio-Indiana line, 17 miles west of Cincinnati, the current-propelled flatboats on the Great Miami couldn't haul Butler County products to the Queen City.
Steamboats -despite flat bottoms and shallow draft -couldn't navigate up stream on the Great Miami, which had an average fall of about three feet per mile.
In 1825 -the same year Miami Canal construction started south from Middletown -work began on the Louisville & Portland Canal to bypass the Ohio River falls at Louisville.
Until that canal was complete, passengers and freight had to change boats there, or wait until high water enabled navigation over the rapids.
The $1 million L&P Canal -including $230,000 in federal help and about $200,000 from Cincinnati investors -opened in December 1830.
By December 1830, a 67-mile stretch of the Miami-Erie Canal between Dayton and Cincinnati was complete at a cost of $77,850.
Hamilton was connected to the state-financed waterway by the Hamilton Basin that ran west from the canal to South Third Street.
The basin -about seven-tenths of a mile in length -was lined with wharves, mills, factories and warehouses.
Hogs were brought to local packers for slaughter and processing, then sent over the canal to Cincinnati for steamboat transport to markets along the Ohio and Mississippi rivers and their navigable tributaries.
Also profiting by the canal-river combination were paper mills in Hamilton, Middletown, Franklin, Miamisburg and Lockland.
Materials and finished products were more plentiful and cheaper in Butler County because of shipments that arrived at Cincinnati by steamboats and were hauled here by canal boats.
In the month of April 1850 – when basin exports were peaking – 40 canal packets departed Hamilton and 2,433 passengers left the city bound for Cincinnati.
In 1852 -as railroads began to be built in the region and take traffic from canals and steamboats -Cincinnati reported 8,000 steamboat arrivals that year.
Although most of the glamor is gone, the Ohio River remains a vital transportation link too complex to explain here.
Steamboats -in their heyday and now in folklore -suggest romance, comfort, elegance, adventure and speed.
But there was a flip side to that positive image of floating palaces that once carried people and freight up and down the Ohio River.
Exploding boilers exposed passengers and crew to death and maiming from jagged bits of flying wood and metal, scalding water, fire and drowning.
An early calamity involved the Moselle, a Cincinnati-built steamboat, that exploded the afternoon of April 25, 1838, soon after starting its scheduled trip from Cincinnati to St.
The boat, launched 25 days earlier, was reputed to be the fastest on the river.
At the time, the Moselle explosion ranked as the worst steamboat disaster on the Ohio River.
Its destruction -which came with no warning to passengers, crew or on shore observers -brought congressional attention to the danger of steamboat travel.
Despite a new federal law and technical improvements, there were more than 20 explosions or accidents on the Ohio River in the 30 years following the Moselle's demise.
Thirty-three crashes were reported on the Ohio in the 1860-1869 period.
The accident has been called the worst head-on collision on the river, although the death toll is uncertain.
The uncertainty was because ""no passenger lists were kept at the offices of the company,"" said the Hamilton Telegraph.
It happened about 11:30m. as the America, built in Cincinnati in 1867, and the United States, launched in Cincinnati in 1865, attempted to pass opposite the mouth of Bryant's Creek near Florence, Ind., and opposite Warsaw, Ky.
Some believe the whistles overlapped, which may have caused confusion in at least one pilothouse.
It is possible the customary signals came too late to avoid a collision.
Another factor could have been that one of the boats was in the hands of an inexperienced pilot.
Whatever the cause, the America's steel helm plowed into the United States, puncturing the cargo area.
Spilled coal oil and whiskey quickly ignited and wind helped spread the fire.
The United States burned and sank with at least 70 passengers perishing in the rapidly spreading flames or drowning in the cold river.
On the Indiana shore, Eli Rayl and his wife converted their home into a hospital for shivering survivors.
Later, a lighthouse was erected at Rayl's Landing near the disaster site, misnamed ""Rail's"" Light by the Coast Guard's lighthouse service.
Most Americans who watched or heard that speech recall it as the most terrifying moment of the Cold War.
Cuba had been under a communist government since Fidel Castro took power in 1959.
Soviet officials had denied plans to place offensive weapons in Cuba, 90 miles from the United States.
Air Force U-2 reconnaissance planes confirmed bases were being built for intermediate-range missiles.
He publicly announced details of the dangerous situation in his Oct. address.
If war developed in October 1962, it was assumed Butler County would be hit.
The county's top military target was the Oxford missile base, north of U S. 27, off Todd Road, about two miles west of Oxford.
Missiles had been ready there in four underground launching silos since 1960.
It was one of four missile bases that defended the Greater Cincinnati area until 1970.
While U.S.-Soviet negotiations continued, additional training was ordered for local members of the Ohio National Guard and reserve units, and military personnel on furlough were recalled.
Civilians also were on alert, paying close attention to every aircraft flying over the area.
Some local businesses, industries and institutions took special precautions, including disaster drills designed for Cold War situations.
Despite international tension, scheduled events continued in the Hamilton area -including the United Way campaign, Civic Theater rehearsals, preparations for Halloween trick or treat, high school football games, homecoming dances and campaigning for the November election.
The missile was trucked to Oxford from Wright-Patterson Air Force Base under sponsorship of Miami's Air Force ROTC unit.
Most inquiries concerned articles that should be placed in private shelters and, for those who hadn't acted earlier, how to improvise shelters.
Other buildings had been approved, but owners hadn't completed the paper work to become public shelters.
Oct., 1962 -six days after President Kennedy's dramatic speech -the nuclear showdown ended.
That day Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the offensive missiles and medium range bombers being assembled in Cuba.
Later, it was estimated the U S. was ready with more than 25,000 nuclear weapons, about twice the Soviet number.
There's no sign declaring it a museum, and thousands of people pass it every day without recognizing it as such.
Some who patronize it, don't realize it is a functional, interactive piece of automotive history.
If you've been driving only a few years, you're not likely to appreciate it as a unique throwback to the 1960s.
Day's Sunoco, 1275 Main St., at Westbrook Drive, is believed to be one of the few, if not the only surviving full-service station in the area, open seven days a week, 6m. until midnight.
Today it is officially Day Son Inc., the name reflecting that it has become a family business in recent years.
Besides filling your gas tank, you can have the air in your tires checked, have the vehicle lubricated and serviced, get help with automotive problems, buy tires, use the restroom and obtain directions.
About the only things missing from a stop at Day's in the 1960s are free road maps and trading stamps earned with a purchase.
You can buy candy, gum, soft drinks, potato chips, other snacks and cigarettes.
As in the 1960s, don't expect to buy beer, bread, milk, ice cream, groceries and the impulse items that temp you in the convenience store super stations, where their workers specialize in operating the cash register and selling lottery tickets.
At Day's station, the 10 employees actually know something about the automotive business.
When he started, Day said, the average length of survival for independent station owners was three months.
A check of Williams' Hamilton city directories shows the local casualties.
Day also credits his relationship with Sunoco as a factor in enabling him to continue to operate a 1960s-style full-service station instead of a big store that also has gas pumps.
The 1970s was an era of many changes in the service station business, starting with the 1973 oil shortage.
Day's offers self-service and pay at the pump, but employees will still pump gas for customers.
Another change since Day opened more than 44 years ago was the switch from leaded to unleaded gasoline.
