This was because key developments in the crisis, including its final resolution, turned on messages from the Soviet President Khrushchev to the American President John F Kennedy , which were broadcast directly and publicly over Radio Moscow.
These were translated immediately by the monitors at Caversham and transmitted by teleprinter not just to the British government departments in London but to the White House and United States government agencies in Washington.
This was done via the American Foreign Broadcast Information Unit – the Americans had maintained a presence at Caversham since the Second World War.
In 1962, there was still no telephone hotline between the governments in Washington and Moscow and diplomatic channels which depended on ciphered telegrams were extremely slow and cumbersome.
During the final weekend of the crisis speed of communication was absolutely vital.
The time difference between Moscow and Washington (which was between seven and eight hours) was another factor that hindered communications and contributed to the tension and exhaustion of the protagonists.
In 1962 Radio Moscow broadcast both domestically and abroad in a wide range of different languages, and during the Cold War it was a vital source of information about all aspects of the Soviet Union, from changes in the direction of government foreign policy to the domestic details of daily life.
The BBC had no radio correspondent in Moscow until 1963 so the Monitoring Service at Caversham was crucial in keeping the British public informed of developments.
Its output in Spanish for Cuba went up tenfold 1 All the monitoring transcripts give times of broadcasts as GMT but it is important to note that summer time ended in both the UK and the United States overnight on 27/28 October. 1 from seven to seventy hours a week.
It also made a number of unscheduled broadcasts not only in English but also in French, Spanish and German.
It was midnight in Britain but the BBC light programme stayed on air to broadcast it live.
Henceforth it would be American policy to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the western hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States requiring a full retaliatory response on the Soviet Union.
He announced that there would be a ‘strict quarantine’ on any military equipment to Cuba which would be enforced by the United States and called for immediate meetings of the UN Security Council and the Organisation of American States.
From the moment of this broadcast the American and British public and people in all countries with an open media were consumed with anxiety.
The BBC followed every development in the crisis to the best of its ability.
In the Soviet Union, in contrast, the public mood was very different and there was nothing like the level of alarm and agitation felt in America, Britain and other European countries.
Sir Frank Roberts, the British Ambassador to Moscow, reported that the Moscow public were much less excited and apprehensive than they had been during the Berlin crisis a year earlier.
There was no run on the shops and no visible signs of nervousness or tension among the people on the streets.
While there was some ‘quiet apprehension’ among the domestic staff at the embassy, other acquaintances reflected the unalarmed picture presented by Soviet leaders.
The Soviet Union was presented as taking the lead in international diplomacy at the United Nations.
The Soviet government completely controlled the news outlets so they could withhold information, or simply impose a short delay on its release.
This produced an atmosphere entirely different from that in the west and the news was managed in such a way that the crisis was not fully evident to the Soviet public until the danger had passed.
For example, Kennedy’s broadcast and the announcement of a naval blockade around Cuba was not reported until 13.00 GMT on Tuesday 23 October.
It affirmed Soviet support for the United Nations Charter and called on all governments and peoples to protest against the aggressive actions of the United States.
This must have indicated that there was some problem but was followed later the same evening by an announcement that Khrushchev had proposed an international summit meeting which was designed to have a calming effect.
There were also numerous references to Khrushchev and other leaders attending theatrical and musical performances, including fortuitously one given by a Cuban orchestra, which were clearly intended to produce an impression of business as usual.
One theme which emerges strongly from the Radio Moscow news reports is the emphasis placed on widespread protests throughout the world against American imperialist aggression.
B.68, October 1962. 3 and demonstrations in London were given particular prominence.
On Thursday 25 October at 19.00 GMT there was a report from London on the trial of pro-Cuban demonstrators who had been arrested outside the United States embassy.
Cuba was portrayed as a revolutionary beacon which required solidarity from the equally, if not more, indomitable Soviet people.
For example, as the crisis reached its height on Saturday 27 October the lead item noted again from the previous day the 470th anniversary of the discovery of Cuba, not usually a landmark on the Soviet horizon.
It would like not only to blockade the island, but even perhaps completely to supress it.
The next mentions of Cuba were much further down the running order and then the focus was on protests in Paris outside the American embassy, a Tanganyika paper that had condemned United States action and news that there had been demonstrations against United States actions in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
Just how vital the role of radio was during the crisis is underlined by the extremely slow and cumbersome nature of official diplomatic communications.
This was evident on Friday 26 October when Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message in an attempt to reach a deal.
This was a long, verbose and emotional letter in which Khrushchev talked of the horrific dangers of nuclear war and said that if it were to break out neither of them would have the power to stop it.
The embassy staff then had to translate the letter and put it into cipher, then send it to the State Department in Washington where it was decoded and typed up.
To speed things up the American embassy divided the letter into four sections which arrived out of order in Washington so that the final part was not ready until after 9pm Washington time on Friday evening, almost 12 hours after it had been first delivered to the United States Embassy in Moscow.
Khrushchev’s Friday message to Kennedy led the United States administration to believe that he was offering to withdraw the missiles from Cuba.
But then on Saturday 27 October, known as ‘Black Saturday’, there was a further move by Khrushchev which dashed that hope.
At 14.00 GMT the Soviet radio and television networks were aligned and the announcer on Radio Moscow proclaimed that they were transmitting a message from the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers to the President of the USA, copied to the acting Secretary General of the United Nations, U Thant.
It was a very long statement and the monitors translating and editing process is visible on the transcript.
The Soviet Union would also promise to respect the frontiers and sovereignty of Turkey if the US would pledge the same and promise not to invade Cuba.
This broadcast was made at 10am Washington time and the President and his advisers were meeting in ExComm, the special committee managing the crisis, as the message came through from FBIS at 10.18am.
So the contrast between this immediacy and the length of time it had taken the Friday telegram to arrive is stark.
This was the first time that Khrushchev had publicly admitted that there were Soviet missiles in Cuba.
He still protested that they were for defensive purposes, but in acknowledging that the United States saw them as offensive he appeared to be moving towards trying to achieve a deal.
But this announcement caused consternation in Washington because it publicly linked any withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba with an equivalent withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
We now know that the obsolete Jupiter missiles, described by Robert McNamara, US Secretary of Defense, as a ‘pile of junk’, were in fact already the subject of secret negotiations between Washington and Moscow, but that was not known at the time when the American public stance was that there had to be an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Soviet missiles.
This new position of Khrushchev’s seemed eminently reasonable and there was consternation that it would go down well with international public opinion and put the United States on the back foot.
The news of Khrushchev’s offer on Radio Moscow at 14.05 GMT was broadcast almost immediately around the world.
By the time the Presidium of the Soviet Union met at 10am on the morning of Sunday 28 October at Khrushchev’s country dacha outside Moscow their anxiety was acute.
Kennedy had replied publicly to Khrushchev and stated that he would not invade Cuba and that he would end the naval blockade if the Soviet missiles were withdrawn.
But Kennedy had ignored the difference in substance between the Friday diplomatic telegram and the Saturday radio broadcast and made no mention of the offer of a deal on the Turkish missiles.
Although Kennedy’s reply was released to the press to avoid the long delay in diplomatic communications, it was not reported on Radio Moscow until the next afternoon.
An American U2 reconnaissance plane had been shot down over Cuba and the pilot killed.
Moscow believed that the Pentagon wanted air strikes against Cuba to begin on Monday.
Reports had also come through from Soviet intelligence sources in the United States that Kennedy was to go on television to make an important announcement at 9am Washington time on Sunday.
It was expected to say that the United States was about to bomb the missile bases and attack Cuba.
Khrushchev had already prepared the Presidium for a tactical retreat and depicted the American promise not to invade Cuba as a great triumph for Soviet diplomacy.
But these latest developments were extremely alarming and to save time Khrushchev decided that his response to Kennedy had to be transmitted publicly by radio rather than by coded cable.
His style was particularly blunt, rambling and disjointed and had to be worked on by Soviet officials to bring it into the acceptable language and bureaucratic style of international diplomacy.
According to one account the car raced along at breakneck speed and was recognised as a Kremlin limousine and waved through by the traffic policeman.
The final phrase of the broadcast was widely paraphrased when it became known as ‘crate and return’.19 In Washington it was just 9.08am, when the news started to come through on the FBIS teleprinter.
McGeorge Bundy, the President’s security adviser, instantly rang Kennedy who was getting ready to go to church.
A further news flash thirty minutes later confirmed that Khrushchev was not making any conditions.
This was greeted with huge relief in Washington, and in London where Harold Macmillan and some of his ministers met at Admiralty House.
There is some evidence (although it is not definitive) that he had planned to call a Cabinet meeting for the Sunday afternoon where a move to the Precautionary Stage, the military and official preparations for nuclear war, would be on the agenda.
When Macmillan says the news came by radio it does not mean that ministers and officials were clustered round the wireless.
Monitoring was also vital in keeping the British public informed of developments in the Soviet Union.
As previously noted, the BBC had no correspondent in Moscow at this time, so the BBC newsrooms and other programmes in London relied on Caversham for information on important developments.
While the archive does not give us much on the thought processes behind the translating or editing process, or any details of exactly how the American FBIS unit operated at Caversham, the transcripts do nonetheless offer a few interesting clues on these topics.
One is the Radio Moscow report of Kennedy’s reply to Khrushchev on Sunday 28 October, which has the note ‘checked against Reuter and found identical’.24 It shows that the Monitors must have checked that Radio Moscow was actually broadcasting an accurate account, that it must have been part of their job to do that.
But what the full archive of BBC Monitoring gives us is much more detail and context.
The detailed running order of the news bulletins means that we know what the Russian people were told, and crucially not told, as well as exactly when they were told it.
The verbatim record of these broadcasts, with their archaic language and quotidian details of daily life, enables us to build up a much richer and more comprehensive picture of the Soviet interpretation of the crisis.
It transports us, as nothing else can do, directly into the mindset of the Soviet Union at the most dangerous moment of the Cold War.
