HomeAbout Comments Policy RSS Feeds To Russia with… Respect February 20, 2014 With worldwide sports audiences focused on television and Internet stories from the 2014 winter games in Sochi, Russia, we are all learning more about this fascinating country.
America has had a long and complex history of relations with Russia, from both the Soviet Union era and now as the Russian Federation.
From allies to adversaries—and sometimes both at the same time— the United States and Russia have covered the gamut of different roles over the centuries.
World War II Russia’s role as both an adversary and an ally during the Second World War lays the foundation for its complicated but critical relationship with the rest of the world today.
But its historic triumph over its former ally, Nazi Germany, is a feat still studied and admired today.
Decision in the East , the planning and execution of the German offensive against Russia in 1941-1942 are reviewed.
The German Defeat in the East describes the German defeat by the Russians in World War II and the events that resulted in the Soviet Union becoming a dominant military power in Europe.
The Soviet Union, the Warsaw Pact and the Cold War In response to West Germany’s inclusion in NATO and reflecting Soviet leadership’s desire to maintain control over military forces in Central and Eastern Europe, the Warsaw Pact was signed in May 1955 in Warsaw, Poland, as a mutual defense treaty between eight Cold War communist states of Central and Eastern Europe.
Warsaw Pact members included the U.S.S.R. plus Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovak Republic, German Democratic Republic , Hungary, Poland, and Romania.
Soviet military planning for conflict in Europe after World War II from the outset harnessed East European military capabilities to Soviet military purposes.
Instruments of Soviet Control whose book and accompanying DVD include a wealth of newly declassified Central Intelligence Agency documents covering the Warsaw Pact period.
Soviet-East European Military Relations in Historical Perspective; Sources and Reassessments , is a collection of hundreds of recently declassified documents designed to take stock of where we are twenty years after the collapse of East European Communism.
It includes sensitive Soviet and Warsaw Pact military journals from 1961 to 1984, recently uncovered in newly opened archives across former Warsaw Pact nations, providing a view into Warsaw Pact military strategy.
At the conclusion of World War 2, the Soviet Union was a major player in the world and again an adversary.
It was referred to as a “cold” war because there were no major world wars or direct conflicts between the two sides, although there were significant regional wars in Korea and Vietnam.
Essays on CIA’s Analysis of the Soviet Union focuses on the organizational evolution of the CIA’s analysis of the Soviet economic, political, military, and scientific and technological developments during the Cold War.
Interestingly, it also assesses the extent to which Western analyses of the Soviet Union may have influenced the USSR’s policy making process.
In addition to watching the West, Soviet leadership had a constant struggle to keep its own member states in line, particularly as some began to chafe under the communist system.
Under Dubcek, the Czech communist leadership had embarked on a radical program of dramatic liberalization of the Czechoslovak political, economic, and social order that was not approved by Moscow.
The CIA and Strategic Warning; The 1968 Soviet-Led Invasion of Czechoslovakia , the Central Intelligence Agency’s Information Management Services reviewed, redacted, and released hundreds of documents related to the 1968 Czechoslovak-Soviet crisis, creating this fascinating book.
Détente Era During the period of 1967 to 1979, there was an easing of Cold War tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Referred to as détente, the era was a time of increased trade and cooperation with the Soviet Union and the signing of the SALT treaties, but relations cooled again with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan until the fall of the Soviet Union and the founding of the Russian Federation.
With a foreword by Henry A Kissinger, this unprecedented joint documentary publication presents the formerly top-secret record of how the United States and Soviet Union moved from Cold War to détente during 1969 to 1972.
Published side-by side are both the United States and Soviet accounts of meetings between Henry Kissinger and Soviet Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin, the so-called Kissinger-Dobrynin confidential back channel, related documents, and the full Soviet and United States record of the first Moscow Summit between President Richard Nixon and Soviet Secretary General Leonid Brezhnev.
The Soviet documents are being released in the volume for the first time anywhere.
One of the crowning achievements of Russia and the Soviet Union has been its space program.
From the launching of Sputnik that triggered the space race to participation in the International Space Station, Russians are justifiably proud of their “stellar” accomplishments.
In this book translated from its original Russian version to English, the famous Russian spacecraft designer Boris Chertok— who worked under the legendary Sergey Korolev— continues his fascinating memoirs about the history of the Soviet space program, this time covering 1968 to 1974, the peak years of the Soviet human lunar program.
The Russian Federation Today, Russia or the Russian Federation continues to be a major power, politically, militarily and economically.
But since the breakup of the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation has continued to have issues with insurgencies and disagreements among its population.
Tanks in the Cities provides an up-to-date analysis of the utility of tanks and heavy armored forces in urban combat from across the world, and includes an analysis of the Russian use of tanks in quelling the insurgency in the Chechen Republic in 1995.
No longer a communist nation, Russia today still has a number of social welfare programs that differ from the rest of Europe.
Europe 2012, Russian social security programs are analyzed and compared to other nations in Europe.
Essays in Memory of Mary FitzGerald includes essays by top United States and Russian analysts to assess current Russian military thinking on warfare, giving insight into the Russia of today.
They say one must study history to understand where we are today and where we are heading.
This listing is just a smattering of the many thoughtful publications about Russia and the Soviet Union that can add to your understanding of where this major power has been, where it is today and perhaps, where it might go in the future.
Search for one of these publications in a nearby Federal depository library.
