Vietcong with North Vietnamese support attacked South Vietnamese government.
United States intervened to stop fall of a ""row of dominoes"" to Communism.
Highlights were the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution , Tet Offensive and the Fall of Saigon in 1975.
Tet Offensive: In 1968, the Vietcong launched a massive offensive throughout South Vietnam, seizing many major cities, including the capital city of Saigon.
At the same time, Nixon increased American bombing of North Vietnam and provided military aid to South Vietnam.
After President Nixon introduced Vietnamization, American forces were gradually reduced.
By 1975, what remained of the South Vietnamese Army was incapable of preventing the advance of the North Vietnamese.
Silent Majority President Nixon and Vice President Spiro Agnew insisted that most Americans still supported the war.
Anti-war Movement Nowhere was this discontent more evident than among young Americans who objected to the country's involvement in Vietnam.
The anti-war movement greatly influenced United States military policy.
Explain constitutional issues raised by federal government policy changes during times of significant events 26th Amendment lowered the voting age to 18.
In 1964, Johnson announced that the North Vietnamese had attacked United States ships in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin.
In both Korea and Vietnam, Presidents had sent American troops into extended combat without first obtaining a declaration of war from Congress.
Discuss the importance of Congressional Medal of Honor recipient Roy Benavidez In May 1968, Roy Benavidez, facing constant enemy fire, carried wounded members of his platoon to rescue-helicopters.
At first, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his heroism When the full story of his daring became known, Benavidez was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor by President Ronald Reagan in 1981.
The exiles invading the Bay of Pigs had been instructed to say they were acting independently, but disobeyed their orders.
In October 1962, Kennedy gathered a group of his top officials to form a special committee in the White House.
In good decision-making, one examines all of the alternatives and weighs the pros and cons of each option.
Explain reasons and outcomes for United States involvement in foreign countries and their relationship to the Domino Theory, including the Vietnam War President Eisenhower had suggested that the fall of French Indochina might create a ""domino"" effect.
In South Korea, a non-Communist state was established with an elected government.
In 1950, North Korean forces invaded South Korea in an attempt to unify the country under Communist rule.
Stalin felt that Americans would not care enough to become involved in the conflict.
He immediately decided to oppose the North Koreans rather than giving in.
Truman ordered United States forces into South Korea to resist the invasion.
The Soviet Union had recently walked out of the United Nations in a protest, so the United States was able to pass a resolution sending United Nations troops, mostly United States soldiers, to South Korea.
This action marked the first time an international peace organization successfully used military force to halt aggression.
After the Geneva Conference, the United States replaced France as South Vietnam's principal supporter.
What types of scientific discoveries in the 1950s improved the standard of living in the United States The post-war period saw many advances in medicine.
The success of antibiotics in treating infections gave new hopes for cures.
In 1953, Jonas Salk developed the first vaccine for polio, a disease that attacks the central nervous system and can cause paralysis or death.
He tested it on himself and his family before setting up a field test with almost two million volunteers.
Other medical advances during this period included a measles vaccine, the first heart transplant, and the discovery of streptomycin, an antibiotic to treat tuberculosis.
Evaluate the contributions of significant political leaders in the United States such as Barry Goldwater In 1964, Barry Goldwater , a Senator from Arizona, won the_______ Republican nomination for President.
In the 1960s, literature also became much more open in its treatment of human consciousness and sexuality.
In the early 1960s, the Motown Sound from Detroit, with African-American artists like the Temptations, the Four Tops, and the Supremes, swept the nation.
Aided President Nixon in adopting the policy of Vietnamization where the army of South Vietnam gradually took over the brunt of the fighting against the Vietcong and North Vietnamese Army, allowing the withdrawal of United States forces.
These included the Job Corps, to train underprivileged youths, and a domestic ""Peace Corps"" to help in depressed areas.
This act ended poll taxes, suspended literacy tests where they were used to prevent African Americans form voting, and led to a substantial increase in the number of African-American voters.
A joint federal and state program that helps low-income individuals or families pay for the costs associated with long-term medical and custodial care, provided they qualify.
Although largely funded by the federal government, Medicaid is run by the state where coverage may vary.
Social Security was expanded to provide medical care, hospital insurance, and post-hospital nursing for people over age 65.
