By Arturo Lopez-Levy | October 31, 2012 “When I saw the rockets being fired at Mario’s house, I swore to myself that the Americans would pay dearly for what they are doing.
Following this logic, not only communism, but most types of nationalism were considered anathema to Ike Eisenhower’s Washington.
In January 1959, the revolutionary army entered Havana and Fidel Castro became the most popular Cuban leader in history.
In less than 72 hours, Fidel Castro and his followers had defeated the U.S.-trained force.
By the end of 1961, Castro’s only choice was to prepare for a fight against an invasion by American troops.
Khrushchev doubled down on Castro’s petition and proposed the installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba as a way to change the global nuclear balance and prevent any United States military “adventure” against Cuba.
Kennedy declared that the United States would not tolerate any action of this kind in the Western Hemisphere.
When the United States discovered the weapons, the nature of the conflict changed.
Confronted with this reality, Kennedy was forced to choose between appeasement and resisting the menace.
As the noted Yale historian Donald Kagan has argued, reputation and honor have a place in the calculations of national power.
The crisis of the missiles in Cuba was a test of the United States’ resolve to face all risks and stand against Soviet adventurism.
The specter of Munich 1938 weighed in the analysis of all policymakers.
Even scholars as prestigious as James Blight appeared in a video psychoanalyzing Fidel and presenting his attitude as a simplistic continuation of a children’s game of crashing bikes against a wall that he is said to have played in his high school years.
Kennedy and Khrushchev ultimately saved the world from a nuclear cataclysm.
But although the Obama administration has taken some minimal steps toward engagement, the necessary presidential leadership has been absent from the Cuban issue.
It was Obama who once advocated a policy of dialogue with Raul Castro and other adversaries not as appeasement but as a proper tool to promote American interests in the world.
Although the president has largely backed away from this policy, nothing positive can be expected from Mitt Romney, whose policy towards Cuba consists largely of kowtowing to the property claims and narrow interests of a hard right-wing segment of the Cuban exile community.
There is evidence that Kennedy began to explore an accommodation of Cuban nationalism if the Cuban regime was willing not to ally with United States enemies elsewhere.
He is Cuban-American and writes frequently about Cuban issues and U.S.-Cuba relations.
