Also, USA had recently tested an atomic bomb and had a new President Truman, who was more anti-communist.
Germany divided in 1945, split into France, USA, USSR and Britain sectors.
March 1946 14 of 70 Explain the ""Iron Curtain"" 9 months after potsdam Stalin dominated most E.Europe,making allies wary, as com.countries in east &cap.countries in west being split.
Britain and USA worried about how much control Stalin had , Truman saw it as an attempt to spread communism by stalin and viewed it as a potential threat. 21 of 70 explain the Greek civil war.
After ww2 there was a civil war with royalists & communists, as communists wanted to enforce communism in Greece.
In places where communism threatened to takeover, America promised to stop them doing so against the country's will.
The truman doctrine said that america would send money, supplies and aid to any country under communist threat who needed it.
JUne 1948 France USA and Britain joined their zones as had similar ideas, and created a new currency which they said would help trade.
Stalin saw the currency change as a threat & next day cut off all road&rail links to West.
Wasn't told about currency change or election plans, so became suspicious of the West.
Nato was important as it proved the United States was committed to protecting and defending West Europe.
MAD was an agreement between the USSR and USA that said if one of them launched an attack, there would be an immediate response, causing the destruction of each country.
Khrushchev signed a trade agreement giving Cuab 100mil in economic aid.
Castro was suspicious of America and asked USSR for help, khrushchev sent them soldiers, arms and supplies.
No, as they were aware it was purely defensive after having just been attacked by America.
However, were worried Russia may supply them nuclear missiles, allowing them perfect access to america.
USA had greater nuclear power could easily destroy them, but didn't wanna look weak.) air attack:destroy missiles before use, but can't guarantee complete destruction & would induce retaliation.
Khrushchev sent letter to Kennedy:would dismantle missiles if didn't attack Cuba.
Before Kennedy replied, sent 2nd letter &demands remove missiles in Turkey, u2 shot down same day.
USA had more long range missiles than them, by putting in Cuba easy access and restores nuclear balance.
Secuirty & independence of Cuba guaranteed & missiles removed from turkey.
The Origins of the Cold War 5. / 5 based on 3 ratings GCSE HISTORY COURSE PLANNER 0.
