All major areas of legal considerations are discussed, including both an American and Soviet perspective.
An analysis of the American approach to the crisis exemplifies the participation of various departments of the Executive )branch, Congress, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, and the President.
The approach by the Soviet Union in justifying the deployment of offensive nuclear weapons and the Kremlin's objection to the U S. quarantine of Cuba were influenced by legal considerations.
The time period that this study encompasses is August 1962 through October 1962, a period much'longer than is usually associated with the crisis.
There had been repeated warnings by the United States that such weapons would not be tolerated.
Following recurrent assurances by the Soviet Union that only defensive weapons would be introduced, Major Rudolph Anderson, flying a U-2 long-range reconnaissance mission on October 14, photographed the evidence of emplacement of offensive missiles in Cuba.
Immediately upon receiving the news of the developing situation, the President summoned a group of close advisers.
This group, later to be offiscially named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , met almost continuously from October 16 to 28.
The decision of the United States to blockade--quarantine--the Cuban coastline was reached.
And on October 28, the Soviet Union capitulated to the American demand.
Most often, this period serves as the parameter in which the Missile Crisis is discussed.
Several in-depth studies 1 2 of the period have been written by men who held government positions as well as others who did not possess that vantage point.
This study, however, does not confine itself to this thirteen-day period, for the influence of international legal considerations was not confined to so short a time.
Chapter IV illustrates the legal influences on the President and the members of the ExCom as demonstrated by them between October 16 and 28.
Chapter VI examines the disagreement between Congress, noted journalists, and President Kennedy regarding the interpretation of an important international legal principle based on the Monroe Doctrine.
But it would seem that nations are not impervious to legal considerations in their dealings in international crisis situations.
Yet, there are those who make this contention, 3 a contention which seems shallow in light of the evidence presented in this study.
One must understand that ""international law is not a set of fixed, selfdefining categories of permissible and prohibited conduct.
This study makes no effort to construct a legal theory that indicts or exonerates either the United States or the Soviet Union for their chosen courses of action.
That task is left to those legal scholars who desire to answer such questions.
It was determined in a world susceptible to destruction by the men making the decisions.
Yet, these men were influenced by.legal considerations as they contemplated their decisions in attempting to prevent the world from being destroyed.
Congress a period of vigorous and decisive debate pertinent to the Soviet buildup of armaments and technicians in Cuba.
This period was the culmination of the discussion in Congress, which had begun much earlier, of the Cuban situation.
Critics of the Kennedy administration maintained scrutinizing vigilance on the apparent Castro-Khrushchev alliance from the moment John Kennedy took office as President of the United States.
Although adequate support for the resolution was lacking at that time, such was not to be the case in September, 1962.
Though the debate touched on a variety of topics,2 this examination will concentrate on the points where international law entered the discussion and the effect international legal considerations had on the adoption of the resolution.
Also, this chapter will observe President Kennedy's position toward the Soviet military buildup in Cuba.
The opposition to the President's position played a key role in the debate over Senate Joint Resolution 230.
On September 13, President Kennedy clarified for everyone, including Congress and the Soviet Union, his position on the Communist military buildup in Cuba.
If at any time the Communist buildup in Cuba were to endanger or interfere with our security in any way, . . . or if Cuba should ever attempt to export its aggressive purposes by force or the threat of force against any nation in this hemisphere, or become an offensive military base of significant capacity for the Soviet Union, then this country will do whatever must be done to protect its own security and that of its allies.
The President had made it clear that this country would act, but not until the material in Cuba constituted an offensive capability.
Some Congressmen believed that the weapons and personnel already present in Cuba constituted a threat to the security of the U S. and the Western Hemisphere.
Soviet military technicians numbered 3,500, and the European power had supplied Cuba with Mig jet fighters, T-34 and 35-ton tanks, JS-2 51-ton tanks, and field and anti-aircraft artillery.
Patrol vessels and torpedo boats were equipped with guided missile launchers having a range of fifteen miles.
Senator Kenneth Keating adamantly rejected the President's distinction between offensive and defensive weapons, labeling such differentiation as ""dangerous and unrealistic.
The shipments of arms and technicians had not worried Senator Keating as much as had the thought of complete Soviet takeover of Cuba.
If he doesn't do exactly what they want him to do they will take him out and put somebody else in.,, 5 4 U S., Congress, Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Armed Services, Situation in Cuba, Hearings, 87th Cong., 2nd sess., September 17, 1962, 7.
There were many criticisms of the administration's policy, and one predominated.
Within this predominant criticism, the President was portrayed as the great violator of one of the most sacred principles of international law.
Simply by allowing Soviet extension'into a portion of this hemisphere--for offensive or defensive purposes is irrelevant to the matter--President Kennedy had irresponsibly disregarded the Doctrine put forth by President Monroe in 1823.
The President's critics were prepared to publicly castigate him for this dastardly neglect.
There were many who believed that the cautious path upon which the President had embarked was the proper course to follow at the time.
The Senate passed the Joint Resolution on September 20 by the vote of 86 to 1.
Presidential critics, however, desired that the Resolution's purpose be to pressure the President into taking strong immediate action.
By encouraging the President to do whatever may be necessary, ""Including the use of arms, Congress had knowingly consented to the imposition of a blockade, if the President should choose to follow that course.
The concept of using a blockade as a solution to the Missile Crisis was not originated during the meetings of the ExCom.
Upon reading the major accounts of the Missile Crisis, one may be left with the erroneous impression that someone simply mentioned blockade as a possible solution on Wednesday, October 17.
However, Congress cannot be credited with the idea of imposing a blockade in this particular situation any more than the ExCom can.
As shall be demonstrated later, another source, one which played a far greater role than is commonly understood in the Missile Crisis, had much to do with the development of that idea.
The time spent on debate is no indication of the degree in depth with which blockade was discussed.
Should it have been otherwise, one would have been well schooled in the principles of blockade under international law.
Instead, it seemed as if some members of Congress knew little about the subject they were discussing and even less about the implications of the act of blockading.
The High Seas The cry heard most often was that blockade would constitute ""an act of war ., 15 Usually, nothing followed these pronouncements which would indicate why or under what circumstances or under what international legal concepts a blockade would be an act of war.
Senator Wayne Morse , on the other hand, during his questioning of Senator Keating on September 17, hinted that there existed an international legal concept pertinent to the high seas in general.
John Colombos defined the high seas as ""the sea beyond the limits of territorial jurisdiction.
David McKay Company, Inc., 1967), 47. 12 one perspective, the legal basis of the doctrine of freedom of the high seas is explained by the concept res nullius, ""belonging to nobody.
The term high seas may be said to refer, in international law, to those waters which are outside of the exclusive control of any state or any group of states, and hence, not regarded as belonging to the territory of any of them.
The ocean, until it envelopes the shores of a littoral state and constitutes its maritime belt, is not a part of the domain of any territorial sovereign.
According to another viewpoint, the high sea represents that which is common to everyone,"" res communis.
Further, Article XIII provides that ""no state or group of states may claim any right of sovereignty, privilege or prerogative over any portion of the high seas or place any obstacle to the free and full use of the seas.-""21 This concept of the freedom of the seas is not outdated nor governed by archaic agreements.
That which was agreed on at the Vienna Conference of 1926 was reiterated in 1958 at the United Nations Conference on the Freedom of the Seas.
The high seas being open to all nations, no State may validly purport to subject any part of them to its sovereignty.
Freedom of the high seas is exercised under the conditions laid down by these articles and by the other rules of international law.
These freedoms, and others which are recognized by the general principles of international law, shall be exercised by all States with reasonable regard to the interests of other States in their exercise of freedom of the high seas.
An Act of War While some members of Congress proclaimed that the imposition of a blockade constituted an act of war, they offered little information to substantiate 21""Laws of Maritime Jurisdiction in Time of Peace, "" Reports of the Conference Held by the International Law Association, 1926, 101.
Senator John Cooper noted that blockade implied a state of belligerency, i.e., state of war.
Blockade, he noted, would be an act of aggression, and, therefore, an act of war under international law.
The analysis presented here will be placed within the context of certain principles of international law.
When the coast represented the besieged place, the sea depicted the line of investment.
Defining blockade in basic terms, one finds that it ""is a belligerent operation intended to prevent vessels of all states from entering or leaving 23 Besides Senators Cooper and Morse who are mentioned in this chapter of thesis, others supported this view.
Before the First World War, the U S. maintained it would not recognize a blockade under any circumstances unless a state of war existed.
He held firm to the position that a blockade of Siberian ports by the Japanese would not be recognized as legal unless a state of war existed between the Soviet Union and Japan.
The thought of blockading Red China in 1954 was labeled a resort to war by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles.
In the traditional sense, and in light of the official U S. position throughout history, those Congressional leaders who advocated that blockade was an act of war were correct.
Article 5 of the Declaration of London, 1909, stipulated that ""a blockade must be applied impartially to the ships of all nations.
Before the Declaration of London, the stipulation of impartiality was recognized in Great Britain by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
In 1855, in the case of The Franciska, the Right Honorable T Pemberton Leigh concurred that a blockade could not be considered legitimate if it conceded to either belligerent a freedom of commerce which had been denied to those states not engaged in war.
According to the Declaration of Paris, 1856, Article 4, ""blockades in order to be binding must be effective, that is to say, maintained by a force sufficient really to prevent access to the coast of the enemy.
If the blockaded state possesses paramount sea power, the effectiveness of the blockade cannot be maintained for any lengthy period of time and will no longer be considered binding.
However, the words of the afore mentioned three Articles should be interpreted with caution and not be taken literally.
One might be inclined to argue that if a single ship broke through a blockade, the effectiveness of that blockade would be questionable.
It would appear that no state would refuse to recognize a blockade on those grounds.
Practically, effectiveness is demonstrated when a blockade is supported and enforced by a sufficient number of vessels to quell communications and to pose a high risk of capture to ships attempting to run it.
Supreme Court demonstrated its agreement with the Declarations of Paris and London.
In the case of The Olinde Rodrigues, the Court concluded that the effectiveness of a blockade was a question of fact.
Furthermore, the fact of effectiveness was not dependent upon the number of warships employed in the maintenance of the blockaded area.
It is not practicable to define what degree of danger shall constitute a test of the efficiency and validity of a blockade.
If any part is defective, the entire declaration is void and another one must be affirmed.
Neutral powers must be notified of the blockade at the same time that the authorized representatives of the port or coastline under blockade are notified.
Not anAct of War Among all the clamor in Congress of blockade in conjunction with war emerged the counter argument that blockade was not an act of war.
Those who supported this view, as far as can be determined by the debate in Congress, were few in number.
Senator Keating interjected that there have been 3 6 United States Reports, Vol.
If not an established knowledge of international law, at least his presentation was organized and well-prepared.
Perhaps more important than having been prepared to defend his position, the Senator based his argument on twentieth century phenomena.
Those who contended that blockade was an act of war became too imprisoned by traditional concepts and arguments to expand their thoughts and analyses to the world order of the 1960's.
This is not to imply that Senator Miller's idea of a ""limited war material blockade,"" a pacific blockade, constituted something new and unihibited by tradition.
To the contrary, the pacific blockade principle is steeped in tradition, much as is that of the principle of blockade in time of war.
In the first half of the nineteenth century, it was generally felt that a war blockade might also be governed by the laws of peace.
The term ""pacific blockade"" refers to denying ships access to or egress from a foreign port or coast by a state's vessels.
Such action is pacific when the blockading state desires to remain at peace.
Peace is contingent, however, upon the response of the blockaded state.
The blockaded state must assess the blockading action as an act short of war, and thus not feel compelled to declare war on the blockading state for peace to remain.
Pacific blockade is subject to the same qualifications as is a belligerent blockade.
A pacific blockade differs only in respect to the absence of a state of war and in regard to third states or states not a party to the controversy.
The interference with vessels of third states while a pacific blockade is being imposed is not justified by international law.
Freedom of trade and commerce cannot be curtailed during the time of peace.
Of course, third states may themselves choose to limit the activity of their ships as a precautionary measure.
The U S. has consistently agreed with the concept of noninterference in the rights of neutral states upon the implementation of a pacific blockade.
In anticipation of a blockade of Venezuela in 1902 by Great Britain, Germany, and Italy, the U S. made it clear that action which might adversely affect neutral states would not be tolerated.
Again in 1916, as the Entente Powers prepared to blockade Greece, the U S. stressed that such action in the 42Digest of International Law, Vol.
VI, Hackworth, 157. 21 absence of a state of war must not interfere with the trading rights of neutral countries.
While Senator Miller's idea was a traditional one, his justifications for its use were supported in contemporary terms.
The failure to employ this type of approach in September, 1962, was precisely the failure of those Congressmen who contended that blockade was an act of war and could be nothing else.
Senator Miller utilized the nineteenth century concept of pacific blockade, while applying it to the context of twentieth century institutions and world order.
In advocating a pacific blockade, he contended that the question one must face was how would such a blockade be permissible under the United Nations Charter, particularly in respect to Paragraph 4 of Article 2 and Article 51.
Article 2, Paragraph 4, states, ""All members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
The ""threat or use of force"" by the U S. would not now violate this Article.
Charter is concerned with the right of self-defense--not simply self-defense in general, but self-defense in the event of an armed attack.
Nothing in the present charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs against a member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security . . . .46 With this Article in mind, Senator Miller asked whether a pacific blockade, an act of force under Article 2, Paragraph 4, was a means of self-defense under Article 51.
He contended that a limited blockade would not be contrary to this Article.
An armed attack literally would not have to occur before a sovereign state could act to defend itself.
In the present armament situation, he argued, no state could be expected to wait for an initial attack by one's adversary.
Some of the defeated insurgents sought and obtained refuge in the U S. where they endeavored to recruit Americans who were sympathetic to their cause and to regroup their forces.
However, before this relocation of men and arms took place, British troops crossed into American territory, seized the Caroline, and sent it over Niagara Falls.
Great Britain claimed that this action by British troops was a legitimate means of selfdefense, even though an actual attack in which the Caroline would have taken part had not occurred.
This claim of self-defense by the British Government received no argumentation from U S. officials.
S agreed that force could be used prior to or in the absence of an armed attack for the purpose of self-defense.
In discussing the principles of Webster's statement, McDougal and Feliciano have suggested that necessity and the proportionality of the response must be interpreted with reasonableness in each particular situation to secure the objective of self-defense.
His answers indicated that a ""war material blockade was not an act of war . . . emphasizing that this was particularly true when dealing with a country's political independence which had become a mere subdivision of the international Communist conspiracy.t51 Certainly international law did not serve as the focal point during the debate on Senate Joint Resolution 230.
It was not interjected in any great depth even in those areas where legal concepts had been discussed in the debate.
Although the concern for international law did not serve as the focal point of Congressional debate, it must be concluded that the concern over international legal concepts did play a role in the Resolution's adoption.
Congress recognized the existence of international legal concepts and understood that they must be reckoned with.
If the President or his advisers had confined themselves to that period of time, they might not have chosen so wise a course.
Furthermore, if President Kennedy had depended solely on his closest advisers for input, perhaps the decision reached would not have been the same.
Such a limited study deprives oneself of a thorough understanding of the crisis, particularly in regard to the role of international legal considerations and that of executive legal counsel closely associated with the crisis.
In the middle of August, the Department of Justice began preparing a legal memorandum pertinent to the Cuban situation.
It was soon followed by one prepared under the auspices of the Department of Defense.
It shall be the purpose of this chapter to discuss those memoranda and the role of the Government's legal advisers prior to the discovery, of offensive weapons in Cuba.
Also, Presidential policy will be traced to observe the influence of the legal advisers on the President.
The influence of legal considerations, or at least the acknowledgement by the administration that international legal criteria would have to be consulted, was explored much earlier.
In the middle of August, Attorney General Robert Kennedy approached Norbert Schlei, the newly commissioned Assistant Attorney General in the Office of Legal Counsel, and told him of the buildup of Soviet weapons and military technicians in Cuba.
Though Schlei was well aware of the increase of Soviet weapons and military technicians in Cuba, he probably did not know that the first task to be assigned to him at his new position would be as a participant in assessing what the U S. might do in what would be the most crucial problem the Kennedy Administration would face.
Robert Kennedy told Schlei that President Kennedy was contemplating the issuance of an official warning to the Soviet Union, a warning that would state unequivocally that the U S. would not tolerate the installation of long-range, offensive missiles in Cuba.
However, before this advance warning was issued, it was thought that a serious study should be undertaken to evaluate whether the U S., ""as a matter of international law, "" could take action to preclude the installation of long-range missiles in Cuba.
Schlei's letter indicated when and in what manner the President and the Attorney General were concerned with law in the ensuing situation.
Legal implications were explored before a warning to the Soviet Union was issued and while the U S. was in the process of formulating a policy.
It cannot be precisely determined from the information available whether it was the President or the Attorney General who first suggested that an international legal study should be pursued before a public warning was made to the Soviet Union.
First, the President might have instructed his brother to investigate how a warning should comply with international law.
Second, the Attorney General, upon hearing his brother indicate that he would issue an official warning to the Soviet Union specifying that long-range missiles in Cuba could not be acceptable to this country, might have suggested that before such a move was made a legal study should be pursued.
Understanding Robert Kennedy's position as Attorney General and his incessant concern with law, the latter seems more plausible.
An obligation would exist to have recourse first, if time should permit, to the procedures of collective security organizations of which the United States is a member.
The United States would further be obliged to confine any use of force to the least necessary to the end proposed.
Defensive action, it was noted, should be limited to the rule of proportionality.
In this instance, the U S. demanded that Great Britain show that it did not act unreasonably or excessively when British forces sent the Caroline over Niagara Falls.
Schlei recognized that this would place a strict limitation on U S. action, but it was felt that it would be unlawful to destroy the missile installations unless there was evidence that an actual attack was imminent.
One discouraging limitation, however, did not mean that it would be either difficult 2 Ibid.,p.8.
From such an analysis, different conclusions would likely evolve, some of which might indicate that the U S. would have to be cautious no matter what its decision was.
Neither the Charter of the United Nations nor the 'Charter of the Organization of American States prohibits unilateral preventive action in self-defense.
However, membership in either of these organizations carries with it an obligation to employ the organization's procedures, if possible, before taking unilateral action.
Pan American Union, Treaty Series, Charter of the Organization of American States, , 6.
That is, defensive action is justifiable if the ""territory or sovereignty or political independence of any American State"" is affected by ""an aggression"" or by ""any other fact or situation which might endanger the peace of America In answer to the Attorney General's request as to what specific course of action the U S. might engage, Schlei proffered one suggestion.
This procedure would assert the right to stop only those vessels transporting offensive weapons.
To reduce the possibility of any confrontation on the high seas, the U S. should offer to make inspections through its consular offices within the Soviet Union.
The concept of visit and search is not unprecedented in international law.
Principally, it is regarded as an act of war, but it can be exercised in time of peace, particularly as a means of self-defense.
When the Virginius sailed from Jamaica in 1875, she was transporting men and munitions to Cuban insurgents.
Many members of Congress viewed the picture in simplistic terms--a blockade was an act of war or it was not an act of war.
Certainly, Congress maintained the prerogative to debate in whatever manner it desired, including a judgment on the legality or illegality of a resultant action of one of its resolutions.
However, if the President plans to base any part of his decision on legal norms, he will seek advice from departmental legal counselors whose jobs entail legal thought.
It had been written for use in the preparation of a forthcoming statement by President Kennedy.
At this time, the Assistant Attorney General recalled, ""Bob proceeded to send copies . . . to various people in the government.
I know the President and Rusk got copies, and I believe McNamara and Dillon were also on the list.
In view of the distribution, I would guess Bundy and Allen Dulles were included.
However, Chayes corrects this by indicating that Schlei was referring to the Director of the CIA, John McCone.
All of the above mentioned people, except Dulles, were included in what was to be known as the ExCom.
On Labor Day, September 3, Nicholas Katzenbach, the Deputy Attorney General; Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State; and Robert Kennedy met to discuss this analysis.
This meeting may be labeled a harbinger of the meetings of the ExCom, not due primarily to the participants but because of the subject matter discussed.
The President Has a Policy The following day, September 4, a meeting was held at the White House to discuss the draft of a Presidential statement prepared by Schlei.
Those present included McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs; Edward Martin, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America; and Douglas Dillon, Secretary of the Treasury.
Other participants were Katzenbach, Schlei, Robert Kennedy, and high officials from the Central Intelligence Agency.
At his press conference on August 29, President Kennedy spoke with circumspection about the developing situation in Cuba.
As no evidence of the presence of troops was apparent, he stated that this country would maintain close surveillance of what might appear to be military activity.
Only six days later, September 4, the President issued a much stronger statement.
The movement from a cautious to a strong statement was not due to the discovery of further evidence of any missiles in Cuba, but was a result of the research conducted by the Department of Justice.
I 34 hardly be taken as the trigger for the President's statement on September 4.
The August 29 flight was the first of a continuous series of flights over Cuba which did not culminate until November.
From the photographs taken that day, surface-to-air missile sites were discovered.
What the discovery of the SAM sites did mean was that their existence became part of a larger concern.
This concern entailed a situation which had been under surveillance since the drastic increase in Soviet dry cargo and passenger ship arrivals in Cuba since the early months of 1962.
By August, the increased number of Soviet ship arrivals had aroused grave suspicion in the American leaders.
As has been indicated, President Kennedy felt it necessary to officially warn the Soviet Union about the possible result of the increased Soviet supply of armaments and personnel to Cuba, but the discoveries of the August 29 U-2 flight were not the reason for the quick change in his public statements from August 29 to September 4.
The shift in the President's position was due primarily to the input of the legal advisers of the Department of Justice.
Schlei intimated that action should be taken only when offensive armaments could be identified.
There is no evidence of any organized combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc country; of military bases provided to Russia; of a violation of the 1934 treaty relating to Guantanamo; of the presence of offensive ground-to-ground missiles; or of any significant offensive capability either in Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and guidance.
The United States, in conjunction with other hemispheric countries, will make sure that while increased Communist armaments will be a heavy burden to the unhappy people of Cuba themselves, they will be nothing more.
Although the President does not categorically state that he will seek 0.
A S. involvement, the above quotation certainly hints at that possibility.
A S. participation, it is most likely that that is what the President had in mind.
From this initial definitive response, the President's position remained firm.
President Kennedy maintained this position throughout the crisis and did not waver when confronted by criticism from Congress. , And when the conditions in Cuba approximated those referred to in his comments to the press on September 13, as determined by U-2 photographs taken October 14, the U S. acted.
Neither the date this legal study began, nor the period over which it evolved, can be precisely determined from the information available.
For example, the U S. could legally act if the United Nations Security Council concluded there existed a threat to peace.
The third and final suggestion involved the participation of the Organization of American States.
Measures taken by Members in the exercise of the right of self-defense shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall not in any way effect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council under the present Charter to take at any time such actions as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore international peace and security.
Department of State, Charter of the United Nations, Conference Series Pubn.
Both documents assessed the right of self-defense and the involvement of the United Nations and/or the Organization of American States.
Conclusions The legal officers of the Departments of Justice and Defense had examined the international legal questions involved in a U S. response to the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba well in advance of the time the offensive missiles were actually discovered.
These analyses were not retained by the legal offices but were distributed to at least eight men who were to be a part of the ExCom.
It seems that the men present at the meeting on September 3 had foreseen what was to constitute the major portion of the debate of the ExCom between October 16 and 28.
Of those men listed by the President on October 16 to participate in a special advisory capacity, there is strong reason to believe that most of them were familiar with the legal questions.
Furthermore, views had already been aired on blockade and air strike issues by members of the ExCom.
So, the meetings beginning on October 16 were not inundated with material unfamiliar to the participants.
Before the creation of the ExCom, arguments had been formulated, thoughts had been provoked.
The legal advisers of the various Departments and their analyses of international law were definitely an influence on government officials long before the ExCom was created.
The purpose of this chapter is to explore those thirteen days, concentrating primarily on those situations in which legal considerations played a role.
It will be illustrated that in a crisis situation where national security was at stake, the advisers and the decision-maker,e., the members of the ExCom and the President, were influenced by legal considerations as they moved toward the final recommendations and ultimate decision.
To demonstrate the influence, or lack of influence, of legal considerations on a decision, one cannot approach the subject in as simplistic a manner as William P Gerberding does.
Furthermore, the question posed above is of too limited a nature to be of value in any scholarly analysis.
To judge the influence of legal considerations upon reaching a decision by stipulating that legal criteria must be ""consciously applied, "" results in an erroneous judgment.
In addition, this chapter will discuss other phenomena of those thirteen days.
During the months of August and September, as-has been previously indicated, the legal advisers of the Department of Justice and the Department of Defense were called upon for legal opinions.
Again,. when it appeared that a decision had been reached in October, legal advisers were summoned to participate in the deliberations.
Not only would the missiles provide increased Soviet capabilities to destroy parts of the Western Hemisphere, but politically the balance of power would have been changed.
President Kennedy stressed this dual probable consequence two months after the Missile Crisis began.
The President recalled, ""This was an effort to materially change the balance of power, it was done in secret, steps were taken really to deceive us by every means they could . . . it would have politically changed the 5 Actually, this was not the first time that the legal advisers of the Department of State were asked to produce an analysis of the situation.
Perhaps the Soviet leader had misjudged Kennedy's will, his determination to stand firm.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco and the Vienna meeting, where the young President allowed Khrushchev to verbally discredit him, may have encouraged the Soviet leader to question the President's willingness.
If Khrushchev were guilty of this misjudgment, he would have to be corrected.
From the beginning of his administration, President Kennedy sought to create an atmosphere of cooperation and trust with Chairman Khrushchev.
On October 16, the President learned that Khrushchev had lied to him, that Khrushchev had deliberately deceived him about his intentions in placing Soviet weaponry in Cuba.
From the time that the U S. began warning the Soviet Union that this country would not accept Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba, the Soviet leadership vehemently affirmed that it had no such intention.
Our nuclear weapons are so powerful in their explosive force and the Soviet Union has so powerful rockets to carry these nuclear warheads, that there is no need to search for sites for them beyond the boundaries of the Soviet Union.
The President realized that khrushchev was apparently willing to take new risks to further the interests of the Soviet Union and to. challenge America's prestige and power.
The Chairman had challenged John Kennedy, testing the young President's courage to initiate, an action which might ultimately lead to nuclear war.
If the President did not accept this challenge, some noted authorities believed that Khrushchev would declare himself victor of this round.
More importantly, Khrushchev might feel that victories in future rounds would come just as easily.
The probable consequence, according to some authorities, could have possibly been on the President's mind.
Less than vigorous action would destroy the confidence of key members of his administration and weaken the chances for the election of his fellow Democratic Congressmen who actively supported his Cuban policy.
Inaction would encourage leaders of other countries, friend and foe alike, to look with suspicion and skepticism on his courage and commitments.
Therefore, President Kennedy was convinced that the U S. must act, and act forcefully, to rid the Western Hemisphere of this Soviet threat.
Most any course that would be followed, except perhaps nuclear war, would directly threaten the prestige of Khrushchev.
S followed fortunately prevented both a humiliating defeat and a nuclear war.
The Men Who Comprised the ExCom The ExCom consisted of approximately fourteen members, including Robert Kennedy, Attorney General; Dean Rusk, Secretary of State; Robert McNamara, Secretary of Defense; McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs; Theodore Sorensen, Presidential Counsel; George Ball, Under Secretary of State; General Maxwell Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Edward Martin, Assistant Secretary of 9 Allison, 194.
Others participated at various meetings, including Dean Acheson, former Secretary of State.
Robert Kennedy, Sorensen, Ball, Roswell Gilpatric, Acheson, and Adlai Stevenson.
These were the men who presented the alternative policy positions to the President.They argued, debated, and some changed their minds about which course of action would be the best to follow.
The bitter arguments and the changing of positions do not discredit these men.
Each presented his arguments vigorously, for each felt his plan was the right course to save the nation.
The role that legal considerations played in the decision was affected by the men who made up the ExCom.
Each of these men brought with him different experiences, different backgrounds, different perspectives.
Douglas Dillon, Secretary of the Treasury; Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary of State; Paul Nitze, Assistant Secretary of Defense; and Roswell Gilpatric, Deputy Secretary of Defense.
Also participating in various meetings were Lyndon Johnson, Vice President; Adlai Stevenson, Ambassador to the United Nations; Ken O'Donnell, Special Assistant to the President; Don Wilson, Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency; Robert Lovett, former Secretary of Defense; and Charles Bohlen, who attended the first day's session only, leaving immediately thereafter to fill the position as Ambassador to France.
It can only be demonstrated that there was an effect, for many other factors were a part of the decision-making process.
There will always be the dark and tangled stretches in the decision-making process--mysterious even to those who may be most intimately involved.
Instead, legal considerations were filtered through the diverse backgrounds and perspectives of the participants, resulting in the consideration and application of law both consciously and subconsciously.
The President had already stated unequivocally his position against the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The U N. could have been authorized to decide the issue, or a secret emissary could have been sent to Moscow to demand action.
However, as the missiles belonged to the Soviet Union and were under the complete control of Soviet personnel, no significant gains would be realized.
Not only would the missiles be destroyed, but Castro would also be removed.
Through a conventional air strike, the missile sites would be eliminated.
This approach would be a less belligerent response than invasion or an air strike, and would prevent further military shipments to Cuba, while conveying America's determination to stand firm.
Two Concepts Contained Within International Legal Thought Which Influenced the Blockade Decision Even though the members of the ExCom viewed the crisis from different perspectives, they all came together for a common purpose--to help determine a course of action which the President could follow.
As Theodore Sorensen recalled, ""The remarkable aspect of those meetings was a sense of complete 1 5 Sorensen, Kennedy, 675. 49 equality.
Further, he continued, ""Experience mattered little in a crisis which had no precedent.
When George Ball was arguing, on October 17, that ""every nation ought to act in accordance with its own traditions,,"" 17 he was arguing, at the minimum, a moral norm.
Gerberding takes a position similar to the one above and stipulates that ""only if one is willing to define American traditions as an element of international law is it possible to construe this as an invocation of such law.
To him, legal considerations had little, if any, influence on the decision.
This statement by Gerberding indicated his unwillingness to comprehend international law within certain contexts.
Perhaps, Ball himself would christen his statement of October 17 a moral position.
Experienced policy makers, moreover, more or less.knowingly assimilate what the law requires, in the gross at least, and it inevitably shapes their inclinations and deliberations.
An example will better demonstrate how moral norms contain legal overtones.
During their arguments, some of which can be denominated ""moral,"" members of the ExCom did not preface or conclude their statements with an indication that their positions could be substantiated by any specific law.
S , Department of State, Charter of the United Nations, Conference Series Pubn.
They recognized that ""there is a direct connection between the rules prescribed and the prevailing ethics and morality .i23 A sense of natural law may be expressed by a decision-maker as he prescribes his case in terms of what ought to be.
The idea of what ought to be is usually the significant factor in the creation of law itself.
Myers McDougal and Florentino Feliciano have asserted that values constitute a part of decisions.
The values to which they referred are concepts of human dignity .25 Although they do not specifically link moral norms and legal considerations, their acknowledgement that moral norms affect decisions helps to substantiate material presented in this chapter, for within these moral contentions law is disguised.
The second concept within the realm of international law to which this study refers is justification for action.
The cost of this legal failure then, may well be in terms of political responses by other nations to the nation which fails to justify its action.
The concept of justification often produces the thought that a decision was made, an action was taken, a justification was proffered, in that order.
In essence, some feel that the justification is formulated after the decision has been reached.
The justification for an action may even bear little resemblance to the facts of the situation.
He employed Sorensen's observation that the blockade's ""legality much strengthened by the 0.
A S. endorsement had been carefully worked out.7 From this statement, Gerberding concluded that the legality of the blockade decision had been worked out after the decision had been reached.
Perhaps, there have been instances where the justification for action was formulated after the decision was reached.
Throughout the debate, some members of the ExCom consistantly integrated justification with their choice of response, specifically, those who advocated blockade.
As they put forth their position, 26 Kaplan and Katzenbach, 344; Louis Henkin, How Nations Behave , 48.
From the completed work of the legal advisers, the members of the ExCom were cognizant of the fact that reliance upon 0.
The problem seemed to become, in part, the problem of determining a response which could be justified through 0.
S in this instance, from which an action could be justified, the choice of action itself was limited.
These two concepts within the scope of international law--moral-legal norms and justification for action, as discussed and defined within the preceeding analysis--influenced the decision of the ExCom.
Theodore Sorensen recalled that, on first observation, an air strike was generally favored.
As he viewed it, this pressure, limited though forceful, could be strengthened as circumstances changed.
An air strike, according to Ball was inconsistent with American traditions .31 Diplomatic overtures were also considered in the beginning.
McGeorge Bundy tended to veer away from military action because he feared events would escalate into a nuclear war.
Bundy argued persuasively that the U S. should inform either Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister, or Khrushchev that the U S. had discovered the missiles in Cuba, and it should demand that the missiles be removed.
If diplomatic channels could resolve the issue, the threat to Khrushchev's prestige in the eyes of the world would be obviated.
Even though such a letter would repeatedly refer to peaceful intentions, Sorensen concluded, however, that it was nothing short 3 0 Kennedy, 34.
From this initial presentation, Sorensen convinced himself that an air strike was not 33 the answer.
October 18 By Thursday, October 18, two distinct groups began to emerge, the blockade team and the air strike team.
Those favoring the blockade were confronted with the question of what type of blockade to recommend.
They decided that the lowest level of action was preferable--that offensive weapons would be the only material prevented from reaching Cuba.
Various arguments surfaced at this juncture, however, over the nature of the low level response.
McNamara, for example, voiced his opinion that a limited blockade would maintain the options for further, more forceful action.
If this limited step failed, the President could have another course readily available.
Moral-legal norms have greater significance when one realizes that those who favored blockade did not feel that it would produce the desired success.
Both Sorensen and Robert Kennedy admitted that blockade was probably not the course to follow if the U S. wanted 3 3 Sorensen, Kennedy, 685.
Sorensen, for example, recognized that a limited blockade would have the least adverse effect on innocent Cubans.
The strongest advocate of this concern for innocent Cuban citizens throughout the week was Robert Kennedy.
I could not accept the idea that the United States would rain bombs on Cuba, killing thousands and thousands of civilians in surprise attack.
Maybe the alternatives were not very palatable, but I simply did not see how we could accept that course of action for our country.
Because of Robert Kennedy's proposals, Douglas Dillon changed his position to support the use of a blockade.
He attributed this change of position to a norm which had alluded him in earlier deliberations.
He continued, ""Frankly, these considerations had not occurred to me until Bobby raised them so eloquently.,""39 Concern for what the role of the 0.
A S. should be was evident in the meetings of a subgroup of the ExCom--the blockade team--which favored the use of a blockade.
Justification for establishing a blockade accompanied this subgroup's decision for blockade and was not formulated later.
The suggestions resulting from the meetings of this group of advisers, as Robert Kennedy recalled, included ""an outline of the legal basis for our action.
Thompson emphasized ""the added legal justification such endorsement would give the blockade under international and maritime law.,""41 Martin attempted to dispel the trepidation of those who were, to some extent, skeptical of the feasibility of 0.
He stated, ""We could not even be certain that the blockade route was open to us.
Robert Kennedy, as did Sorensen, Thompson, and Martin, placed great weight on the 0.
The other team of advisers, the air strike team, did not concern themselves very much with legal approaches.
Its use, he believed, would only postpone, not prevent, the use of air strikes to protect American security and its leadership position in the Western Hemisphere and in Western Europe.
The nuclear weapons were already there . . . were capable of killing eighty million Americans.
The ill-executed Bay of Pigs invasion failed to rid the Western Hemisphere of 42 Ibid. , 687.
It was felt by the Joint Chiefs of Staff that another opportunity was presenting itself in the Missile Crisis.
The Joint Chiefs advocated, in addition to an air strike, an invasion and the overthrow of Castro.
There is, however, one indication that the air strike group considered how their prescribed course of action could be justified.
October 19 Before the evening meeting of October 18 ended, a comment by Llewellyn Thompson spurred further legal considerations of the general situation for the following day.
Working through the night, the lawyers were prepared to present their evaluations the following morning.
Katzenbach, because of his position and close association with the Attorney General, reflected primarily the concerns of Robert Kennedy who had become the chief advocate of using the blockade.
At the same time, however, in order not to foreclose the possibility of military responses of greater proportions, he stated that U S. military action could be legitimated under 49 the principle of self-defense.
Since Chayes was not in Washington at that time, Meeker presented the legal views of the Department of State.
Before discussing his position under the scrutiny of the full ExCom, Meeker aired his thoughts with Ball, Johnson, and Martin.
This was the first occasion that quarantine was mentioned, even though other contributors to the deliberations of the ExCom laid claim to its origin.
The advantage of this substitution implies a less bellicose act than blockade itself.
Following Katzenbach's statements before the ExCom, Meeker presented his position with a sense of assuredness of purpose and with a deep personal commitment to and respect for legal solutions to problems.
Having acquired a respect for the capacities of international organizations, it is understandable that he supported their jurisdiction in this matter.
He hesitated to justify U S. action, particularly unilateral action, purely as a matter of self-defense.
Charter, which allows regional organizations to deal with matters pertinent to peace and security.
A S. acted within the provisions of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance.
Meeker's argument, restrictive though sound, demonstrated his legal acumen and provided a firm legal case for those who advocated quarantine.
A S. or the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance for the approval of U S. action was a misconception.
Although he argued that legal niceties were irrelevant to the threat to American security, Acheson did acquiesce in one of Katzenbach's points.
If it were necessary that questions of international law be followed, he noted, U S. action could be justified by self-defense .54 It appears that that is the extent to which Acheson would concede the role of legal considerations in the Cuban situation.
I must conclude that the propriety of the Cuban quarantine is not a legal issue.
The power, prestige and position of the United States had been challenged by another state; and law simply does not deal with such questions of power--power that comes close to the sources of sovereignty.
I cannot believe that there are principles of law that say we must accept destruction of our way of life.
One would be surprised if practical men, trained in legal history and thought, 5 3 Chayes, 33.
But they were not charged with the responsibility for deciding what the United States would do or how it would do it.
The latter was the role of the decision-maker, the task of the President, and he would have to bear the consequences of that choice.
He, and he alone, would have to choose from among the proposed alternatives, unless his own perspectives and prejudices dictated otherwise.
A quarantine of all Soviet ships carrying offensive weapons to Cuba would be implemented.
Though the President occasionally vacillated on how to bring this confrontation to a successful end, he was consistent in the procedure used in the search for an answer.
This maneuver was intentional on his part, for he desired that these men be as candid with each other as possible.
His presence, he felt, might inhibit the expression of straightforward thinking.
Though he was 55 Proceedings of the American Society of International Law , p.. 64 absent from most of the ExCom meetings, he often summoned individual participants to his office to obtain their reflections on what the U S. response should be.
Through these private conversations and his contributions at ExCom meetings, one can partially determine the President's thoughts as he considered what action should be taken.
One the first day that the ExCom met, October 16, President Kennedy called Adlai Stevenson to his office.
Stevenson had not been present at the initial morning session of the advisers.
The President exhibited the photographs indicating the missile launch areas andexpressed his opinion to the Ambassador.
To that statement Stevenson replied that it would be more appropriate if a diplomatic solution were sought, if all possible peaceful solutions were explored, before the U S. resorted to an air strike.
In March, 1965, Stevenson recalled this first meeting with the President over the Cuban Crisis.
At that time he recalled, ""I was a little alarmed that Kennedy's first consideration should be an air strike.
Acheson expressed his view that an air strike was the course which the U S. should pursue.
In support of his argument, he indicated that the imposition of a blockade would only postpone the issue while 59 allowing time for the missiles to become operable.
When the President spoke, he indicated that an air strike was tantamount to a Pearl Harbor in reverse.
A Sunday-morning surprise attack was not consistent with our heritage and our ideals.
He argued further that thousands of Cubans and Russians would be killed without warning .60 The President was arguing a moral-legal principle much the same as his brother, the Attorney General, had in the ExCom meetings.
In fact, it is apparent that President Kennedy and the Attorney General had discussed this Pearl Harbor analogy, and it seems that the President was impressed by it, as he used it in private consultation with Acheson.
Robert Kennedy had argued what he considered to be the stigma of Pearl Harbor before the ExCom.
He stated that he ""did not believe that with all the memory of Pearl Harbor and all the responsibility we would have to bear in the world afterward, the President of the United States could order"" an air attack.
Having heard the Pearl Harbor theory now for a second time, Dean Acheson told the President 59 Dean Acheson, ""Dean Acheson's Version of Robert Kennedy's Version of the Cuban Missile Affair,"" Esquire, February, 1969, 77.
Moreover, within the last few months the Congress, and within the last few weeks the President, had reiterated this warning against the establishment of these weapons in Cuba.
Besides moral-legal norms, there is evidence of further legal considerations which President Kennedy applied in his decision to establish a blockade.
Traditionally, blockade had been regarded in most circumstances as an act of war.
In the 'realm of legal justification for the action to be taken, one incident dembnstrated the President's legal concerns.
It seems to indicate that-he was thinking that the quarantine would be legitimated, and thus possible, under the provisions of the 0.
These considerations, in part, possibly influenced his choice of quarantine.
Given his knowledge of the August legal Memoranda and his statement of October 18, legal considerations would appear to have influenced his decision to impose the quarantine.
The American public had to be informed, parties other than the ExCom had to be consulted, and appropriate procedures had to be followed.
These developments demonstrated that there existed an interplay between law and action, thus suggesting that legal considerations were still a part of the administration's thinkings.
A S. and the resulting resolution, and the U S.. quarantine proclamation.
On the evening of October 22, President Kennedy announced to the American people what U S. intelligence activities had discovered and verified in Cuba, along with the initial steps the Government was taking.
This urgent transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base--by the presence of these large, long-range, and clearly offensive weapons of sudden mass destruction--constitutes an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas, in flagrant and deliberate defiance of the Rio Pact of 1947, the traditions of this Nation and hemisphere, the joint resolution of the 87th Congress, the Charter of the United Nations, and my own public warnings to the Soviets on September 4 and 13.66 This list of legalisms was not unintentional.
It was important that the American people be aware of this specific threat to American peace and security, and that they understand the global consequences if such action were not halted.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the U N. recognizes the existence of collective regional security.
Within the guidelines of Chapter VIII, the U S. called for a meeting of the Organ of Consultation under the 0.
This threat to hemispheric security, since it did not specifically constitute an armed attack, could be considered under Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty.
It was these Articles which the U S. urged the Organ of Consultation to invoke.
In addition, as outlined by the President, the U S. requested an immediate meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
The U S. planned to offer a resolution demanding the withdrawal of all Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba.
The role of the U N. would be to supervise and confirm the 67 Ibid.,p.7.
American officials believed that it was important to take their case to the U N. , but they were convinced that the Soviet Union would veto the resolution.
Nevertheless, this approach to the U N. cannot be construed as a mere token move.
If an organization such as the United Nations is to be a viable institution, if it is to provide an adequate forum for discussion, nations must be willing to approach these organizations with all problems, complicated or trivial, whether or not the problems can be resolved through regional arrangements.
Abram Chayes offered another insight into the President's speech to the American people.
On the morning of October 22, Chayes argued that the quarantine's legal basis should be established under Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty.
As a result of his contentions, specific references to Article 51 were deleted from the speech.
Such references, he argued, would have indicated to the other nations that the U S. did not con70 sider seriously the legal issues involved in the situation.
The U S. and the Latin American countries felt the need to amend this understanding.
Their concern was not directed solely at the Soviet Union and this particular crisis.
This situation, however, brought about their concern and awakened them to the need for a new international principle to apply to all nations at all future times.
The alteration of existing principles should include the understanding that a stealthy and rapid deployment of nuclear weapons was intolerable.
And, the U S. was going to act whether or not it received a favorable vote from the 0.
S was threatened, and it was not going to foreclose its inherent right of self-defense.
Throughout the speech there were references such as, ""1. . . in the defense of our own security and of the entire Western Hemisphere,""73 which signified that the U S. was going-to act and that that action was justifiable.
Still, there was hope for justification for the U S. position through 0.
At the time of the President's speech, the Organ of Consultation had not yet convened.
A S. decision, the possibility of not receiving such support had to be considered by the administration.
A S. endorsement, he deliberately obscured the question in the speech. . . .75 The uncertainty, yet the hope, that the quarantine would receive 0.
A S. endorsement affected the timing of the actual quarantine imposition.
By unanimous approval, the delegates adopted a resolution supporting the U S. position.
As the President had suggested, the Member States invoked Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty.
In addition, the resolution was carefully worded to point out previous 0.
A S. warnings' that intervention in the Western Hemisphere by Sino-Soviet Powers would not be tolerated.
Those actions included a resolution adopted in January, 1962, at the Eighth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics in Punta del Este, and a reassertion of that same resolution at an informal meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs in October, 1962, in Washington.
The signing ceremonies occurred on the same day the resolution was passed.
Now, the justification for the U S. position which had long been discussed, beginning with the Department of Justice 75 Sorensen, Kennedy, 699.
A S. approval, demonstrates that the legal considerations and actions were a concern of the administration.
S legal position for the actions to be taken against the emplacement of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba.
Staff members worked throughout the night of October 22 and the morning of October 23.
By Article 6 of the Rio Treaty, the American States were authorized to deal with aggression that was not an armed attack.
When alleged aggression did occur, the Organ of Consultation was to meet immediately to deal with the threat to peace and security.
If it found that aggression had occurred, as defined under Article 6, the victim could respond in a variety of ways, as listed in Article 8, including the use of armed force.
In the Cuban situation, the Organ of Consultation concluded that Soviet action constituted aggression under Article 6.
Further, it recommended that the Member States ""take all measures . . . including the use of armed force,"" to deal with the Soviet threat to peace.
In sum, the recommendations of the adopted resolution were consistent with the terms and procedures of the Rio Treaty, and 78 the U S. quarantine was in accord with the resolution.
The second question which the official U S. legal position entailed was whether or not the 0.
Article 52, Paragraph 1, of the Charter recognizes the existence of regional organizations and gives them express authority to deal with problems of peace and security.
Generally, enforcement action could be equated with quarantine in the Cuban case.
However, the definition of enforcement action had been narrowed in the past within the meaning of Article 53.
One example shows that in September, 1960, the Soviet Union alleged that the embargo measures recommended by the Organ of Consultation constituted enforcement action.
The Security Council rejected this Soviet plea as the action was only recommendatory in nature.
S'. action was purely recommendatory since Article 20 *of the Rio Treaty provides that no Member State shall be-compelled to use armed force.
And, if Lewellyn Thompson's evaluation that the Soviet Union had a respect for law was accurate, it would be expected that the Kremlin would employ legal concepts when the opportunity presented itself.
When the U S. announced it would impose a quarantine around Cuba, the Soviet Union objected to its establishment in terms of international law and assumed the role of the prosecution.
Its efforts were directed toward indicting the U S. in the presence of the U N. , hence, castigating this country before the world.
This chapter will illustrate and analyze the legal objections of the Soviet Union to the imposition of the U S. quarantine of Cuba and the Soviet defense of its installation of missiles on that island.
Basis of the Soviet Position Before any specific references are made concerning the legal objections of the Soviet Union, it is important to understand a concept developed by Soviet jurists.
This is the principle of ""piracy,f"" or as entitled by Soviet international 77 78 lawyers, ""state piracy.
It was not until the latter part of 1954 that the concept of state piracy emerged as a prominent part of Soviet international legal literature.
Shortly after Stalin's death, Grigori I Tunkin, the official spokesman for Soviet jurists, proposed a new interpretation of international law.
Up to that time, Moscow had considered international law as merely an amalgamation of principles and norms binding upon nations.
He emphasized the utilization of international law as an instrument of policy achievement for the state.
If international law were to be a successful tool for the Soviet Union, its ill-equipped and underdeveloped legal doctrines would have to be strengthened,e. . modified in order to be acceptable to the West.
Rather than undertaking a sound, detailed study of legal principles to strengthen their new found tool, the Soviet jurists emphasized their exceedingly broad definitions of some existing principles, thus indicating a willingness to apply these principles in a greater number of situations.
Soviet International Law (Cleveland: Reserve Distributors, 1968), 40. 79 demonstrated not only the weakness of Soviet legal thought and development, but proved at times to be in conflict with the definitions acceptable in international law.
The Soviet concept of piracy was one principle which was exceedingly broad and proved to be in conflict with the generally accepted standard.
An infringement, they noted, was placed on international navigation and trade; and international transactions in general were encroached upon.
Furthermore, the classical definition was not restricted to unlawful actions perpetrated for private objectives.
Both private and state vessels could be charged with actions of piracy if their actions constituted a violation of the principle of the freedom of the high seas.
The idea that an act of piracy could be committed by a vessel of the state was inconsistent with Western principles and has yet to be accepted in general international law.
Specifically, he stated, ""acts of piracy can only be committed by private vessels. ,,5 The case of the Ambrose Light, 1885, also supported this contention.
If a vessel were armed without the authority of the state, that is, by private authorization, it was regarded as a pirate ship, whether it committed an act of violence or not.
Throughout its opinion; the court carefully and repeatedly indicated that the actions of a vessel, whose authority was derived from the state, could not commit an act of piracy.
It provided the Soviet Union with an opportunity to modify its international legal interpretations of some principles in terms that would be acceptable to the West.
On the concept of piracy, at least, the Soviet Union refused to pursue this opportunity.
Here again, one finds that the accepted concept of piracy referred only to private vessels.
At the Conference, the Soviet Union objected to the above adopted Article and to other Articles relating to piracy.
Tunkin contended that the concept endorsed by the world leaders was undoubtedly obsolete.
In our modern world, he argued, piracy could be committed by vessels other than private ones.
Tunkin argued that the greatest danger of piratical acts did not come from private ships; it came from state-owned warships.
Despite Soviet objections to the Articles relevant to piracy, its chief delegate signed the final product of the Convention.
IV , ""Text of the Articles and Draft Resolutions Adopted by the Second Committee,'"" April 22, 1958, 152.
The principle of state piracy could be applied to many situations, albeit, these applications might not necessarily be recognized in accepted international law.
The Soviet Legal Position Immediately Prior to and After The Crisis Settlement When President Kennedy announced the U S. decision on October 22 to impose a quarantine on the transporting of all offensive weapons to Cuba, the Soviet Union objected vociferously.
Now that the U S. had discovered and varified the clandestine installation of Soviet offensive weapons, the Soviet Union deemed it necessary to defend its actions.
Second, Moscow objected to the U S. quarantine and charged that the U S. had violated international law.
The Soviet Union was not convincing in its presentation of legal arguments in either area.
But, the desire to include legal criteria in their arguments demonstrated the influence and the importance of legal considerations in an international crisis situation.
In defending its actions, however, the Soviet Union offered little sound reasoning.
It was Moscow's contention that only U S. action necessitated the 83 defensive arming of Cuba and that Soviet assistance to Cuba was for defensive purposes.
From the inception of the Castro regime, Cuban independence had been threatened by the North American giant. Positive proof of this threat had been best exemplified in the April, 1961, invasion at the Bay of Pigs.
No nation, according to the Kremlin, which valued its independence could refuse to accept the military equipment necessary for its self-defense.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, all countries, large or small have the right to organize their lives in their own way, to take such measures as they consider necessary to protect their own security, and to rebuff aggressive forces encroaching on their freedom and independence.
As the U S. found substance in international law to legitimate its quarantine, the Soviet Union resorted to legal principles to support its contention that a quarantine and the manner in which it was legitimated were in violation of international law.
Prior to the resolution of the conflict, the legal case that Moscow initially presented was very general.
One has to look very closely at the Soviet presentation to extract the specific grounds on which these general charges were based, for the record is inundated with statements simply claiming U S . violation of international law.
As noted earlier, the Soviets.held the U S. quarantine to be an act of state piracy, a position that had been rejected at the last international conference on the law of the sea prior to the Missile Crisis.
Nevertheless, the Soviet delegate to the Security Council argued that American action was in violation of the principle of state piracy.
According to this argument, . . . the United States usurped the right . . . to attack ships of other states on the high seas--i.e. , to engage in piracy.
This same claim was reiterated to President Kennedy by Chairman Khrushchev in private letters dated October 23, 24, and 26.
These letters basically stipulated that blockade was a piratical act and that the Soviet Union would not recognize such an act as legitimate.
This also illustrates that the Soviet Union was determined to establish its own brand of international legal principles, though there had been some internal Soviet disagreement.
In 1961, Lisovskii, a Soviet jurist, expressed his opinion about blockade in the absence of war.
It was his contention that when such a blockade was in effect the rights of a third state were lawfully curtailed.
No vessel of a third state had the right to pass through the blockade and proceed to a port of the blockaded state, regardless of the content of its cargo.
Kolodkin, a Soviet legal scholar, supported the rights of a third state in the event of a pacific blockade.
Dominant Soviet law rejected Kolodkin's claim of the rights of third states.
He had to rely exclusively on Western international law to sustain his arguments.
A S. is openly usurping the prerogatives of the Security Council, which is the only body empowered to take coercive measures.
The Soviet Union attempted to make it clear that it vigorously supported the U N. and its programs, and that it would not permit the destruction of the authority of the world body.
On the other hand, the U S. , having sought legal authoritythrough the 0.
Onlygeneral arguments were offered as the Soviets endeavored to exascerbate the emotions of the members of the Security Council and those of world public opinion.
It was not until after the crisis was over that any substantive legal arguments were proffered by Soviet international lawyers.
And, he contended, Article 2, Paragraph 4, was violated because the quarantine was an illegal threat or use of force.
Charter to support the view that U S. actions violated international law, the substance of the articles is extremely general.
No firm legal case could be based on the alleged violation of such general concepts as to ""live together in peace with one another as good neighbors.
Like Korovin's,his legal interpretation came after the crisis was over.
First of 1 8 Butler, 196. 88 all, Kolodkin 'attacked the concept of pacific blockade.
There were, however, specific instances in which a blockade would be consistent with the Charter, self-defense by an individual state during wartime.
The establishment of a blockade would also be in accord with the Charter if it were invoked by the U N. pursuant to Articles 39, 41, and 42, or if the stipulation of Article 51 were met.
Article 39 specifies that in the absence of a state of war the Security Council has the authority to determine whether an act of aggression or breach of peace has occurred.
Articles 41 and 42 list measures which the Security Council can call upon the Members of the U N. to apply.
The criterion that must be met, according to Article 51, is that an armed attack must have taken place.
The quarantine implemented by the U S. was not within the context of any of these situations.
The U S. had disregarded the peaceful settlement obligation of Article 2, Paragraph 3, and had exercised unlawful force in violation of Paragraph 4 of the same Article.
Because a forceful response was undertaken by the U S. in the absence of an armed attack, he also alleged that Article 51 had been breached.
A S., a regional organization, could authorize the quarantine only if the Security Council had previously approved it.
As this had not occurred, Article 53 had been violated and the quarantine was illegal.
In addition, legal arguments were not voiced altogether in an international meeting.
The personal letters from Khrushchev to President Kennedy was another means.
It has been demonstrated that Soviet legal doctrine with regard to areas concerning the high seas,blockade in this particular case, had not been strengthened,e. , modified in order to be acceptable to the West, since Moscow had designated international law as an instrument of policy achievement.
In this crisis, the U S. was most often accused of an act of state piracy, a concept that conflicted with the generally accepted international legal definition of piracy.
Due to its lack of a convincing legal view of blockade, the Soviet Union had little else to offer in its behalf.
One can only speculate whether the existence of a firm Soviet view opposing the legality of pacific blockade prior to 1962 could have stiffened Soviet resistence to the Cuban quarantine.
The lack of a well defined position may have made it easier to accede to American pressures during the crisis.
Had the Soviet Union acquired a well defined legal position regarding blockade, Butler appeared to indicate that the results might have been different.
Or if the results had not been different, the manner in which they were reached might have been.
A VIEW FROM THREE PERSPECTIVES On December 2, 1823, President James Monroe proclaimed to a joint session of Congress what was to become an instrumental foreign policy principle.
We owe it, therefore, to candor and to the amicable relations existing between the United States and those European powers to declare that we should consider any attempt on their part to extend their system to any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety.
With the existing colonies or dependencies of any European power we have not interfered and shall not interfere.
The developments of the 1960's could not have even been imaginable to Monroe at the time of his pronouncement of the Monroe Doctrine.
Yet, there were some who maintained in 1962 that the action of President Kennedy, or rather his inaction, was an unmitigated and unjustifiable disregard for the principle put forth by President Monroe.
Those critical of the President's position, including some members of Congress and certain noted journalists, contended that the Soviet Union had violated the Monroe Doctrine.
This study makes no effort to determine through a legalistic analysis whether or not the Monroe Doctrine was legally applicable to the situation under consideration.
This chapter seeks to explore the views of Congressmen, journalists, and the President toward the Doctrine.
Congress's View Toward the Monroe Doctrine On September 4, 1962, President Kennedy publicly announced his official position concerning the developing situation in Cuba.
That policy was that when offensive weapons were installed in Cuba, this country would act to insure that those weapons were removed.
In his statement, the President.indicated a toleration for defensive weapons but not for offensive ones.
Having espoused this ""wait and see"" policy, the President came under heavy criticism.
One of the primary areas of criticism was pertinent to the Monroe Doctrine.
I think that it is for the Congress of the United States to say whether the Monroe Doctrine is dead or not and I think inasmuch as Khrushchev has undertaken to say that it is dead, it would be well for us to make-very clear in a ringing proclamation that it is alive, and I think we ought to so state.
With Senator Miller urging Congress to exercise its authority to determine the Doctrine's life or death, other Congressmen took it upon themselves to determine the applicability of the Doctrine to the existing situation.
Senator Kenneth Keating praised the ""profound wisdom"" of President Monroe, and specified that Monroe's words applied directly to the present situation.
The arbitrary distinction between offensive and defensive weapons was felt to be irrelevant.
The mere fact that an excessive amount of weapons, weapons of any kind, was being shipped to Cuba was the pertinent question.
As Senator Miller viewed it, these weapons may not have been intended for use against the U S., but their presence in Cuba represented a possible supply of machinery for revolution and guerrilla activities in other nations of the Western Hemisphere.
The Senator concluded that these weapons presented a threat of armed attack to the Western Hemisphere and, thus, vio5 lated unequivocally the principles of the Monroe Doctrine.
To add credence and strength to his argument, Senator Miller held that there was a precedent for his contention.
According to the Senator, the circumstances in Greece in 1947 and those in the Cuban situation in 1962 were the same.
As the concept of ""armed attack"" applied to the Grecian conflict, the U S. should apply the same judgment to the Cuban Crisis.
Yet, if President Kennedy did not understand the Monroe Doctrine, as claimed by some members of Congress, it is difficult to determine who misunderstood it more, the President or the President's critics.
One is simply instructed that President Kennedy did not understand the Doctrine.
In support of their accusations, the critics contended that the Soviet Union, by transporting arms to Cuba, had interfered with the affairs of the Western Hemisphere, and, thus, had violated the Monroe Doctrine.
They refused to discuss why the Doctrine was applicable to the Cuban Crisis, even though one-hundred and thirty-nine years had passed.
Alterations in the world situation since 1823 apparently were of little concern to the critics.
The primary argument regarding its applicability was simply that it was applicable.
Given the degenerate and illconsidered arguments accusing the President of lack of knowledge about the Monroe Doctrine, it is questionable who misunderstood the Doctrine. 71bid.,, September 26, 1962, 20871.
As phrased, the Resolution made little reference to the words of President Monroe.
Only if the Resolution relied primarily on the words of the Monroe Doctrine, 8 according to some members of Congress, would it be strong enough.
He argued that the Resolution contained no direct statement of opposition to the Communist extension into the Western Hemisphere.
In fact, he contended, the Resolution signified the acceptance for Communist takeover of 9 Cuba.
To resolve the inadequacies of Resolution 230, as expressed by Representative Ostertag, Representative Bruce Alger urged that the measure be recommitted to committee and strengthened.
His major concern was to indicate that the Soviet movement had violated the Doctrine.
He also advocated that the second section of the Resolution be amended to read, ""Be it resolved . . . that we stand behind our President in urging the enforcement of the Monroe Doctrine which has been violated.
Senator Miller's resolution was liberally sprinkled with references to the Monroe Doctrine and its relevance to the Cuban Crisis.
Reaffirming the principles of the Monroe Doctrine and authorizing and directing the President of the United States to take such action as is necessary to prevent any violation thereof.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, that the President of the United States is hereby authorized and directed to take such action as is necessary to prevent any violation of the Monroe Doctrine.
Senator Miller had made it evident that in urging President Kennedy to act, the was President should be primarily conscious of the fact that the Monroe Doctrine alive and that it had been violated.
During the month of September, 1962, several journals and noted columnists expressed their opposition to Soviet activities in Cuba.
Many of their own answers to these questions represented inimical attitudes toward the President and the policy position he had asserted.
Some of the columnists and journals pointed out the importance of the Monroe Doctrine and the failure on the part of the President to invoke it.
An editorial comment from a popular magazine labeled the Monroe Doctrine as ""a foundation stone of U S. foreign policy.
Indeed, if one's neighbor was arming itself for possible offensive purposes, this conclusion was highly probable.
Given the importance placed on the Monroe Doctrine and the unwillingness of President Kennedy to implement it, some journalists vigorously attacked the President.
He will not intervene to save the people of Cuba . . . from domination by a European power.,""14 The Wall Street Journal expressed much the same opinion in several editorials.
On September 5, 1962, that journal opined that ""a strong nation has hoped that its weak neighbors will somehow rise and shield it from a danger on its own doorstep.
The reflection reads, ""If the United States continues to appear weak and lets the Soviets move about the Western Hemisphere with impunity, there is no telling how far they will go.,""16 There is one other major point which the columnists and journals made with regard to the Monroe Doctrine.
This observation was not always intended as a critical response, though at times it was.
It often was a mere statement of fact, as understood by the journalists, a conclusion to a simple comparison between the words of President Monroe and those of President Kennedy.
To add to his criticism of the President's policy, David Lawrence suggested that the Doctrine had been interpreted with extensive omissions.
These omissions, in turn, had contributed to the surrender of American initiative, thereby giving the Soviet Union the upper hand.
Other writers were more sympathetic toward the President and analyzed his position in relation to the world situation.
Arthur Krock attributed no fault to the President for narrowing the original scope of the Doctrine.
He stated that ""this modification of the Doctrine can be supported as sound policy in an age of nuclear weapons with the facility of almost instantaneous delivery to targets thousands of miles away--an age not envisioned in 1823, even in a physicist's dreams.
Not as an official administration spokesman, only as a supporter of the President, Humphrey illustrated his point.
He argued that the principles of the Doctrine pertinent to European expansion into the Western Hemisphere were as valid in 1962 as they were the day Monroe announced them.
But, he stressed that they could not be applied automatically to all situations.
It was not possible for President Monroe and John Quincy Adams to have been thinking in terms of the Soviet system as it existed in 1962.
S had shirked its duty by not having responded to this alleged violation of the Monroe Doctrine with the use of force.
He instructed the critics that the Doctrine did not specifically prescribe how to respond to a violation against it.
Being only an implication, however, a response of force was neither binding nor obligatory.
Furthermore, Senator Humphrey commented that it was not desirable that a response of force should be binding in all situations in which the Doctrine had been violated.
He explained that the Doctrine must apply to many unforeseen and unpredictable circumstances.
Finally, to demonstrate the Doctrine's modernity, Humphrey spelled out in unequivocal terms what he called the Kennedy doctrine.
Second, he argued, the portion of the Monroe Doctrine relating to the Western Hemisphere had been strengthened.
President Kennedy had stated in greater detail than the Monroe Doctrine does itself ""just how we intend to implement the Monroe Doctrine under the threat of Communist penetration in this hemisphere.
This statement by Senator Humphrey is not directly supported by anything that President Kennedy said.
At no time did the President delineate how the U.S.' intended ""to implement the Monroe Doctrine.
He did emphatically specify the point at which the U S. would take action, but this point was not shrouded with the cloak of the Monroe Doctrine.
Furthermore, the President never did state that his intentions and efforts were conceived in conjunction with the Doctrine.
In so doing, he created an analogy between the Monroe Doctrine and the Kennedy doctrine.
The President's View Toward the Monroe Doctrine While some observers concerned themselves with the ""necessity"" for immediately invoking the Monroe Doctrine, President Kennedy adroitly avoided mentioning the Doctrine, by name, in his public statements.
What he was rejecting was the emphasis of the Monroe Doctrine as the primary justification for the U S. action against the installation of missiles in Cuba.
This section explores President Kennedy's feelings toward the Monroe Doctrine as expressed in both his public and private statements.
At his press conference on August 29, reporters questioned the President about his interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine.
The Monroe Doctrine means what it meant since President Monroe and John Quincy Adams enunciated it, and that is that we would oppose a foreign power extending its power to the Western Hemisphere.
And that's why we oppose what is being--what's happening in Cuba today.
That's why we worked in the Organization of American States and in other ways to isolate the Communist menace in Cuba.
This definition coincides with a promise he made in his inaugural address to all nations of this hemisphere.
President Kennedy seemed to be intimating that the U S. should act in conjunction with other Latin American Countries, if possible, and not unilaterally.
The method of carrying it out has been altered. . . .it25 It will be recalled that what President Kennedy believed the Monroe Doctrine meant was enunciated by him on August 29, 1962.
This clarification was prior to his official policy statement which distinguished between offensive and defensive weapons.
Before the President's official statement was made, the Department of Justice had been asked to prepare a study on the international legalities regarding the possible prevention of the installation of long-range missiles.
Heretofore, the discussion of one major section has been deliberately withheld.
That section gave detailed attention to the Monroe Doctrine, exemplifying its value and implementation since its creation.
Above all, it concluded that there existed a special legal regime for the Western Hemisphere.
The initial draft included a direct reference to the Monroe Doctrine, as suggested by Norbert Schlei.
Although the idea of a special regime of law for the Western Hemisphere based on the Monroe Doctrine has sometimes been advanced by U S. legal scholars, it has not been embraced by any other Western Hemisphere publicist.,""28 However, Schlei did not agree with Chayes' observation that no other country recognized a special regime of law based on the Monroe Doctrine.
To Schlei, the Doctrine was, and had been, the basis for a special hemispheric regime of law.
He added that this basis had been acknowledged not only by the U S. and the Western Hemisphere, but also by other governments of the world.
He felt that the world had maintained little resemblance after World War II to any previous forms of security arrangements.
Bilateral and multilateral treaties had emerged to govern hemispheric relations and security.
In light of the existing security arrangement in 1962, Chayes concluded that ""it is difficult to believe in 1962 unilateral action by the United States premissed on the Monroe Doctrine, would have been greeted with enthusiasm by other nations in the hemisphere.,""30 These observations by Chayes provide perhaps the best insight into the refusal of the President to refer to the Monroe Doctrine by name in his public statements.
As noted earlier, the President preferred to rely on multilateral agreements.
His pointed out that the President took particular interest in the 0. comment that the blockade could be worked out in the 0.
And, since such organizations existed, U S. action under been advisable. auspices of the Monroe Doctrine would have probably not indiAlthough the President declined to mention the Doctrine, there is an for the cation that hedid not disavow the existence of a special legal regime this Americas.
Dean Rusk, as an official spokesman for the administration, put thought in positive terms.
Then, in his announcement to the nation on October 22 that offensive weapons had been discovered in Cuba, the President again made such a reference.
The intrusion, he stated, was ""in an area well known to have a special and historical relationship to the United States and the nations of the Western Hemisphere.
Yet, the Monroe Doctrine was never mentioned by name in any public statements of the Chief Executive, nor was it ever referred to in the Quarantine Proclamation or the 0.
The specific treaties defied by the Soviets, as stipulated by the President, included primarily the Rio Pact of 1947 and the Charter of the United Nations.
Thus, to the President, a legal regime for the Americas did exist in 1962.
Conclusions The instrumental foreign policy principle expressed by President Monroe, subject to various amendments and interpretations, was illustrated in 1962.
Some members of Congress should not have wasted their time attempting to bring something back to life that was already alive.
President Kennedy understood the Monroe Doctrine within the concepts of the 0.
It was those organizations to which he resorted to help resolve the Cuban Crisis.
And, with their existence, unifor laterial action based on the Monroe Doctrine would have been difficult other nations to understand and accept.
So, the President avoided direct its basic reference to the Monroe Doctrine, but he intimated the validity of principle of self-defense.
Certainly, one must agree with the wisdom of Doctrine Dean Rusk's evaluation that the methods of carrying out the Monroe had changed.
S had no choice but to respond forcefully., Although it was definite that the U S. would act to protect its national interest, the manner in which it would respond was less certain.
However, as has been clearly demonstrated in this study, legal considerations played a vital role throughout the advisery stages, the decision-making process, and in the ultimate implementation of the policy agreed upon.
It is important to note the initial time at which legal considerations Missile Crisis. began to play a role in the American assessment of the Cuban U S. offiLegal ramifications became a principal issue for some high level cials long before the President made his decision in late October.
In this the connection, the Department of Justice was directed to evaluate whether U S. , as a matter of international law, could take action to prevent the installation of long-range missiles in Cuba.
At this time it could not be absolutely determined what the Soviet activity in Cuba was leading'to, and President Kennedy had not issued a warning to the Soviet leaders.
This early influx of legal considerations, and their continual interdemonstrate clearly play in many stages of the developing Cuban situation, them in that the Kennedy administration understood the need to incorporate the resolution of the crisis.
Had the U S. become concerned with legal criteria only after the President made the decision to impose a quarantine, this Union that it country would have demonstrated to its allies and the Soviet them seridid not give credence to legal considerations, that it did not take ously. nations, along By showing respect for international legal implications, to place limitations with their high-level advisers and decision-makers, tend on themselves.
Limitation may be a factor international which is not undesirable to nations in their attempt to resolve crises.
Both concepts influenced some of the members of the ExCom and President Kennedy.
Robert Kennedy favored a blockade of surprise Cuba because a blockade would not kill thousands of civilians as a bombing raid most likely would.
And so, he argued his position with deep emotional and personal concern for the moral actions he preferred his nation to take.
Further, it must not be disregarded that the fore-knowledge of means of justification for action influenced those members of the ExCom who ultimately supported blockade.
To know that sound legal justification was available for alternative that a given action would appear to have significantly affected the each member advocated.
If moral-legal concepts limited, in the minds of some would have men, the type of action which could be supported, these same men been reluctant to support a policy which could not be justified within a framework of well developed legal principles.
A respect for international legal considerations also imposed a major limitation on the Soviet Union.
However, the limitation on the Soviet Union, unlike the ones placed on the U S. , seemed to be disadvantageous.
When the Soviet Union in the latter part of 1954 began to utilize international law as an instrument for policy achievement, its jurists emphasized exceedingly broad definitions of existing principles.
By broadening the concept of piracy beyond that which was acceptable to the U S., the Soviet Union, in actuality, limited the grounds on which it could effectively present its legal case.
Respect for legal principles was by no means limited to the thirteen most crucial. days of October 1962.
Nor did such considerations influence the thoughts of only a very few people or only the thinking of one nation.
The positions taken by both superpowers and their approaches to the resolution of the crisis ememplify the fact that nations are not impervious to legal considerations in international crisis situations.
Allison, Graham T., Essence of Decision, Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1971.
Butler, William E., The Soviet Union and the Law of the Sea, Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins Press, 1971.
Friedman, Wolfgang and Lawrence A Collins,""The Suez Crisis of 1956,"" Intern ational Law and Political Crisis, edited by Lawrence Scheinman and David Wilkinson, Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1968.
Hildebrand, James L., Soviet International Law, Cleveland, Western Reserve Distributors, 1968.
Larson, David L., editor, The ""Cuban Crisis"" of 1962, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1963.
Schlesinger,, Arthur M., Jr., A Thousand Days; John F Kennedy in the White House, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1965.
The Naval Interdiction of Offensive Weapons and Associated Material in Cuba, 1962, "" American Journal of International Law, LVII , 525545.
Reports ""Laws of Maritime Jurisdiction in Time of Peace,"" Reports of the Conference Held by the International Law Association, 1926.
Pan American Union, Treaty Series, Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, 1947.
United Nations, Security Council, 1022nd Meeting, October 23, 1962, S/PV 1022.
U S., Congress, Senate, Committee on Armed Services, Investigation of the Preparedness Program, Interim Report, prepared by a subcommittee ofthe Committee on Armed Services, Senate, on the Cuban Military Buildup, 88th Cong., 1st sess. , May 9, 1963.
U S., Congress, Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Armed Services, Situation in Cuba, Hearings, 87th Cong., 2nd sess., September 17, 1962.
