There was also an increase in the number of Soviet ships arriving in Cuba which the United States government feared were carrying new supplies of weapons.
President John Kennedy complained to the Soviet Union about these developments and warned them that the United States would not accept offensive weapons in Cuba.
As the Cubans now had SAM installations they were in a position to shoot down U-2 spy-planes.
Elections were to take place for the United States Congress in two month’s time.
The public opinion polls showed that his own ratings had fallen to their lowest point since he became president.
In his first two years of office a combination of Republicans and conservative southern Democrats in Congress had blocked much of Kennedy’s proposed legislation.
The polls suggested that after the elections he would have even less support in Congress.
One poll showed that over 62 per cent of the population were unhappy with his policies on Cuba.
Understandably, the Republicans attempted to make Cuba the main issue in the campaign.
Kennedy hoped this would ensure that a U-2 plane would not be shot down, and would prevent Cuba becoming a major issue during the election campaign.
On September 27, a CIA agent in Cuba overheard Castro’s personal pilot tell another man in a bar that Cuba now had nuclear weapons.
U-2 spy-plane photographs also showed that unusual activity was taking place at San Cristobal.
However, it was not until October 15 that photographs were taken that revealed that the Soviet Union was placing long range missiles in Cuba.
President Kennedy’s first reaction to the information about the missiles in Cuba was to call a meeting to discuss what should be done.
Fourteen men attended the meeting and included military leaders, experts on Latin America, representatives of the CIA, cabinet ministers and personal friends whose advice Kennedy valued.
This group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
At the first meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, the CIA and other military advisers explained the situation.
After hearing what they had to say, the general feeling of the meeting was for an air-attack on the missile sites.
Remembering the poor advice the CIA had provided before the Bay of Pigs invasion, John F Kennedy decided to wait and instead called for another meeting to take place that evening.
By this time several of the men were having doubts about the wisdom of a bombing raid, fearing that it would lead to a nuclear war with the Soviet Union.
The committee was now so divided that a firm decision could not be made.
The Executive Committee of the National Security Council argued amongst themselves for the next two days.
The CIA and the military were still in favour of a bombing raid and/or an invasion.
However, the majority of the committee gradually began to favour a naval blockade of Cuba.
Kennedy accepted their decision and instructed Theodore Sorensen, a member of the committee, to write a speech in which Kennedy would explain to the world why it was necessary to impose a naval blockade of Cuba.
As well as imposing a naval blockade, Kennedy also told the air-force to prepare for attacks on Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The army positioned 125,000 men in Florida and was told to wait for orders to invade Cuba.
If the Soviet ships carrying weapons for Cuba did not turn back or refused to be searched, a war was likely to begin.
Kennedy also promised his military advisers that if one of the U-2 spy planes were fired upon he would give orders for an attack on the Cuban SAM missile sites.
A public opinion poll in the United States revealed that three out of five people expected fighting to break out between the two sides.
There were angry demonstrations outside the American Embassy in London as people protested about the possibility of nuclear war.
However, in the United States, polls suggested that the vast majority supported Kennedy’s action.
On October 24, President John F Kennedy was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the United States ships blockading Cuba.
In this he proposed that the Soviet Union would be willing to remove the missiles in Cuba in exchange for a promise by the United States that they would not invade Cuba.
The next day a second letter from Khrushchev arrived demanding that the United States remove their nuclear bases in Turkey.
While the president and his advisers were analyzing Khrushchev’s two letters, news came through that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba.
The leaders of the military, reminding Kennedy of the promise he had made, argued that he should now give orders for the bombing of Cuba.
Kennedy refused and instead sent a letter to Khrushchev accepting the terms of his first letter.
The Democrats increased their majority and it was estimated that Kennedy would now have an extra twelve supporters in Congress for his policies.
The event appeared to frighten both sides and it marked a change in the development of the Cold War.
Nikita Khrushchev was ousted from power on 15th October, 1964, but his successors, including Leonid Brezhnev, Yuri Andropov, Konstantin Chernenko and Mikhail Gorbachev provided aid to his government.
However, after the fall of communism in the Soviet Union in 1989 this economic help came to an end.
SpartacusEducationalUK/Cuba’sCrisis/YouTube/InternetPhotos/TheCubanHistory.com TheCubanHistory.com Comments comments This entry was posted in Military by admin.
