Kennedy stated that if the USSR removed its missiles from Cuba, the United States would end its “quarantine measures” and publicly pledge that it would not invade Cuba.
Map of Soviet ships and the quarantine line by Michael Dobbs, author of One Minute to Midnight.
But, Kennedy’s judgment that Khrushchev would run the quarantine was incorrect.
The Soviet leader had ordered his ships to turn back even before he had sent Kennedy the 24 October 1962 letter.
Secretary of State Rusk’s oft repeated description of a naval standoff—that “we were eyeball to eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked”—never actually happened.
Despite detecting some nuclear weapons in Cuba, United States intelligence was dangerously incorrect in other facets.
In addition to mistakenly reporting the presence of Chinese troops on Cuba, Secretary of Defense McNamara reported to the President that there were 6,000 to 8,000 Soviet “technicians” on the island rather than the actual 43,000 armed combat troops.
Some of these troops, we now know, were within fifteen miles of Guantanamo Bay and were armed with nuclear cruise missiles which could have obliterated the United States base within minutes.
Fidel Castro was ready to sacrifice his country to nuclear war to promote the socialist cause.
Castro’s zeal likely contributed to Khrushchev’s decision to remove the nuclear weapons from Cuba.
On 27 October 1962, Cuban and Soviet troops shot down an American U2 over Cuban airspace because they feared it could uncover the position of the Soviet nuclear cruise missiles near Guantanamo Bay; Maj.
That same day, a U2 piloted by Captain Charles Maultsby flew into Soviet airspace, ran out of fuel, and glided home to Alaska.
And most shockingly, hours after the U2 plane was shot down over Cuba, the United States Navy used grenade-sized depth charges to force a Soviet submarine armed with a nuclear torpedo to surface in the Caribbean.
According to Robert Kennedy, when McNamara informed the President that depth charges had been used on Soviet submarines, “those few minutes were the time of greatest worry to the President.
These recent revelations make the Kennedy-Khrushchev letters an even more exciting read.
But the leaders’ ten letters also show the shortcoming of relying solely upon documents to understand history.
The letters make no mention of the secret deal brokered between RFK and the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin.
Alas, despite progress and proclamations, the specter of nuclear war still hangs above our world.
Of course, he had tactical nukes there but these would and could only be used to defend against an invasion force.
Keep in mind from this person who lived in that era, everyone was ready to err on the side of caution.
We see that there is a military tendency to always go beyond the operational to the strategic realm that is only civilian prerogative, hence we have numerous idiotic strategic analyses that really make you wonder how complex these guys can really think and how many balls they can juggle at one time.
To their end, debating several of the close-ups to JFK, I found them to be extremely mendacious, insisting that we MUST all accept their lies as truth for the sake of national security– even 20 years after JFK was dead.
The incompetence of decisions made was due to the fact that the ideas of men deemed loyal to a fault was taken over that of men deemed able to get into Soviets’ shoes.
Bottom line, Khrushchev was not playing Cuba but a piano of crisis keys across the board, determined to make a global symphony that would cause JFK to trip and remain off balance.
Lastly, with no nuclear warheads in Cuba, Khrushchev had nothing to bargain with.
Had JFK not been assassinated by a United States ally fearing that we would force it to abandon its developing nuclear weapons in compliance with Khrushchev’s demand on route to nuclear disarmament, JFK could have really brought on, together with Khrushchev, the 1963 end of the Cold war that so many academics on the left erroneously thought to the case.
Trackbacks Why Rand Paul was right to call Carly Fiorina an isolationist | Rare Comments are closed.
