INFORMATION FOR CANDIDATES The number of marks is given in brackets at the end of each question or part question.
For Examiner’s Use Section A Section B Total This paper consists of 6 printed pages including the cover page.
You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those sources you were told to use.
In October 1962, the world was on the brink of nuclear war as the USA and the USSR jostled over the issue of missile weapons in Cuba.
Earlier on from 1959 to 1961, Fidel Castro had turned to the Soviet camp for support as his policies took an increasingly anti-American tone.
The US, has always been the aggressor in the conflict between Cuba and the USA, repeatedly trying to invade and assassinate Fidel Castro, enforcing an economic embargo and committing acts of terrorism against Castro.
A British cartoon published in ‘Punch’, a weekly British magazine of humour and satire.
OR 3) Explain how the weaknesses of the League of Nations and Hitler’s nationalistic goals for Germany contributed to the outbreak of World War II in Europe.
L4 L3 + giving reasons from Source A 4-5m Award 4 m for one inference with reason, 5 m for two inferences with reason 1.
Khrushchev had no respect for Kennedy ‘s ability / Kh had a condescending attitude towards Kennedy.
The evidence is the source said K was ‘inexperienced and weak…’ This was based on the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Khrushchev did not think that Kennedy would be able to sustain his resistance against the Soviet Union with regard to Cuba / would eventually give in / Kennedy would not be able to threaten Cuba.
L4 Answers No, cross-referenced, explained provenance with close 6m analysis of the date of the source and Cross-reference to Contextual Knowledge.
Source B is reliable in telling me that the Soviets had no intentions of aggression.
Source B can be supported by Source C which shows that it was the USA that intruded into Soviet sphere by surrounding the Soviet Union with missiles and bases in Japan, West Germany and Turkey represented by the hanging branches creeping into USSR’s yard and overshadowing him.
However, Source B can be challenged by Source A In Source A, Khrushchev already thought that Kennedy was a weak and inexperienced President, so it is unbelievable that Kennedy would take an aggressive stand with regard to Cuba.
The conversation Khrushchev had with his son as quoted in the evidence suggests that Khrushchev intends to escalate the crisis by bringing the challenged directly to Kennedy as he thought Kennedy would acquiesce when confronted with the missiles in Cuba.
The author of the source was a Soviet historian and it would not be surprising that he would take an anti-American stand.
Furthermore, this source was in 1971, when the Soviet Communists were still in power and had tight control over expressions of opinions.
It was only from 1986 with glasnost, and later in 1991, the collapse of the Soviet Union, that Soviet historians began to express opinions different from the government.
I am not completely surprised by this source because this cartoon pointed out that the USA seemed to be the aggressor or had overreacted when at the height of the tension, the world seemed to remember only the missiles in Cuba.
The tree planted in Kennedy’s garden was bigger and intruded more into Khrushchev’s garden, which symbolized the Soviet sphere of influence.
The Americans had already established its influence in Turkey, Japan and West Germany.
The American missiles in Turkey were aimed at the southern part of the Soviet Union, and Japan and West Germany were close allies of the USA, flanking the eastern and western side of the Soviet Union.
The British had always been close allies of the Americans, and it is surprising that they had published a critical view of the Americans.
In Source E, it shows the Americans depicted in a negative light, as a pirate carrying an atomic weapon and throwing the lasso, ‘blockade’ around Cuba.
Source D agrees in terms of how USA was the aggressor in the CMC as it states ‘The United States was ready to use nuclear weapons to defend Berlin’ which indicates that the USA was prepared to use force against USSR during the Cold War.
Furthermore, the source describes how Fidel Castro allied Cuba with USSR after the Bay of Pigs incident which, based on my contextual knowledge, was a botched assassination attempt conducted by the USA on Castro’s life.
However, Source D does not support E in the dismissive / disrespectful way it referred to Cuba, as a ‘small useless piece of land’, just like Berlin was to the Americans.
In contrast, E portrayed Cuba in a heroic light, showing Castro standing tall and proud and ready to fight against the Americans.
L2 Identifies sources that show yes and No 2m Yes – B, E No – A ; C (about K over-reacting to Cuba being a Soviet base – the branch ‘Cub’ intruding into America’s yard); D (where Sergei said that the Soviet Union need to act to prevent losing face.
Explain Stalin’s use of terror and propaganda helped him to consolidate his control over the Soviet Union.
Award 7-8 marks for two 8 explained factors The use of propaganda is one of the methods Stalin employed to control Soviet society.
His method of control was over culture, mainly in the areas of education and arts.
This was done with the aim of controlling the perception of the people would have towards Stalin and his government.
The existence of Stalin’s opponents were either down played or totally erased.
Both students and teachers were closely monitored in order to ensure total compliance in the teaching and learning of such contents.
As for the arts, only a positive image of Stalin and his programmes could be portrayed by the artists and writers.
This was done by placing pictures and erecting statues of Stalin all over the country.
The image of him was always portrayed positively such as being fatherly, cheerful, popular and intellectual.
As a result, young Russians were brainwashed into worshipping and supporting him.
His use of terror involved the use of purges, detention and labour camps and the secret police to spy on his people.
Following the Kirov affair, Stalin purged the communist party of potential threats, and consolidated his grip with Trotsky to overthrow Stalin and the party.
Positions vacated by those purged were filled up with those loyal only to Stalin and through this, he assured himself of their loyalty since they owed their advancement to him.
In total, some 39 million were executed and another 3 million imprisoned in labour camps; majority of which were largely innocent.
I agree that Stalin’s Five-Year Plans were a disaster for the Soviet Union in some ways.
The plans focused on heavy industries, as a result of which any Russians were denied basic consumer goods that their Western counterparts enjoyed.
The Black Market would make things worse because revenue generated from sales never made it to the USSR Treasury, incurring billions of roubles in losses.
Furthermore, the workers were pushed to their limit in order to make work targets.
Some parts of the economy faced underproduction because factories were held up by shortages of materials.
This resulted in a great deal of wastage when some parts were overproduced.
In the haste to meet production figures, the quality of products was also often sub-standard and potentially hazardous.
The programme was geared towards the production of weapons and resources for war.
The promise they gave to families about improving their lives and increasing consumer goods were not kept.
On the other hand, the five –year plans did help to to speed up the industrialisation of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union had three Five-Year Plans from the 1920s to the end of the 1930s.
Under the first Five Year Plan, output was to be doubled in five years for steel, iron and electricity.
As a result, hundreds of new factories were built, and the industrial workforce expanded.
The Second Five-Year Plan from 1933 to 1937 set new targets for heavy industries, but it also gave more attention to industries that produced goods such as clothing.
However, from 1934 onwards, Soviet Union thought another war might occur and produced more military products.
Transport and communication networks improved greatly during this period, allowing the Soviet Army to move quickly in the event of a war.
The increased production of oil, coal, and steel production enabled the Soviet Union to rise greatly and helped to propel the Soviet Union forward.
By 1941, his proved pivotal in the success of Soviet resistance against the Nazi invasion.
The Soviet people would probably have suffered even more under Nazi occupation.
With the benefit of hindsight, Stalin’s industrialization programme were a success even though they resulted in widespread short term suffering, etc 13 3a) Explain how the weaknesses of the League of Nations and Hitler’s nationalistic goals for Germany contributed to the outbreak of World War II in Europe.
Although the LON could ban the export of oil to Italy, they did not do so.
Britain and France tried to shirk their responsibility as they were caught in an embarrassing bind by Italy.
Then, the LON did not have the political clout or military might to force countries give up their weapons.
When Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931, the League of Nations merely condemned Japan for doing so, resulting in the Japanese representative walking out of the meeting.
Germany was then emboldened to increase the size of its armed forces, starting an arms and naval race.
Britain, the most powerful member of the LON broke the treaty and caused other members to following its example.
Therefore, the failure of the LON was a factor because it showed clearly that it was in no position to stop Hitler from further aggression.
Hitler ‘s nationalistic goals were to restore the territorial greatness and military tradition of Germany.
For this reason, he resented the Treaty of Versailles for imposing harsh military and economic terms on Germany, and was determined to defy and undo these terms.
He also resented the Treaty for breaking up the Austria-Hungarian Empire, and creating the independent states of Poland and Czechoslovakia, and considered parts of these countries as rightfully belonging to Germany.
These nationalistic goals led Hitler to remilitarize Germany step by step, beginning with conscription to beef up the army to 550,000 strong, followed by the navy and the air force, all violating the Treaty of Versailles.
His threat to use military force enabled him to force through Aunschluss, seize Sudetenland and Czechoslovakia.
L2 The appeasement policy was not a mistake as there were many 3problems at that time that did not allow Britain and France to afford a 6 war with Germany.
The casualties and losses during World War One were still huge and Britain and France did not want another war that will cost more young soldiers lives.
Not only that, due to World War One and the Great Depression, Britain and France had no more surplus money left to fight with Hitler, they could not afford to fight the war with Hitler.
Moreover, the most powerful country at that time; the United States did not join the League of Nations, and without the support of the US, no country can go against Hitler.
Without a strong army, navy and support from the US, the appeasement policy was justifiable as it allows Britain and France to grow their army and navy, so that they can compete with Germany.
It bought time for them, and it was a wise idea not to go against Germany without fully prepared, as they will definitely lose.
However, while I think the appeasement policy did help France and Britain in some way, it was a mistake as it had made Hitler bolder and more ambitious.
The appeasement had made Hitler think that France and Britain were weak in dealing issues with him, and each time Britain and France gave in, he asked for more.
For example, when Hitler wanted to conquer Sudetenland, Britain and France agreed to give part of Sudetenland to Hitler.
This eventually emboldened him to conquer Poland which led to World War Two.
Thus, I think appeasement only made the situation worse, it only delayed the war.
Appeasement was a mistake also because it had built the suspicion in Stalin.
Stalin was worried that he might be threatened as Hitler hated the communists and wanted to control the USSR and the League of Nations was not preventing Hitler from doing so.
Stalin asked for help from the league but Britain and France were not interested from Hitler.
It deliberately led to the sign of Nazi-Soviet pact by Stalin, when Hitler offered this to him.
They also agreed to divide Poland among themselves; without the worry that he had to fight two fronts.
Thus, the appeasement was a mistake as it helped Hitler to have more chance to invade other the countries that had never belonged to Germany and Nazi-Soviet pact definitely.
