May, 2014 Candidate Number: 001127 0043 Supervisor: Mr Laurence McLellan Word Count: 3992 Abstract: After the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba on the 14th of October, 1962, U.S President, John.
F Kennedy presented a televised speech proclaiming the enforcement of a strict quarantine on all shipments to Cuba.
This question is worth investigating as had this historical act of brinkmanship been handled or responded to differently, perhaps the world may have already witnessed its first full-scale nuclear war.
This investigation analyzed the two dominant forms of historiography surrounding this matter of historical debate.
These historiographical perspectives are the Post-Revisionist perspective, typified by John Lewis Gaddis, and the Orthodox perspective, expressed most notably by James Hershberg.
Since the missiles were deployed secretly and the USA was unfamiliar to direct foreign threats, Khrushchev must have anticipated a response from the USA after the missiles were discovered.
However, President Kennedy’s lack of willingness to consider that the weapons were intended to defend Cuba displays ignorance and over-reaction on the Kennedy administration’s behalf.
Deteriorating Relationship Between the USA and Cuba....................................6 * 1.
Soviet Re-Assurances of Defensive Intentions.....................................................8 * 1.
The Orthodox Perspective.....................................................................................10 * 2.
The Soviet Union’s Deception...........................................................................11 * 2.
Lost In Translation.................................................................................................13 * 3.
On the 14th of October, 1962, the U.S Central Intelligence Agency verified that covert Soviet nuclear missiles were stationed in Cuba, a Sovietallied, communist nation situated 90 miles from the United States coastline.
This discovery instigated thirteen days of political tension and negotiations between these two nations and their leaders, American President, John F Kennedy and USSR leader, Nikita Khrushchev.
On October 22nd, 1962, President Kennedy presented a speech describing the nuclear arms buildup in Cuba.
However, historians have very different interpretations of this act of brinkmanship’s justifiability.
This essay will analyze the different perspectives surrounding this question, leading to the author’s own conclusion.
This is because the Cuban nuclear weapons may have been installed by the Soviet Union purely to defend Cuba’s security and government.
During the crisis, President Kennedy was presented with this explanation, however, he rejected it.
Kennedy also expressed his definition of the word “offensive weapon” in this speech, and in doing so, depicted the Cuban weapons as being a threat to U.S security.
In his address to the U.S public on the 22nd of October, 1962, President Kennedy emphasized the “offensive” characteristics of the Cuban missiles.
In fact, the word “offensive” was repeated 13 times throughout this speech.
As these extracts of the speech reveal, the USA was insistent on expressing to the American general public that the missiles were intended to serve an undeniably offensive purpose.
This account was written to presenting a persuasive explanation of why these historical events occurred.
The author himself is award 5 Lauren Zammit Extended Essay winning, and renowned in his field.
However, it is also important to note that this historical source is limited by its purpose to persuade.
This results in only Gaddis’s limited perspective of the crisis being presented, when this subject is open to different interpretations.
An understanding of what motivated Khrushchev to provide Cuba with missiles and why Castro was willing to agree to this controversial plan, will be explored in this section of the essay, providing a deeper insight into the Post-Revisionist historiographical perspective of the crisis.
However, the U.S government remained determined to limit Castro’s acts to very specific U.S approved guidelines.
Historian, John Swift, suggests that Castro viewed this intervention as “a barrier for Cuba overcoming it’s domestic issues” , motivating the Cuban leader to halt the USA’s interference in Cuban affairs.
Castro achieved this by nationalizing U.S owned land and businesses within Cuba.
The nation which previously assured “a market for half of Cuba's sugar crops and two-thirds of its foreign exchange” , was no longer consuming Cuban products.
Assistance from the Soviet Union was able to soften the negative economic toll this had on Cuba.
The USA’s desire to contain communism outside of the United States is exhibited through examples, such as the announcement of the “Truman Doctrine” in March, 1947, which proclaimed the United States would provide aid to nations attempting to resist communism.
These aggressive acts provoked Cuba to seek diplomatic assistance from the UN in July of 1960.
These false words of assurance were followed by the Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961, an attack in which CIA-trained Cuban refugees were sent into Cuba to incite a political uprising to deposit Cuba’s communist government.
The U.S President was determined to keep the White House’s involvement in the engineering of this attack strictly covert.
The embarrassment of the Bay of Pigs invasion did not stop United States attempts to remove Castro from his position of power.
Primary sources, such as a CIA summaries of the objectives of Operation Mongoose, , highlight the CIA’s intent to initiate revolution via establishing bases for guerrilla action, sabotaging Castro’s military and spreading anti-Castro propaganda to reduce popularity towards the Cuban regime.
Reports also reveal attempts to assassinate Castro and significant members of his government.
Krushchev’s desire to supply Cuba with protective armaments was re-affirmed on multiple occasions.
Cuban President Dorticós’ address to the United Nations General Assembly in October of 1962 is one such example.
In this meeting the Cuban representative affirmed ""If we are attacked, we will defend ourselves.
Furthermore, on September 11th, 1962, a Soviet government statement was made, clarifying the defensive nature of any weapons within Cuba.
However, as the aforementioned evidence implies, these weapons may have been deployed to serve a purely defensive purpose for Cuba.
The aggressive acts of the USA towards Cuba, such as the destruction of Cuban targets and attempts to undermine Castro and his regime, contributed towards Castro’s desire to receive defensive aid.
The intention of the weapons to defend has also been supported by the aforementioned statements of Soviet and Cuban spokesmen.
On a side note, it is important to question how accurately Kennedy’s language captured his judgement of the missiles.
The purpose of the speech was to persuade the United States public to support the dangerous policy which the USA was about to pursue.
Because of this purpose, one is left to consider whether Kennedy’s labeling of the weapons accurately captured his conviction of the weapons, or whether this was merely a dysphemism which enabled Kennedy to cunningly express a threatening, persuasive message.
The limitations of this source should be acknowledged when we make the assumption that Kennedy’s claims accurately reflected this political figure’s thoughts and emotions.
John Lewis Gaddis, believes that the missiles were placed in Cuba to protect the nation from future attacks from the United States.
Should the U.S have succeeded in their attempts to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro, it would have been a significant strike against the communist revolution worldwide.
Gaddis believes what Khrushchev intended was to spread revolution throughout Latin America, and saw Cuba as his portal to achieving this objective.
A point to take into consideration when analyzing Cold War historiography is the advantageous access Post-Revisionist historians have to more historical sources compared to Orthodox historians.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the historical archives in Russia were accessible for the first time for study and analysis.
Thus, post-revisionist historians would have had access to more historical evidence to base their interpretation of history upon.
Traditionalists would not have had such advantageous access these previously unavailable materials, which is a limitation of their perspective.
Khrushchev had the option to install less provocative, shorter range missiles in Cuba to prevent an invasion of American troops.
These historians view the quarantine which Kennedy enforced as the “optimal” strategy to the intolerable Soviet Missiles in Cuba.
These arguments have been used by Orthodox historians to rebut Post-Revisionist claims that the Soviet missiles were intended solely to defend Cuba.
Several restrictions were placed upon those involved in the deployment of the Cuban Missiles to assure the mission remained covert.
The modern publication date of this source is another advantage as it would have enabled the author access to a larger array of sources when compared to, for example, historians publishing a similar summary in the mid-1900’s.
Since this is written and published by a United States government organization, purposeful omission of particular facts, censorship of content, and patriotic/political bias are all aspects of this source which limit its validity.
President John F Kennedy specifically quoted extracts of this report in his address to American public in his October 22nd speech.
Because Khrushchev attempted to conceal the Cuban missiles, the U.S.A was adamant that the Soviet Union planned to utilize the weapons in an offensive manner, not a defensive one.
Kennedy utilized such evidence to justify his speech on October 26th, 1962.
May and Philip D Zelikow have addressed this question, believing had of Khrushchev announced his intentions or privately warned Kennedy that he planned to base missiles Cuba, the crisis would have unfolded differently, or, there may have been no crisis at all.
Hershberg believes Khrushchev placed intermediate range nuclear missiles in Cuba in an attempt to resist the emerging lead the United States was developing in the deployment of strategic missiles.
Lost In Translation At the beginning of his speech, Kennedy described the characteristics and capabilities of the missiles based in Cuba.
As this description illustrates, President Kennedy viewed strategic weapons and strategic warfare as offensive, and therefore, he would not accept Soviet missiles, especially those deployed in Cuba, proclaiming them to be defensive.
This definition very much differs from Khrushchev’s who via a telegram addressed to President Kennedy on the 26th of October, 1962, stated in this telegram “These missiles are a means of extermination and destruction.
But one cannot attack with these missiles...only people, troops, can attack.
When questioning why President Kennedy reacted how he did to the discovery of nuclear weapons directed towards the USA, it is important to take the historical context of the crisis into careful consideration.
The USA’s geographical location shielded it from major border-related threats and conflict.
Excluding events such as its arguable peak of vulnerability, the Japanese attack of Pearl Harbor during the Second World War, the USA had not experienced many circumstances in which its territory had been directly targeted.
Meanwhile, the Soviet Union during the 20th century alone had been exposed to three major wars, all of which negatively impacted the nation.
Whilst the weapons may have been intended by Khrushchev to be purely defensive, this definition did not align with the Kennedy administration, who perceived the characteristics of these long range, extremely dangerous missiles as intended to serve an offensive purpose.
On October 26th, 1962, U.S President, John F Kennedy, conducted an astounding act of brinkmanship as he informed the world of the Soviet Union’s deployment of “clearly offensive” nuclear missile bases in Cuba.
Through analyzing the events which influenced President Kennedy to conduct this act, it has been revealed that this act of brinkmanship was only partially justified.
This act of brinkmanship was unjustified because the President did not take into consideration other probable explanations for the missiles’ deployment.
As the critical analysis from historians Gaddis and Stern argue, the USSR provided Cuba with these weapons to defend the nation.
The USA’s attempts to undermine Cuba’s communist revolution throughout the early 1960’s justified Cuba’s need for defensive weapons.
In addition to this, on multiple occasions, the USSR and Cuban diplomats emphasized that if weapons were to be deployed in Cuba, their purpose would be strictly to defend.
Despite these multiple indicators, President Kennedy mistook these defensive weapons for offensive ones.
Alternatively, as historians Hershberg and authors Ernest R May and Philip D Zelikow suggested, the USSR’s determination to conceal the nuclear missiles supported Kennedy’s fixed mindset that the weapons were of a threatening nature, hence, justifying this act of brinkmanship.
Finally, the characteristics of these nuclear missiles and their damage potential played a key role in Kennedy’s desire to immediately dismantle the nuclear weapons.
Through the differing applications of the word “offensive” used by the Soviet Union and the United States, it appears that these two nations defined this extremely important term very differently to one another.
As Sergei Khrushchev argued, the Cuban missile crisis can be viewed as psychologically inflicted crisis.
Whilst Swift condemns John F Kennedy for letting the attitude towards communism impair his good-judgement, those such as Gaddis exhibit empathy towards the USA, scolding Khrushchev’s lack of consideration for the US’s predictable negative reaction to the crisis.
Taking this evidence and varying historical analyses into consideration, it has been revealed that President Kennedy’s act of brinkmanship of October 26th, 1962, was only a partially justified.
Khrushchev couldn’t have expected the USA not to react to the crisis, especially due to the covert characteristic of the missiles and the USA’s lack of historical direct foreign threats.
However, Kennedy’s lack of consideration for alternate explanations for the nuclear weapons, such as the viewpoint of Castro, was a significant mistake made by the American President during this critical period of Cold War history.
Castro, the missile crisis, and the Soviet collapse, US: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
How the United States played Russian roulette with nuclear war, The Guardian.
