Walking on the beach he was acutely aware that on the opposite shore of the Black Sea, in Turkey, there were American military bases with nuclear warheads capable of wiping out Moscow in a matter of minutes.
It was about then that an idea formed in Khrushchev’s mind of placing missiles in a base close to the United States.
His plan to place short-and-mediumrange missiles in America’s backyard would, overnight, create a parity with America’s long-range weapons.
SOURCE C Cuba’s geographical position has always made it very vulnerable to its enemies.
We were sure that the Americans would never reconcile themselves to the existence of Castro’s Cuba.
This question was constantly on my mind, and I frequently discussed it with the other members of the Presidium.
It was during my visit to Bulgaria that I had the idea of installing missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba.
No more weapons to Cuba and those within Cuba withdrawn or destroyed, and you respond by ending your blockade and also agree not to invade Cuba.
From a letter by Khrushchev to President Kennedy during the crisis, 26 October 1962.
SOURCE F Our purpose has been to help Cuba develop as its people desire.
You say it worries you because it lies at a distance of 90 miles from the United States.
When I heard that, I imagine that Khrushchev knew it was the last thing I wanted to hear.
That went against the theory the missiles had been sent to defend Cuba.
The sign in the picture, which states ‘I forbid you to make friends with the Soviet Union’ is making reference to United States involvement in Cuba which, up until 1960, had been considerable.
Until Castro’s takeover of Cuba the United States had a controlling influence in Cuba, but since his arrival in 1960 all United States businesses in Cuba had been nationalised without compensation, leading to the United States breaking off diplomatic relations with Havana and imposing a trade embargo in response to Castro’s reforms.
Cuba and the Soviet Union, both communist states, had established relations in 1959 and then signed trade agreements in 1960.
The cartoon was probably published to show how America was treating another communist country badly, and therefore generate sympathy for Cuba as well as hatred for America.
They both agree that it was on a visit to Bulgaria that Khrushchev decided to place nuclear weapons into Cuba.
However there is disagreement in the sources regarding Khrushchev’s main reason for putting missiles into Cuba.
But Source C sees the reason as being to protect Cuba, with Khrushchev thinking the country was in danger from US attacks and only by moving weapons there would they be able to protect it.
The difference here may well be explained by considering the provenance of the sources.
Source C is taken from Khrushchev’s own memoirs, and he may well want to appear defensive in tone, hence why he explains the move of the missiles as protecting Cuba.
Source B, written by a modern historian, sees it in a more provocative way.
The influence of their rivals spreading is shown in the cartoon as the branches creeping into the gardens, and the fact that both leaders are shown reading the books on pruning portrays that both leaders were concerned over the influence that this may well have.
The cartoon is painted at the height of the Cold War and is reflecting the mood at the time.
The fact that Cuba is the only small branch creeping into the American side, whereas the large branches of West Germany, Japan and Turkey are going into the USSR side, supports the view that the message of the source is that Kennedy’s reaction is over the top – he’s reacting to one small country in the same way that the USSR is reacting to several issues.
They are similar in many respects, and he doesn’t contradict himself; he just increases his demands in the second letter.
In the first letter Khrushchev agrees to remove weapons from Cuba, an offer he continues to make in the second letter, showing consistency.
In the second letter he alludes to why these missiles are there, indicating he feels threatened by United States weapons in Turkey.
Whilst his offer to the Americans largely stays the same, it’s what he wants in return that changes; but he’s not necessarily lying in the first letter.
It does show that Khrushchev’s motive was always Turkey and not Cuba, but it doesn’t show deceit.
Firstly I am not surprised that Khrushchev knew Castro would be angry once he knew of the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba; as the USSR and Cuba were both communist allies Castro would have expected Khrushchev to support Cuba, not abandon them, because America agreed to remove weapons from Turkey.
I am a little surprised that Castro was willing to criticise an ally like this.
By 1992 the Soviet Empire had started to collapse, and the influence of Communism in Eastern Europe was declining.
Therefore I am not surprised that Castro is willing to criticise Khrushchev because the USSR was no longer so important to Cuba.
The strongest source to support this view comes from Khrushchev himself, who in Source C states “everyone agreed that America would not leave Cuba alone unless we did something”, showing that the source strongly supports the view that he wanted to protect Cuba.
As these are his memoirs though he may want to sound like he had Cuba’s interests, rather than forcing America out of Turkey, as his motivation.
Source E echoes this point, as Khrushchev demands that America “agree not to invade Cuba”, showing that he is concerned for their safety.
Source A also indicates that this view is true, as it shows a Soviet cartoon trying to generate support for Cuba against America, showing that the USSR was genuinely concerned regarding Cuba’s safety.
This shows how they were not as concerned for Cuba and that actually they’re only a bargaining chip.
This view is supported by Castro in Source G, who suggests that Cuba was only being used by the USSR to force America to withdraw weapons.
Castro’s reliability might be doubtful though, writing once relations between the USSR and Cuba were less important and the Soviet Empire had collapsed.
Overall, whilst the sources provide evidence that Khrushchev put missiles into Cuba to protect Cuba from the US, it isn’t convincing.
Cambridge International Examinations bears no responsibility for the example answers to questions taken from its past question papers which are contained in this publication.
