At 9 o'clock in the morning on December 1, 1962, the large Soviet cargo ship Arkhangelsk quietly left the Cuban port of Mariel and headed east across the Atlantic to its home port of Severomorsk near Murmansk.
This inconspicuous departure in fact signified the end of the most dangerous crisis of the Cold War.
What was called ""the Beloborodov cargo"" in the Soviet top secret cables — the nuclear warheads that the Soviet armed forces had deployed in Cuba in October 1962 — was shipped back to the Soviet Union on Arkhangelsk.
According to the documents, Soviet nuclear warheads stayed on the Cuban territory for 59 days — from the arrival of the ship Indigirka on October 4 to the departure of Arkhangelsk on December 1.
United States intelligence at the time had no idea about the nature of the Arkhangelsk cargo.
Arkhangelsk carried 80 warheads for the land-based cruise missile FKR-1, 12 warheads for the dual-use Luna launcher, and 6 nuclear bombs for IL-28 bombers — in total, 98 tactical nuclear warheads.
Four other nuclear warheads, for torpedoes on the Foxtrot submarines, had already returned to the Soviet Union, as well as 24 warheads for the R-14 missiles, which arrived in Cuba on October 25 on the ship Aleksandrovsk, but were never unloaded.
The available evidence suggests that the 36 warheads for the R-12 missiles that came to Cuba on the Indigirka also left on Aleksandrovsk, being loaded at Mariel between October 30 and November 3.
In the last twenty years, numerous scholars have published on the issue, each introducing additional evidence and moving the debate forward step by step.
Today's posting brings together the most important pieces of evidence documenting the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba during the Missile Crisis — the most authoritative story so far based on documents.
Although many of the documents included here were previously published in English by the Archive and by the Cold War International History Project, this posting includes three newly translated documents, never available before in English, which provide detailed accounts of the Soviet deployment of missile forces and nuclear warheads and the exact chronology of the deployment.
Former CIA photointerpreter Dino Brugioni takes pictures of FKR and Luna missiles in Cuba, 2002 Both reports read as understated but pointed condemnation of the Soviet General Staff's planning of the Cuban operation.
Statsenko's report describes shortcomings in initial reconnaissance and camouflage and ignorance of local conditions on the part of the Operation Anadyr planners.
Beloborodov's report points to difficulties with storing nuclear warheads in the tropical conditions, unanticipated transportation problems, and the camouflage issues.
His report also reveals the fact that even as the Soviet Presidium was deciding to pull back the strategic missiles (ships carrying parts of Statsenko's division turned around on October 25 rather than challenge the United States quarantine of Cuba), the Soviet support troops in Cuba were given orders to unload the tactical warheads from Aleksandrovsk, and did that during the nights of October 26, 27 and 28-because at that moment, the Soviets were planning to leave tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba.
On the basis of these two reports and all other Soviet documents available today, the following chronology outlines the Soviet decisions relating to the tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba.
May 24, 1962 -original plan for Operation Anadyr included deployment of 80 FKR cruise missiles with nuclear warheads.
Khrushchev augmented the original plan by adding 6 nuclear bombs for IL-28 bombers and 12 short-range nuclear missiles for the dual-use system Luna/Frog.
October 4-Indigirka arrived in Mariel with 36 warheads for R-12, 36 warheads for FKR, 12 warheads for Lunas, and 6 nuclear bombs for Il-28s.
October 22-Presidium discussed the possibility of using tactical nuclear weapons in the event of an American invasion of Cuba.
October 23-Aleksandrovsk arrived in La Isabella with 24 warheads for R-14 and 44 warheads for FKRs.
October 30-Aleksandrovsk ordered back to Severomorsk still carrying the 24 warheads for R-14s, after probably loading the 36 R-12 warheads at Mariel harbor and departing November 3.
November 2-Anastas Mikoyan arrived in Cuba as Khrushchev's special envoy.
November 8-Mikoyan suggested transferring ""all remaining weapons"" to the Cubans after special training.
November 22-Mikoyan informed the Cuban leadership that all nuclear weapons would be removed from Cuba.
The strategic missiles, R-12 and R-14, could only be used by direct orders from Moscow.
To the best of our knowledge, Soviet commanders in Cuba did not have the physical capability to use them without the codes sent from the Center.
Initially, at the Havana conference in 1992, General Gribkov stated that such authorization was given by the central command in the event of a U.S. airborne landing in Cuba.
He presented a draft order providing for such pre-authorization, but that order was not signed by Defense Minister Malinovsky.
According to Gribkov and other Soviet participants of the crisis, such authorization was given by Malinovsky orally to commanders before their departure for Cuba.
This provides indirect support to the argument that it was the understanding of the field commanders that tactical nuclear weapons would be used to repel a United States attack on Cuba.
Even if the official pre-authorization order was not signed by the Defense Minister, we can conclude that in all likelihood, tactical nuclear weapons would most definitely be used in a first salvo if United States forces had landed in Cuba.
The Presidium discussion of October 22 shows that the Soviet top leadership envisioned this scenario as well.
After the most dangerous phase of the crisis was resolved on October 28, and Khrushchev promised to withdraw ""the weapons you call offensive"" from Cuba, the world rejoiced.
However, the Soviet leadership knew better-almost 43,000 troops and all the nuclear warheads were still in Cuba.
Khrushchev sent his right-hand man, Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan, to Cuba to oversee the removal of the missiles, salvage the Soviet-Cuban friendship, and negotiate the future Soviet-Cuban military agreement.
The documents suggest, as of early November 1962, that the Soviet intention was to withdraw the offensive weapons , but keep a massive military base in Cuba and make no more concessions to the United States.
All tactical nuclear weapons, IL-28s and the combat troops except missile support personnel would remain on the island.
This position, however, evolved significantly in the dynamic days of the November crisis.
In his talks with the Cubans, Mikoyan gradually realized that this would not be an easy relationship.
He thought perhaps the best solution could be to strengthen the Cuban defenses but not to keep a large Soviet base.
Because none of the these tactical weapons were mentioned in the Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence and because the Americans were essentially oblivious to their delivery to the island, at the time it seemed to him that it would have been the most natural and logical way to resolve the Soviet-Cuban crisis.
He requested permission from the Central Committee to tell Castro regarding the future military agreement that rather than maintaining a Soviet military base, ""the Cuban personnel with the assistance of our specialists will gradually start to operate all Soviet weapons remaining in Cuba.
As these personnel become prepared, gradually the Soviet people will be replaced with the Cubans.
On November 9, Presidium member Gromyko in a cable approved Mikoyan's new line for negotiations with the Cubans.
Just as soon as Mikoyan presented the idea to his Cuban hosts, Khrushchev decided to agree to the United States demand to withdraw IL-28 bombers, which created a new crisis with the Cubans, who now had good grounds to expect further Soviet concessions and unleashed their fury on Mikoyan.
We will be able to transfer them to you when the Cuban military officials become familiar with them.
This military equipment is incomparably more powerful than any equipment that Cuba currently has.
Issa Pliyev, commander of the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba] currently has.
Over the next several days, the Cubans, from the Soviet point of view, started behaving even more erratically, making the situation more dangerous and unpredictable.
What became clear to Mikoyan during numerous conversations with the Cuban leadership is that the Soviets could not really control their Cuban ally, and that if they were going to maintain Cuba as an ally, they would need to accept the fact that the Cubans would not always follow the Soviet script and that in fact they would develop quite an independent foreign policy.
In these circumstances, transferring nuclear weapons to such an ally would be too risky.
Mikoyan understood that it would be his task to reconcile his hosts to the loss of all the nuclear weapons which they were promised.
He suggested this course of action to the Presidium in a cable written right after midnight on November 22.
Mikoyan met with the top Cuban leadership to explain this decision during the long late night conversation on November 22.
Castro tried to persuade Mikoyan to leave the tactical weapons in Cuba.
The Cuban leader pointed out that the Americans were not aware of the presence of these weapons on the island, and that the Soviets did not have to keep a military base in Cuba but could train the Cuban military, as the initial agreement had stipulated.
He begged the Soviet representative to leave him the weapons that meant so much to the Cubans.
On November 25, the Soviet support troops started pulling the warheads from the storage facilities to the port of Mariel and loading them on the Arkhangelsk.
The loading was completed and the ship departed Cuba on December 1, 1962.
Previously declassified United States documents published by the National Security Archive show that United States intelligence did not detect any of the nuclear warheads in Cuba during the crisis — either for the strategic missiles or for the tactical delivery systems — and close examination of United States overhead photography by author Michael Dobbs established that United States intelligence never located the actual storage bunkers for the warheads.
United States planners assumed the missile warheads were present in Cuba, but discounted the possibility — even after seeing the dual-capable Luna/Frog in reconnaissance photographs as early as October 25 — that tactical warheads were on the island or might ever be used.
United States analysts completely mistook the FKR cruise missiles for the conventionally-armed Sopka coastal defense missiles, and never understood the likelihood that the United States base at Guantanamo would be smoking radiating ruin from an FKR nuclear warhead if the United States invaded.
Report of Major-General Igor Demyanovich Statsenko, Commander of the 51st Missile Division, about the Actions of the Division from 07.12.62 through 12.01.1962.
This contemporaneous after-action report, published here for the first time in English, provides invaluable detailed information on the deployment of the 51st missile division as part of the Soviet Group of Forces in Cuba.
While the report describes the difficulties of the deployment, it also points to shortcomings of the General Staff planning for the deployment.
Memoir of Lieutenant General Nikolai Beloborodov, head of the Soviet nuclear arsenal in Cuba.
This memoir-report was written by Nikolai Beloborodov in the 1990s, most likely on the basis of his own contemporaneous after-action report.
It provides details of transportation, deployment and removal of nuclear warheads from Cuba.
His report also reveals the fact that even as the Soviet Presidium was deciding to pull back the strategic missiles , the Soviet support troops were given orders to unload the tactical warheads from Aleksandrovsk, and did so during the nights of October 26, 27 and 28 — because at that moment, the Soviets were planning to leave tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba.
It is not clear from this report whether the warheads for R-12 missiles were loaded back on Aleksandrovsk before it sailed back to Moscow on November 3 but other evidence suggests that was the case.
This is the original General Staff plan of Operation Anadyr presented to the Soviet Presidium on May 24 and finally approved by the Soviet leadership on June 10, 1962.
Defense Minister Malinovsky presented these proposals on expediting the shipments of weapons to Cuba and augmenting the deployment with additional tactical nuclear weapons.
After Khrushchev's decision on September 7, Malinovsky and Zakharov sent a revised deployment plan to the Commander of the Soviet Group of Forces.
The addition of Lunas and bombs for Il-28s was approved by the top leadership, but Khrushchev canceled the deployment of R-11s.
Orders to the 12th Main Directorate-the unit of the Defense Ministry responsible for nuclear warheads-confirm the addition of 12 Luna warheads and 6 bombs for Il-28s to be shipped to Cuba.
General Anatoly Gribkov, one of the principal planners of Operation Anadyr stated in 1992 that the memo reflected the oral instructions that commanders received in Moscow before their deployment to Cuba.
The existence of this draft suggests that it was Malinovsky's preferred option but Khrushchev probably had not approved it-therefore the memo was never signed.
However, it is clear that Soviet commanders in Cuba had the capability to launch tactical nuclear weapons, and many of them subsequently stated that they had received pre-delegation instructions orally.
Malinovsky Report on Special Ammunition for Operation Anadyr, 5 October 1962.
The Defense Minister's report to Khrushchev about the progress of shipping of Soviet armaments to Cuba specifically states that Aleksandrovsk was fully loaded and ready to sail.
Moscow issues strict orders prohibiting local commanders from using tactical nuclear weapons.
This concern on the part of the central leadership gives indirect support to Gribkov's argument that local commanders were instructed in the spirit of the September 8 memo-that in case of an American attack, they had the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons.
Now Khrushchev wanted to make it very clear that under no condition were tactical nuclear weapons to be used.
The telegram instructs Pliyev that tactical nuclear warheads would most likely be left in Cuba under his control.
Anastas Mikoyan, who was negotiating the resolution of the Soviet-Cuban Missile crisis with the Cuban leadership, came to the conclusion that it would be inexpedient to keep a full-scale Soviet military base in Cuba.
He requested Presidium approval for him to present this idea to the Cubans.
The proposal was approved in the telegram signed by Gromyko on the next day.
In this conversation, the first one after Khrushchev decided to remove Il-28s from Cuba, Mikoyan was trying to assure Fidel Castro that the Soviet Union was not abandoning its Latin American ally and would make no further concessions to the United States.
He informed Castro that the CC CPSU passed a resolution to leave all the remaining weapons in Cuba and to transfer them to the Cuban Army over time.
This telegram orders Pliyev to load all tactical warheads on steamship Atkarsk and send them back to the Soviet Union.
This might have been a draft cable, anticipating an imminent policy change, or there might be a mistake in the date, which was transcribed from an original that is not available.
We know from Beloborodov that on November 22 all tactical nuclear weapons were still in Cuba, that they only started to be pulled to the Mariel pier on November 25 and that loading lasted till November 30.
Also, they were loaded and shipped back to the Soviet Union on Arkhangelsk, not Atkarsk.
This telegram was probably the basis of General Gribkov's oft-cited assertion that all Soviet tactical weapons left Cuba on November 20, 1962.
This telegram was sent by Mikoyan either right after midnight on November 22, or late in the evening on November 21 but put into his logbook as of November 22.
Mikoyan was scheduled to have a meeting with the entire top Cuban leadership to discuss the future of the Soviet-Cuban military agreement.
By this time, Mikoyan came to the conclusion that leaving tactical nuclear weapons in the hands of the Cubans was dangerous, so he requested from the Central Committee to approve his suggestion-to tell the Cubans that the Soviet Union had an ""unpublished law"" prohibiting transfer of nuclear weapons to third parties.
Most likely, Mikoyan made up this ""law"" for the occasion, but it seems to have stuck as a precedent for future Soviet policy.
This cable signed by Gromyko approves Mikoyan's suggestion from the previous night and categorically states that he was to tell Castro and the top Cuban leadership that all tactical nuclear weapons would be removed from Cuba.
Mikoyan admitted that they were still in Cuba and that the Americans indeed had no idea that they were deployed, but that the Soviet Union decided to pull them back due to the ""unpublished law"" prohibiting the transfer.
This memcon provides an extraordinary glimpse into the microcosm of the Soviet-Cuban relations and helps one understand the depth of Castro's humiliation at the Soviet hands during the Cuban missile crisis.
For him, the resolution of the crisis meant that he was abandoned by his Soviet ally and left to the mercy of the American imperialists-because the Cuban security now depended not on the powerful Soviet weapons but on the United States non-invasion assurances, which the Cubans were not inclined to trust.
There is a Malinovsky cable dated October 30 ordering the commander of the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba to load the R-12 warheads on the Aleksandrovsk and send to Severomorsk; and the CIA retrospective in January 1963 of overhead photography of the Aleksandrovsk's movements placed the ship at Mariel on November 3, at sea on November 10, and back at Severomorsk on November 23 with ""missile nose cone vans"" on deck.
Beloborodov's account has Aleksandrovsk leaving Havana on October 30, but it is likely that he is referring to the order from Malinovsky.
Less likely is the possibility that the R-12 warheads may have remained for the Arkhangelsk to carry.
In the Defense Ministry cables that were transcribed by Russian veterans for publication in 1998, one dated November 20 orders the commander of the Group of Soviet Forces to load all tactical warheads on ""steamship Atkarsk""; but Beloborodov's account specifically cites the Arkangelsk, not the Atkarsk, and the cables between Mikoyan and Moscow place the decision to withdraw the tacticals only on November 21 and 22.
The Defense Ministry transcription may be misdated, or if the date is correct, perhaps the Ministry was already anticipating the political decision.
In this document, the number of the missile division is given as the 43rd missile division, but in the military documents from the fall of 1962, the number of the division is consistently the 51st missile division.
Most likely, the number was changed when the division was reorganized in the summer, according to the General Staff directive of June 13.
