American spy planes discovered the Soviets had installed missiles with nuclear warheads in Cuba with enough range and power to destroy much of the southeastern United States.
President John F Kennedy was advised to send in the military to take out the missiles, but instead demanded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev remove them.
The Soviets publicly removed all the missiles, the United States promised never to invade Cuba, and the United States removed similar American missiles that had recently been installed in Turkey, near the Soviet border.
Kennedy's capitulation about Turkey was concealed from the American public at the time.
That deal remained a secret from most Americans, however, and contributed to the myth of Kennedy being a strong president who stood up for the United States.
President Kennedy meeting with Soviet Ambassador Andrei Gromyko at the White House.
Sending nuclear weapons 4 Intelligence failure and response 5 Photography 5.
Jupiters 7 American options 8 Soviet Missiles in Cuba 9 Naval Quarantine 10 Public Alert 10.
Jupiters in Turkey 12 Khrushchev blinks 13 Aftermath 14 Bibliography 14.
The Communist logic, following Lenin, was that the economic health of capitalism depended on its exploitation of the wealth of the Third World.
Russia would give military and diplomatic support to anti-colonial, anti-capitalist proCommunist movements.
The new slogan of the left across the globe was that America—run by and for the benefit of giant corporations—had succeeded fascism as most dangerous agent of imperialism.
I had an hour alone with President Kennedy immediately after his last meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna at that time,"" Reston reported.
Khrushchev had assumed, Kennedy said, that any American President who invaded Cuba without adequate preparation was inexperienced, and any president who then didn't use force to see the invasion through was weak.
Cuba Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's first important opportunity to employ the strategy came in 1962, when the United States seemed on the verge of rolling back the first pro-Communist regime in the Western Hemisphere, Cuba.
In the first months after the bearded guerrilla captain came to power in 1959, Washington was willing to overlook reports that he was a true Marxist–Leninist, not merely some agrarian reformer.
By 1960 Cuba had become a Soviet satellite; and President John F Kennedy ordered the CIA to destabilize his regime.
Embarrassed, Kennedy cut off dollar trade with Cuba, while the CIA stepped up its sabotage; rumors abounded about a new invasion, this time by the Marines.
The rumors were in fact disinformation designed to frighten and weaken Castro.
As a loyal Democrat who had learned the ""lesson"" of Korea, Kennedy believed in the containment strategy, and rejected rollback.
Obviously it was far too little to defeat an American invasion that seemed imminent.
Without consulting his strategists, Khrushchev personally concocted a reckless scheme; Cuban leaders, terrified for their own safety, eagerly accepted it.
Fidel Castro rejected warnings that acceptance of the missiles would make Cuba a helpless pawn of the Kremlin, and he ordered his intelligence agencies to stop studying the matter.
Beginning in July, 1962, Khrushchev sent in 70 ships loaded with a billion dollars' worth of munitions—including 42 IL-28 nuclear bombers , 24 surface-to-air anti-aircraft missile complexes , and 42,000 troops.
Possible range of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba Most ominously, he delivered 42 medium-range SS-4 ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads, and began loading 24 intermediate-range SS-5 IRBMs.
They could hurl H-bombs to any target from Washington to the Panama Canal.
Besides deterring an invasion, they would help redress NATO's lead in strategic weapons; above all the missiles on America's doorstep would enhance Soviet prestige across the world.
Intelligence failure and response Kennedy believed Soviet assurances that there were no missiles—and warned Moscow there had better be none.
A breakdown in data gathering prevented the CIA from convincingly refuting Moscow's cover story.
The missiles were discovered by a lone U-2 reconnaissance plane on October 14.
Kennedy was stunned, and immediately assembled a high-level emergency group, called ""ExComm"" , to immediately propose a solution.
Although the president and his brother Robert Kennedy , the Attorney General, distrusted men in uniform, they brought in a close friend General Maxwell Taylor , the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
The other chiefs distrusted Taylor's dovish viewpoint and his inability to articulate their urgent advice.
The Pentagon's civilian voice on ExComm was Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
McNamara largely ignored his generals and admirals and generally took a dovish position.
ExComm decided that the SS-4 and SS-5s would not upset the strategic balance of power, but nevertheless represented a challenge to American prestige; they had to be removed, even at the risk of threatening war.
When Navy Secretary Paul Nitze was added to ExComm, he forcefully argued the services' viewpoint that the missiles were highly destabilizing.
At its critical September 19, 1962, meeting it decided that the intelligence contained no evidence that the Soviets had sent nuclear missiles to Cuba, and it unanimously concluded that on balance they would not do so in the future.
Kennedy trusted the USIB and repeatedly denied there were Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba.
Intelligence photo showing Soviet IRBM missile site in Guanajay Cuba Oct 23 1962 High-altitude U-2 aircraft flown by the United States Air Force, took photographs that were analyzed by the National Photointerpretation Center , a joint CIA-military analytic group.
The United States could tolerate a gradual evening out of the strategic balance if it took several years and so permitted political adjustments as it proceeded and at least tacit understandings, if not formal ones, on a whole range of matters including arms control.
What Washington could not accept was a swift, sudden, and secret shift in the strategic equation by using a new threat of nuclear weapons that would cause massive political and diplomatic upheaval.
However, these reports were potentially of such importance that they required unequivocal verification before action could be taken, Photography was essential in determining the range, power, and completion of Soviet missiles.
The challenge was being able to run a photographic mission above range of detection, and Surface-to-Air-Missile range.
Lockheed designer Clarence L ""Kelly"" Johnson led a project to create a light, high altitude aircraft capable of carrying photographic equipment over hostile territory.
New lens designs were needed to function adequately at these altitudes.
James Baker was one of the contributors of lens designs to function at approximately 65,000-80,000 feet.
Photographic Interpretation After a U-2 Mission was flown, duplicates were made from the film taken.
One set remained at the base for safekeeping, the other was flown to Washington to be analyzed.
The film would then be delivered to an elite team of CIA photo interpreters, who worked primarily in a vacated automotive building, to remain unknown.
Using different methods, the CIA was able to keep the Government informed on the type, range, and completion of the missile sites.
Low Level Photography Throughout the later parts of the Crisis, low level reconnaissance flights were run by the United States.
Through the use of the RF-101C ""Voodoo"", the F-8 ""Crusader"" and the newly designed KA-18A Stereo Strip Camera, the CIA photo interpreters were able to update the United States in detail on the status of the Soviet missiles.
These low level flights provided critical information, but also presented a higher risk.
By contrast America had far more weapons capable of reaching the Soviet homeland.
Jupiters In early 1962, an Air Force squadron of 15 Jupiter medium range ballistic missiles became operational in Turkey; two squadrons were deployed in Italy but due for retirement.
The ExComm heard that Jupiters were ""obsolete""; lacking good military advice they concluded they were therefore worthless.
The Jupiters were set up in the open and burned kerosene and liquid oxygen.
A Jupiter on alert could be launched on 15 minutes notice; the comparableSoviet SS-4 SS-5 missiles probably needed four or five hours to launch.
Missiles in Cuba could knock out much of the United States bomber force, and if Kennedy permitted the first 40 to stay, Khrushchev could have shipped hundreds more.
Third, the ""air"" solution would use tactical air power to shoot them out.
Op-Plan 3-14 would land one Marine and five Army divisions and seize the entire island within two weeks.
The Joint Chiefs recommended the air solution, but ExComm perhaps misunderstood what a ""surgical strike"" would entail.
Finally Robert Kennedy vetoed the air solution, saying it would be too much like Pearl Harbor in reverse.
The sea option was chosen; it would not require any casualties, and it would block the arrival of nuclear warheads.
The SS-4 itself was capable of striking primary targets such as Washington, Houston, and anywhere in the southeastern United States.
U-2 photos installations of the SS-5 ""Skean"", an IRBM capable of delivering a nuclear warhead up to 2,530 miles.
With installations of the SS-5, the Soviet Union had the capability of striking most of the United States.
Further complications were added to the crisis by the placement of SA-2 missiles, the SA-2 a SAM or Surface-To-Air-Missile.
These missiles had the ability to shoot down any aircraft, even the high flying U-2.
When operational, these sites would pose a great danger to the photographic missions, necessary for the United States to keep informed on the crisis.
On October 27, 1962, a U-2 photographic mission over Cuba was shot down by a Soviet SA-2 SAM missile.
Some on the ExComm called for air strikes upon that SAM site, or further military action.
Naval Quarantine On October 21, 1962, an agreement was reached by the ExComm after much debate, to place a ""Quarantine"" around Cuba, in order to prevent more Soviet Missiles from being delivered.
The call for a quarantine was a difficult one to make, because a blockade was technically an act of war, and needed caution to avoid a misunderstanding.
The next step would either have been a complete blockade, or perhaps the air strike option.
The United Nations The United States made vigorous efforts to gain international support, through organizations such as the Organization of American States, and the United Nations.
For example, UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Zorin, and publicly showed the U-2 photography for the first time, gaining international support in the process, while proving that the missiles did exist.
Secret negotiations Jupiters in Turkey The United States had stated early in the crisis that if the missiles were not voluntarily removed, the Air Force would remove them through aerial attacks.
As the time drew near to the last exchanges between Washington Moscow, the United States prepared its final offer.
Robert Kennedy paid a secret visit to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin regarding the Jupiter type NATO missiles stationed in Turkey; both realized that this may be the deciding factor in deciding the outcome of the crisis.
Kennedy revealed that he had been authorized to agree to the removal of the missiles, but not under pressure or in any way a publicized quid pro quo manner.
This could not be done publicly or unilaterally in order to comply with NATO agreements, as well as world opinion of both parties.
Dobrynin and Kennedy agreed, and Dobrynin rushed off to get a message through to Moscow.
Even before the deal, however, America had already considered removing the Jupiter IRBM stations from Turkey anyways due to their being rendered obsolete from the advent of submarines with nuclear launch capabilities.
He obeyed the quarantine/blockade, and on October 28 agreed to dismantle, crate and remove the missiles, and never to station offensive forces on the island.
Kennedy demonstrated firmness in crisis, and avoided serious losses in the midterm elections.
Ignoring the military chain of command, he established the pattern of command-post micromanagement over military matters that Lyndon Johnson after 1964 expanded during the Vietnam war.
Conservative Republicans, dissatisfied that Castro had escaped the noose, rallied behind Senator Barry Goldwater and editor William F Buckley.
They redirected the GOP to an aggressive rollback policy of the sort represented by the rejected invasion option.
Realizing how close they had come to war, Kennedy and Khrushchev became friendlier in public.
They signed a test ban treaty that eliminated nuclear testing above ground or in space; the treaty was primarily designed to hobble China and other countries trying to build their first bombs.
The Kremlin vowed never again would Communism be humiliated by raw American nuclear superiority.
The United States response was to add multiple warheads to each missile; the number of strategic warheads thereby doubled from about 5,000 in the 1960s to about 10,000 after 1976.
Che Guevara during the event attempted to have them launch nukes into the United States, and maintained he would have done it had Khrushchev not ordered them to stand down in a special issue of the Socialist newspaper The London Daily Worker.The incident also contributed to the Sino-Soviet split.
China and the Maoists reacted by viewing the post-Stalinist Moscow leadership of the global Marxist revolution in the nuclear age as reckless.
The communist monolith was broken over more than just how to implement Marxist theory.
By 1964, China developed its own nuclear bomb and began developing its own foreign policy.
But Washington and the CIA were slow to recognize the Sino-Soviet split and continued to view the worldwide communist movement as being directed from Moscow for another decade.
Kennedy's removal of the Jupiters in Turkey, and his refusal to consult with any allies during the crisis, raised doubts in Germany about America's commitment to Berlin, led France to pull its forces out of NATO, and ruined a proposed multilateral nuclear force.
The Europeans, increasingly prosperous, felt sufficiently well protected.
They were annoyed when Washington wanted them to assume a larger fraction of defense costs, yet never consulted in critical emergencies.
Castro, was now immune from an American invasion, though the dollar embargo continued.
He kept taking Moscow's subsidies until 1992, but independently launched an adventuresome program of subverting pro-capitalist governments throughout Latin America and Africa.
Tens of thousands of Cuban combat troops and military advisers were sent shore up left-wing regimes as distant as Angola and Ethiopia, and as close as Nicaragua and Grenada.
Hundreds of thousands of people would die in civil wars supported by Castro, and it would take the United States three decades and tens of billions of dollars to finally neutralize his efforts.
The economic blockade was briefly lifted by Barack Obama in 2016 as one of the latter's last attempts at pushing through his radical left-wing agenda on the United States, but was eventually brought back by Donald Trump in 2018.
The Cubans see this as one of many crises; The Soviets view it as a confrontation that took place in the Caribbean ; and the United States perceives this as a multidimensional time bomb with international consequences including the future of Berlin.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War excerpt and text search Frankel, Max.
Berlin, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam online edition Fursenko, Aleksandr, and Timothy Naftali.
Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958-1964 , Russian perspective online edition Garthoff, Raymond.
The Struggle over Policy. online edition Munton, Don, and David A Welch.
Focus on ExComm meetings excerpt and text search; also online edition Taubman, William.
The ExComm investigated new information, and thought out all possible options, for President Kennedy to consider.
The ExComm met at unusual times and in unusual manners in order to keep the situation secret for the time being.
Third, the missiles would reduce but not end Soviet strategic inferiority.
Fourth, Moscow had never in the past sent nuclear weapons outside their own borders.
McCone, a businessman, had no expertise in intelligence, Cuba or the Kremlin, and undercut his credibility be departing for a month-long honeymoon as the crisis began to escalate; his warnings were ignored.
Kennedy had decided these missiles were useless and provocative and wanted to remove them.
He therefore was eager to secretly trade them to get rid of the missiles in Cuba.
Eventually, the Soviets agreed to dismantle the missiles in exchange for American pledges not to invade Cuba and to remove United States missiles from Turkey at a later date.
Cold War1960sDiplomacyCubaSoviet UnionNuclear Defense Navigation menu Personal tools Log in Namespaces Article talk page Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Popular Links Main Page Recent changes New Pages Random page Statistics donate Edit Console What links here Related changes Special pages Printable version Permanent link Page information This page was last modified on February 18, 2022, at 01:43.
