The “secret agreement” accidental firing during a circuits test in 1959, accompanying the 1969 reversion pact between that was blamed on stray voltage.
The warhead bounced out and skidded across the agreement specified that the United States “requires water “like a stone,” but did not detonate.
The standby retention and activation rocket blast killed two technicians and injured in time of great emergency.” one.
This was one, and perhaps the most nuclear weapons on Okinawa dangerous, way that the disproportionate burden carried by this small island prefecture, where two-thirds of the total United States military presence in the country remains, weighed so 1956 Ryukyu Assembly of Elected Officials heavily.
Along with the risk of “reactivation” is demands the withdrawal of all nuclear weapons the troubling possibility of serious from the island environmental hazards at former nuclear sites in Okinawa.
These include the village of Henoko, now also threatened by the planned 1962 first of four Mace missile sites becomes construction of a United States Marine airbase in the operational at Bolo Point, Okinawa. face of deep Okinawan opposition from the grassroots to the Governor.
More than 30 the first official United States admission of the presence million Japanese people sign a petition in of nuclear weapons on the island 2 13 | 13 | 2 APJ | JF radio communication message from the Missile Operations Center at the Kadena Air Base.
Bordne has mentioned the incident in an unpublished memoir based on his United States Veterans Reveal 1962 Nuclear Close diary.
Bordne, who later found to have been mistakenly issued, currently lives in Blakeslee, Pennsylvania, was according to testimonies by former United States one of seven crew members there. veterans given to Kyodo News.
In the fall of 1962, the Soviet Union introduced nuclear missiles into Cuba from where Moscow could target the mainland of the United States.
United States President John F Kennedy and his top advisers then seriously considered military options as a countermeasure, and the two superpowers were on the brink of nuclear exchanges.
The testimonies by the veterans, who gazed into the ""abyss"" of a nuclear war, shed new historical light on a nuclear close call which could have triggered the use of nuclear weapons, highlighting the potential risk of an accidental nuclear launch.
Mace B According to John Bordne, 73, former member There were a total of four Mace B sites in of the 873rd Tactical Missile Squadron of the Okinawa including Bolo Point.
Each site had United States Air Force, several hours after his crew eight missiles which were commanded and took over a midnight shift from 12m. on Oct. controlled by the Missile Operations Center at 28 in 1962 at the Missile Launch Control Kadena.
Center at Yomitan Village in Okinawa, a coded order to launch missiles was conveyed in a 3 13 | 13 | 2 APJ | JF The main daily mission of Bordne, one of the When the launch order was issued, the fiveflight-control specialists called Mech2, was to level ""DEFCON"" scale, or defense condition, maintain the ready-to-launch status of Mace B remained at level 2, one step from starting a missiles.
Theoretically, a launch order should not hour shift at the site, they ""recycled"" a missile, be issued unless DEFCON is raised to 1, which meaning powering down a missile, checking means initiating a military counterattack parts of the warhead, nosecone and flight against enemy forces. control systems and returning it to ready-tolaunch status.
The order was issued from Kadena to all four Mace B sites in Okinawa including Bolo Point, he said.
Finally, the launch officer figured out that the order had been mistakenly issued, Bordne said, but added he has no idea why such an order was issued.
Even though Bordne did not specify According to him, the three-level confirmation which country had been targeted besides process was taken step-by-step in accordance Russia under the order, it is believed to be with a manual by comparing codes in the China considering the Mace B missile range of launch order and codes given to his crew team 2,200-2,300 kilometers. in advance.
It is not clear what caused such a wrong launch ""So, we read the targets out loud.
Out of the order to be issued, but a United States U-2 spy plane four missiles, we had only one headed toward was shot down over Cuba just a few hours Russia.
The other three were not going to before the order was conveyed to the Mace B Russia.
Because the launch directive said you launch all the missiles,"" Bordne said.
His crew team was in charge of four out of eight missiles deployed at the site.
They've got nothing to do with this. seems to have been handled as a military That doesn't make any sense,"" Bordne said. secret.
If we had launched our missiles and they had launched 4 13 | 13 | 2 APJ | JF their missiles, there would be nothing to go Nevada. back to,"" Bill Horn, a 71-year old former colleague of Bordne, recalled of the moment when he listened to the presidential address on Oct., 1962, which made public the Soviet After DEFCON 2 was issued, United States forces took a buildup of a missile base in Cuba. posture to be ready for war within 15 minutes.
The crisis ended on Oct., when Soviet leader ""Everybody in that part of the Air Force, or in Nikita Khrushchev announced that he would the military service, knew at that point in time withdraw nuclear missiles from Cuba. that peacetime would be over, that there would be no more wars to fight...1962 was the closest we ever came to complete annihilation of Ota Masakatsu’s report appeared at Kyodo civilization as we know,"" said Horn, who lives News on March 27, 2015.
Riot knew that if all the missiles were unleashed Police and Okinawan Citizens Face-off over there would not be much left of this world or New Marine Base the people on it.
