President Kennedy announced a blockade on Soviet ships approaching Cuba and for a week a nuclear war seemed a terrible possibility.
Using every diplomatic avenue behind the scenes, Kennedy asked Pope John XXIII to help defuse the tension.
He sent a message to Moscow appealing for negotiations to continue for the sake of peace.
These encouraging signals enabled President Khrushchev to overrule more combative colleagues, withdraw the missiles from Cuba, and portray himself as a dignified peacemaker.
At St Nicholas Church in Leipzig Pastor Christian Führer started regular ‘Peace Prayers’ in 1982 and the small group persevered despite harassment by the secret police.
In 1989 widespread election fraud provoked furious demonstrations across the country.
The East German Church Federation called for a democratic multi-party system, economic reforms, a free press and freedom to travel.
Thousands now attended Monday peace prayers in Leipzig, where they were urged to use nonviolence.
Tension was at its height on 9 October 1989, with thousands of extra Stasi police on the streets, and a bloody confrontation expected.
Three citizens’ leaders met Communist officials in private and agreed that if the protestors remained peaceful so would the police.
After the prayer service 70,000 unarmed people holding lighted candles marched through Leipzig.
Each week numbers increased as prayer services followed by protest demonstrations erupted all over the country.
On 4 November half a million marched in Berlin; on 8 November the entire Communist leadership resigned, and the following night the border between East and West was opened and the Berlin Wall came down.
It took enormous courage for many of these politicians to sit down together, agree to discard some long-held dogmatic principles and accept compromise and change.
It took enormous courage for them to recognise each other's ‘identity’ and agree to each persons’s right to different political aspirations.
It took enormous courage to admit that violence is not the way forward and to pledge themselves to nonviolence and democracy.
Taylor agreed to peace talks with opposition warlords and a delegation of women then kept vigil outside the negotiations in Ghana.
After seven weeks and no cease-fire they escalated their nonviolent protest, forming a human barricade across the doors, so the male negotiators could not leave until agreement was reached.
When security guards tried to arrest the women they threatened to undress a cultural taboo for the guards to witness.
The women went on to work alongside UN Peacekeeping Forces, persuading fighters to hand over their weapons and go back to school.
Liberians elected President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf who, together with Leymah Gbowee, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2011.
Various sources Kenyan Muslims shield Christians A group of Kenyan Muslims travelling on a bus ambushed by Islamist gunmen protected Christian passengers by refusing to be split into groups, according to eyewitnesses.
They told the militants to kill them together or leave them alone, a local governor told Kenyan media.
Some of the Muslim passengers gave non-Muslims headscarves to try and conceal their identities when the bus stopped.
One hundred passengers, mostly women, were on the bus at the time of the attack, according to Kenyan officials.
December 2015 Nonviolent resistance in the South Hebron Hills Residents of the South Hebron Hills experience continual harassment from nearby settlements but remain firm in their commitment to nonviolent resistance.
Each day they graze their sheep in contested areas and resist settler attempts to drive them from their lands.
International volunteers from Operation Dove have maintained a presence there since 2004.
Recently the shepherds, accompanied by the volunteers, were arrested following a nonviolent action during which villagers repaired the road which links At-Tuwani village to Yatta.
This is an example of nonviolent resistance and of the importance of the witness of volunteers.
The volunteers were quickly released and the shepherds were held for several hours, released only after paying a fine.
We name them now before you… People can be invited to come forward to light a candle and, if they wish, name out loud a person who has been an example of peacemaking for them.
Reader 1 We know that we do not go alone, for the path is brightened by those who have gone before us.
Thank you for giving us this example and forgive us for the many times we fail.
