That is correct, sir. before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 1963 JFK: It seems to me . . . we o u g h t . . . to be reasonable.
But I mean by negotiation we're going to have to take our weapons out of Turkey. in ExComm, 4.00p.m. meeting, 27 October 19621 Introduction After 28 years, the history of the Cuban missile crisis remains unsettled.
New information regarding the events of October 1962 is continually released; scholars and former officials still debate the crisis.
One of its more folkloric segments, appearing in both its prelude and its conclusion, has been the story of the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
President John F Kennedy had ordered the Jupiters to be removed from Turkey, perhaps repeatedly, well before the Cuban missile crisis.
His orders, however, were disobeyed or ignored by his subordinates in the bureaucracy.
When the Soviets offered on 27 October to remove the SS-4 1 2 THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES missiles they had shipped to Cuba if Kennedy would dismantle the Jupiters in Turkey, he and his advisers on the National Security Council's Executive Committee refused to discuss such a trade.
They feared, the traditional story continues, a vehement reaction among Turks and other NATO allies, Republicans , and the American public.
The United States might face a loss of credibility, charges that it had sacrificed an ally's security for its own, or Soviet demands for more concessions.
Besides, the analogy between the Cuban and Turkish missiles was specious.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy privately mentioned to the Soviets that the United States would ultimately withdraw the Jupiters in any case, but there could be no explicit trade.
This version is a composite drawn from first-generation accounts of the missile crisis,2 and it is mostly inaccurate.
To be sure, several recent accounts describe more accurately the Jupiter issue or certain aspects of it.
But none discusses the missiles in detail, with the exception of Barton Bernstein's 1980 article, which was written before important new evidence emerged.
Moreover, the first-generation accounts continue directly and indirectly to influence how people look at the crisis despite the availability of the new evidence.
These books, especially Robert Kennedy's Thirteen Days and Graham Allison's Essence of Decision, are still widely used and provide readers with an often distorted version of events.
And, especially in the case of the Jupiters, incorrect or misleading bits from these accounts have continued to crop up in more recent works.
In these ways, the historiographical past maintains a firm grip on the present.
The impact of this should not be underestimated; Cuba is the classic case study of 'crisis management' from which influential lessons are often distilled.
Kennedy's order to remove the Jupiters before the crisis; the analogy between Cuba and Turkey; and the Cubafor-Turkey missile trade.
It will conclude by tying together the revised versions of these issues into a brief summary, followed by a discussion of their implications for defense policy, for analytical applications, and for the historiography of the missile crisis.
Such claims have had the effect of exonerating Kennedy for having left the United States exposed to the Soviets' second letter; he had ordered the Jupiters out previously, so it is claimed, and it was not his negligence but rather the failure or disobedience of others that presented the Soviets with the opportunity to demand a Turkish trade.
As will be seen, however, there is an important distinction to be drawn between Kennedy's previous request that the Turks be consulted regarding the Jupiters' removal and an alleged order for their removal that was not carried out.
Largely as a response to the launch of Sputnik, in December 1957 the United States and its NATO allies had agreed to deploy intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Europe.
This was in one sense an extension of Washington's established policy of relying on strategic bombers stationed in Europe to help deter Soviet aggression.
The United States canvassed potential host countries through 1959 and at one point considered Greece.
If Mexico or Cuba had been penetrated by the Communists, and then began getting arms and missiles from them . . . it would be imperative for us to take . . . even offensive military action.
He could see the reason for [short-range missiles in Greece], but not IRBMs.
Italy would become home for two 15-missile Jupiter IRBM squadrons, while Turkey agreed in October 1959 to take the third Jupiter squadron.
Actual deployment, however, had still not begun by the time Kennedy entered office.
On 11 February 1961 the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of the Congress presented the new administration with a secret report that 4 THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES listed the Jupiters' drawbacks.
Exposed above ground and immobile, they could be easily sabotaged; they had virtually no retaliatory value, being the obvious first targets of a Soviet attack; they were inaccurate; and they burned liquid fuel, necessitating hours of preparation before launch.
The study recommended that '[construction . . . not be permitted to begin' on the sites and that the Jupiters be replaced by solid fuel Polaris submarinelaunched ballistic missiles .11 At least some in the administration agreed.
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Assistant Secretary Paul Nitze, and others had a hand in the Acheson report on NATO, which in March also recommended cancellation.
It is not known to what extent the JCAE report influenced the Acheson report or Kennedy's decision for a review.
But 'it was the foundation for the action we have been taking since that time', McNamara testified in 1963, when the Jupiter withdrawal was truly under way.
In short, in the spring of 1961, the Kennedy administration reviewed the Jupiter deployment and decided to proceed or more accurately, decided not to interrupt the ongoing preparations for deployment.
Suggestions that the Eisenhower administration alone decided to deploy the Jupiters or actually completed their deployment16 are thus incorrect.
When Kennedy came into office, neither deployment of the Jupiters nor even construction of their sites had yet begun, and his administration bears responsibility for the decision to continue the Jupiter deployment despite the JCAE and Acheson report recommendations against it.
Nevertheless, the administration appears to have been predisposed toward cancellation despite the interagency group's ongoing review, or at least wanted to sound out the Turkish government regarding cancellation, because it began approaching Ankara on the matter.
In March or April 1961, Kennedy asked McGhee if the Turks would allow cancellation, and when attending a Central Treaty Organization meeting in late April, Secretary of State Dean Rusk raised the issue with Turkish Foreign Minister Selim Sarper.
This and probably other contacts were made in spring 1961, well before McGhee's interagency group presented its findings on 22 June.
As would be the case repeatedly until after the Cuban missile crisis, however, the Kennedy administration's interest in cancelling the JUPITER MISSILES AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 5 deployment of the Jupiters was easily overcome by Turkish opposition and the administration's own concerns about credibility.
Foreign Minister Sarper objected strongly to Rusk's overtures, citing domestic opposition and morale.
In his 1987 account, Rusk recalled that he then returned to go 'over these Turkish points with President Kennedy, and he accepted the idea of some delay in removing the Jupiters'.19 In this instance, Rusk must be taken at his retrospective word, but there is no reason to doubt that the deployment went ahead with Kennedy's approval.
In the wake of Vienna (and especially with the summer Berlin crisis), the President probably agreed with McGhee's assessment that cancellation of the deployment might be interpreted as 'a sign of weakness'.20 Sources conflict over when the Jupiters became operational either November 1961 or April 1962.
Initially they were manned by United States crews, then handed over to Turkish personnel the warheads remaining in US custody on either 25 May or 22 October 1962.21 Washington did not raise the cancellation issue with the Turks again until May 1962, when Rusk attended a NATO ministerial meeting in Athens accompanied by Paul Nitze.
Late that summer, Kennedy instructed Undersecretary of State George Ball, filling in for Rusk, to contact the Turks once more.
According to Abel and Hilsman, Ball felt it unwise to persist at this point, but Kennedy 'insisted' on removal even at some political cost.
Ball and Nitze then met with the Turkish Ambassador in Washington and encountered equally strong opposition.
There is no better information on these 1962 attempts, but while it is clear that the approaches were made and repelled, it is unlikely that Kennedy 'insisted' on removal he probably just insisted the matter be brought up again.
On 23 August 1962, McGeorge Bundy issued NSAM 181, in which the Jupiters were linked to the disturbing but as of yet merely conventional Soviet military build-up in Cuba.
Bundy noted, The President has directed that the following actions and studies be undertaken in light of new bloc activity in Cuba.
And, if Kennedy had issued an order before 23 August, one would expect it to have been referred to in this document.
It is clear that Kennedy had been interested in negotiating cancellation of the Jupiter deployment, and, later, in the removal of the missiles after deployment, as evidenced by the diplomatic activity in spring 1961 and spring and summer 1962.
But despite Kennedy's lingering concern, there is no evidence that he at any time before the crisis issued explicit orders to remove the Jupiters, and thus no evidence that such orders were disobeyed.
And describing a different point in the discussions, the minutes read 'he President recalled that over a year ago we wanted to get the Jupiter missiles out of Turkey . . .'.27 Too much significance should not be assigned to the wording of minutes or spoken phrases.
Nevertheless these references are interesting in light of the other evidence, which alone more strongly refutes the misconception of Kennedy's 'order' for the Jupiters' withdrawal.
The missiles were still in place, as vulnerable and provocative as before, in October.
The Cuba-Turkey Analogy The Kennedy administration both accepted and rejected the analogy between Soviet SS-4s in Cuba and United States Jupiters in Turkey, sometimes in the same breath.
Acceptance of any parallel between United States missiles in Turkey and Soviet missiles in Cuba would expose the United States to charges of unprovoked aggression, of using a double standard, and of bringing the world to the brink of nuclear war over the same situation that the Soviets had tolerated with only verbal protest.
The administration in fact privately acknowledged the Cuba-Turkey analogy, in the broadest sense, in three distinct ways.
As the audio transcript for 16 October reveals, two of these variations emerged at the beginning of the crisis deliberations.
First, the analogy was drawn in terms of military strategy, in which the Jupiters were seen as logical targets for Soviet retaliation after a United States attack on Cuba.
Second and more importantly, the analogy was drawn at the general, politico-military level.
In this sense, the analogy was between United States clients next to the Soviet Union and Soviet clients next to the United States, and how each superpower might perceive weapons in the other's satellite as a threat.
United States lawmakers drew this general analogy well before the crisis, in early 1961.
Senator Albert Gore privately described the Jupiter deployment to Dean Rusk as 'the kind of provocation which needs to be considered very carefully.
In addition, an NSC staff member devoted a memo on 10 October to 'Attempts to Equate' NATO installations with 'Soviet missile bases . . . being established in Cuba . . .'.37 It is remarkable that these two documents, while each clearly referring to Soviet deployment of surface-to-surface missiles, were drafted before such missiles were actually discovered.
The administration may already have been anticipating the possibility of Soviet strikes against the Jupiters, in retaliation for a pre-crisis United States move against Cuba.
Or, perhaps officials worried that Moscow might justify a non-nuclear military build-up in Cuba by comparing it to the Jupiters.
In any case, the administration was probably confronting the general analogy regarding similar weapons and geography.
The President himself inadvertently but flatly validated the analogy by commenting on Khrushchev's policy, 't's just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBM's in Turkey.
Now that'd be goddam dangerous, I would think'.39 The obvious nature of the general analogy explains why Kennedy chose Turkey out of the blue, the first reference to that country at the second 16 October meeting, to make his point.
Officials would periodically confirm the general analogy throughout the crisis, the CIA at one point concluding that the Soviets might respond to the United States blockade with one of their own 'perhaps against a nation such as Turkey'.40 REJECTING THE ANALOGY Despite its tacit recognition that there was some validity to the Cuba-Turkey analogy, the Kennedy administration also denied the analogy, at certain points in private, and uniformly in public.
On 16 October, after being reminded that the Jupiter deployment was not hypothetical but factual, the President backed away and denied the analogy.
This brief recorded exchange is far too little to go on; it was spontaneous, perhaps a simple error on the President's part from which one can only suppose that Kennedy denied the analogy early on in the crisis, rather than just momentarily.
Kennedy's 16 October response must fall in the first category of denial, that of simple contradiction.
A second way to deny the analogy was to point out how the Jupiter deployment was undertaken by an open alliance , whereas the SS-4 deployment was not.
Z.44 And on 18 October JUPITER MISSILES AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 9 ExComm, according to an official top secret post mortem, agreed that basic principle of the balance of power in the nuclear age . . . was that sensitive areas, such as Berlin, Iran, or Laos, should not be turned into missile bases, and that missile installations only be established pursuant to open military alliances, such as NATO.45 The validity of this distinction is questionable, though one might expect a little self-serving, ex post facto rule-making under the circumstances.
ExComm conveniently defined Turkey away as not being a 'sensitive area' and seemed to imply that the Cuban deployment would have been legitimate and acceptable had the Soviet Union only joined Cuba in an 'open military alliance' before shipping its MRBMs.
And, although the SS-4 delivery was a Soviet initiative, it was welcomed by Fidel Castro.
Fourth and finally, the administration distinguished between openness and secrecy.
The Jupiter deployment had certainly been public in this sense because the Soviets had known of it before and during its execution.
Thus, following Kennedy's logic, the Jupiters were more acceptable because they had not sparked a crisis as the SS-4s did.
A cursory review of popular literature suggests that the Jupiter deployment was 'public' only in the sense that the public could know about it after some investigation.
The October 1959 bilateral agreement was certainly publicized, but, for the subsequent three years, there appears to have been next to no public discussion of its fulfillment.
Three of 10 THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES these references, ironically enough, appeared in reports of Soviet warnings or demands on nuclear weapons in Turkey.
Nor does the policy on the Turkish end seem to have been particularly overt.
The Times reported immediately after the crisis that 'the Turkish Government had never officially said for domestic publication that Turkey possessed missiles'.53 Thus, anyone interested could have learned about the Jupiter deployment with little effort.
But the policy was little known and even less discussed, and the claim that it was public should be qualified.
The arguments the administration offered in denial of the Cuba-Turkey analogy, in short, all have serious weaknesses, but this does not settle the issue; the debate over the analogy continues even today.
Trading the Jupiters ExComm's public denials of the analogy were also betrayed by its recurring consideration of a trade, SS-4s for Jupiters.
For the first few years after the crisis, Kennedy's confidants categorically denied that such an exchange had occurred or even been considered.
This account was first transformed by RFK's Thirteen Days , in which he revealed his meeting with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin on the evening of 27 October.
Beginning on 17 October, a Cuba-Turkey trade was repeatedly considered necessary or desirable by several members of ExComm.
At the end of the crisis, President Kennedy was by far the most ardent proponent of such a trade, suggesting it to the Soviets (through his brother) on 26 October and repeatedly returning the discussion to that subject on 27 October.
Kennedy put in place a contingency plan, for possible use in case the Soviets rejected the United States offer of 27 October, in which he would have the United Nations propose a public trade that the United States would then accept.
The 27 October offer that Moscow did accept included an explicit but private trade under which the Jupiters were withdrawn some five months after the crisis.
Charting ExComm's discussions of a missile trade reveals their impressive extent.
In an ExComm meeting on 18 October, moreover, participants wondered if Khrushchev's goal was to force a withdrawal of the Jupiters.
On 19 October, Secretary McNamara did not advocate a trade, but was convinced that only by NATO giving up the Jupiters in both Italy and Turkey would Khrushchev pull his MRBMs out of Cuba.
He reiterated this opinion the next day during an ExComm meeting, at which Ambassador Stevenson did urge giving up the Turkish IRBMs.
The evidence on the President's attitude at this point conflicts slightly, but it seems clear that he rejected a trade for the moment while leaving it open for future consideration.
On Sunday, 21 October, consideration of a trade continued, first within a State Department group working on UN matters, chaired by Stevenson and attended by Rusk.
RFK polled the others for their responses, and 'there was no disagreement with McNamara's evaluation'.62 However widely accepted the necessity of a swap was, the Attorney General was concerned that Stevenson would offer a trade at the UN prematurely.
United States interest in a trade may have waned temporarily that afternoon, however, at a formal NSC meeting.
The United States naval blockade had succeeded in preventing further Soviet shipments from reaching Cuba, but work on the existing missile sites continued, and ExComm now had to anticipate or try to decide what would happen next.
According to the administration's crisis history, the President and his advisers were struck by 'the fact that the letter did not condition withdrawal of the missiles on a quid pro quo fulfillment of Soviet demands in other parts of the world such as Berlin, elimination of United States bases, or, most importantly, the Jupiters in Italy and Turkey'.69 A new twist in the plot was revealed in 1989 by Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin.
If Dobrynin's account can be believed, he met with Robert Kennedy alone late on the 26th, most likely after the 10.00m.
Dobrynin remarked to RFK that the strong United States reaction to the Cuban deployment was curious considering the presence of Jupiters in Turkey; this comment, Dobrynin claims, was meant rhetorically, not as a substantive proposal.
Whatever the Kennedys' precise intent, Khrushchev apparently took RFK's comment as a cue and thus upped the crisis ante.
If true, Dobrynin's remarkable revelation helps explain the rapid Soviet issuance of the second letter, which traditionally has been seen as a matter of internal Kremlin politics.
More important, it apparently shows that Kennedy was willing to accept a trade late on 26 October; what kind of a trade, public or private, is not known.
But it was he who put the Jupiters on the table, and Khrushchev who called him on it.
The problem was that the Soviet Premier dropped his second letter as a public bombshell, placing the White House in an awkward position.
Stevenson had thus predicted correctly, and the Soviet first letter had indeed proven too good to be true.
The President remained steadfast in his support of a trade despite the dissent.
He repeatedly expressed his conviction that a trade would be necessary and acceptable , particularly in contrast to the military action he saw as unavoidable otherwise.
Bundy, Ball, and General Maxwell Taylor all worried about NATO rejecting a trade or being seriously damaged by it.
In response to a question by Bundy, Ball said he did not think NATO would be 'wrecked', and if the alliance were to fall apart over such an issue, then perhaps it was no longer worth US participation.
This would remove them as a target for Soviet military retaliation in case the United States attacked Cuba.
JFK approved the Trollope ploy in the form of a letter to Khrushchev at that same 4.00m. meeting, and it lay at the core of Robert Kennedy's proposal to Ambassador Dobrynin that Saturday evening.
But even at the last ExComm meeting, at 9.00m., Kennedy still held a Jupiter swap in reserve.
It is inaccurate to summarize, as some have, that in 'early sessions the notion of a swap had been dismissed as unthinkable'.87 Despite the flux of events, on virtually every day of the confrontation, during its beginning, middle, and end, several top officials repeatedly returned to the possibility or eventual necessity of a trade.
According to Dobrynin, it was President Kennedy's interest in a missile deal late on 26 October that triggered the Soviet second letter.
Kennedy and his advisers undoubtedly hoped the Soviets would not raise the Jupiter issue publicly, and studiously avoided broaching it themselves in public.
But before the first Soviet proposal arrived they considered a Soviet Jupiter demand a real possibility, and were relieved by its absence from that first letter.
The Kennedys, it seems, and not Dobrynin, then privately added the Jupiters to the equation, thus triggering Khrushchev's public demand for the Jupiters' removal.
The number of ExComm and other high-ranking officials who initiated or received discussion of a trade is impressive.
Clearly the administration was not unified; there were several shades of thought.
Depending upon the instance and the conditions, some favored a trade, and some rejected it; some rejected it while anticipating it, or were certain of its approach and sought more palatable forms of it.
What is indisputable is that the notion of a trade, broadly speaking, was neither restricted to a few 'doves' like Adlai Stevenson, nor a taboo subject in memoranda or ExComm sessions.
Fourth, policymakers' stances on the Jupiter issue could be flexible or uncharacteristic.
Kennedy changed his view of a trade between 20 October and 26 October, and George Ball his within one day, 27 October.
That same day, most ironically, Ambassador Stevenson flip-flopped and JUPITER MISSILES AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 15 opposed a Jupiter trade.
CIA Director John McCone, easily one of ExComm's staunchest hawks, not only supported a trade at one point, but recommended forcing Khrushchev to accept a trade.
Others, such as Ball, McNamara, and Johnson, either supported or reluctantly accepted a swap.
The claim of Nitze90 and others, that a majority opposed it, is almost certainly untrue and definitely unsupported by the evidence.
And there is no doubt that on the 27th no one found a trade more acceptable than the President did.
Debate continues to surround Robert Kennedy's meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin on the evening of the 27th.
After the 4.00m. meeting in which he had okayed the letter to Khrushchev, Kennedy met in the Oval Office with a smaller group of advisers to discuss how best to follow up on the letter through the RFK-Dobrynin backchannel.
Rusk suggested telling Dobrynin that while there could be no missile deal, the United States would remove the Jupiters after the crisis was settled.
The President and everyone else quickly approved and agreed to keep knowledge of this aspect in the room, being especially sensitive to repercussions in Turkey should it be revealed.
If some time elapsed and per your instructions, I mentioned four to five months I said I was sure that these matters could be resolved satisfactorily.
Khrushchev accepted the United States offer early on the 28th, effectively ending the crisis.
Dobrynin sought to nail down a written agreement which he presented to the Attorney General on the 29th, but RFK responded, according to his notes, Read letter Studied it over night.
That the trade was explicit, despite being private, has now been confirmed by Dobrynin, and most importantly, by Sorensen, who admits having excised RFK's reference to an 'explicit' deal from the notes that became Thirteen Days.
Of course, in this form, the trade featured two important differences from what the Soviets wanted in their second letter.
First, the exchange was private, not public, denying Khrushchev the chance to save face beyond the no-invasion pledge.
And second, the missiles in Cuba and Turkey were not removed simultaneously.
The United States would not withdraw the Jupiters until months later, providing a 'decent interval' with which Washington could additionally avoid the appearance of a trade.
Moreover, from the Kremlin's standpoint, there was theoretically nothing preventing Washington from reneging on the agreement.
Khrushchev had to pull his missiles out, and then hope without recourse that Kennedy would uphold his side of the trade.
However, Robert Kennedy's private, explicit assurance did, as Schlesinger puts it, 'sweeten' Khrushchev's retreat,95 especially if the Jupiters were as painful a thorn in the Soviets' side as they seem to have been.
If there could be no deal, why did Kennedy not simply have his brother tell Dobrynin, 'Absolutely no deal.
As in other cases, there is a gap between what officials said and wrote at the time, privately, and what they have said and written since, publicly.
RFK wrote privately in his notes that notification of the Jupiter removal was a United States concession, part of an explicit deal.
It is understandable for ExComm participants to minimize any concessions they made, but this only strengthens the case for caution in relying on their recollections.
THE 'CORDIER PLOY' In 1987, Dean Rusk revealed other striking new details about the President and the Jupiters at the end of the crisis.
But apart from the fact that Rusk gains little from this revelation if it is false, it is consistent with other evidence in three ways.
First, the Cordier ploy is compatible with Kennedy's role, confirmed by the 27 October ExComm transcripts, as leading advocate of a trade.
Second, the ploy's form, in which the United Nations would propose a trade, reflects Kennedy's preference.
The Cordier ploy, in which the UN would propose the exchange, thus has Kennedy's mark on it.
Third, the Cordier ploy accords with Kennedy's doubts about the Trollope ploy.
The ExComm transcript demonstrates Kennedy's reluctance to accept it, and RFK wrote how theirs was 'a hope, not an expectation'101 that Moscow would give in without getting a public trade.
In this light it is logical that Kennedy wanted to have in advance the machinery in place in advance to trade publicly, should that become necessary, in the less painful manner described by Rusk.
Just because Kennedy installed an apparatus with which he could trade, however, does not necessarily mean he would have traded.
There were alternatives to an air strike or invasion of Cuba if the Soviets stuck to their demand for a public missile trade.
On 27 October, ExComm discussed non-attack measures to apply more pressure to the Soviets.
These included tightening the blockade to include petroleum, oil, and lubricants , mobilizing NATO forces, deploying more warships, and calling up additional air reserve squadrons, the last of which was done that night.
This suggests that Kennedy would have reached for alternatives before resorting to military action.
What is known is that on 27 October Kennedy was sufficiently willing to trade missiles openly that he readied the Cordier ploy, but not so willing that he would not give the Trollope ploy, and perhaps other actions, a chance first.
The success of the Trollope ploy on 28 October allowed Kennedy to avoid a decision on a public deal and prevents a more informed judgment by historians.
Consistent with the notion that the United States agreed to a delayed, explicit trade for the Jupiters is the fact that an interdepartmental task force met immediately after the crisis, on 29 October, to begin their removal.
The IRBMs were withdrawn, with Turkish consent, slightly behind schedule.
At about the same time, the missiles were replaced by Polaris submarines, a less vulnerable and less provocative nuclear deterrent.
One of them, the USS Sam Houston, visited the Turkish port of Izmir to reassure the Turks of Washington's continuing strategic commitment to the area.5 Conclusions The Kennedy administration desired to cancel the deployment of, and then to remove, the Turkish Jupiters during 1961-62.
But fearful of appearing weak and faced with stiff Turkish opposition, it allowed the deployment to be completed.
Although despite this Kennedy remained interested in their removal and continued talks with the Turks, he never, prior to the crisis, ordered their removal.
When the crisis began, Kennedy and his advisers quickly faced the analogy between the Jupiters and Khrushchev's SS-4s in Cuba.
In private, they tacitly acknowledged the analogy while at times denying it.
The tacit acceptance probably explains why officials, with equal speed, began discussing a missile trade as a solution to the crisis and continued to do so through 27 October.
On 26 October, Kennedy probably informed the Soviets that the Jupiters were negotiable, and this apparently led Khrushchev on the 27th publicly to demand their removal as part of a trade.
That day, Kennedy repeatedly argued, more strongly than any of his advisers, in favor of a trade.
Moreover, had Khrushchev not backed down, the President might have traded publicly, via the Cordier ploy, rather than invade Cuba, though there were other actions he might have chosen instead.
The point is moot, because on the 27th he agreed to try the Trollope ploy first.
This move, coupled with an explicit but private missile trade, succeeded.
THE PRIMACY OF POLITICS From this summary emerge four substantive, intertwined conclusions.
In surveying the deployment and removal of the Jupiters, one cannot help but be struck by how at almost every step defense policy decisions, like many decisions in the nuclear age, were heavily influenced if not guided by political considerations.
The 1957 NATO decision to station IRBMs in Europe, while not devoid of military logic, was largely taken to satisfy political needs created by Sputnik.
The advent of a Soviet ICBM capability called into question the US nuclear commitment to Europe; the resulting fears in NATO demanded political reassurance from Washington, something Thors and Jupiters could help provide.
Political factors were even more salient in the Kennedy administration's decision to proceed with the Jupiter deployment in 1961 despite the compelling reasons for cancellation.
To maintain United States credibility vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and to avoid antagonizing the Turks, Kennedy decided to go ahead and install weapons that were obsolete, even detrimental to NATO security.
Recognition of this military reality drove the administration to approach the Turks regarding cancellation anyway, but not so far as to overcome its more pressing political needs.
Not, that is, until October 1962, when a missile trade presented itself as an obvious possible solution to the missile crisis, indeed, partly because the Jupiters were militarily useless.
Fifteen Jupiters in return for forty-two SS-4s what would have comprised two-thirds of the Soviet strategic missile force would have been a bargain.
And yet again, political factors explain ExComm's distaste for a public trade.
Such a trade would not really have affected United States military superiority, but the risk of a Turkish, NATO, Republican, and popular backlash rendered a public deal politically unacceptable, at least so long as alternatives such as the Trollope ploy existed.
Finally, politics shrouded the Jupiters even after their bases were closed in 1963.
Fear of shaking the alliance led officials to drape their own 'cloak of secrecy' over the RFK-Dobrynin deal until much later, the first hint not appearing until Thirteen Days was published in 1969.
Long after the crisis, even the scent of a superpower bargain struck behind Turkey's back promised to be too potent to let seep out.
In sum, politics played an influential or a dominant role in the decisions to send Jupiters to Turkey, to keep them there, and to pull them out.
This would mean little had the Jupiters not ostensibly been for the enhancement of Western defense.
Instead, two administrations used them to soothe allied apprehensions, bolster United States credibility, appease the Turks, and in the end, help get Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
The banal yet important point is that political considerations often outweigh military considerations.
Such was the case when NATO repeated this complex ritual, deploying and withdrawing the Intermediate Nuclear Forces beginning in 1979.
The Jupiter experience, in short, only buttresses the notion that 20 THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES military explanations should never be accepted at face value.
More important political motives almost certainly lurk beneath the surface.
BUREAUCRATIC POLITICS A second conclusion involves how the Jupiter story is applied analytically.
Graham Allison's Essence of Decision , 'the most widely read scholarly account of the crisis in English',106 is one analysis that helps explain why the inaccurate, popular version of the Jupiter issue persists.
The book features the 'bureaucratic politics model', in which leaders have difficulty executing policy because they rely on unwieldy, parochial bureaucracies.
While Allison's model is still useful, its application to a particular historical issue, the Turkish Jupiters, breaks down in light of the evidence.
To illustrate how the bureaucracy stymied Kennedy and left him exposed during the crisis, Allison depends in part on non-events, especially Kennedy's 'disobeyed' pre-crisis removal order.
Writing in 1971, Allison had none of the documents now available which might have led him to alter his Jupiter account; his use of 'dubious evidence' can be excused.
What perhaps should not be excused is that Essence of Decision has not been and apparently will not be revised.
True, Allison did not aspire 'to write a definitive history . . .'.110 Fair enough, but he did presume to 'explain' the missile crisis based on historical evidence.
The vast amount of evidence made available since 1971 has fundamentally changed the subject of Allison's case study, and a revised case demands a revised study in this instance, for three reasons.
First, some of the new evidence, and not merely concerning the Jupiters,111 now undermines the applicability of the bureaucratic politics model to the missile crisis.
If the 'bureaucracy' did not foil a removal order, then the Jupiters no longer fit or support the model.
Much of it appears to sustain Allison's broader point, that presidents simply do not exercise tight control over their political and military resources.
And third, because there is no definitive history of the crisis, and because his book enjoys such popularity, Allison's inaccurate Jupiter story is continually disseminated and serves as history despite his disclaimer.
This is not his fault, but a revised Essence of Decision would help both correct some widespread historical misconceptions and determine whether the bureaucratic politics model is still valid in the case of the missile crisis.
INFORMATION DEPENDENCE Third, the way the Jupiter episode has unfolded reflects a fundamental problem of contemporary history.
The missile crisis is too recent an event for its documentation to have been fully declassified.
However, the considerable accessibility of those who took part in the crisis fills this evidentiary vacuum even more so than usual.
Perhaps the release of the remaining documents will render the question irrelevant.
Until that happens, the question only underscores our information dependence.
For now, those who made the history will continue to be those who help shape it.
The image that persisted for 25 years was in part that of a leader tough enough to stand up to the Soviets and refuse a missile trade, even at the risk of nuclear war.
There is now a danger that this old image is being replaced by one of a Kennedy tough enough to stand up to his hawkish advisers, and sustain the serious political costs of a missile trade, in order to avoid nuclear war.
Rather than conclude that the Cordier ploy indicates Kennedy may have been willing to trade the Jupiters publicly, some claim he was willing to do so.
Kennedy may have been prepared to trade openly, but it cannot be determined with certainly.
It is conceivable, however unlikely, that Kennedy would have later ordered an air strike or invasion instead of trading publicly.
An additional pitfall is that Kennedy may appear as a lone 'dove' surrounded by a 'hawk' consensus.
Some ExComm members opposed a trade, but they neither formed a consensus nor dominated the discussions quite the contrary.
The 27 October deliberations are much harder to characterize, and even if Kennedy had confronted a hostile, anti-trade 22 THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES consensus, this still might have had no impact on his policy.
Thus neither the traditional image nor the emerging image is accurate, though the new one is certainly more so than the old one.
At a different level, both of Kennedy's images, though contradictory, are favorable.
After 25 years, Kennedy partisans can praise restraint where they once praised toughness, thus remaining loyal to the same figure.
This phenomenon captures the United States' lingering ambivalence toward nuclear weapons.
Just as this country still debates whether nuclear weapons are for military and political use or only for the prevention of their use, neither can it reconcile its desire for a forceful foreign policy with its persistent fear of nuclear war.
With the historiographical shift now seemingly underway, in which the courageous Kennedy who would not trade the Jupiters is transformed into the courageous Kennedy who would, views of his 1962 actions more clearly reflect that nuclear ambivalence.
The seemingly endless search for lessons of the Cuban missile crisis will thus no doubt continue, as images of Kennedy and larger views of the crisis continue to clash as surrogates in current nuclear debates.6 NOTES 1.
United States Congress, Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 'The Study of United States and NATO Nuclear Weapons Arrangements', 11 Feb.61, quoted in United States House of Representatives, Committee on Armed Services, Hearings on Military Posture, 88th Congress, 1st Session, 30 Jan.63,279.
Dean Acheson, interview by Lucius Battle, 27 April 1964, Oral History Program , JFKL,11; George McGhee, interview by Martin Hillenbrand, 13 Aug.
McGhee, OHP, JFKL,ll; Hearings on Military Posture,277, also 281; Dean Rusk to James Blight, 25 Feb.87, quoted in Welch and Blight, 'Eleventh Hour',1736.
O'Donnell, 'Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye',337; Hilsman, To Move A Nation,203; Abel, The Missile Crisis,193.
CIA Information Report, 'Soviet Threats of Retaliation', 23 Oct.62, DDRS 1990, 41.
Sieverts was Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs.
See note 1, as well as Sorensen, Kennedy,714; and Schlesinger, A Thousand Days, 827.
Schlesinger, journal, 22 Oct.62, quoted in Robert Kennedy,516; see also A Thousand Days,811.
RFK to Rusk, 30 Oct.62, quoted in Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy,522, ellipsis in original.
RFK, handwritten notes,d. , quoted in Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy, 523, ellipsis in original.
Reconsidering Khrushchev's Gambit Defending the Soviet Union and Cuba', Diplomatic History 14 , 23938.
Scholars have been dependent on a participant for the release of documents as well; the 27 Oct. transcript is available only because Bundy took a personal interest and transcribed the tape.
The Defense-of-Cuba Theme and the Missile Crisis', Diplomatic History 14 , 249; and Gaddir., Russia, the Soviet Union and the United States, 251.
