Soviet troops were building hidden military installations in Cuba.One of those installations was on the farm where his family raised chickens and pigs.In 1962, Fidel Castro's revolution was just beginning to reshape Cuba.
Our life was getting up every day to take the livestock out to pasture,"" Lopez remembers a half-century later.
Seventy-two hours later, Lopez said, a house had been built for them, no small feat in a country beset by shortages.
Lopez, his brother and parents left their farm with all their animals and earthly possessions.
The troops"" were thousands of Soviet soldiers and technicians who had been secreted into Cuba as part of a confidential agreement between Castro and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to place nuclear missiles on the island and upend the dynamic of the Cold War.On his family's new farm two miles away, Lopez might not have ever known that a large military operation was under way where they once lived -if not for the pigs.The Lopez family's pigs kept wandering back to the old farm.
Pope calls for greater freedoms in Cuba as he ends two-country tourAs Lopez left with the livestock he could rescue, the Russians asked the teenage Cuban farm boy to come back with rum for them.Despite the furious pace of activity on his old farm, Lopez didn't pay too much mind to the foreigners.Then the shiny planes -flying fast and low -appeared over the green hills.
Dissident Cuban blogger arrested, colleagues say""I saw the planes twice.
They flew over that mountain range, came down and then flew out,"" Lopez said.
The planes Lopez saw were United States spy planes, and as they flew over San Cristobal on October 15, 1962, they were capturing the first photos of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.Those photos arrived on President John F Kennedy's desk the next morning.More spy flights revealed Soviet installations across the island and nuclear missiles that could reach the United States Eastern Seaboard.Kennedy ordered Navy ships to quarantine Cuba to prevent more Soviet missiles' and troops' passage to the island.
Back then, we didn't have TV,"" Lopez said of simple life in Cuba's countryside.
Lopez said they never heard of the crisis while it unfolded or that a deal was reached between the Americans and Soviets to remove the missiles if the Americans promised not to invade Cuba.
He does remember the loud noise of trucks hauling the Soviet equipment from their farm.After the mysterious visitors left, Lopez said he and his father returned to their old land.
Lopez's family still works the land where Soviet troops once erected nuclear missile sites.When Lopez, 65, is not tending to the animals, he takes the occasional visitor out to see the traces of the Soviet occupation of his farm.
Jailed American in Cuba may be ill, lawyer saysIn the nearby jungle, vines wrapped around fallen buildings that seemed to belong to a much older and forgotten civilization.A small, faded marble plaque marked the spot where Soviets once pointed nuclear missiles at the United States.
Lopez said the marble plaque was a replacement for a bronze one that disappeared years ago.The loudest sound at the remote site was the wind rustling though the adjacent sugar cane fields.
