A vehicle that was manufactured to burn E85 or regular gas had a sticker on the window and you could tell by the VIN and didn't cost any more than a vehicle that just burned regular gas.
They were all the rage in Europe and many were available only as fleet purchases in 2006.
By 2008, they were more abundant and we got June a good used E85 vehicle.
It was hard to say if technology was a boon to mankind or had doomed us to an existence we didn't want.
Didn't happen until about a week ago and by that time we were accustomed to just using radios.
We pulled two pickups across the road, their noses coming together to form a V that pointed towards those 20 people.
It is located at the intersection of highways K-96 and K-25, straight north of us.
The man, who looked to be maybe 40 and was dressed in clothing I'd associate more with a farmer than a businessman, handed his rifle to the woman beside him who held it at port arms.
He stepped forward and visibly relaxed when he saw we had women with us, never mind that they had guns.
I don't know who it was, but a bad bunch came in Wichita County and turned Leoti upside down, killing, raping, all manner of evil.
We lit out but had to come on foot; we didn't have any fuel for our vehicles.
Weird, Maureen O'Hara played opposite John Wayne in McLintock and Big Jake.
They made 5 movies together, mostly because she was a favorite of Director, John Ford.
No we didn't ask if they were Methodist, Christian Charity knows no denominations.
We took them back to Mike's and Rachel made a big pot of coffee and oatmeal, just to warm their innards.
June, Marilyn and she next started a huge pot of beef stew and Mike fished out a pint of White Lightning for the men, that would warm them up.
We used up all of our diesel farming and couldn't get gas for our vehicles.
There's a wood furnace in the basement and bottle gas for hot water and the stove.
They shook their heads or otherwise indicated that one sip would last them for a good while.
That's one of the reasons it's hard to produce pure ethanol, it absorbs water from the air.
If you mix coffee and Everclear and later strain out the coffee grounds, you have Kaluha.
I didn't offer the Jones's place because they weren't finished moving out.
After Paul had mentioned the propane stove and water heater in the new triple wide, I went into Lakin and arranged for my propane tank to be topped off.
And that's how we came to ending up with 3 temporary hired hands in addition to Jason.
Jake had been carrying a hunting rifle, but his kids had his AR-15s and his wife was wearing 2 pistols.
They'd seen us coming and made a few adjustments in case we weren't the bad guys.
He explained that he felt if we saw the AR, we might make the wrong assumption about them.
The next day, we took some fuel and a little gas and recovered some things they could use from their farms.
Their kids could drive the tractors, though it would take them 2-3 hours to make the trip.
We borrowed the machinery dealer's tilt bed truck and haul most of their implements down to Mike's farm to preserve them and possibly use them.
We told him not to get too close and gave him a pair of fairly high powered binoculars.
Even though Wichita County was sparsely populated, they did have a County Sheriff.
Probably were, it wouldn't be likely for the Sheriff or Deputies to be carrying Assault Rifles.
State Defense Forces were few in the Midwest; the states probably couldn't afford them or thought they were duplication of the National Guard.
Kansas didn't have one although the Governor had the authority to create one.
There was some kind of long discourse on the subject, but what it boiled down to was a law existed authorizing the Militias referred to in the 2nd Amendment.
More of us thought that the 2nd Amendment was all about the right to keep and bear arms, but some authorities claimed that wasn't a right and the purpose of the 2nd Amendment was to preserve the states' rights to maintain militias.
Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, South and North Dakota and Colorado were just some of the Great Plains states that lacked State Defense Forces.
To execute the laws of the Union -e., to enforce national laws; National laws include: provisions of United States Constitutions, statutes of Congress, United States treaties, and final decisions of the United States Courts.
To suppress insurrections -e., to put down any armed rebellion against the United States national government or against the duly constituted government of any state; To repel invasions -e., to defend the Country against foreign attack.
Acting under the authority given to it by Clause 15, Section 8, Article I, Congress has enacted statutes authorizing the President to employ the state militias as well as the United States Armed Forces against ""combinations of persons too powerful to be dealt with"" by ordinary judicial processes.
Normally, the national guards operate under the direction of their respective states, subject to the provisions made by Congress.
When called into ""the service of the United States,"" the national guards become parts of the United States military forces and are subject to government by Congress and to the direction of the President.
When the national guards are not in the national military service, Congress can still exercise a considerable degree of control.
Through conditions attached by Congress to federal grants of money to the states for the national guards.
Anyway, the Kansas National Guard had been Federalized and wasn't available.
Well... after New Orleans, there was some discussion of whether or not the President had the authority to Federalize National Guards without the Governors' permissions.
That assumes that WW III qualifies as a national emergency, Ted Kennedy claims that depends on whether the President's was a Democrat or a Republican.
Way back when the H5N1 was on the other side of the ocean, we could have done something.
We had $100 billion to kill Arabs, but only $7 billion to save the population.
I wonder who dreamed up the idea to add pneumonic plague to the mix, terrorist #1 or terrorist #2.
Enjoy Paradise Osama, you earned it, but it might be a bit warmer than you planned.
Except when the equation was incomplete; a car was nice, but it needed fuel to go.
They also needed parts and if it broke and the dealer didn't have the part, you cobbled it back together or got another car.
The cars had stainless steel gas tanks, Teflon lined hoses and different compression ratios, not a simple procedure especially in these times.
We were grateful to have E85 vehicles and someone planning to produce E85 fuel.
And I think technology has put us in a position of destroying the planet as we know it and us along with it.
Meanwhile someone had to do something about those buttholes that raided Leoti, maybe Lakin would be next.
If we let them get away with what they did, others might think they could get away with the same darn thing.
We had some trouble getting weapons, so we don't have many automatic weapons.
I talked to Big Jake and got him squared away on producing ethanol and biodiesel so they won't have as big a problem with fuel.
We put off leaving until 2am; we wouldn't have to spend as much time walking.
The 2 spare hours had been spent getting briefed on the layout of Leoti and determining our avenues of approach.
It took a while for everyone to get into position and then we started in on foot.
Strange what runs through your mind when you're sneaking up on a bunch of guys armed with full auto assault rifles in the middle of the night.
We found them and took them out, one at a time and always with a knife.
It was organized brutality, what they did, not what we were doing, although after a while, I think that may have applied to us too.
When we found towns people, we freed them and gave them the guns we took from the bad guys.
They are taught to be forgiving, not to let themselves get kicked around like they had been.
Besides, a man might forget all about that when his family is abused by a bunch of drunken criminals.
It remained to be seen how the bad guys had gotten the drop on Leoti at the outset.
I told you they were temporary farm hands, and once we had the town cleared just after noon, we climbed in our vehicles and headed home.
You needed a state government functioning to pay wages to the state employees and you needed law enforcement.
A hundred or more years ago, law enforcement officers were allowed to accept rewards, probably because they weren't well paid.
There wasn't any way to get the tax revenue to Topeka, even 18 months after the war so they were forced to rely on the local tax base.
If you want City and County government, you have to be able to pay the employees.
With no mail service, we didn't worry about state or federal income taxes.
Paul told me that the thought crossed his mind more than once, but Don insisted that they weren't.
It was agreed that they'd wait to get married after she graduated from high school in just a little over a year.
We weren't that much older than we would have been having children of our own.
Any regrets we had had long since vanished, especially once Jim and Mary moved in.
They'd have 3 more years of school after this year and the older one gets the faster time seems to move.
I was basically cranking out one 55-gallon drum of biodiesel every 3 hours, 4 times a day.
In the end, we'd found that the easiest way to transfer the fuel was in 55-gallon drums because they held one batch.
Whenever we got a truckload of drums, Paul would haul them to town and divide up the money based on a ratio computed from each of our input into the raw oil production.
That way we didn't feel like we were getting anything for the time we were putting in.
That would give us 1,640 acres of beans and depending on the yield anywhere from 79,000 to 118,000 gallons of oil.
We were going to need more of the biodiesel processing units just to handle the oil.
I already had two, one here and the one over at the Hansen place that Jason was using.
If Mike and Paul each added another processor, it would serve to even things out, by yiminy.
If I could get enough help, I might try working those Clydesdale mares a little so I wouldn't have to try and retrain them to harness.
I should be able to breed them in the spring and use them for a bit before I had to stop.
And should, God forbid, more than one thing happens, how those things relate to each other.
It began in 2003 and by 2006; there could not have been a single person in the United States who hadn't heard something about it.
If they didn't know that you could take Tamiflu within the first 48-hours and most likely survive, they had to be hiding in a closet.
While companies rushed to develop a vaccine, remember, we won't have a pandemic unless the H5N1 mutates.
Probably, but why take a chance; get some Tamiflu while it's still available for around $50 per card.
People like that crazy guy in California have been telling anyone who would listen to be prepared.
In an article on CNN or one of the other multiple news sources, a doctor said, to start stocking up on food.
What he was talking about is having food to deal with a forced isolation period if the flu strikes.
A flu pandemic probably won't cause the lights, water and gas to go off, hopefully, so you probably won't have to have a generator.
There are also hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, volcanoes and really nasty storms that sometimes bring down power lines.
Taken one step further, it won't do you much good to have a standby generator that runs on natural gas if, God forbid, you should have an earthquake.
Yes Virginia, you can have an LP tank in your backyard in Palmdale, it just has to be a certain distance from any buildings.
There is even a Santa Claus, in the hearts and minds of everyone; it's just that we eventually learn that Santa Claus is an alias.
The point is, get something because when 'they' say you can't leave your home, 'they' mean it.
The grocery stores will be locked up tighter than a drum and Wal-Mart will be in the same boat.
The key is incremental preparations, if you plan to wait until the last minute, you'll find that the last minute was in the previous hour.
Rotate them, everything eventually loses its effectiveness and certain things can kill you or make you very sick if they are too old, epinephrine and cyclines for example.
Ask your doctor, he charges you plenty for his time, get your money's worth, but ask over time, not all at once.
In case you hadn't noticed, The Three Amigos are always about Vz prepared, but never fully prepared.
In the stories they always end up borrowing this and that and never get shot for looting.
Its fiction, if they tried, they'd get shot, count on it; the chances are you would too.
In my lifetime there have been several flu epidemics, Hong Kong, Asian and who remembers.
Measured resistance to the standard antiviral drugs amantadine and rimantadine in H3N2 has increased from 1% in 1994 to 12% in 2003 to 91 % in 2005.
Oseltamivir is the most commonly sought drug, since it is available in pill form.
Zanamivir (trade name Relenza) is also considered for use, but it must be inhaled.
Or, you could have read the article in the Washington Times about the United States forward basing B-2s on Guam as defense against the Chinese.
You get a basic supply that will last you for say, 3 months, and then rotate it, don't use it up because Y2K didn't happen.
There are 10 or 20 earthquakes EVERY DAY in California and any one of them could be The Big One.
Oseltamivir is an anti-viral used in the treatment and prophylaxis of both Influenza virus A and Influenza virus B Like Zanamivir, Oseltamivir is a neuraminidase inhibitor, acting as a transition-state analogue inhibitor of influenza neuraminidase and thereby preventing new viruses from emerging from infected cells.
It was developed by Gilead Sciences and is currently marketed by Hoffmann-LaRoche under the trade name Tamiflu.
With increasing fears about the potential for a new influenza pandemic, Oseltamivir has received substantial media attention.
Production capacity is limited, and governments are stockpiling the drug.
Oseltamivir is indicated for the treatment of infections due to influenza A and B virus in people at least one year of age, and prevention of influenza in people at least 13 years of age.
The usual adult dosage for treatment of influenza is 75 mg twice daily for 5 days, beginning within 2 days of the appearance of symptoms and with decreased doses for children and patients with renal impairment.
Oseltamivir may be given as a preventive measure either during a community outbreak or following close contact with an infected individual.
Standard prophylactic dosage is 75 mg once daily for patients aged 13 and older, which has been shown to be safe and effective for up to six weeks.
Various cases of psychological disorders were associated with Oseltamivir therapy between 2000-2004, including several deaths.
However, it was recommended that a warning was added to the Product Information regarding rashes associated with Oseltamivir therapy.
The bill would provide more money for armored vehicles and nearly $2 billion for the Pentagon to develop technology to detect and destroy makeshift roadside bombs.
Also known as improvised explosive devices, these are the Iraqi insurgency's weapon of choice and the leading killer of United States troops. $2 billion, hell, I'll tell you how to do that for only $2 million.
Like many Americans, I support the troops, but question the decision to keep them there for very much longer.
I can assure you they won't be there after January 20, 2009, assuming they are there on November 4, 2008.
They shouldn't believe all the Patriot Fiction they read, they might accidentally do something right.
Come gather around people wherever you roam And admit that the waters around you have grown And accept it that soon you'll be drenched to the bone.
If your time to you is worth saving, Then you better start swimming or you'll sink like a stone.
Come writers and critics, who prophecies with your pen And keep your eyes wide, the change won't come again And don't speak too soon for the wheel's still in spin And there's no telling who that is naming For the loser now will be later to win.
Come senators, congress-men, please heed the call, Don't stand in the doorway, don't block up the hall.
For he that gets hurt will be he who has stalled There's a battle outside and it's raging It'll soon shake your windows and rattle your walls.
Your sons and your daughters are beyond your command Your old road is riply again Please get out of the new one, if you can't lend your hand.
The line it is drawn, the curse it is cast, The slow one now will later be fast As the present now will later be past.
The order is rapidly fading And the first one now will be later the last.
In the squares of the city, In the shadow of a steeple; By the relief office, I'd seen my people.
As they stood there hungry, I stood there asking, Is this land made for you and me.
He wasn't good with cattle or the hogs, seemingly preferring the horses the kids rode.
We thought militia when the guy from the extension service told us about the Sheriff's collective resistance, but it was just a plea for more reserve deputies.
The few perks you got from being a reserve deputy were more than made up for when you got called up.
Hadn't happened since that 4th of July thing in Deerfield, but we had to carry the radios all of the time, especially after Leoti.
By the time we finished processing the soybean oil, it was time to get the soil ready to plant the coming year's crops.
I planted and had him finish up the plowing of the fields on my original 160.
Of course a 6 bottom plow will turn twice as much soil as a 3 bottom plow, but what you save in time, you burn up in fuel.
At a time when many conventional farmers across the United States are in desperate financial straits, Amish farms are still making money and turning a profit with a cautious disregard for get-big-or-get-out modern technology and no participation in direct government subsidies, other than those built into market prices, which they can't avoid.
In fact, the Amish have been exempted from paying Social Security tax, not because they don't want to pay taxes, but because they are opposed to accepting the benefits.
Maybe the greatest paradox and tragedy of modern society is that so many of us have become disconnected from the land that nourishes and feeds us with its beauty and bounty, and yet we experience no sense of loss.
As any good farmer will tell you, Amish or not, sooner or later one reaps what one sows.
We had been hunting for horse drawn equipment since we'd bought the Clydesdales.
One of the things we found was an old combine that had its own motor to power the machine and could be rigged to be towed by a 6 horse/muie hitch.
A type of baler which is less common today produces small rectangular or 'square' bales.
The bales are wrapped with two, three, or sometimes four strands of twine and knotted.
This form of bale is no longer much used in commercial agriculture because of the costs involved in handling many small bales.
However, it enjoys some popularity in small-scale, low-mechanization agriculture like our situation.
Those huge round bales were difficult to handle without specialty equipment.
Conversely the small square bales weighed about 50 pounds and could be dropped in the field or stacked on a wagon towed behind the baler.
And, Virginia, that's one of the reasons why farmers' had large families.
Those old manual tie wire balers could take your hand off in the blink of an eye.
They had 2 people riding on the baler feeding the baling wire into the mechanism that wire wrapped the bales.
They weren't the good old days ; they were more like the labor intensive dangerous old days.
The equipment is hard to wear out and they still made baling wire right up until the war.
Baling wire, otherwise known as ""farm wire"" or ""soft wire,"" is primarily used in an agricultural setting for everything from mending fences to manually binding square bales of hay, straw, or cut grass.
Baling wire is commonly used in many non-agricultural applications, usually in an informal, make-do manner.
Typical uses range from supporting loose mufflers to patching chain-link fences.
Built small rooms and insulated them to keep in some of the heat from running the stills and the biodiesel converters.
Maybe we jumped the gun by giving those firearms to the kids when we did; it was harder getting presents every year.
We bought Jim and Mary some clothes and gave them each two of the 1/1 Oth ounce gold coins to carry in their BOBs or whatever.
The old saw is that if you build a better mousetrap, the world will beat a path to your door.
If you get a good idea about how to solve your fuel problem, many will copy you and there goes your market.
Nothing lasts forever and this would be the last year we planted a big crop of soybeans.
We had to get the crop rotation kicked in because we didn't have all of those agricultural chemicals.
Next year, it would be V 6 oats, V 6 barley, % corn and % grasses of one kind or another.
Those mares were big enough now to fit the harnesses to them that McGilvray sold us.
I figured that since most Clydesdales end up about the same size, I might be able to get by with duplicating the harnesses, but the old harness maker in Lakin said draft horses could probably use one of two sizes of harness and it would be better to wait.
He, or one of his former employees, could fashion quality harnesses out of synthetics that would outlast leather and be less expensive.
A mistake many beginning horse farmers make is failing to allow for special conditions under which teams must work.
You can't assume that a certain number of horses will handle a certain implement under any and all conditions.
A team of Haflingers (originally ~13. hands) may easily pull a 12"" plow in moist, stubble ground, while an 8"" or a 10"" plow might give them trouble in dry, alfalfa sod.
A grain binder in clean, dry wheat on hard ground will pull easier than the same machine in weedy or lodged wheat on soft ground.
Over hilly land, an implement is harder to pull uphill and tougher to hold back when traveling downgrade.
Now that we've established that there are no hard and fast rules about what size equipment can be used with a given amount of horse power, we can put forth some general guidelines.
The equipment used is smaller, and progress is slower, but it can be done.
The old John Deere and International Harvester catalogs for horse-drawn equipment recommend a 10"" plow for one horse, 12"" for a light 2-horse team, and 14"" for a regular 2-horse team.
New 12"", 14"" and 16"" walking plows are available from Pioneer Equipment, and l&J Equipment offers an 8"" walking plow.
A small team should be able to handle a 12"" sulky plow in ordinary conditions, and these are sold new by Pioneer and White Horse Machine.
Both spring tooth and spike tooth harrows can be purchased new from Pioneer Equipment.
Small disc harrows are offered by Groffdale Machine and Kota Manufacturing, and 4' or 5' single gang disc harrows might be found at farm auctions.
A cultivator that straddles a single-row would require a team, while a single horse could pull a hand cultivator that goes between two rows, such as the one sold by I & J Manufacturing.
A team would be sufficient to operate a mower with a 5' cutter bar, but a single animal would be better off with a 4' machine.
I know of no source for new horse-drawn mowers, but used and rebuilt ones usually McCormick-Deering or John Deere can readily be found.
Side delivery hay rakes and tedders can be bought new from most equipment dealers, including l&J Equipment and Pequea Machine. l&J's side rake is ground driven, as are Pequea's hay tedders, and may easily be pulled behind a forecart by a light team.
A two-row corn planter and a small 9or 10-row grain drill are two-horse machines.
A one-row corn planter and a five-row grain drill, meant to be pulled by one horse, were once built by most of the major manufacturers, and used ones can still be found.
Corn and grain binders were often pulled by mediumand large-sized teams of two horses, but threeand four-horse teams were more efficient and provided enough power to make the ground-driven mechanism work properly.
Pulling a wagon and hayloader might be practical on flat land, but would be a big load for a single horse or a team in hilly Country.
During the early days of mechanical grain threshing, machines were often driven by one or two animals on a treadmill.
Winnowing or separating the grain from the chaff and straw was accomplished by hand or with a fanning mill.
In the last half of the 19th century as threshing machines were improved by the addition of cleaning fans, self-feeders, straw walkers, and wind stackers power requirements increased until 8, 10, and 12 horses were needed to run the things.
I suppose that if you could find one of the early, small, wooden threshers, you could get by with your one or two animals.
These same areas will usually have a number of implement dealers who specialize in finding, refurbishing, and reselling horse machinery.
In theory, if the farm is too large, you're better off farming with tractors than horses.
It is based on the theory that you need 6 horses to farm about 75 acres and 1 teamster for every 6 horse team.
Stated a different way, you could farm a quarter section just fine with horses.
There was no un-punching the buttons that destroyed China and the United States and later other countries.
We exist within our environment and if that environment doesn't include factories capable of refining fuel or producing parts, then we are forced to basically start over.
With good luck, the wind turbines would keep us in electricity for twenty years, each.
I'm not talking about running out of natural gas, but about the parts they'll need when one of the machines or generators breaks or wears out.
If that environment includes colder winters and warmer winters, we adjust or go hungry.
Some things weren't to be had, no matter how desperately you wanted them, like anhydrous ammonia.
Anhydrous ammonia is made from natural gas , LPG (propane and butane) or naphtha.
Constraints on the weather affect the crops too, and we were pushing it planting soybeans 2 years in a row without the necessary nutrients to add to the soil.
That's why the crops are rotated in a certain order with the consuming plants planted after the fixing plants.
As I told you earlier, soybeans should follow corn, wheat, barley or other grass crops in a rotation to minimize disease carryover and to optimize the nutrient utilization within the soil profile.
Soybeans should not follow alfalfa, dry edible beans, canola, or sunflower where white mold disease has been detected.
We could plant soybeans where the corn would be planted this year and lots of alfalfa, timothy, oats, barley and corn.
If that guy in Garden City could get enough gasoline, he could produce a lot of the highly stable E85.
We were just trying to stay one step ahead of the market, not one step behind.
Furthermore depending on the available labor supply we could always sacrifice a little corn and increase the garden.
We made certain to hold back plenty of potatoes because they are one of the largest components in the American diet.
Deeply excised eyes were more than enough, leaving extra potato to turn into alcohol or even hog feed.
And speaking of alcohol, you use the sour mash method to provide yeast for the subsequent batch of mash.
If you have cows, you have to milk them in 12-hour intervals, and they don't take weekends off.
They generally shun electricity but a wind turbine uses natural energy and some of them have those.
In the US, there are Amish communities in nearly every agricultural state.
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana and Iowa are just a few of their several communities.
They don't refuse to deal with the English and give probably more respect than they get.
As long as we had homemade diesel fuel and the tractors didn't breakdown, we were set.
It gave us the time we needed to expand our herds of Clydesdales and riding horses.
An Amish will ride in a car belonging to the English if necessary, they just won't own any.
Our herd now included the 4 Morgan mares, the two Morgan stallions, the colt and 3 fillies, plus 4 4-year old Clydesdale mares, also bred.
According to that fella's formula, we need 24 draft horses to farm a section, if it ever came to that.
I didn't doubt that it would, given the rate at which the Country wasn't rebuilding itself.
It was bits and pieces now with the cleanup of the big cities taking longer than anyone thought.
Kansas needed money, badly, and with no one filing tax returns, the till was empty.
It occurred to me that they were a bit behind the curve but it was a good way to unload the mostly worthless FRNs.
Don graduated and asked Sandy to marry him after she graduated the following year.
Jim and Mary adapted to living on the farm and Mary told June, Jim and she really appreciated our finding a place for them and that we were the best substitute parents they'd ever had.
One day they'd own everything, however in the meantime, they each were allow to choose a foal as their own horse.
While it was clearly understood he was their dog, maybe Shep decided that Mary needed the most companion213 ship or protecting.
He was getting big; I wouldn't want to be on the other side of those teeth.
With enough help, our fences were sound and we could pretty well see the entire section from anywhere.
The only two areas fenced beside the perimeter were the pasture and the garden.
The Sheriff seemed to have his own ideas about what constituted a local militia so he'd check a prospective candidate out in his own way and if he was satisfied, give them a badge and swear 'em in.
It wasn't quite in full compliance with Kansas law, but the Sheriff seemed satisfied.
Word was he'd told the bikers they could party at the lake anytime, provided they let him know and checked their guns, but no dope.
The winter wasn't as bad as the previous and we were in the field early, planting according to what we worked out over the winter.
We weren't using hybrids and although it reduced the yields, we had seed stock for each year that followed.
Several of the young people from the Lakin Public Schools volunteered to work in the 3 large gardens for a share of what we produced.
Considering that the gardens all ran about 10 acres, we took all of the help that we could get.
Even if you plow up your backyard, I doubt you can produce enough food for a family for a full year.
One of the problems that began to surface was the lack of pharmaceuticals.
Doc Williams had basically run out of alternatives and the drugs stores couldn't get meds from their suppliers and the suppliers couldn't get them from the distributors.
Doc and the Board at the hospital had seen it coming and had stocked up the best they could before the flu and the war.
They had pushed the expiration limits to the ragged edge but Kearny County had a drug problem and it wasn't meth.
I meant to tell you, the store was repurchasing the empty quarts and pints and we should have plenty.
A guy in Garden City is trying to get an engine to run on pure ethanol, like Henry Ford did,"" Paul explained.
I think that it finally took Chavez getting elected in Venezuela to force the President to take a hard look at our energy problems.
It might not happen unless all of the environmentalists were caught in the big cities the Chinese hit.
Coal is one of the true measures of the energy strength of the United States.
One quarter of the world's coal reserves are found within the United States, and the energy content of the nation's coal resources exceeds that of all the world's known recoverable oil.
In 2004, net generation of electricity rose slightly to 3,971 billion kilowatt-hours.
For the 2005 through 2009 planning period, respondents reported 94 gigawatts of new generators were scheduled to start commercial operation.
Or, maybe because we have 6 53-gallon barrels of whisky that we can drink one of these days.
This new wood means that the bourbon draws a great deal of color and flavor from the barrel, with vanilla and caramel predominant characteristics.
The climate in Kentucky in the summer gets very hot, and cold in the winter.
This means that with the rapid expansion and contraction of the spirit into and out of the wood, maturing happens at a quicker rate than for example in the cool, damp climates of Scotland or Ireland.
The new, white oak barrels are filled to capacity with the high wine, ready for several years of aging.
The barrels are charred on the inside, giving bourbon its amber color and mellow but potent taste.
As the liquid ages in the barrel, variations in temperature as the seasons change force it to expand and contract through the caramelized layer of charred wood inside the barrel, ""mellowing"" it and giving it the distinctive bourbon flavor and appearance.
The whiskey is generally similar to bourbon, in that it is composed of a mash of 51 80 per cent corn, and is aged in new, charred oak barrels for a minimum of two years.
The difference between Bourbon and Tennessee whiskey is that Tennessee whiskey must undergo the Lincoln County Process.
This process requires that the whiskey be filtered through an approximately 10 foot thick layer of sugar maple charcoal.
We figured it would be a steep learning curve; most of the people who had farmed with horses in this area were long gone.
We all agreed that we'd keep one colt each as a backup stallion and geld the rest.
The Morgan's could be trained to harness and pull buggies and wagons, just to go to Lakin.
If you think about it, in one sense, the war had been environmentally friendly.
The day when we'd have to store the tractors was rapidly approaching, although they all burned biodiesel.
The things that had always been important to mankind, potable water, waste disposal and food, had survived the war.
People shouldn't get the idea that we were totally self-sufficient, we weren't.
Rural flight had a new meaning, fleeing to the Country instead of from the Country.
Life hadn't changed that much, same food on the table, meat, taters, a veggie and homemade bread.
Maybe I shouldn't say that, we had oats and June rolled them to produce oatmeal.
I sometimes skimmed the cream and June used a powered butter churn, also known as an ice cream maker.
In a small sauce pot add sugar and water and simmer until slight caramel color comes to the liquid.
As we increased our herds, we had more milk than we knew what to do with so we chilled it and hauled it to Lakin.
Maybe to the early part of the 20th century, but not much further back.
And yes, we carried guns, not because we wanted to but because Leoti was never far from our minds.
I know I'm not telling the story in what would appear to be an orderly fashion, more like how it happened and some days I didn't write anything in my journal.
More cows meant finding a good used milking machine setup and installing it.
Sometimes subjects that wouldn't otherwise get discussed are discussed in the few moments before you roll over and go to sleep.
Like Mary having a semi-steady boyfriend; a little young, if you ask me, but these are different times.
June and I weren't mom and dad and given their ages, I doubt it would come to that.
That County lady never came back, if she talked to the kids, it must have been at school.
From only 2 cows and a bull, you can build a cattle herd; it just takes a few years.
From 4 Clydesdale mares and 4 Morgan mares, you can build it herd of horses and it doesn't take nearly as long, especially if most of the foals are fillies.
When another farmer bit the dust, too old and no kids to take over, we bought his livestock.
How they ever handled large dairy herds before the milking machine came along purely escapes me, must have had large families or lots of hired help, or both.
I had an older milking machine, the Surge belly milker, the one with the big pot.
It came with 6 pots and some extra utter cups , not much to wear out on a milking machine.
You can take the boy off the farm, but you can't take the farm out of the boy.
Of course, if he hasn't been on a farm since 1954, some of his information might be a little dated.
In the 1960's, pipeline milking systems replaced bucket milkers as the preferred way to milk cows in North America.
Pipeline milkers require much less labor and are easier on the humans doing the milking.
Thousands of Pipeline milking systems were installed in the 1960's and 1970's as farmer's herds were getting larger.
Many are on small hobby farms or homesteads where they milk a family cow or a few dairy goats for their home use.
Some are still used on smaller commercial dairy farms to milk all their cows and others are just used to milk fresh cows or treated cows on commercial dairy farms.
Pat Hinch, from Nashua, and my dad were friends and Pat sold Surge milkers.
Farm Tractor Company, my dad's Ford and New Idea business sold repair parts for the Surge milker, back in the late '50s and early '60s.
The old man sold a lot of Kelly Ryan elevators, too, enough to get a trip to New Orleans, courtesy of Mr Kelly Ryan.
The rollers don't hit that much and it goes a long time before something breaks.
Could it be the chain was too loose I took a half link out when it broke.
Jeff"" Jeff, you don't want to crimp hay you feed to horses because the crimpers crush a beetle into the hay and that will make your horses sick.
The idea was to crush the stems letting moisture out and let the hay cure faster.
We finally had everything in and before long would be harvesting from the garden.
I used the corn planter to put 8 rows of sweet corn and they must have cut and planted a ton of spuds.
I also changed the seed plates in the planter and put in 4 rows of green beans.
Our garden was 200' wide and 2,200' long, actually just a shade over 10 acres.
Most of the food available was locally grown, so the extension man encouraged different farmers to plant different crops, many for human consumption.
Without all of those high school kids helping out, Mary and June would have been canning green beans until Christmas.
The 3 of us all picked up more hired hands during the summer and most of them want food and a little cash and fuel.
They came to the farms in an old school bus that you could still see the graffiti on.
It was one of those buses from Leoti, painted over but not enough to hide the previous markings.
Paul suggested we consider building bunk houses for the day when we were forced to use those horses for farming.
The deal was simple, 10% of the original balance plus 4% interest on the unpaid balance, not compounded and due at the end of the year.
How we got through that summer, I'll never know; I didn't have much time to make notes in my journal.
We put a 4-horse tongue on one wagon and used the Clydesdale mares to pull a few loads of hay back to the barn.
Jim drove the wagon and was getting right handy handling a fist full of reins.
Because I had the only hay crops, Mike, Ray, Paul, Don and a couple of hired hands helped out putting my share in the haymow.
Mike and Paul's share was towed to their farms using a tractor and stacked.
You get 2.68 gallons of ethanol per bushel, so my best guess would be 80,000 gallons of 95% ethanol.
I use some of that to process my soybeans, but I'd bet I end up putting most of it into whiskey barrels.
I need something on the order of 1,400 barrels, about 10 times as many as was available.
There was no way I was going to make that much bourbon, but I did intend to make more than 6 barrels.
Other technologies biodiesel, hybrids, ethanol, plug-ins, fuel-cells can in the near term only nibble at the edges of our 20 million barrels per day of oil consumption, or, so one reporter claimed.
June's car ran just fine on that E85 fuel and it would run on about any mix so I planned to add ethanol to our supply of gasoline.
The car had barely been driven and the tank of preserved gasoline held 1,000 gallons, enough to make over 6,667-gallons of E85.
Not having a spare tank was the least of my worries; I could always find an empty tank.
Bye, bye Miss American Pie drove my Chevy to the levy but the levy was dry an them good ol' boys were drinkin whiskey and rye singin this will be the day that I die, this will be the day that I die.
Well I know that you're in love with him cuz I saw you dancin in the gym you both kicked off your shoes and I dig those rhythm and blues.
I was a lonely teenage bronkin buck with a pink carnation and a pick-up truck but I knew I was out of luck, the day, the music, died.
Chorus Now for ten years we've been on our own and moss grows fat on a rollin stone but that's not how it used to be, when the jester sang for the king and queen in a coat he borrowed from James Dean and a voice that came from you and me, oh and while the king was looking down, the jester stole his thorny crown the courtroom was adjourned, no verdict was returned, and while Lenin read a book on Marx, the quartet practiced in the park and we sang dirges in the dark, the day, the music, died.
Chorus Helter Skelter in a summer swelter the birds flew off with a fallout shelter, eight miles high and fallin fast, it's the land that failed on the grass the players tried for a forward pass with the jester on the sidelines in a cast, now the half-time air was sweet perfume while the sergeants played a marching tune we all got up to dance oh but we never got the chance oh as the players tried to take the field the marching band refused to yield do you recall what was revealed, the day, the music, died.
Bye, bye Miss American Pie drove my Chevy to the levy but the levy was dry an them good ol' boys were drinkin whiskey and rye singin this will be the day that I die.
The last word on American Pie\ As you can imagine, over the years I've been asked many times to discuss and explain my song American Pie.
I have never discussed the lyrics, but have admitted to the Holly reference in the opening stanzas.
I dedicated the album American Pie to Buddy Holly as well in order to connect the entire statement to Holly in hopes of bringing about an interest in him, which subsequently did occur.
Casey Kasem never spoke to me and none of the references he confirms my making, were made by me.
You will find many interpretations of my lyrics but none of them by me.
Sorry to leave you all on your own like this but long ago I realized that songwriters should make their statements and move on, maintaining a dignified silence.
Don McLean Castine, Maine The Day The Music Died refers what happened on the night of February 2, 1959 in a plane crash in Iowa during a snowstorm.
Since all three were so prominent at the time, February 2, 1959 became known as The Day The Music Died.
What we need from McLean now is a song titled, The Day The Country Died.
Maybe that's extreme, ys of the surviving post pandemic; post bioterrorist attack population survived the war, more than was expected.
In that case, the court held that New London, which had been designated a distressed municipality, could acquire the property of Susette Kelo and eight other residents of the city's Fort Trumbull neighborhood and use the land for an elaborate development surrounding a $300 million Pfizer pharmaceutical company research facility,"" Paul claimed.
I really didn't see how anyone could take the food from us; it was destined to feed people in Lakin and Garden City.
Spock: If I may be so bold, it was a mistake for you to accept promotion.
Commanding a starship is your first, best destiny; anything else is a waste of material.
Were I to invoke logic, however, logic clearly dictates that the needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few.
I really didn't want to get into it with the feds, they are so many and we are so few.
They have tanks and fighting vehicles, we have dynamite grenades and rifles.
Better not to anticipate what might happen in Lakin or I'd end up like the guy who needed to borrow the jack, telling someone to shove it after he said hello.
The spare tire was all right, but he found that someone had taken his jack and not returned it.
As he walked toward the house, he tried to rehearse his request for the jack.
The closer to the house he came, the more nervous he was about the response he might receive.
The fellow stopped pounding on the door and yelled up, ""You know what you can do with your old jack.
Blonde to the bone A blonde had just gotten a new sports car and was out for a drive when she accidentally cut off a truck driver.
He gets a baseball bat out of his truck and broke every window in her car.
He went back to his truck and got a can of gas, poured it on her car, and set it on fire.
When he turned around, he saw that she was laughing so hard she was about to fall down.
Among other things learned, there is this clear warning about the practice of Borrowing Trouble.
I had better wait until the FEMA guy tried to take away the food, and then shoot him.
And, yes Virginia, some Methodists have read the Bible, I have 3 or 4 versions of it.
The Christian Old Testament includes the books of the Hebrew Bible as well as other deuterocanonical books, often referred to as the Apocrypha.
These books are part of the Greek Septuagint but not in the main collections of Hebrew texts that became the Hebrew Bible.
However, this practice is fairly recent; most Protestant Bibles included the Apocrypha until around the 1820s.
This is perpetuated in large part by an e-mail chain letter of Bible facts, which tries to illustrate the recurrence of the number 1188 in the Bible.
It is perhaps fitting that the verse in question talks about trusting God over man.
Using Microsoft Word 2000, (which resulted in a total verse count of 31,102 for the King James Version), the middle verses are Psalm 103, verses 1 and 2.
Some verse counts in the past , have resulted in an incorrect verse count of 31,175, leading to Psalm 118:8 as the middle verse.
The Second Epistle of John has one fewer verse, but contains more words.
We didn't want cash; we'd gotten rid of it by paying our state income taxes.
To be totally honest about it, I was back to fumbling with my rifle, checking my magazines and wishing I had a hone to put a little extra edge on the Ka-Bar.
We looked up and there stood a guy dressed in Blackhawk tactical clothing.
What the hell, since FEMA knew we were here, we might as well stop by Wally World.
I got the toilet paper and sanitary products, but not much else on June's list.
A Sheriff can deputize anyone in an emergency, but under Kansas law, you have to have training to be a Reserve Deputy.
Considering the state of emergency, I sort of ignored the letter of the law.
Reserves are selected by background checks and interviews coupled with drug screening and psychological testing.
In fact, the only time we did was on the raid up in Leoti to rescue the town's people and that was strictly a private adventure,"" Paul pointed out.
With a high resolution scanner, an inkjet and the proper paper, you can duplicate nearly anything; just don't try it with money, jails are houses with bars on the windows.
These were certificates, not money, and you couldn't tell them from the genuine article.
It wasn't the same, of course, as going to a law enforcement academy, but we all studied.
When we weren't milking cows, mucking out stalls, feeding the hogs or the chickens, that is.
When we ran out of canning jars, I knew we would, we started blanching the veggies and freezing them.
Thirty acres of garden required more jars then there were in all of southwest Kansas.
We had fried chicken, potato salad, macaroni salad, homemade rolls, lettuce salad and a little taste of our homemade bourbon.
That needed a couple of more years in the barrel, it wasn't quite ready.
You know I think it's about time I gave some thought to putting in a trailer for one of the kids.
I found a home at Premier Homes in Garden City, an Osborne with optional basement entry, 2,280ft 2 called the Roseland Park.
The dealer would assemble it on-site and I pointed out that it was sitting on a basement.
He said it wouldn't make much sense to have a basement entrance without a basement.
He wanted to talk to the contractor putting in the basement to make certain it was up to specs, whatever that means.
Oh, probably I-beams to support the house, or perhaps the size of the basement.
Still, an education was the one thing no one could ever take away from you.
Nevertheless, farming is almost entirely taught through On-the-Job training.
If it came to the kids wanting to quit school, I'd discuss that with June.
He had it installed, the fire bricks replaced as needed and new grates installed.
One of the 500kw units would be just perfect, but those probably went in first and the 2mw units were the ones being installed when the world ended.
Back in 1996-1998, a wind study had been done in Lakin and showed that the average wind speed at 25m was 6.75mps and at 40m was 7.29mps..75 meters per second was 15. mph and 7.29mps was 16.3mph.
Jake said they would find time to haul the disassembled tower and all of the components down to Mike's farm in an effort to repay all that we had done for them.
What had we done; just killed a few people badly in need of killing, nothing more.
The tall tower is justified if there's a high wind shear, such as NREL believes exists on the American Great Plains.
NREL's research, says Sue Hock, has found wind shear greater than the V 7 power law.
NREL's Hock says that turbines and towers need to be tailored to individual sites, and tower height is part of the equation in North America as well.
Lynette's AWT-26, a redesign of the ESI-80 undertaken as part of NREL's advanced wind turbine program , lends itself to tall towers, says Lynette.
Guyed pole towers are an economical means for reaching the heights NREL envisions.
Complex terrain can complicate if not thwart use of lattice towers because of the need to transport lattice tower sections from the assembly yard to the final site.
The transport of huge assembled lattice tower sections is a hair-raising experience and risky task.
The greater footprint of guyed tubular towers relative to conventional tubular and lattice towers may make them less desirable to farmers and ranchers who will have to dodge them with their tractors.
The problem is not unlike that faced a decade ago by Carter with his slender guyed tower.
Landowners may demand higher royalties to compensate for their trouble.
It's conceivable that higher land leases for guyed tubular towers could offset their lower initial costs, boosting long-term operating costs.
While the tower was 200' tall when assembled, the blades extended well above that.
I didn't vote for that guy in office anyway, so they could kiss my rosy red rump.
We'd have to hook up with the power company once we got the turbine installed and see if they wanted us to connect to the power grid.
I'm probably wrong, but I deluded myself into believing that we were a holder in due course and the new turbine was our property.
The former General Foods Corp. headquarters complex was in White Plains, NY; been there, saw it, and never was in the building.
Stayed in a motel in Greenwich, CT and it snowed about 15' in the area where we had our car parked.
The motel ran out of food and we had to wade through snow to a deli just to get something to eat.
Yep, its lots of fun being an auditor, you get to see the Country and develop a taste for Dutch Master cigars.
Bush also hinted that United States forces could remain in Iraq after his presidency ends in January 2009 in answering a reporter's question about when all American troops would leave.
They're going to have one hell of a time moving those sections of the lattice tower down here.
I was very fond of Jim and Mary and hoped that she'd let me walk her down the aisle when she did get married.
The improved death benefits didn't last long, military families; even National Guard families have a tough go of it.
Instead of a $10,000 rifle, they ought to give the troops a $10,000 pay raise.
We hadn't pressed either Mary or Jim, and given time, they adjusted to life on the farm.
Getting Shep hadn't hurt and most of the gifts they received were practical.
The CD players may have been the biggest departure, finding CDs had proven to be difficult.
We found them laptop computers in Garden City that used Windows Vista, Service Pack 3.
If Mary's boyfriend was taller than she, I just hoped he knew how to farm.
The contractor put in several loads of concrete and the tower was assembled on the ground.
Then, they brought in the biggest crane I've ever seen and stood the sucker up.
Once it was securely anchored, some of the people installed the turbine and others built a control building and installed the equipment.
Our newest residents were a semi-retired couple from Leoti who knew how to run the turbine and all of the equipment.
After the kids started back to school, the 6 of us, Jason, Ray, Don, Mike, Paul and I de238 cided to lay in a little extra supply of wood.
We cut firewood until we had 70 cords, and each took 10 to stack beside the house under a tarp.
Ralph and Johnny Barrows, the couple from Leoti had their own nice 16'x90' singlewide and they didn't burn much wood.
The only reason I fired up the still was to make 12 barrels of bourbon.
I'm down to one tractor now, the Ford bit the dust, either transmission or rear end, maybe both.
I'm holding off on the Clydesdales, I want to breed them again, along with the Morgan's.
I hear that they try to optimize the breeding program and drop a calf about every 13 months.
I sure wished my old Ford tractor had held out another 4-5 years, I didn't have the time to shop around for whatever parts it would take to fix it.
Four years of steadily breeding the Clydesdale mares would increase the herd to 20 and then I could begin to breed the first year's fillies.
I was also going to need some sort of horse barn and it looked like, come spring, I better get on it.
We really didn't believe that our 30 acres of gardens could feed the entire town and most certainly, we weren't producing enough beef; pork, maybe and chickens, no way.
There weren't many aircraft flying these days and I left the red light on top of the wind turbine off, no sense advertising.
That done, Paul set to crushing 29,000 bushels of soybeans to extract the oil.
The electrical company declined to buy our excess electricity, darn it.
One of these days, they'd have a boiler or generator go down and they'd come begging.
My fellow Americans, While I regret the delay in informing the American public of our progress, until the satellites were replaced, we lacked the capacity to make a nation-wide address.
Approximately 60% of those weapons were targeted on metropolitan areas with the remainder targeted on military installations.
The United States responded, emptying the missile tubes on 4 of our Ohio class ballistic missile submarines.
As you may or may not know, after the war, India and Pakistan entered into an exchange of weapons with no clear winner.
In addition, the government of Israel elected to attack most of their Arab neighbors when Iran announced they had succeeded in developing a nuclear weapon.
Other than a brief exchange with the PRC, Russia has been strangely silent, although there is every indication that they had 3 bad winters in a row.
The 5mT weapon that the Chinese apparently aimed at Cheyenne Mountain detonated over Peterson AFB, decapitating Northcom.
Northcom was responsible for the military response within the United States, handicapping our initial response.
The change in the weather was surprisingly brief and by the third growing season, the effects of the war on the atmosphere were negating.
However, the excessive ozone has continued the global heating and the icecap in Greenland is nearly gone, raising ocean levels and inundating coastal cities.
Seismologists indicate that there is increased volcanic activity, especially in Alaska.
A major quake, magnitude 8. hit California's central valley further reducing the ability of this nation to feed its remaining population.
Effective immediately, I am invoking certain Executive Orders to mitigate distribution problems within our food supply.
Pursuant to EO 10999, your government will take over all food resources for redistribution pursuant to EO 10990.
These orders will remain in effect until every man, woman and child has an adequate amount of food.
The majority of petroleum products will continue to be used by the government pursuant to EO 10997 which has been in effect since the war.
The National Guard, acting under FEMA's orders will implement these orders.
If all Americans work together to restore this great Country we anticipate that we can rescind the Executive Orders within a year or two.
Our hearts go out to the millions of families who lost loved ones during the pandemic and the subsequent war.
Although he supported Civil Rights, he didn't back the 1964 Civil Rights Act, probably because he hated Johnson so much.
EXECUTIVE ORDER 11000 allows the government to mobilize civilians into work brigades under government supervision.
National Security Act of 1947 allows for the strategic relocation of industries, services, government and other essential economic activities, and to rationalize the requirements for manpower, resources and production facilities.
Obama was out of his mind if he thought he was getting any of our food.
We owned the land, or were paying for it; we planted, cultivated and harvested crops grown from seed we produced.
Perhaps that explained the presence of the FEMA guy and National Guard troops in Garden City.
Section 1385 of title 18, United States Code (commonly known as the ""Posse Comitatus Act""), prohibits the use of the Armed Forces as a posse comitatus to execute the laws except in cases and under circumstances expressly authorized by the Constitution or Act of Congress.
Enacted in 1878, the Posse Comitatus Act was expressly intended to prevent United States Marshals, on their own initiative, from calling on the Army for assistance in enforcing Federal law.
The Posse Comitatus Act has served the Nation well in limiting the use of the Armed Forces to enforce the law.
Nevertheless, by its express terms, the Posse Comitatus Act is not a complete barrier to the use of the Armed Forces for a range of domestic purposes, including law enforcement functions, when the use of the Armed Forces is authorized by Act of Congress or the President determines that the use of the Armed Forces is required to fulfill the President's obligations under the Constitution to respond promptly in time of war, insurrection, or other serious emergency.
I can remember one author who didn't want to do research and is a little slow producing stories because of all of the research he's doing now.
Yes, Virginia, the United States really does have multiple super-secret bunkers aka bomb shelters for government officials.
But unless you know where they are, you can't find them, they aren't visible on the internet.
Robert Conte, has produced a captivating slide presentation that showcases the former top-secret government relocation facility that was built under the West Virginia Wing during the Cold War era.
For the purposes of concurrence, the actus reus is a continuing one and parties may join the plot later and incur joint liability and conspiracy can be charged where the co-conspirators have been acquitted and or cannot be traced.
Finally, repentance by one or more parties does not affect liability but may reduce their sentence.
A conspiracy theory may or may not relate to an actual conspiracy, and, an actual conspiracy may never be discovered.
President Bush scraped the ABM Treaty to build a Ballistic Missile Defense System.
Lacking anyone to ask or an internet to look it up on, I reasoned it out.
China had to have more weapons than were reported by anyone; China must have been able to MIRV several missiles; and, we didn't have enough interceptors.
Mike's plan was to cut the head off the body of feds and an attempt to eliminate control of the National Guard.
While Mike had been Marine Infantry, he wasn't in the same class as Paul, a Force Recon sniper.
If you didn't know by now, Paul would have the duty if we sniped the guy.
Moreover, I was beginning to suspect that if one could be found, the feds had already seized it.
Obama had to be anti-gun; I think that was part of the Democratic platform.
My list of H&K dealers didn't indicate there was anyone close to Lakin who sold the H&K firearms.
Our farm production had been good to us, money wasn't a problem and I'd even replaced one of the CDs I'd cashed out earlier.
I had the bourbon and didn't really need to hurry in processing that soy246 bean oil I started In Tulsa; it was close and hadn't been hit.
He had them, but wanted a premium and said he didn't see how he could sell me the class III suppressors.
When one considers the alternative, they were in all probability a very good investment.
When we got home, we sorted through the Ml 6s and found 10 of the A4s equipped with the ACOG, the standard sight for United States Marines on their Ml 6A4s.
He didn't have us fill out any paperwork either, but he had a gleam in his eye when we each laid out 4 one ounce gold coins.
We sent Ray to Garden City with a shopping list but mostly to check out the FEMA guy.
The Glock 23 is the standard FBI issue firearm in .40S&W and their SWAT Teams use Springfield Armory ,45ACPs.
This was beginning to get serious; it would be difficult to get close to those guys.
Ray claimed the second FEMA guy looked more like a bodyguard, always standing off to the side, scanning the scene.
The guy Ray assumed we met was still wearing his old military style flap holster.
Ray was a pretty smart young man and prolific, Sue was expecting, again.
If the government thought it necessary to provide the FEMA guy with a bodyguard, we concluded that it wasn't good news for us and if we took the 2 guys out, they'd just send more.
He checked into the hotel and hung out like he was resting up from a trip.
Being only 18, he wasn't a Reserve Deputy and nobody in Garden City knew him.
Apparently the hotel had faith in the government, they were accepting FRNs.
One of the larger employers in Garden City was Iowa Beef Processors, which had been acquired by Tyson Foods in 2001.
Don overheard a couple of Guardsmen belly aching about the FEMA man, apparently FEMA had taken over Tyson Meats and intended to use it to process the beef they were going to seize.
FEMA was riding rough shod over the National Guard and they had a belly full.
That answered another question; Obama had somehow managed to suspend Posse Comitatus, no doubt with the help of Congress.
And all this time we had thought that Dubya had acted perhaps a bit, Imperial.
As stalwart Republicans, we had supported John McCain and he was looking better with the passage of time.
The National Guard when not federalized can act as cops at the direction of the Governor.
Once federalized, they're active duty military coming under Posse Comitatus.
We'd have to take the bodyguard out first but I saw the movie and Kevin Costner was very hard to sneak up on.
Sometimes having dumb luck beats the heck out of whatever comes second.
We got a call from the Sheriff; he was activating us because FEMA was coming to Lakin to discuss who in the County had what.
We're invoking the 5th Amendment here, but the general details of what happened were that the FEMA guys made it to Lakin and had their meeting.
They were lucky the people from Kearny County didn't kill them on the spot.
Finney County Deputies later found their Suburban in a ditch about 2 miles inside the Finney County line, but the FEMA guys were missing.
The vehicle wasn't seriously damaged and the Deputies said that it appeared to them that they'd gone off the road and had gotten out and walked toward Garden City.
Personally I think it was dumb for Mike to keep it, it should have gone in the hole with the bodies and their other guns.
They didn't seem to think it was likely, if they came through at dusk, there should have been enough light so they shouldn't have gotten lost.
A few days later, two FBI Special Agents showed up and asked questions.
It would have been nice if that was the end of it, but it was just the beginning.
Plus, we had unregistered cans for our Ml As, the USP Tactical's and 10 of the M16A4s.
You can remove the handle from the A3 and A4 and install the Aimpoint sights.
Don't know; the decision was to wait until after Iraq and they were very busy after that.
That XM-8 didn't look like a military weapon, unless your name was Buck Rogers.
Apparently they went inter-service on the subject of a new combat rifle and open the process up to bidding.
One of the problems they never solved with the XM-8 was the weight; it gained weight to 7. pounds instead of losing it down to 5. pounds.
H&K completely redesigned the magazine for the HK416, eliminating the dust problem that plagued the Ml 6s and M4s in Iraq.
The rifle had the same 4 barrel lengths that were supposed to be available for the XM-8.
I've got Jim feeding corn, soybean meal and dried mash into the hammer mill to produce feed for the livestock.
I can't believe this President waiting until 3 years after THE CRAP HIT THE FAN and then pulling this stuff.
Each 1,000-head hog finishing barn produces enough pork to feed 8,800 people for one year, and an 80-cow dairy produces enough milk in one day to provide 3,000 people three 8-ounce glasses of milk.
We might not be the ultimate producers, but left alone, we did a pretty good job of supplying Lakin, Kansas.
If we could get more help, we could always grow bigger gardens, but there was a definite limit to how much food we could can because we didn't have enough jars.
The grocery stores said they could take more fresh produce ala green beans and guaranteed to purchase all of our excess production.
Many of the people in town would be looking for things to can themselves in the coming year.
The war produced more than 970,000 casualties , including approximately 560,000 deaths.
But as you well know, their vehicle was found in a ditch in Finney County, past our roadblock.
With satellite service restored, the internet was back up as was long distance.
Because the government put up those satellites, I wondered what they had built into them to monitor phones calls and the internet.
The FBI's computer program hadn't worked, and it took them nearly 3 years to replace those satellites.
Mueller told Congress that the agency is far from relying on carrier pigeons.
That's what happens when you get busy on the farm, you lose track of time.
Jim and Mary had come here back in 2010, just before their 14th birthdays.
I must be getting older; my mind seems to be going, along with my hairline.
The next event I recall was the kids' 17th birthday party on April 16th.
We hadn't seen hide or hair of those FEMA folks and we were hoping they wouldn't be back.
Wish in one hand and spit in the other; see which one fills the fastest.
I remembered seeing them in the garden the previous year, but I hadn't put them together with the kids.
I made a point not to call Jim and Mary kids in front of their friends.
In a couple of months, they be seniors and it seemed like only last week that they'd come to live with us.
Fine, I'll just cut back on the grass, at the moment we have more than we can use.
Moreover, the president said, by their doing so the Soviets had demonstrated that they had for many months been lying about their intentions in that island nation.
Kennedy then stated that the United States was prepared to not only blockade Cuba but to ultimately do whatever might be necessary to remove the missiles.
In the days that followed Kennedy's address, Soviet ships moved toward a line of United States naval vessels that had been set up as a blockade to ""quarantine"" Cuba.
The United States government's intention was to force the Soviets to ship their missiles back to the Soviet Union.
As the Soviet missile sites reached completion, the American pilot of a U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba and the pilot killed.
Also during that time, President Kennedy ordered 180,000 combatready troops deployed to the southeastern United States to prepare to attack Cuba.
On October 28, however, just before 9:00 EST, Soviet chairman Nikita Khrushchev announced in a broadcast over Radio Moscow that he would accept Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba in return for a Soviet pledge to remove the missiles from the island.
Cu255 ban leader Fidel Castro was outraged at what he felt was a Soviet betrayal, but he reluctantly allowed the missiles to be withdrawn.
As a result of these conferences and continuing research, it is now clear that the key sources of the crisis were the enormous, mutual misperceptions and misunderstandings between Washington and Moscow and Havana.
The Soviets, for example, felt that they had to deploy the missiles to Cuba because they believed (incorrectly, but understandably, following the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961) that a massive United States assault on Cuba was imminent.
On the other hand, the United States dismissed growing signs of the possibility of a Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba because the Soviets had never before positioned such weapons outside the Soviet Union, and because it was so obvious that such a move would be totally unacceptable in Washington.
In addition, the Soviets felt sure that the missiles could be introduced into Cuba secretly, via a clandestine operation supplemented by a systematic attempt to deceive the United States.
Thus the danger of the confrontation in 1962 was more severe than United States leaders, from Kennedy on down, believed at the time.
At the time, the United States Central Intelligence Agency estimated that fewer than 10,000 Soviets had arrived on the island.
Furthermore, by the last weekend of October 1962, Castro had concluded that a United States air strike and invasion of Cuba was all but inevitable.
This led him to request of Khrushchev, in a cable sent on October 27, that in the event of an invasion, the Soviet leader launch an all-out nuclear strike against the United States.
If Cuba was to be destroyed, Castro urged the Soviets to take the United States down with it.
The CIA believed at the time that there were no warheads on the island.
During the last few days of the crisis, the Soviet field commander ordered the warheads for the short-range, tactical weapons moved out of storage and closer to their launchers.
He did so without prior approval from Moscow, and he likely would have ordered their use in the event of a United States invasion.
A further fact uncovered is that each Soviet submarine escorting ships bound for Cuba carried one nuclear-tipped torpedo, which could be used without consultation with Moscow.
One such submarine, certain that it was under attack from United States vessels and that war may have already begun, came very close to launching its nuclear weapon against the United States fleet blockading Cuba, an action that might well have led to a United States nuclear response.
Some 250,000 Cuban troops and more than 40,000 Soviet troops armed with dozens of tactical nuclear weapons would have met a United States invasion force (which would not have been equipped with nuclear weapons), initiating nuclear war in the assumption that the United States would have attacked with nuclear weapons.
Historians speculate that such an action would very likely have ended in nuclear catastrophe.
In the end, President Kennedy rejected military advice for a full-scale surprise attack on Cuba and instead delivered the public ultimatum to the USSR on October 22, declaring the quarantine and demanding the withdrawal of all offensive missiles.
After nearly a week of unprecedented tension, the Khrushchev government yielded.
Kennedy, in return, agreed to refrain from attempting an overthrow of Castro's government.
Despite this concession, all sides regarded the outcome as a substantial victory for the United States, and Kennedy won a reputation as a formidable international statesman.
The USSR, for its part, began a long-term effort to strengthen its military capability, but in the immediate future both nations sought to relax hostilities.
I may have known before most of you did, there were 12 B-47's on the flight line, loaded and ready to go.
It was a long time before people learned that part of the deal was removal of the Jupiter C missile from Italy and Turkey.
The situation with FEMA reminded me of a loaded gun with the hammer cocked and the safety off.
We didn't know that the 2 men had already been replaced by 3 men 1 representative and 2 body guards.
They flew in during the middle of the night, holed up in the same hotel and were almost totally unobtrusive.
When word finally leaked out, what we heard was they were trying to repair relations with the National Guard unit.
It was suggested that they wait until the crops were in the ground before they gave us the bad news.
We had an abundance of hay, several years supply of biodiesel and if push came to shove, we'd just let the ground lie fallow for a year.
Historically, benign tyrannies have tended to be insecure, and to try to maintain their power by becoming increasingly oppressive.
Therefore, rule that initially seems benign is inherently dangerous, and the only security is to maintain legitimacy an unbroken accountability to the people through the framework of a written constitution that provides for election of key officials and the division of powers among branches and officials in a way that avoids concentration of powers in the hands of a few persons who might then abuse those powers.
The key is always to detect tendencies toward tyranny and suppress them before they go too far or become too firmly established.
That was something you might get away with once, but if you kept it up, a pattern would emerge and that's how they caught serial killers.
I'll bet June would be relieved and we could still plant a small one family garden.
That would give Jim and Mary an excuse to have the friends come out to the farm and help.
We decided that instead of dumping the milk, we'd make cheese, something that required aging, like Cheddar.
Our gardens would produce just enough food to feed our families and maybe enough to feed a couple of friends families.
I might plant a couple of acres of corn, wheat and barley to keep myself occupied during the next winter, just enough grain to produce 12 barrels of bourbon.
I am not, by my nature, a drinking man, but an occasional nip on a cold winter's night helps to take the chill off.
And we almost made a tradition of sampling the whiskey on the 4th of July.
Those contracts with the grocery stores contained an out; we couldn't be held to selling food we didn't produce.
Mike, Ray, Paul and I had been called up by the Sheriff to put up a roadblock at the east Kearny County line.
There wasn't a lot of traffic that day, just locals going about their business.
Tell them not to bother; we've overworked the land and are planning on allowing it to lie fallow for a year.
Not a lot, you don't want to tell them anything you don't want them to know.
No matter how secure the FBI thinks its interviews are, these things have a way of getting around.
Possibly a secretary in an office hears something and mentions it to the spouse.
Production has fallen off and we need to incorporate more manure and allow it to lie fallow for a year.
My old Ford tractor gave up the ghost and I'm going to have to use our horses for part of the work.
We offered what extra energy we might have to the electric company, but they weren't interested.
I hadn't figured out how I was going to bottle the bourbon in 2-3 years when it was ready.
I'd probably end up with 750ml plastic capped glass wine bottles, if I could find them.
I also did some research on the internet and found out that I need a permit to produce ethanol for biodiesel and wasn't allowed to produce my own moonshine or bourbon.
In the story, The Consultant, the government got too oppressive and it took an armed rebellion to set things right.
We had started down that path but, for my part, my conscience got the better of me.
Sure Gandhi and King died, but only after they'd started a snowball rolling down a hill that couldn't be stopped.
The next thing you knew, our phone was ringing off the hook, people volunteering to help in the gardens, if we'd just make them bigger and they could get a share.
My problem was that I had already made exceptions for the kids' boy and girl friends.
After several calls, Mike and Paul came over and said they'd tried to reach us but our phone line had been busy.
First June and I talked about a bigger garden and then I decided that passive resistance was the best approach.
Colby is similar to Cheddar, but because it is produced through a washed-curd process, it is a softer, moister, and milder cheese.
The washed-curd process means that during the cooking time, the whey is replaced by water; this reduces the curd's acidity, resulting in Colby's characteristically mild, gentle flavor.
Monterey Jack is a type of cheddar-style cheese using pasteurized cows' milk.
While he was there, he wrote Quartet in F, opus 96, the American, sometimes referred to as the Spillville Quartet.
Shortly after the completion of Opus 96, he began work on a quintet for strings, the String Quintet in E flat.
In the quintet's second movement is the first definite suggestion of Native American musical influence.
June and I took some time and went through our medical supplies, discarding outdated meds and making a list of things we'd need to replace.
If those tyrants from FEMA try to seize our gardens, there'll be trouble for sure.
Anyone who was killed in Iraq is a hero in my book, even if all he got was a couple of campaign ribbons and a Purple Heart.
Take the discards to the hospital pharmacy and they see that they're properly disposed of.
I'll write the prescriptions, but you may have to go to the hospital in Garden City to get them filled.
They give them away and make it up by the high price on testing strips.
I got Mike the blood sugar tester there plus new strips for the two of us.
We also had an older Glucometer Elite by Bayer, but it took 60 seconds to read the strips.
If you have expired strips, you can always test them with the bottle of control solution, if properly stored, they sometimes last longer.
You test your fasting blood sugar tomorrow morning when you first get up and give me a call.
OGTT , FPG, and the usual blood draw where blood serum level of glucose are measured.
Type 1 diabetes occurs when the body's immune system destroys the beta cells in the pancreas and gestational diabetes is a condition characterized by high blood glucose levels that is first recognized during pregnancy.
It might be less now after the war, more people are getting more exercise.
That's one of the many reasons that doctors worry about obesity in children. years ago when farming was a lot of manual labor, you didn't see many fat farmers; then came the gleaner, the tractor and all of those implements to make life easier, increase production and reduce labor.
A point was made about the SUREVENT Disposable Automatic Resuscitator and advised that it required bottled oxygen to work the vent.
We never had to resort to using the SURVENT Resuscitators during the pandemic.
It didn't have enough pressure to work the SUREVENT without an accessory to pressurize the oxygen.
Hospital oxygen systems are relatively high pressured systems and will run all medical devices.
That's why you need an air pump to run a nebulizer; the oxygen concentrator lacks the pressure.
Concentrators are tested to make sure they deliver at least 93% pure oxygen.
Compressed oxygen gas and liquid oxygen are two ways to have oxygen delivered to the home.
Oxygen gas can be compressed and stored in tanks or cylinders of steel or aluminum.
These tanks come in many sizes; larger ones are usually left in the bedroom, and smaller ones are used for leaving the house.
Liquid oxygen is made by cooling the oxygen gas, which changes it to a liquid form.
It is often used by people who are more active because larger amounts of oxygen can be stored in smaller, more convenient containers than compressed oxygen.
The disadvantage is that it cannot be kept for a long time because it will evaporate.
In addition, oxygen concentrators are available to deliver higher concentrations in the home.
An oxygen concentrator is an electric device about the size of an end table.
It produces oxygen by concentrating the oxygen that is already in the air and eliminating other gases.
This method is less expensive, easier to maintain, and doesn't require re266 filling, but it is not portable.
Back-up methods are necessary in case of a power failure, and the electric bill may rise.
For some patients, oxygen concentrators may not deliver adequate oxygen.
For people who do not get enough oxygen naturally, supplements of oxygen can have several benefits.
Supplemental oxygen can improve their sleep and mood, increase their mental alertness and stamina, and allow their bodies to carry out normal functions.
Oxygen at very high levels over a long period of time can be toxic and very harmful to one's health; therefore, a doctor's prescription is required.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is a term referring to two lung diseases, chronic bronchitis and emphysema, that are characterized by obstruction to airflow that interferes with normal breathing.
Chronic bronchitis is the inflammation and eventual scarring of the lining of the bronchial tubes.
When the bronchi are inflamed and or infected, less air is able to flow to and from the lungs and a heavy mucus or phlegm is coughed up.
The condition is defined by the presence of a mucus-producing cough most days of the month, three months of a year for two successive years without other underlying disease to explain the cough.
This inflammation eventually leads to scarring of the lining of the bronchial tubes.
Once the bronchial tubes have been irritated over a long period of time, excessive mucus is produced constantly, the lining of the bronchial tubes becomes thickened, an irritating cough develops, and air flow may be hampered, the lungs become scarred.
The bronchial tubes then make an ideal breeding place for bacterial infections within the airways, which eventually impedes airflow.
Emphysema begins with the destruction of air sacs in the lungs where oxygen from the air is exchanged for carbon dioxide in the blood.
Damage to the air sacs is irreversible and results in permanent ""holes"" in the tissues of the lower lungs.
As air sacs are destroyed, the lungs are able to transfer less and less oxygen to the bloodstream, causing shortness of breath.
The lungs also lose their elasticity, which is important to keep airways open.
Years of exposure to the irritation of cigarette smoke usually precede the development of emphysema.
Of the estimated 3. million Americans ever diagnosed with emphysema, 95 percent were 45 or older.
The only way to know for sure which one you have is to autopsy the body.
The thing was, the equipment was expensive and the average guy didn't have the stuff sitting around unless the doctor ordered it.
Try and get a defibrillator or oxygen if you didn't have either COPD or a heart disorder.
It became the rage to implant combination pacemakerdefibrillators and then they had a product recall.
When Paramedics first arose, the need envisioned was immediate treatment of heart attacks.
Generally patients treated immediately had a much increased chance of survival.
Paramedics would reestablish a normal sinus rhythm in the heart and give the patient oxygen.
They might administer drugs, as appropriate, and transport the patient or send them to the hospital in an ambulance.
For example, LA City had Paramedic ambulances and LA County Paramedic trucks.
With the emergence of sophisticated medical treatments, a dilemma arose.
The only assurance that anyone has that his or her wishes will be carried out is a Durable Power of Attorney for Healthcare Purposes or a Living Will.
Do yourself a favor and make your wishes known in a legal document before the question comes up.
A persistent vegetative state is a condition of patients with severe brain damage in whom coma has progressed to a state of wakefulness without detectable awareness.
There is controversy in both the medical and legal fields as to whether this condition is irreversible.
Many patients emerge from a vegetative state within a few weeks, but those who do not recover within 30 days are said to be in a persistent vegetative state.
The chances of recovery depend on the extent of injury to the brain and the patient's age, with younger patients having a better chance of recovery than older patients.
Generally adults have a 50 percent chance and children a 60 percent chance of recovering consciousness from a PVS within the first 6 months.
After a year, the chances that a PVS patient will regain consciousness are very low and most patients who do recover consciousness experience significant disability.
The longer a patient is in a PVS, the more severe the resulting disabilities will be.
Rehabilitation can contribute to recovery, but many patients never progress to the point of being able to take care of themselves.
This conclusion is in dispute, however, as there have been cases like those of a man in Australia who was closely followed for years before suddenly waking up.
In the United States, it is estimated that there may be between 15,000-40,000 patients who are in a persistent vegetative state, but due to poor nursing home records exact figures are hard to determine.
This typology distinguishes various stages of the condition rather than using one term for them all.
The highly publicized case of Terri Schiavo involved disputes over a diagnosis of PVS given by several court-appointed doctors.
Ultimately the court challenges were unsuccessful and Schiavo's feeding tube was removed, leading to her subsequent death.
In an autopsy after she died, microscopic examination revealed extensive damage to nearly all brain regions, including the cerebral cortex, the thalami, the basal ganglia, the hippocampus, the cerebellum, and the midbrain.
The neuropathologic changes in her brain were precisely of the type seen in patients who enter a PVS following cardiac arrest.
Throughout the cerebral cortex, the large pyramidal neurons that comprise some 70 percent of cortical cells critical to the functioning of the cortex were completely lost.
The pattern of damage to the cortex, with injury tending to worsen from the front of the cortex to the back, is also typical.
The damage was, in the words of Thogmartin, irreversible, and no amount of therapy or treatment would have regenerated the massive loss of neurons.
In my humble opinion, you've qualified as a diabetic, but Doc can run some tests and you will know for sure.
These levels are considered to be risk factors for type 2 diabetes and its complications.
If Mike took care of himself, there was a good chance he'd avoid becoming insulin dependent.
However, if you get too much radiation, there isn't a pill that will do much more than ease your pain.
For bleeding gums or sore mouth, use a mouthwash made up of a half teaspoon salt to a quart of water.
Diarrhea medication or a mixture of kaolin and pectin may help relieve diarrhea.
We had one set down in late spring that tore up some pasture and the ground we were leaving lay fallow.
Those clouds came up rather sudden and I was watching the sky, just in case.
Jim and Mary were in their last month of their junior year and at school.
It might turn out to be one of those summers where tornadoes popped up now and then; I guess I'd better keep a radio on.
If we had to have a tornado summer, it was better that we didn't plant crops, a tornado will suck up quite a bit of corn or wheat.
I decided to plant 40' of field corn next to the sweet corn to get 2 acres of corn.
Post began his breakfast empire in 1892 when he opened La Vita Inn sanitarium on this site.
Post's first commercial success occurred in 1894 when he created the hot beverage Postum.
His continued experiments with grains resulted in Grape-Nuts, his first cold cereal, in 1897.
In 1908-09 sales from Grape-Nuts, Postum, and Post Toasties surpassed $5 million.
Upon Post's death, his daughter Marjorie ran the company, continuing to advertise extensively, and expanding the product line.
The Philip Morris Company purchased General Foods in 1985, and the plant became part of Kraft Foods in 1989.
It didn't take long to plant the wheat and barley and I had the garden plowed as soon as the ground allowed, in this case, April 29, 2013, a Monday.
I used the planter to plant 8 rows of sweet corn and 8 rows of field corn.
I could also plant the peas and change the plates to plant the green beans for June, saving her time and allowing her to plant spuds.
The living room and dining rooms were full up with tomato plants and pepper plants, we didn't have a greenhouse.
Maybe with the free time I had this summer, I should get some plastic and build one.
The plants were in flats making it easier to move them around and share the sunlight coming in the windows.
We got the flats from Maverick Manufacturing Company in Clarksville, Texas.
There wasn't room to walk, but we had racks (similar to bread racks), that helped on space, but not on the light.
By using the 3"" pots, we didn't have to transplant until it was time to plant the garden.
In personal terms, it's something you can't legally have anywhere I've ever lived.
Talking about building a greenhouse actually doing it weren't the same.
I went looking for a contractor who could convert the plans into a finished building.
Strike 2, I couldn't find anyone who had the know-how AND could get the materials.
So, I contacted the company in Clarksville, TX and ask them if they knew where I could find a greenhouse contractor.
I hired them to build a greenhouse about the size of the plan I had, their American Classic model.
I couldn't have assembled the thing, it was steel and aluminum framed and I chose polycarbonate panels.
We had a place to start plants the following year and given the size of the greenhouse, we could start everyone's plants.
The garden was in by the time the company showed up to erect the greenhouse.
June wouldn't let me watch, saying that if I had time to stand around and watch, I could help in the garden.
It suited me; I cultivated the things I planted, greatly reducing the hoeing needed.
They were still running disaster stuff on TV, and I wondered where they got the programs, sometimes.
A pal of mine from Iowa had lived through the worst tornado in Iowa history on May 15, 1968.
It was an F-5 that left a trail of destruction on the ground for 55 miles.
It had by passed most towns only striking his home town of Charles City.
Must have been a busy news day, that was little more than a month after the King assassination and for whatever reason news coverage of that killer tornado got little press coverage.
Six years later when the super outbreak occurred and Xenia, Ohio lost 34 people and you'd have thought it was the end of the world.
That town in Iowa I mentioned was one of the last bastions of true conservatism.
But if you looked at the obits in their newspaper, most of the deaths were people who had been on social security for ages.
Those people assembling the greenhouse must have done it before, it was slam bam, thank you ma'am and they were done.
I'd gone ahead and gotten the automatic vents, maybe I could spend all of our money and go on the dole.
Now if you folks with the federal government could see you way clear to providing anhydrous ammonia, insecticides, herbicides and all the modern things we need to farm on tired soil, I might be able to plant crops.
I was short a few parts we needed to rebuild the tranny and the rear end.
As luck would have it, I found a dealer who had the missing parts and his mechanic was familiar with working on the old Fords.
Then he went on about the dairy herd and I told him the cheese was aging.
Mike had been experimenting through the winter, getting a brewing recipe he was happy with.
Paul was going to have to start making wine, and then we'd have a well-rounded production of alky-hall.
Vintage ports are aged in barrels for a maximum of 2 years before bottling, and often require another 5 to 15 years of aging in the bottle before reaching what is considered proper drinking age.
Since they are aged in barrels for only a short time, they retain their dark ruby color and fresh fruit flavors.
It was an adaptation of original barbecue where people in the Caribbean slow cooked a whole goat.
Mike had acquired several empty beer kegs and cleaned them then kegged the beer and had it chilling.
Barbecue sauce, on the side, maybe yea so many sliced tomatoes and don't forget the watermelons or the corn on the cob.
Not being a drinking man, I got waylaid by the high proof beer Mike brewed.
Canadian beer sometimes runs to 8% and Carlings has a commercial 10% brew.
Mike figured on that and had a few six-packs as care packages for the drivers.
When everyone had their fill, the wives packed up any leftovers for the troops, mostly in empty plastic coffee cans.
We told the CO it was for the troops who hadn't been able to come to the celebration.
I think we made some new friends, which was the whole idea in the first place.
The only thing missing was fireworks, but by then we weren't in any condition to be playing with explosives.
I'd heard her, but the thought got in my brain and started fighting with those demons that were pounding on the drums.
The first time was in the Army, before I'd met June, 1/2 a lifetime ago.
She said I should eat something, but my stomach felt like the food I'd eaten the day before was still there waiting for my stomach to wake up and digest it.
Every time someone came to compliment the 3 of you they brought you each a glass of beer.
I wasn't concerned that I had a drinking problem, unlike a drunk; I wasn't in any rush to drown the drummer.
I don't know what really accounted for my behavior, probably the built up stress.
It began accumulating when FEMA showed up and our first reaction to their appearance wasn't anything I was going to write home about.
Our venture up in Leoti, wasn't our finest hour, we just did what needed doing and made ourselves some good friends along the way.
I didn't think so, or they would have had people in Lakin as well as in Garden City.
I'd told that FEMA guy we'd be waiting for him and we would, with loaded weapons.
We didn't have cellars for cheese aging so we'd done the next best thing, built buildings that we buried in up to 6' of soil.
It was tough getting the hang of it, but once we figured it out, it wasn't such a big deal.
Cheese was made from the milk solids that you took off by way of curdling the milk.
Cheddar is an English cheese and Jack Cheese is uncolored Colby Cheese.
The pizza cheese is the string variety of Mozzarella was originally made from buffalo milk.
That FEMA guy called in a bunch of feds when the National Guard refused to back his play.
They're on a farm outside of Deerfield and they came up against some farmers who won't play ball with them.
The Sheriff called in Mutual Assistance from Finney County but they'll be slow responding.
You heard 'bout the legend of Jesse James and John Henry, just to mention some names.
They swear he got asphalt a-runnin' in his veins, a foot like lead and nerves like steel.
He hit Mont Eagle and it started to rain so hard he couldn't even see the passin' lane.
Well, he started down the grade when he lost a gear, he reached for them brakes, found he had no air.
The mount Eagle grade is steep and long and everybody that seen it thought the bandit was gone.
Well, his truck Jackknife turned completely around, he was cornin' down backwards 'bout the speed of sound.
Well, he got to the bottom safe and sound Everybody asked Bandit how he made it down.
You heard the legend of Jesse James and John Henry just to mention some names.
They swear he's got asphalt a-runnin' in his veins, a foot like lead and nerves like steel.
Well I'm east bound and down, loaded up and truckin' a' we gonna' do what they say can't be done We've got a long way to go, and a short time to get there I'm east bound, just watch 'ole' Bandit run.
Keep your foot hard on the peddle son, never mind them brakes let it all hang out 'cause we've got a run to make The boys are thirsty in Atlanta, and there's beer in Texarkana and we'll bring it back no matter what it takes Well I'm east bound and down, loaded up and truckin' a' we gonna' do what they say can't be done We've got a long way to go, and a short time to get there I'm east bound, just watch 'ole' Bandit run.
All wearing Blackhawk tactical gear with FEMA is big white letters on the back.
They had us outnumbered 2 or 3 to 1 and they were wearing H&K handguns and carrying MP5K-PDWs.
They were surrounding a group of farmers, maybe 15 altogether, holding their hands high.
I worked my way to Ray and slapped on an ACS, using the compression bandage to hold it in place.
Moving back to cover, half dragging Ray, I was grazed myself, but it wasn't bleeding so bad I needed to worry about it.
It was probably only seconds, perhaps minutes, but it seemed like hours.
Last thing he ever said, got him in the heart and when I checked, he didn't have a pulse.
I changed magazines and got a couple more of them when Mike cried out something indistinguishable.
I heard a sound and looked around and here came those National Guard troops and they were firing on the FEMA guys.
I felt the jolts as first one, then two and finally three of his rounds hit me.
I grabbed at my first responders bag to get an ACS, but it was so far away, I couldn't reach it.
Ray grabbed the bag and started slapping on the bandages, but I was losing blood fast from 3 wounds.
Finally, Randy got one of those FEMA guys and the guy gunned him down as he fell,"" Ray explained.
They started it ma'am, but those National Guardsmen and what there was left of us finished it.
I'm afraid we lost most of our contingent, 37 dead and the other 3 of us wounded.
It couldn't have come at a worst time, Mike, Paul and Randy getting killed, like there is ever a good time for someone to die.
Ray had said, / don't know what bravery is ma'am, but it seems to me that laying down your life to protect and defend the Constitution of this Country counts for something.
Jim and Mary were as distraught as I was, this was the third time in their lives they'd lost someone they were close to, first their father in Iraq, then their mother to the H5N1 and finally, Randy, a victim of tyranny.
The people from Lakin pitched in and made sure we didn't lose any of our garden produce, heck they even canned it for us.
Everything needs a beginning and those FEMA jack-booted thugs killing over 40 people in Kearny County, Kansas all over some grain and livestock, couldn't be kept quiet for long.
By the time the mass funeral was held on Thursday, July 12, 2013, there must have been more media in Lakin than residents.
They'd shown up on our farms, only to be run off with guns by Don, Jason or Susan.
I suppose we could have made statements, but like Randy once told me, / understand how Ms.
I was cut to the quick, broken hearted, but proud of Mike, Paul and Randy.
Widows are supposed to wear black at funerals, but Rachel, Marilyn and I brought new red dresses, perhaps to reflect the anger we felt.
Randy had an insurance policy, paid in full, for $300,000 with Principal in Des Moines.
Des Moines hadn't been hit by the Chinese on July 4, 2009, thank God for that.
But we couldn't just run to the grocery store for food and what we had in the garden would keep the 3 of us going until the following year.
Rather than continue the violence, Randy, Paul and Mike had staged what amounted to a sit-in.
They passed on planting crops, except for that corn, barley, oats and wheat Randy wanted for the bourbon he was illegally brewing out in the machine shed and to mix horse feed.
He'd gotten his old Ford tractor repaired, but never gotten the chance to use it.
I suppose he was a bit obsessive-compulsive, but Randy favored making lists, it was God sent.
Our husbands had been smarter than we knew, Limited Liability Corporations with the stock held by the husband and wife as Joint Tenants in Common with Rights of Survivorship, whatever that means.
The corporation was the beneficiary of the policy and before the kids started back to school, the land was free and clear and we had operating capital.
I went down Randy's list, topped off the propane, got a load of coal and finished up with the garden.
I kept myself busy, idle hands are the Devil's playground and when you're busy, it seems to dull the pain.
The kids' dog, Shep, seemed to sense how I felt and began to sleep on the floor next to the bed.
How we got through the summer of 2013 is anyone's guess, probably thanks to Randy's lists.
In a way, it was if he was still here, looking out for us, not buried next to his parents in Lakin.
Randy hadn't much cared for the media, but in this case, the story of the shootout grew, and people started to compare the Kearny County Massacre to the Branch Davidians and Randy Weaver's standoff on Ruby Ridge.
It not only cast the previous events in a better light but it seemed to become the core of some new movement.
We'd lost all of the sworn officers of the Sheriff's Department, for example.
They hired some Deputies from the Finney County Sheriff's Department and the Garden City Police Department and appointed one of them Acting Sheriff.
President Obama EOs seemed to wither away and FEMA never came back to Garden City.
There hadn't been elections in 2012, and Obama wasn't in office legally anyway, a situation quickly remedied by Congress which removed both him and Joe.
The President until the elections in 2016 would be the former Speaker of the House, a Republican, but more moderate.
The Iroquois model of representative government influenced English philosophers, as well as Benjamin Franklin, and inspired the Americans and French to create representative democracies.
The United States Constitution is the supreme law of the United States of America.
It was completed on September 17, 1787, with its adoption by the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and was later ratified by special conventions in each state.
It created a federal union of sovereign states, and a federal government to operate that union.
It replaced the less defined union that had existed under the Articles of Confederation.
It took effect on March 4, 1789 and has served as a model for the constitutions of numerous other nations.
The Constitution of the United States of America is the oldest federal constitution in current use.
It was about as good as a people could get, but it was less than perfect.
But they were interpreted, and sometimes the results were less than satisfactory.
Randy always opposed the Supreme Court's interpretation of the Second Amendment.
He took the position that owning firearms and carrying arms was an individual right and should have been written more clearly.
Their weapons had been returned to us by those National Guardsmen before they packed up and went home.
The Commanding Officer of that National Guard Company had his own demons to excise.
Then he hadn't arrived at the scene of the Massacre soon enough, according to some.
The general sentiment was that had he gone with FEMA in the first place, the bloodshed could have been avoided.
He'd been right to refuse to follow an unlawful order and had arrived quickly, the minute he heard that there was trouble in Kearny County.
The upper echelons of the military had just wanted to avoid the controversy and had accepted his resignation and dropped the matter.
Then, just after school started, John proposed to Mary and she accepted.
Jim was a bit slower to react, but just before Thanksgiving, he proposed to Julia and she accepted.
The four of them talked it over and it was decided to have a single, joint wedding on the date that John and Mary had picked.
We have a load of used medical equipment that belongs to Doc and both my late husband and I had been trained in its use.
The Sheriff had offered to deputize Jason as a Reserve Deputy, but Jason had never taken him up on the offer, a move that probably saved his life.
Nevertheless, the certificate that said Jason had completed the necessary training was in the Sheriff's files.
Anyone who knew that certificate wasn't the genuine thing is dead, so I think I'll apply.
Jim still needs some guidance and I'm not sure about how much John knows.
Randy had planned to build the herd of Clydesdales to 64 working horses.
If you have any questions, you'll have to contact Mike McGilvray up in Bird City.
Physician assistants practice medicine under the supervision of physicians and surgeons.
They should not be confused with medical assistants, who perform routine clinical and clerical tasks.
PAs are formally trained to provide diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive health care services, as delegated by a physician.
Working as members of the health care team, they take medical histories, examine and treat patients, order and interpret laboratory tests and X-rays, and make diagnoses.
PAs record progress notes, instruct and counsel patients, and order or carry out therapy.
In 48 States and the District of Columbia, physician assistants may prescribe medications.
Some order medical supplies or equipment and supervise technicians and assis287 tants.
However, PAs may be the principal care providers in rural or inner city clinics, where a physician is present for only 1 or 2 days each week.
In such cases, the PA confers with the supervising physician and other medical professionals as needed and as required by law.
PAs also may make house calls or go to hospitals and nursing care facilities to check on patients, after which they report back to the physician.
The duties of physician assistants are determined by the supervising physician and by State law.
Aspiring PAs should investigate the laws and regulations in the States in which they wish to practice.
Many PAs work in primary care specialties, such as general internal medicine, pediatrics, and family medicine.
Other specialty areas include general and thoracic surgery, emergency medicine, orthopedics, and geriatrics.
PAs specializing in surgery provide preoperative and postoperative care and may work as first or second assistants during major surgery.
In Kansas, PA programs are two years in length and require anywhere from two years to four years of pre-PA college courses for admission.
General Chemistry 1 and 2, Biology 1 and 2, Microbiology, Human Anatomy, Human Physiology, College Algebra, Pharmacology, Pathophysiology, Immunology and Medical Terminology.
I didn't have a college education and after talking to Doc about the PA program, he suggested that I get the Paramedic training.
He said there were a couple of reasons for his suggestion, but primarily because once I became a Paramedic, I'd have many of the pre-requisite courses out of the way.
The PA Program took 3 years of intensive study and he considered this the most productive direction for me to take.
The program had been a killer and more than once I wondered what I had gotten myself into.
It had been a blessing in disguise; I didn't have a lot of time to think about my loss.
Marilyn and Rachel pitched in and helped Jim and Mary get through their senior year and ready for the weddings.
The two of you don't know how much I appreciate all that you did, getting the kids through their senior year and preparing for the weddings.
I didn't tell them that he was very attractive, for a kid, and if I hadn't had to work so hard in school, I might have taken him up on it.
That's when Randy switched from the idea of having a basement shelter to that culvert shelter.
You know we all weathered the war in the shelter and after, we got the idea to provide a home for a couple of kids who might have lost their parents to the Pandemic.
As far as the garden goes, I see the greenhouse is full of starts that should be planted soon.
He converted the wheat, barley, oats and corn into bourbon and horse feed with Jason's help.
Jason told him that the oldest stuff should be ready to bottle in a year.
Just what the kids' would need, the BATF on their backs; however, feds tended to stay away from Kearny County during the past year.
I fired up Randy's computer and printed myself a certificate; and then, I went to see the Acting Sheriff.
The Sheriff had the Chief Deputy take me to the Range and I had to qualify with a handgun, shotgun and rifle.
I think Randy was there, watching over my shoulder, like a guardian angel, I passed.
They headed to the range to practice and told me to fire up that printer.
I fudged the dates and put the same dates on their certificates that Randy had put on Mike and Paul's.
I had taken my guns with me when I'd gone to school and when I'd gotten too frustrated with school, spent time on the range, shooting at a picture of the guy who had killed Randy.
I bought myself one of those Springfield Armory XD ,45s while I was at school.
Honey, let me tell you something, I'm one girl you don't want to mess with.
I can shoot you in the heart or right between the eyes and if I'm out of bullets, I'll just cut your heart out.
Think of an actress in her nastiest role, Sharon Stone times 10, or Demi Moore times 20.
The wedding had been lovely and we were having the reception at the Methodist Church.
In the 2 weeks since I'd gotten back, I'd put in our garden and the people from town had bought all of the plant starts that were left over after Rachel and Marilyn had their pick.
The company had objected to my carrying the XD and I'd gone to concealed carry and when you're a size 4, that's easier said than done.
One thing Randy always told me that holding grudge and getting revenge hurt you more than the other guy.
In this case, the other guy was dead and my focus was more on the system than the man.
The government, under the new President, took a new approach, they bought instead of took and offered premium prices.
I needed the time, to grieve and to consider what I could do to balance the scale.
That was the last full week of June and by this time he knew who most of the folks in Kearny County were.
That was the keystone, clearing the way for us to keep our less than legal aka LEO and military only firearms.
Since the magazines weren't interchangeable, when we went anywhere in a group, I followed suit, carrying Randy's gun.
That was followed by several questions, how was I feeling, had I intentionally lost weight, was I having sleep related problems, the whole depression litany.
I told him I was fine, but had literally worked myself to the bone getting through Paramedic school, to which he replied, Imagine something 3 times worse.
When you spend 30 years of your life with a man, you adopt his thinking, to an extent.
For a man who had been a Force Recon Marine, he had a pretty short fuse.
Marilyn was probably a little brash while Rachel was quiet and more reserved, putting me somewhere in the middle.
I was relatively sure Rachel wouldn't remarry; she had her 4 grandchildren that she shared with Marilyn.
I did learn that my sister in Kansas City was gone, taken out in the attack.
I'd long suspected that, I hadn't heard from her since and that was very unlike her.
Just after Independence Day, Jason, Ray, Don, John and Jim headed to Bird City to talk with McGilvray.
According to Jason, he didn't know about Mike, Paul and Randy and sent his condolences.
He also told them he was retiring and they could buy him out, lock, stock and barrel.
I like the idea; it will give us time to get to know each other better.
I'd lost weight evenly and needed new clothes so I decided to go shopping and treat myself to a new wardrobe from the skin out.
The choices were better in Garden City and I called Marilyn and Rachel to see if they wanted to go.
Rachel said she wanted to finish weeding, but Marilyn was ready to go, she only needed 30 minutes.
I was going for a new look, with the proper clothes I might be able to take off a few years.
I didn't take that much off, maybe I needed a new hair style and to get my nails done.
Nothing to elaborate, it had to be an easy to care for style and I didn't dare do too much with my nails.
I got a Dorothy Hamill cut aka The Wedge and my nails were short acrylics.
Some of the men might think the new look meant I was easy or looking but they were in for a rude awakening.
I went home, saddled a horse, strapped on the revolver and slid the Winchester into the scabbard.
I'd ride the stallion today; he hadn't been ridden for a while and was full of spirit.
A woman named Dorothy Hamill skated for the United States in the Olympics in Innsbruck, Austria in 1976.
I didn't get the impression that he was having any severe adjustment problems.
We visited a while and I headed back to the house, it was getting late.
On the way home, for no particular reason, I got to thinking about a lecture from school.
The maximum recommended daily dose is 4 grams, 8 Tylenol Extra-strength.
Acetaminophen is rapidly absorbed in therapeutic doses, with peak levels in 1-2 hours and 2-4 hours in the overdose setting.
Small protein binding of 10% occurs, with a volume of distribution of 0.
The liver metabolizes more than 90% of acetaminophen to glucuronide and sulfate conjugates, which are eliminated in the urine.
Only a small amount of acetaminophen is excreted unchanged by the kidney.
Hepatotoxicity is the result of formation of the reactive and toxic metabolite NAPQI by the cytochrome P-450 system.
As glutathione stores are diminished, NAPQI is not detoxified and covalently binds to the lipid bilayer of hepatocytes causing centrilobular necrosis.
Glutathione stores are affected by age, diet, liver disease, and medical conditions such as fasting, gastroenteritis, chronic alcoholism, or HIV disease.
Acetaminophen-induced hepatic failure is the second leading cause of liver transplantation.
N-acetylcysteine is the active ingredient in a formulation known as Mucomyst, an oral agent given to counteract liver damage in cases of acetaminophen overdose.
The history should include the dosage, route of administration, duration of therapy, and names of other medications ingested concomitantly.
The nomogram is intended for use in patients with no concomitant risk factors for hepatotoxicity and assumes a single-dose ingestion and a known time of ingestion.
If these conditions are not met, the nomogram is not accurate enough to be useful.
Additionally, liver toxicity cannot be predicted from serum levels determined earlier than 4 hours after ingestion.
In addition, their use may further irritate the gastrointestinal tract, making oral antidote administration difficult.
Hemodialysis may remove 10% of the ingested dose but has not been shown to add any clinical benefit.
Activated charcoal should be administered to bind acetaminophen in the stomach.
This antidote replenishes glutathione in the liver, allowing the toxic metabolite N-acetyi-p-benzoquinoneimine to be broken down to a nontoxic substance.
It helps prevent binding of NAPQI to hepatocytes and enhances synthesis of additional glutathione and sulfate.
It should be given if the serum level of acetaminophen was not measured within 8 hours after ingestion.
Acetylcysteine is proven effective in prevention and treatment of hepatotoxicity up to 24 hours after ingestion if any acetaminophen is detectable in serum or if biochemical evidence of hepatic dysfunction is ongoing.
The possibility of charcoal binding to acetylcysteine is a concern because availability of the agent would then be decreased.
Therefore, some investigators advocate that a 50% increase in the dosage of acetylcysteine may be warranted if activated charcoal was administered.
Other methods to ease administration include diluting the solution even more, changing the diluent, chilling the solution, sipping slowly, using a straw, and drinking from a covered container.
If vomiting occurs within an hour of administration, the dose should be repeated.
Metoclopramide may be given intravenously for marked vomiting, because only a small amount of the agent is metabolized by the liver.
The benefits of intravenous use are ease of administration and reduced nausea and vomiting; however, there is a 10% chance of allergic reaction due to the pyogens in the formulation.
Some experts advocate that an institutionally approved protocol for intravenous administration be created for use in patients with severe acetaminophen poisoning who cannot tolerate the oral form of the drug.
This protocol should include recommended indications and procedures, informed consent information, and details of administration.
In patients at high risk of hepatotoxicity, a second intravenous dose of 50 mg/kg should be given 4 hours after the initial dose.
Those in whom severe liver damage develops have a 5% to 25% mortality rate.
Liver transplantation should be considered in patients with fulminant hepatic failure.
You can see why school was difficult, that was only one small lecture out of many.
I was home; it was quite the lecture on the dangers and treatment of Tylenol overdose, whether accidental or intentional.
Before the war, we saw more cases of intentional overdose, but after, most of the cases seemed to be accidental.
From my experience in the hospital, use of oral NAC generally induced vomiting with the patient bringing forth large volumes of what had the appearance of coffee grounds.
It was best to give the patient a container to hold the vomit before you gave them the glass of Mucomyst.
I didn't feel like eating much; I open a can of soup, a special treat Wolfgang Puck's Old Fashioned Beef-Barley.
That and a slice of homemade bread made the meal and I had the rest of a jar of home canned peaches.
I tended to munch on fresh veggies if I got hungry and they were available.
She was being catty and if I really wanted to know, I'd have to get the appraisal of a man, like my partner on the nightshift.
Leer, pretty much described his look if the lady was particularly attractive.
To look with a sidelong glance, indicative especially of sexual desire or sly and malicious intent.
If he gave me, the look I'd know what I wanted to know and also shut him down, quickly.
The late Andy Griffith was best known for his starring roles in two very popular TV series, The Andy Griffith Show and Matlock.
One of the other drugs we studied was Flunitrazepam , the date rape drug.
Flunitrazepam is known to induce anterograde amnesia in sufficient doses; individuals are unable to remember certain events that they experienced while under the influence of the drug.
This effect is particularly dangerous when flunitrazepam is used to aid in the commission of sexual assault; victims may not be able to clearly recall the assault, the assailant, or the events surrounding the assault.
It is difficult to estimate just how many flunitrazepam-facilitated rapes have occurred in the United States.
Very often, biological samples are taken from the victim at a time when the effects of the drug have already passed and only residual amounts remain in the body fluids.
These residual amounts are difficult, and sometimes impossible, to detect using standard screening assays available in the United States.
If flunitrazepam exposure is to be detected at all, urine samples need to be collected within 72 hours and subjected to sensitive analytical tests.
The problem is compounded by the onset of amnesia after ingestion of the drug, which causes the victim to be uncertain about the facts surrounding the rape.
This uncertainty may lead to critical delays or even reluctance to report the rape and provide appropriate biological samples for testing.
If a person suspects that he or she is the victim of a flunitrazepam-facilitated rape, he or she should get laboratory testing for flunitrazepam as soon as possible.
Scopolamine is used criminally as a date rape drug and as an aid to robbery, the most common act being the clandestine drugging of a victim's drink.
It is preferred because it induces retrograde amnesia, or an inability to recall events prior to its administration.
Victims of this crime are often admitted to a hospital in police custody, under the assumption that the patient is experiencing a psychotic episode.
The patch is programmed to deliver approximately 1 mg of scopolamine over 3 days.
Technically speaking, any substance that renders you incapable of saying no or asserting yourself and your needs can be used to commit rape.
This can include things like alcohol, marijuana or other street drugs, designer or club drugs like ecstasy, over-thecounter sleeping pills and antihistamines, even cold medications.
In the United Kingdom, the use of flunitrazepam and other ""date rape"" drugs is becoming widespread as a means of sedating victims and stealing from them.
It is estimated that up to 2000 men and women are robbed each year after being spiked with powerful sedatives, making drug-assisted robbery a more common problem than drug-assisted rape.
A number of people are expressing fears that some benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms last forever, and that they can never completely recover.
All the evidence shows that a steady decline in symptoms almost invariably continues after withdrawal, though it can take a long time even several years in some cases.
Most people experience a definite improvement over time so that symptoms gradually decrease to levels nowhere near as intense as in the early days of withdrawal, and eventually almost entirely disappear.
All the studies show steady, if slow, improvement in cognitive ability and physical symptoms.
Although most studies have not extended beyond a year after withdrawal, the results suggest that improvement continues beyond this time.
There is absolutely no evidence that benzodiazepines cause permanent damage to the brain, nervous system or body.
My weapon was in the BOB, which was just like an AMEX Card; I never left home without it.
I had time to build BOBs for John and Julia, too and told Mary and Jim to find an appropriate firearm to add.
The key, I felt was that Speer Gold Dot 124gr +P JHP ammo, that some called flying ashcans.
Aside from the rather obvious physiological differences between men and women, that don't require explanation, men and women think differently.
I didn't say one gender was smarter than the other, just that they have divergent thought processes.
What may seem perfectly obvious to a woman may completely escape a man and vice versa.
Women mature mentally more quickly than men, or so experience seems to show.
While the female may be emotionally driven, men generally aren't and thus appear to be insensitive.
That being said, couples who spend much of their lives together generally know what their spouse would do in any given situation, generally wives more often than their husbands.
The women who suddenly found themselves widows and walk away from their former life, or in this case, continue to carry out the course their husbands envisioned.
The night shift at the hospital, that's where we're based, is generally quiet.
Kearny County's population, being small, meant we didn't get many calls.
If being a Paramedic hadn't been so much a cause, rather than a job, I couldn't have lived on the wages they paid.
I haven't decided; I still get flashbacks to the day that Randy was killed.
We had a big party just a few days before on Independence Day and most of those National Guard troops attended.
Mike had 2 barrels of home brewed beer and we did a side of beef on a spit.
They kept bringing Mike, Paul and Randy glasses of beer to thank them for the great meal and I'm afraid they got drunk,"" I explained with a shutter, remembering.
That said; Ron was more of a letch than the type of man who would follow through.
You'd think a Paramedic with several years' experience had seen enough that a woman's body wasn't a subject of fascination.
It just doesn't seem right, putting our bourbon without a label on the bottle.
The United States has 4 deserts, Chihuahuan, Great Basin, Mojave and the Sonoran.
The High Plains are a subregion of the Great Plains in the central US, located in eastern Colorado, western Kansas, western Nebraska, central and eastern Montana, eastern New Mexico, western Oklahoma, western Texas, and southeastern Wyoming.
In some definitions of the subregion, parts of western South Dakota and North Dakota are included.
The movie High Plains Drifter wasn't filmed on the High Plains, but rather on the shores of Mono Lake in California.
Randy's HDD must have contained 10,000 files and it was as informative as going on the internet.
We'd had almost no snow last winter, and the Arkansas River was dry again.
I worked on the computer for a while and eventually designed a label that I could print on the Avery 3""x4"" labels that came 6 to the sheet.
A rare glass of wine, I favored the Merlot, or an occasional cocktail, usually an old fashioned.
When you think of cocktails, it is often the Martini that first comes to mind.
While it might be one of the more simplistic drinks in the cocktail category, for many the term Martini has become synonymous with, if not outright replace, the label of ""Cocktail"" when talking about this style of mixed drink.
It is similar in basic form as the Martini, but its ingredients are often considered to be more complex and robust in flavor, and so to many cocktailians it provides a much better representation of this category.
Only a few other cocktails that have survived to modern day that comes from the era of the Martini and the Manhattan.
There is one cocktail of similar lineage, but holds nowhere near the same level of respect and esteem as either the Martini or the Manhattan.
But instead of being held in any sort of awe, the Old Fashioned is often seen as just one of those old slop drinks that isn't worth the time it takes to make it.
And to taste it the way many modern bartenders serve it, it's no surprise.
They remove the spoon, add a cherry and a slice of orange and often top the glass off with soda.
It was probably originally a man's drink, but a Lady can like them too.
Lakin provide little experience and Garden City had a population in excess of 25,000, hence more calls.
I also switched to working days and nights, according to their rotating schedule.
Heck of a commute, a little over 30 miles one-way; I drove my car, there was an ample supply of E85, now.
I think we were having what they call an Indian Summer, it remained very warm out and slightly hazy.
The term Indian Summer is generally associated with a period of considerably above normal temperatures, accompanied by dry and hazy conditions ushered in on a south or southwesterly breeze.
Several references make note of the fact that a true Indian Summer cannot occur until there has been a killing frost/freeze.
Since frost and freezing temperatures generally work their way south through the fall, this would give credence to the possibility of several Indian Summers occurring in a fall, especially across the northern areas where frost/freezes usually come early.
In any event, there are several theories or possibilities of the explanation and origin of the term Indian Summer, yet no one theory has actually been proven.
Given the fact it has been centuries since the term first appeared, it will probably rest with its originators.
It is an abnormally warm and dry weather period, varying in length, that comes in the autumn time of the year, usually in October or November, and only after the first killing frost/freeze.
There may be sever305 al occurrences of Indian Summer in a fall season or none at all.
I had a bad spell of depression in early July that started around Independence Day and lasted perhaps 3 weeks.
I quickly identified it as a seasonal depression that related to the Massacre and my losing Randy.
Typically one doesn't treat a short lived period of depression, unless it deepens.
Most anti-depressants take about 3 weeks to kick in and even longer to take full effect.
I talked to Doc about it and he told me we'd wait about a month and treat it if it didn't lift.
There are several types of antidepressant medications used to treat depressive disorders.
The SSRIsand other newer medications that affect neurotransmitters such as dopamine or norepinephrine-generaliy have fewer side effects than tricyclic's.
Each acts on different chemical pathways of the human brain related to moods.
Although some individuals notice improvement in the first couple of weeks, usually antidepressant medications must be taken regularly for at least 4 weeks and, in some cases, as many as 8 weeks, before the full therapeutic effect occurs.
To be effective and to prevent a relapse of the depression, medications must be taken for about 6 to 12 months, carefully following the doctor's instructions.
Medications must be monitored to ensure the most effective dosage and to minimize side effects.
For those who have had several bouts of depression, long-term treatment with medication is the most effective means of preventing recurring episodes.
He concluded that the timing of the depression probably reflected the Anniversary, as it were, of Randy's death.
He suggested that I remain aware of the possibility of a reoccurrence next year, but since I had started a new life, he expected it would pass with time.
When it eventually cooled off, it didn't really get cold; Jason and Jim bottled the bourbon and affixed the Proprietor's Reserve labels.
We were afraid that ATF would be pounding on our door as soon as the stuff hit the streets.
The way they marketed the stuff was to take a bottle of the bourbon to the various bars in Lakin and Garden City.
It noticeably lacked the tax stamps and didn't appear on any of their back bars.
Kansas Law says, in relevant part, inventory may only be purchased from a retail liquor store, which has a federal wholesale liquor license or from a licensed distributor.
The retail liquor store, which provides the liquor, must be in the same or adjacent county as the club or drinking establishment.
You figure it out, we sold it for $15 a bottle or $180 a case and we ended up selling 90 cases.
I stopped one night for a drink in Garden City on the way home and asked for an Old Fashioned made with Proprietor's Reserve.
A woman, sitting alone, in a bar in Garden City just naturally attracts attention.
The lesson was that if I wanted a drink after work, I'd better have it at home; I didn't want to be labeled as a Tart.
It was about that time that I purchased a S&W Chief's Special revolver.
It was a model 360P, with the optional Crimson Trace grip, .357MAG/.38+P and blued finish.
It was bad enough with the .38 Special, but when I switched to the .357MAG, it took an extremely firm grip.
As with any laser aiming device, the Crimson Trace laser grips need to be zeroed and I needed to train properly so that I could manipulate the laser under field conditions.
The device was adjustable for both windage and elevation using an Allen wrench.
That's the median distance for my handgun training and I recognized that the point-of-aim / point-of-impact relationship changed if I was closer or farther away; closer and my shots would hit higher than the laser dot farther away and the shots hit lower, Mary was due in February and both Susan and Karen were expecting, yet again.
Stop and think about Karen, her kids ranged in age from teenagers and she was pregnant.
Don had pressed the soybeans and everyone was busy converting the oil to biodiesel.
It was easier to just sell most of the corn to the ethanol producer in Garden City; he had all of the proper licensing.
It didn't take a lot of corn to produce 12 barrels of bourbon or to feed our growing herds of livestock.
I suppose than some might think we were corrupt, what with making Moonshine ala bourbon.
You can lay the blame for the current state of the laws right at the foot of our own Carrie Nation.
She went through Medicine Lodge over in Benton County like a whirlwind.
Alone or accompanied by hymn-singing women, she would march into a bar and sing and pray, while smashing bar fixtures and stock with a hatchet.
Prohibition didn't stop people from drinking; it just helped expand organized crime.
Even prominent citizens and politicians later admitted to having used alcohol during Prohibition.
President Harding kept the White House well stocked with bootleg liquor, though, as a Senator, he had voted for Prohibition.
This discrepancy between legality and actual practice led to widespread disdain for authority.
Some Prohibition agents took bribes to overlook the illegal brewing activities of gangsters.
It had been estimated that six million dollars would be needed to enforce prohibition laws.
Over time, however, more people drank illegally and money ended up in gangsters' pockets.
Gangsters would then bribe officials to ignore their illegal activities.
In some cases, the money likely ended up in corrupt Prohibition agencies.
Al Capone, one of the most infamous bootleggers of them all, built his criminal empire largely on profits from illegal alcohol.
After the repeal of the national constitutional amendment, some states continued to enforce prohibition laws; Oklahoma, Kansas, and Mississippi were still ""dry"" in 1948.
Mississippi, which had made alcohol illegal in 1907, was the last state to repeal prohibition, in 1966.
While there are still some dry counties and communities in the United States , in practice this now means little more than that people wishing to buy alcohol must travel some distance to do so and bars are not allowed in the prohibiting jurisdiction.
I thought back remembering all of our early preps, the change from a basement shelter to the culvert, the standby genset, the small wind turbines they went to Denver to get and later that 2mw monster that we had to hire someone to maintain.
The expansion of the farm came in stages, it doubled when John Hansen had a heart attack and doubled again when James Jones decided to retire.
Randy bought that single premium insurance policy just after that, just in case something happened.
The amount was calculated to enable me to pay most, if not all, the money we owed on the property.
Now, we produced biodiesel, replenishing our usage and selling the remainder to Lakin and the County at $6 a gallon.
We charged for the garden plot based on size with a tenth acre running $75.
We preserved our heirloom seeds and provided spring plants and potato cuttings quite reasonably.
It was unconscionable to charge much for the potato eyes, they were collected when we peeled spuds, just keeping a little extra meat.
We generally got the flats and small square pots back because we provided garbage cans for people to drop them in.
We mixed our own potting soil with a mixture of soil, vermiculite, sand and a little fertilizer.
Fresh peppers were blanched and frozen and the green beans generally canned along with sliced beets and pickles.
As for the pickles, we rotated the recipes from dill to sweet to bread and butter, a different kind every year.
I didn't believe in ghosts, still don't, but Randy was there with me, at least in spirit.
He reminded me of Don Galloway, Detective Sergeant Ed Brown on Ironside.
He was a retired Command Sergeant Major with 30 years in the Army, retiring in May of 2009, just before the crap hit the fan.
He was born and raised in Iowa, but his late wife was from Garden City and when he retired, they settled there.
He had been Marine Infantry, not Force Recon, although Force Recon dated to the '50s.
The Marine Corps Special Operations Command had been activated back in February of 2006 at Camp Lejeune, NC by then SecDef Donald Rumsfeld.
The Corps had always played 3rd fiddle when it came to getting their share of funds for the military.
Not Rachel, aside from the one time she wore the red dress to the funeral, she now wore dark colored clothes, usually black.
She wasn't an unattractive woman, but dressing down as she did sent a clear signal.
He'd badly sprained his wrist and came in to have a doctor check it out.
We must have visited for the better part of an hour; he was very polite and excused himself to take 2 of the pain pills the doctor had prescribed.
They ought to erect a Memorial; I think that sometimes the government forgets it place.
The name of this Country is the United States of America, not the State of America.
They sometimes act like they forget that their power is derived from the people and not the other way around.
I put a roast in the crock pot on low and the meat should be falling apart by the time I get home.
Maybe you shouldn't drink and drive, I have a large house, bring a change of clothes and if it gets late, you can sleep over.
We had a call around 4:30, heart attack, and it was after 5 by the time we got back to the hospital.
We filled the doctor in, gave them our report and I went to look for Dan.
He made 6 barrels the first year and then, 12 barrels a year until he was killed.
We both had EMT-1 and EMT-2 training but didn't have the time to get the Paramedic training.
He had an insurance policy that paid the farm off and left enough for me to go to school.
I thought about Physician's Assistant training, but Doc recommended Paramedic training instead.
Apparently the Sheriff told those FEMA people to stop what they were doing and the head guy simply shot him.
Then it broke out into a firefight with most of the Deputies and Reserves getting killed.
She knew she was at some risk, her mother died of the same thing, but she put off having the mammogram because they made her so uncomfortable.
The previous exam had produced a false positive resulting in an ultrasound and biopsy and that may also explain why she put it off.
The tumor is larger than five centimeters and has spread to the lymph nodes under the arm, or a tumor that is any size with cancerous lymph nodes that adhere to one another or surrounding tissue.
When breast cancer metastasis, the majority of women know that it is an illness that's ultimately going to take their life.
Right after, he and the other two went looking for draft horses and we now have a large herd of Clydesdales and a large herd of Morgans to ride.
Paul and he also went to Denver and bought wind turbines before the war.
It's one of the 2mw turbines that they were going to install at the Sunflower Wind Turbine Farm east of Leoti.
They were farmers who escaped the area after a group took over the town.
A force was put together and they went up to Leoti and I suppose you can say that they liberated the town.
The maxim is Qui tacet consentiret the maxim of the law is Silence gives consent.
Not too much, you understand, but when Dan went to bed in the Guest Room, he didn't need the Tylenol.
I liked this man, from what little I knew of him; a definite 4 and just possibly a 5.
You might expect temperatures like this in late March, but not in January.
Once Dan was in the saddle I tied his jacket behind the cantle and got on the stallion.
I met Dan at the hospital yesterday and because of his injured wrist invited him over for dinner.
The house we bought had a basement shelter and we stayed there until the fallout cleared.
Then we went through her first cancer scare and I spent a lot of time with my wife.
There wasn't much work after that and the government got caught up on my pension.
I puttered around the house and such for quite a while, unable to find work.
I won't bother you with the details, but she died about a year and a half ago.
I offered to take her out for a drink and instead she invited me home for supper.
I was going to say no, but it was roast beef with potatoes, carrots, onions and garlic.
We had dinner, toured the shelter, had a couple of more drinks and I turned in, in the guest bedroom.
This morning she had breakfast when I got up and asked me to go riding.
Once they got involved, the insurgency began using what amounted to a shaped charge that the uparmored vehicle couldn't protect against.
We made a pit stop before we left; we weren't going to make every stop begin with a potty call. o Our next stop was the old Jones farmhouse where John and Mary lived.
When we finished, I offered to help with dishes, but Mary told me she'd just have John rinse them and put them in the dish washer.
They'd been having problems with the placements, physical and sexual abuse.
I had one egg and one slice of toast for breakfast, a small bowl of chili with a half-slice of bread for lunch and only plan on the steak, mushrooms and a small potato tonight.
I knew that Dan enjoyed Randy's bourbon so I served him some the way he wanted it, on the rocks.
The spuds went in the oven and I opened a can of button mushrooms to saute in butter.
During dinner, it occurred to me that I was trying very hard to make a good impression on Dan.
There was just something about him, he was direct, honest enough and yet laid-back in a way.
It was the episode where Samantha tries to figure out why Martin's behavior is so erratic.
His reply indicated that he realized he had a problem and was willing to admit it.
He later showed up at an NA meeting, his first step on the road to recovery.
When the dryer buzzed, I took his shirt out and hung it on a hanger and put the whites in to dry.
For a change there didn't seem to be anything brewing but the weatherman had several comments about the unseasonable warmth.
Dan explained that Maxwell was a blond singer, sort of a cross between Joan Blondell and Mae West.
I didn't see him again until Wednesday when he popped in to know if I wanted to go to lunch.
If I went the first route, an accessory or two could make it full dress up and if I went the other way I could dress down but not up.
I had just the thing, an outfit from Maurice's that was only casual because of the open knit sweater.
If I left the sweater off and added a string of pearls, it could pass for full dress up, just short of a cocktail dress.
My bag had my makeup bag, a nightgown, a couple of changes of underclothes, jeans, western cut shirts, pumps, boots and jewelry.
We only had a single call on Friday, an auto accident with minor injuries.
When I got off at 5, I showered and changed, taking special care with my makeup.
Ripeness seems critical; both under ripe and overripe grapes lean away from fruit and towards herbaceousness.
Kathryn was striking and about my size before I lost the weight; the same and yet clearly different.
If I styled my hair the same way she did, I suppose we might pass of distant cousins.
I knew our personalities weren't the same; she was less outgoing and, according to Dan, timid.
Not on a second date I wasn't and if taking Dan home for dinner didn't count as a first date then this was our first date and it wasn't going to happen.
The movie was a spy movie based on the novel There Are No Spies by Bill Granger.
He was an average, maybe above average, actor who had played James Bond in several films.
It's hard when you been out of the game for so many years to know these things.
Unbidden, he had made me another Old Fashioned and was sipping some more of the bourbon.
We went to our rooms and I changed out of my clothes and into my night gown.
It was near February and it hadn't really cooled down with temperatures remaining in the 70s during the daytime.
I'll have to find and buy more of the Avery labels, I didn't have that many.
When I walked into the house, Marilyn was sitting at the kitchen table.
The human heart is very strange; it can expand to make room for the love of a man, and later 2 children.
Doc claimed Paramedics need a year of seasoning after they're certified.
Generally, they are assigned to an experienced paramedic who acts as a training officer or a guide.
Emergency medicine is built on the differential diagnosis, explained earlier.
We follow protocols based on urgency, Airway, Breathing and Circulation.
The further up the food chain you get, the more you can do to restore and maintain them.
I think that emergency medicine must be a calling, more than a discipline.
It's nothing like a doctor seeing a patient in the office, this is often life or death and time is the enemy.
QuikClot, for example, doesn't repair the torn vein or artery; it just stops the blood loss.
He has to decide if the patient will bleed out before they can do an MRI, it isn't an easy job.
You'll also get asthma attacks or other forms of acute respiratory distress, strokes, heart attacks, and depending where you're located, gunshots.
One of the largest antivenin banks in the United States is at the Miami-Dade Fire Rescue.
They have 38 types of antivenin covering 95% of the world's snake species.
There are hundreds of bottles and when you consider that one bottle of CroFab runs $750, you can understand why the refrigerator is locked.
We don't get many rattlesnake bites in Kansas, Copperhead, Cottonmouth, Massasauga, Timber ratter and the Western rattlesnake.
We had more green beans than any other vegetable, I opened a quart and heated half, with a little vinegar and bacon bits.
The amount of rehabilitation and the time needed for full recovery after a sprain or strain depend on the severity of the injury and individual rates of healing.
For example, a mild ankle sprain may require up to 3 to 6 weeks of rehabilitation; a moderate sprain could require 2 to 3 months.
With a severe sprain, it can take up to 8 to 12 months to return to full activities.
I don't think she shoots it; maybe I can work out some kind of swap with her.
When I first saw you that day in the hospital, you almost took my breath away.
I haven't seen Jim this week so I can't tell you what Mary may have told him.
We decided that he would move to the farm in July, after I finished my year and quit my job.
He could help with the harvest and learn to make bourbon and biodiesel.
The real problem I saw was that we had a year without winter; that worried me.
With the river dry, the only water we had was whatever rain we got and our wells.
The man from the extension office said we'd need big wells if we wanted to irrigate, a 12"" well on each farm.
On Saturday morning, I called to let Marilyn and Rachel know and Rachel said Ray would handle it.
Dealing with death is part of life but for some people the grief associated with losing a loved one is so crippling that it dominates their lives for years to come.
It is estimated that as many as a million Americans a year develop a chronic, disabling condition known as complicated grief brought on by the loss of someone they love.
Just don't say anything to him about the terms of our deal or to anyone else, for now.
But, I'll tell you Dan, once you have enough grenades for the M203, you're carrying more weight and aren't any better off.
Darned shame, we made it through the flu, the plague and the Chinese attack.
The daughter is expecting any day and I don't know how well the boy and I hit it off.
She couldn't make ends meet and ended up working and somehow missed out on the H5N1 vaccine and couldn't use Tamiflu.
Then June's Husband Randy was killed in the Massacre along with Marilyn's husband Paul and Rachel Jenkins's husband Mike.
One big happy inter-married family; and you almost need a program to know the players.
When Gunny had the glasses ready, Marilyn raised hers and said, ""I raise my glass to toast the brave men we knew and to all the brave men and women who have given their blood, sweat and lives to keep this Country free.
It seemed clear that the new men in our lives held the former men in our lives in very high regard, it was a good start.
I told him to go deep; I had a feeling that the year without a winter forebode something bad.
They named him Randy John McCartney and he came out at 7 pounds, 6oz and 22"" long.
We don't need it for now; the farm is clearing close to $150,000 a year.
As long as there is water in the deep aquifer, we can irrigate to produce crops.
Ralph said that we're going to need to replace some parts in that wind turbine sooner than he thought.
It is a bit dated now, but it still works and I've been trained to use it.
Doc and I have kept the equipment serviced and have replaced things as they need replacing.
The little pharmacy we have doesn't amount to much, mainly drugs for the 3 families and some of our neighbors.
Our primary power source is the big turbine, the secondary is our wind turbines and the last backup is the generator and the way it is wired now, it's totally automatic.
That new wife of mine could be harder than high tensile steel, yet soft and caring when the situation called for it.
Barely 6 weeks after she'd lost her husband of 30 years she had enrolled in school and had followed up on plans the two of them had.
I found it interesting that an outsider would have trouble telling they hadn't been born and raised on a farm.
If a person considered all those kids had been through in their lives, they had turned out well rounded, healthy individuals.
In those rare instances, I sensed, rather than knew, that Jim had a score to settle with the feds.
The dairy herds numbered about 40 on each farm and they kept other cows strictly for raising beef cattle.
June explained that Jason was salaried and got a small percentage of the farm profit for managing the farm.
There was a cheese operation that used about half of the milk, a biodiesel operation that produced all the diesel fuel they needed with some to sell to the County and City, small ethanol production that produced anhydrous ethanol and or bourbon.
With few exceptions, a person could have built a wall around the three farms and ignored the outside world.
None of the farms had sheep; hence no wool and they didn't grow cotton.
One of my old friends who was still in the Army called one day just to say hi, extend condolences and congratulations, and catch up on old times.
During the course of the conversation, he mentioned that he'd be retiring soon and was thinking of locating in a rural setting.
I pitched this area and also asked if he had some things I thought could come in handy in the future.
It was, he said, doable despite severe controls now in place by a struggling government.
It involved munitions, certain individual weapons and a few crew served weapons.
He fabricated a unit out of whole cloth that he then proceeded to supply a basic issue and subsequent resupplies.
It was a mammoth computer exercise these days that only required a single signature at the end of the line by someone wearing BDUs and CSM stripes.
As mysteriously as the Platoon appeared on certain paperwork, it just as mysteriously disappeared a few months before he retired.
I remember how Randy had to supervise construction of our greenhouse, so I just naturally assumed that Dan would supervise construction of the Quonset hut.
No sooner had I said yes than he was on the phone talking to someone about the hut.
A couple of days later, some fellas showed up, he showed them where I said he could put it and he went back to his chores helping Jason.
They graded and put in a slab the same day and a few days later were back and popped that hut up in a matter of hours.
Dan paid them in gold coins, signed a piece of paper and they were gone.
After that, about once a month, he'd get a phone call and the next day wear BDUs.
A 5ton Army truck would pull into the farm, and unload the equipment into the Quonset hut, Dan would sign and they'd be gone.
That continued for about 6 months and I didn't really have time to look into it.
Either I trusted him or I didn't and when I said 'I Do' it meant that I did.
The place wasn't locked so I could have looked at any time, but I didn't.
I had gotten coal for the furnace, had the LP tanks topped off and they even had the bourbon made and stored.
We had Thanksgiving on the farm and invited his boys and their families.
By this time any problems the kids may have had with him or I had evaporated.
I managed to get everything done at the same time and on the table promptly at 2pm.
This was our first Thanksgiving as a married couple and I wanted it to be perfect.
I guess I struck some kind of resident chord with his boys when they learned that I was a Reserve Deputy with the Kearny County Sheriff's Department.
It amazed the Sheriff to learn that Dan also had completed the necessary training to become a Reserve Deputy as had Gunny.
He was surprised they had the time what with being career military types but he had the proof right there in his hands in black and white.
I think that Dan's boys were more surprised than the Sheriff, they knew better.
I think he probably told them, Ask me no questions and I'll tell you no lies.
I also think that by now a certain Sheriff had figured several things out.
But, with the school having been destroyed on July 4, 2009, it was rather difficult for him to confirm what he suspected.
In the aftermath of the Kearny County Massacre, changes had occurred throughout Kansas, indeed the Country.
There wasn't one state that didn't have a state defense force beholding only to the Governor of the state or his or her designee.
There had also been some landmark Supreme Court cases, overturning earlier decisions and forcing the states to do the same.
There was still a National Firearms Act of 1934, it hadn't been overturned, but some of the supporting decisions had been.
The F in BATF had its fangs pulled and getting their permission for a NFA/NFR weapon was mostly a matter of a criminal background check as it should have been all along.
All of which made being Reserve Deputy Sheriff's superfluous, unless you wanted to help the Sheriff.
My being a Paramedic meant that I got called out on any operation where there was the slightest possibility of someone getting hurt badly enough to need immediate medical assistance.
I had, of course, upgraded the equipment that Randy and I had previously to reflect my new status, not that it took much.
For all practical matters, there is only so much one can do in the field.
The Sheriff had allowed lights and siren to be installed in the pickup, though the lights were behind the grill.
If you're in southern Kansas and see a pickup with lights and siren bearing down on you, give way, it isn't Walker, Texas Ranger, it's just little of me and I'll run you right off the road.
Country music singers have been a real close family, but lately some of my kinfolks have disowned a few others and me.
I am very proud of my Daddy's name although his kind of music and mine ain't exactly the same.
If I'm down in a honky-tonk some ole slick's trying to give me friction.
I said leave me alone I'm singing all night long it's a family tradition.
Lord I have loved some ladies and I have loved Jim Beam and they both tried to kill me in 1973.
Back when Mike and Paul and he went storming off to help the Kearny County Sheriff put a cap on FEMA's outlandish behavior.
One day she comes to me with a piece of paper that proved I had completed a 22 week course necessary to become a Reserve Deputy.
Let me tell you, she got lights and a siren installed in Randy's pickup and she gets called out at times whenever the Sheriff thinks it's one of those DangerWill Robinson Danger types of situations.
If some bad guy thinks he's going to shoot my new wife, I've got a bit of a surprise for him.
Besides, they could use a proficient shooter in the Reserve Deputy Pool.
Gunny went along for the same reason, so he could go with Marilyn if she got called up.
I also discovered a secret; they wore latex gloves when they handled the bottles and labels, leaving the BATF and the Kansas Revenue Department not a single clue as to who was producing the Proprietor's Reserve Bourbon.
After I got the final delivery from my friend in the Army in December, I took June to the Quonset hut and showed her what we had on hand.
There were M16A4s, new, for 3 rifle squads, some including M203s for the grenadiers.
We had M67s, a few crates of M18A1s, and all manner of what had been standard military hardware about 10 years back.
This was an Infantry Platoon that included 3 rifle squads and one weapons squad but we didn't have mortars.
I thought that I'd better stick with the tried and true that I was more familiar with.
Besides which, my buddy didn't have any spare Striker IFV lying around.
I realized that there were ample weapons on the 3 farms for everyone, but remembered the story of when they had liberated Leoti with a force of 80 some people.
There were also a few spare A4s, with that many machine guns and the necessary ammo; we might need more ammo bearers.
I had 6 of those SPMOD accessory kits for the M4s and they were complete, including the Knight Armaments suppressors.
On the other hand, when I bought the house in Garden City for Kathryn and me, I hadn't expected to ever need that basement shelter.
We found in Iraq that every soldier ought to be equipped with one and have the necessary training.
It could just be expensive insurance, but someone always gets to collect on a life insurance policy.
I thought the snow we got during nuclear winter was bad, but this cold came from Canada and the Indian was going to have to find a stump to stand on when it started to snow.
Hey, it's a Midwestern expression, ""buttdeep on a 9' Indian"", search the web.
That was a switch; we went from a year without winter to a winter with record snowfalls The atmosphere was saturated and when the cold air came in the air lost its moisture holding capacity.
The heater in the hut was propane fired and for a while there, I thought we could run out of propane, we only started with 1,500-gallons.
We ended up on the generator, no problem there because we had 30,000-gallons of separately plumbed propane.
Every home on the 3 farms had a fuel powered source of power, Randy and the fellas had seen to it.
Sure Rachel had solar power and we had backup wind turbines to the main wind tur345 bine.
We could switch to imported power at the flip of a switch but those lines were down too.
Later than that, but I suspected it the moment I laid eyes on you and you didn't have a wedding band.
The year without a summer was 1816 and that was attributed to the April 5 to April 15, 1815 eruption of Mt.
On July 4, 2009, we had a nuclear war during a period of global warming.
Although it appeared to be returning to normal, the polar icecaps continued to melt along with the Greenland Ice Cap.
That in turn raised sea level by nearly 2 meters as we discussed earlier about Miami and the Florida Keys.
My sense is that we should begin stockpiling like we did before the pandemic and the war.
The first thing I plan to do in the spring is put in a bigger fuel tank to supplement what we already have.
We need to store additional food and if that means contacting major suppliers, like canning jar suppliers, I believe we should do it.
Think about it Dan, 8 canners each processing 19 jars at once doing 3 shifts daily.
I know that much of this is new to you, but between the 3 farms, we have tremendous storage capacities.
When Mike acquired the other half section of his farm, he had the 10k diesel tank cleaned to store soybean oil.
I try to line up other supplies and have them stored in warehouses until we can transfer them.
All we'd have to add would be a basement and septic system, we have excess energy most of the time and it's free to everyone on the 3 farms.
If you can find out, get the make, model and size of his home and we'll have the basement installed and a genset located.
We'll probably opt for a propane generator, there is ample propane available.
I explained to Dan about keeping the area around the buildings clear, with our large herds, this was especially important.
I talked to Marilyn via radio and she said she would teach home school, if necessary.
The school had a weather report and made sure the kids took their books home with them together with an envelope containing home schooling instructions.
Jim and John had struggled through the snow to help with the livestock.
I'll have to work the road every day or it will close up tighter than a drum.
Marilyn said she'd do the home schooling and I talked to Karen about Jason, Jr. and Daniel.
In revealing a little about the people we'd spent most of our lives with, we were opening some hidden door revealing more about ourselves.
We never compared the present with the past; they were distinct and separate, people wise.
The past is a guide to dealing with your current circumstances, which in this case, weren't good.
You couldn't eat it hot out of the refrigerator, but I over did it a bit with the chilies.
If a good one comes along, you'd best grab 'em before someone beats you to it.
Back in the '90s and the first decade of the new century, the United States imported diesel gensets from China.
They were inexpensive by comparison and were well built, probably by slave labor.
While I was in town, I could also check out the possibility of acquiring a used diesel truck with a snow blower mounted.
I didn't find the snow blower I had in mind, but I found a Hanson snow blower for a % ton truck with its own Kohler 27hp gas motor.
I got 2 12kw China diesel portable generators in Garden City and said hello to the boys while I was in town.
I set the generators on top of the load of sand I got to weigh my pickup down and headed home.
I paid for them and told the guy to hold them for me; that I'd pick them up on the way out of town.
When the pickup was ready, I got a load of sand for weight, picked up the generators and headed home.
My new husband was a winner, a gentle man through and through; and a gentleman.
Wasn't half bad in... oh never mind, I might tell Marilyn but nobody else needs to know that.
I think by the time spring came, Dan was nearly out of shear bolts for the snow blower.
When they finally got the phones up, he called and arranged for the 40'x 100' Quonset hut and for a contractor to put in a basement for his friend Tom.
She'd better not look like the Mistress of the Dark or he and I are going to have a very serious talk.
I only bring it up because I was going through some of the files on Randy's computer and re-read the Abrupt Climate Change Scenario authored by Schwartz and Randall.
While they hadn't predicted an ELE, some species could certainly die out if we were going through a major climate change.
The TTAPS study discussed the possibility of nuclear winter and when one considers it, nuclear winter was a major climate change.
All of those seedlings in the greenhouse are beginning to outgrow their pots.
If we have those conditions, the feds will try and step in to redistribute the food the same as they did last time.
We don't want another confrontation with the government, we lost 37 and they lost nearly 100.
You give a person some power and a gun to back it up and they can easily turn into your worst nightmare.
The great thing about cloth diapers is that they make very good cleaning rags when they get too ratty to use as diapers.
It had taken quite a while after the war to restart many of the manufacturing plants.
So, when I saw a large stack of packages of cloth diapers in a Garden City store, I bought them and put them up, just in case.
Up until the 1920s feminine hygiene products made of cloth and other natural fibers were simply the norm.
With the introduction of disposable menstrual products in Europe and the US, women were suddenly sold their ""liberation"" from this monthly cycle; they could use this product and simply throw it away.
People gave little thought to the environmental impact of manufacturing and disposing of these products.
Nor to the chemicals absorbed into women's bodies from use of these products, many of which are scented, bleached, and made extra-absorbent through the inclusion of synthetic fibers.
Someday, big cities will probably have special cans for contaminated waste.
It has been referred to the Subcommittee on Health, where it sits, and where it has died several times in the past.
The problem with the Rely product wasn't the product itself, but how the product was used.
There isn't any dioxin in the products and if there is a problem synthetic, it's Rayon.
A long time ago, in a galaxy right, right here in 1936, actually a Denver physician named Earle Haas invented a cardboard tube of compressed cotton with a little string inside.
And in 1983, when the Today contraceptive sponge was released to the market a sponge designed to be worn for 24 hours TSS cases rocketed.
Not all the people who die from TSS are women; it kills men and children too.
Persons of all ages are affected; most do not have predisposing underlying diseases.
This is in sharp contrast to previous reports of GAS bacteremia, in which patients were either under 10 or over 60 years of age, and most had underlying conditions such as cancer, renal failure, leukemia, or severe burns or were receiving corticosteroids or other immunosuppressing drugs.
The complications of current GAS infections are severe; bacteremia associated with aggressive soft tissue infection, shock, adult respiratory distress syndrome and renal failure are common; 30% to 70% of patients die in spite of aggressive modern treatments.
In only 10% of patients does systolic blood pressure become normal 4 to 8 hours after administration of antibiotics, albumin, and electrolyte solutions containing salts or dopamine; in all other patients, shock persists.
Similarly, renal dysfunction progresses or persists in all patients for 48 to 72 hours in spite of treatment, and many patients may require dialysis.
In patients who survive, serum creatinine values return to normal within 4 to 6 weeks.
Renal dysfunction precedes shock in many patients and is apparent early in the course of shock in all others.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome occurs in 55% of patients and generally develops after the onset of hypotension.
Supplemental oxygen, intubation, and mechanical ventilation are necessary in 90% of the patients in whom this syndrome develops.
The upside to a winter was that I got a lot of time to spend with my new hubby in front of the fireplace.
One of the many blessings we had was a sleigh and while I got the Ob kit ready, Dan harnessed a Clydesdale, a bit of overkill, and off we went across the fields.
It was an uncomplicated delivery and my kit included everything I needed.
Dashing through the snow In a one horse open sleigh O'er the fields we go Laughing all the way Bells on bob tails ring Making spirits bright What fun it is to laugh and sing A sleighing song tonight Boil some water is what the doctor tells the husband to get him out of the way.
It was also flood month and we can't plant month and why the heck did I ever get into farming month and when is summer coming month.
We had the time to stock the Quonset warehouse before we could plant the garden.
They did get Tom and Elle's basement and septic system installed just in time for them to move in.
The contractor had selected the Kohler GNAC and installed the generator in their basement, wiring it into the automatic transfer switch.
He had run an intake and exhausts though the basement wall and added rain caps above ground level.
Dan quickly paid Tom when they arrived and Tom and Elle went shopping for new furniture.
Oh yes, the sun did come out, finally, but it was too late to plant anything except grass and we had sufficient hay.
However, all was not lost; we had enough stored corn, wheat and barley to make 12 barrels whiskey.
Not a banner year, but we had enough income to refill everything except the biodiesel tanks.
They buy all the biggest, best, new machinery and get low crop yields in a market with falling prices.
I didn't see action in all of them, just Desert Storm and 2 tours in Iraq in the second action.
Those insurgents got weapons easily and started with crude lEDs, RPGs and AKs.
He didn't like talking about it, most soldiers who have seen action don't.
Many people who have seen action say the same thing, hours of boredom followed by moments of sheer terror, or some variation on the theme.
With the land free and clear our only fixed cost was property taxes and fuel.
We could get by for a fair amount of time living off the garden, such as it was, and the sale of livestock and other commodities.
Without a crop, the only concern would be feeding all of that livestock.
You know, it's getting late in the season, if we're going to add that new propane tank, it might be a good idea to do it now.
Stocking the warehouse hadn't been difficult; Wal-Mart and Sam's Club became our source for food supplies.
I hadn't realized how big 4,000ft 2 of floor space was until we began stocking shelves.
We could pack some things ourselves when we got a crop, wheat for example.
Don had established the merlot cuttings and in a year or two we'd have our own wine.
We hit a manufacture's outlet and stocked up on work clothing, socks and underwear.
I had gone ahead and ordered the mason jars, before we knew what the weather would do.
Glassware is less expensive when you buy it wholesale from the distributor; a case of jars ran about $6.
New jars come with rings and lids meaning all you need to add are extra lids for recycling the jars.
The National Weather Service is forecasting an early winter with moderate to heavy snowfalls, not good news for Kansas farmers.
The cooling of the northeast continues and the citrus crop from Florida established record lows this year.
Market prices of livestock have risen in response to reduced feed grains.
The contest for the fall elections have heated up with Libertarian John Jay equally dividing the vote in most primaries.
Jay is running on a platform to reduce the size of the federal government by up to 10% a year.
The last major election where a third party candidate had such a strong showing was the 1992 election campaign when Ross Perot opposed Bush and Clinton.
Jay maintains that in the years since the war, the United States had maintained tight borders enhancing the job pool for Americans.
Personally, I think it's about time the people put someone besides a Republican or Democrat in the White House, both parties have lost touch with the people.
You men should try and harvest 10 cords of wood per family and I'll see if they have stoker coal available this year.
If you froze the chicken and then packaged it, you could pack it according to the cut; either breasts360 wings quarters or leg quarters.
And, when a brood hen's production fell off, she'd end up packaged whole as a baking chicken.
Each family processed meat according to the size of the family and the number of hired hands.
We generally processed 3 steers, 1 dairy cow and 7 hogs, providing meat for our family (a side of beef and a whole hog per family) plus meat for Jason and Karen, Ralph and Johnny, and now Tom and Elle.
The hams were processed and divided into butt and shank portions and the bacon came sliced.
I'm sure we ate too much bacon and sausage, we always had to get more bacon at Wal-Mart, but Dan preferred bacon and eggs over pancakes or cereal.
The beef was packed in small cuts; just enough for 2, like half roasts, half a round steak, 2 steaks, etc.
One of the things I like most was the homemade sausage the locker plant produced, which accounted for the extra hog; it went with the trimmings on the other hogs into sausage, divided 6 ways.
We also took the leftover fat and it rendered it into lard, it made great pie crusts.
If the grates ever wore out I might consider it, Randy's father had put it in new a long time ago.
The propane dealer was more than willing to install a 3,300-gallon tank, it meant selling us an additional 3,000-gallons of the moderately expensive fuel.
That tripled our storage capacity and we wouldn't have to worry about running out.
With that snow blower, we were well prepared for another bad winter with heavy snow.
Tom's a heck of a man, just because he was in supply didn't mean he didn't see action.
John and Mary have a barn and there's no reason they can't keep some of the horses.
Jason asked me if he could keep saddle horses and a team down in his barn.
Dan had a point, although you'd really have to look to find anything except the empty bottles.
We may have produced 24 barrels this year, but were lucky just to get some food out of the garden, so the decision to increase the production to 24 barrels a year was pushed back one year.
The bottle cases were buried under the cases of mason jars as a precaution but that wouldn't keep a sharp revenuer from finding them.
Maybe it was silly, but we didn't keep everything set up all of the time.
We didn't do the same with the biodiesel production equipment because it wasn't a problem.
We Ladies sat in the kitchen and discussed practical matters, like our personal lives, the coming winter, our grandchildren and the usual girl talk.
The guys didn't take long to adjourn to the small Quonset hut to go over the inventory of defense supplies.
Gunny had 28 years, Dan 30, Tom 30 and Rachel's boyfriend Hank, a retired Master Sergeant, 20.
The dynamite that Mike had, had been disposed of when the shipment of M67s came in.
She said her name had been a real problem over the years, everyone associating her with Cassandra Peterson, so she'd always preferred Elle.
One was a ranger trying to get into Special Forces and the other a combat medic.
Tom, she said, had done 2 tours in Iraq, trying to keep the troops supplied with everything from rations, fuel and medical supplies to ordnance.
I mentioned Dan suggesting redistributing the livestock and feed supplies and Marilyn and Rachel thought it was a good idea.
They had followed our old practice of keeping everything on the home place and it was causing problems.
Then I mentioned the sleighs and how I thought it might make getting around easier in winter.
The previous year, Dan had bulled his way to town to get the snow blower and could keep our road partly cleared if it didn't snow too much.
The biggest concern was the predicted moderate to heavy snowfall and the fact that we hadn't grown any crops this past summer.
There were odds and ends that needed to be taken care of before anyone went to bed.
Dan told me that the fellas had helped him mount the snow blower on his pickup, just in case.
He also said that Tom had suggested that we distribute some of the SINCGARS radios so that all the homes could keep in touch.
The military was using a newer generation radio and our having the frequency hopping equipment would provide us with secure communications apart from what everyone else used.
The other men had each taken enough to equip their homes and all of their vehicles.
He'd mount ours, the radios were the AN/PRC-119F man packs that operated on 12vdc.
There were also Spearheads, which a few years back had been the latest addition to the ITT Industries family of tactical communications systems.
I told him that the girls thought it was a good idea to divide up the livestock and feed supplies, but wondered what effect the snow would have on accomplishing that.
We can begin the process tomorrow afternoon after church and move the hay and feed first, unless we have a terrible snowstorm.
The National Weather Service advises that the massive arctic cold front won't hit Minnesota until late Monday and won't reach northern Oklahoma until Wednesday at the earliest.
Long range forecasts show another front following that could hit us as early as 10 days.
The cold is expected to spread as far as Florida, which is already experiencing massive rainfall.
We still need to do some odds and ends shopping, but it's not pressing.
I get in touch with them tomorrow and we'll see about getting that set up.
That's a lot of wood and we already have 30 cords stored at every location.
I've done some research and a cord of hardwood has about the same energy as a ton of coal.
It might make more sense to get a second delivery of coal for everyone that can burn it and cover it with a tarp.
That was quite the trip, they came back engaged and Ray had some new guns.
You have all of the qualities I admire in a man, so I suppose that in some ways Randy and you are alike.
At least the weatherman was right; we should be able to get everything moved by evening.
As far back as 2003, they met 2012 emission standards and then E85 got to be real popular.
There weren't many E85 certified models to choose from, but June and I picked up an even dozen.
The kids each got 2, Ralph and Johnny got a pair, Jason and Karen got 4 and we kept a pair.
I said something to June about our doing something special for Jason's 2 oldest boys, Jason and Daniel; they were growing up and the age where a young man needs to learn to shoot a rifle and or shotgun.
I thought Dan had a good idea, but wasn't completely sure how Jason would feel.
I don't think there's a man in the world that hasn't been sidestepped by his wife when things needed to be done.
When we talk guns around here, we're talking a complete set including any appropriate accessories and a starting supply of ammo.
And anyway, the next farm north had a certain Gunny who had been a Dl for a while.
My husband suggested that Jason and Daniel were getting old enough that they should have their own hunting weapons.
He suggested rifles and shotguns, so I suppose he means a .22 rifle and a 12-gauge shotgun.
It's ideal timing with Christmas coming but I wanted to talk with you first.
I walked out to the barn where Dan was mucking out stalls and muttering under his breath.
Monitor SINCGARS on channel 1001 and if I'm going to be late, I'll let you know.
I figured 2 bricks each of .22 LR ammo and 2 mixed cases of 12-gauge ammo.
Dan hadn't said anything, but I'd noticed that he'd trimmed down a little, maybe 15 pounds.
Could be that he'd just converted what little flab he had into muscle, he worked hard, especially considering he'd left the farm when he was a young man.
With Mary gone off and raising a family, I got to do the eggs all by myself.
I began to wonder how deep the snow would get this year and if we'd be able to plant crops next year.
We could always get a crop of grasses and try to buy bagged or bulk feed, if it came to that.
A person can do whatever they want, provided they have the money and what they want is available.
I should have told Dan chipped beef on toast, he was thinking hamburger gravy.
The military finally rescinded the no combat rule for women, when someone sued and won.
Those were good times, the Army, and I'm sure it contributed to my independent thinking and my being as practical as I was.
Early MREs were notoriously poor in quality, earning them the nicknames ""Meals Rejected by Everyone,"" ""Meals Rejected by the Enemy,"" ""Materials Resembling Edibles"", ""Meals Ready to Excrete"", and even ""Meals Rejected by Ethiopians"" in reference to a Country that was gripped by famine at the time.
Randy and I had met in the Army and by the time we got out were already planning marriage.
Then that thing came up that resulted in my getting the partial and kids were off life's menu.
Later, after the war, Jim and Mary came to live with us and life was looking good for a while; right up until July 7, 2013.
I pulled myself together and went to school, fulfilling, in part, a dream that Randy and I had.
He'd been cheated just like I'd been; when he had time to spend with Kathryn, she'd gotten sick and was gone.
Being a CSM, I think he understood people and even better, had a firm grasp on our situation.
If we left at noon tomorrow, we'd get there about 8am the following day.
Tomorrow is Tuesday and we'd start back on Thursday, arriving home in the wee hours of Friday morning.
We could be stuck in the middle of nowhere and have to wait out the storm.
June is worried that one of these days the government is going to shut us down.
The first bootlegger was John Hancock and the Revolutionary War was over, among other things, taxes on alcohol.
After the Revolution the Country was in debt and Washington had to pay off the loans so a tax was imposed on liquor.
The people ran rather than fight the militia and soon after moved to Kentucky.
Marilyn told him more was better and he ended up with the last 12 Arctic Cats the dealer had in inventory with the 4 cycle, E85 rated engine.
Due to the lack of a growing season, the price of E85 had slipped up about a buck a gallon.
The dealer also had a shipment of new sleds come in, the Magnum Otter sleds.
The Country has experienced a substantial recovery since the war, yet much remains to be done.
With the loss of substantial portions of our coastline, citrus production has fallen sharply.
The shortened summer has affected crop production even more significantly.
For the first time in recent memory, the United States is experiencing a shortage of foodstuffs.
Climatologists are predicting that we could experience shortened growing seasons and longer winters for the next 10 years, possibly longer.
This weather pattern has been documented to be worldwide, affecting nearly every Country.
Nature has a way of healing herself and lowered temperatures are already causing reformation of the polar icecaps and the icecap in Greenland.
As frozen moisture accumulates, the salinity of the oceans will increase and eventually, the Gulf Stream will rise.
However, predictions are that it will take more than a century for the ocean levels to fall to the point where we recover major portions of our coast.
In the aftermath of the war, your government attempted to redistribute food resources with devastating results.
Working with various land-grant colleges, short season crops have been developed and seed will be available in early spring to allow farmers to plant the improved varieties.
Working together, we can solve this crisis and meet our needs and begin helping other countries around the world to feed their populations.
Much of the land mass of the world isn't suitable for growing large quantities of food.
What he implied was that the havenot's will take from the haves, using whatever force is required,"" Dan explained.
Hence it is that you murder and devour one another, that you wage wars, and that many among you perish in civil strife.
This was one of the earliest expressions of what has come to be called the Malthusian theory of war, in which wars are caused by expanding populations and limited resources.
Thomas Malthus wrote that populations always increase until they are limited by war, disease, or famine,"" Gunny continued.
Among the 3 farms, we have nearly 2,000 acres of fertile land to protect against any and all who would seek to steal from us.
Had they gone to Nashville, they've have gotten caught in a terrible storm before they made it home, the next storm came in on Thursday and it was a blizzard.
I noticed that Jim had been very impressed by the lesson provided by Dan and Gunny.
I believe he finally understood the maxim, Si vis pacem, para bellum. If you want peace, prepare for war.
At the time, we had no idea that the food shortages around the Country were as severe as the President had implied in his speech.
In view of the moderate snowfall, we began to prepare for a massive growing season in 2017.
I'm sure that people will be more than willing to work for a small share of the crop.
We had many of them that ended up in the hands of people who kept them and used them to can the production of their own gardens.
At this point, Lakin and Garden City are pretty well saturated and the numbers that are being recycled is increasing.
I see what you're getting at, among the 3 families, we have lots of burners and every burner can process 19 quarts.
She had a point and because of Paul's father, the ability to implement it.
The six of us, Hank and Rachel, Marilyn and Gunny and Dan and I sat down and carefully went through the various planning stages.
Dan said that the huts were available and could be erected during the winter, although probably not on slabs.
We would use one warehouse for processing and the other to store jars and finished goods.
We'd combine my canners with 16 more that Rachel and Marilyn were going to order, allowing us to run 24 pressure cookers at once, each containing 19 quart jars or the 32 pint jars.
Depending on the output of the garden, we'd just run a day shift and process 1,368 quarts a day.
I'd order ahead and we'd store as many as we had room, both quarts and pints.
We decided to pack pickles in all 3 flavors in pint jars because few people ate a quart of pickles in one sitting.
For ease of processing, we'd only can sliced pickles, varying the spices to produce the various flavors.
We checked with two of the grocery stores and learned how much they typically sold of various canned products.
This would be the basis for the proportions of the various crops we planted to produce canning vegetables.
It seemed later, more like February, but that's what happens when winter comes early, like on August 28th.
We'd had 5 blizzards before Thanksgiving, blizzards because of the wind that came with them, not the amount of snowfall.
I don't suppose the total snowfall was much more than 15"", above normal but not like the previous year.
That particular Indian need a very tall stump, this Indian didn't need the stump, yet.
I suppose my biggest concern was the supply of biodiesel because we hadn't produced any this summer, lacking crops.
We were on generator power about half of the time and on one of the various turbines, usually the big one, the remainder of the time.
This was where Hank and Rachel had one up on us; they could almost get though the downtime on the turbines with the solar panels, batteries and small generator.
On the other side of the coin, it wasn't us who ran into problems the previous year with heavy snow and high wind preventing clearing the machine shed roof.
The question on how to handle the boys' new guns had been resolved, we gave the guns and ammo to Jason and Karen told them to handle it however they liked.
Getting the sleighs hadn't been as hard as envisioned, when the phones were up, we contracted the guy in Nashville and ordered enough for the 3 farms.
If things went as envisioned in our planning meetings, the only use the tractors would get would be preparing the land and cultivating, it was time to switch to the Clydesdales and saddle horses.
We also planned on making some Pepper Jack this year, the Colby and Monterey Jack cheese had been well accepted, while the Havarti pepper cheese hadn't.
The Colby was popular because it was mild, but it wouldn't have taken much to vary the recipe and replace the Colby with regular Cheddar.
We didn't get turkeys this year and were planning on having roasting hens for Thanksgiving and a ham at Christmas.
Jason said he wanted time off around Christmas to visit his folks and Karen's family.
That was perfectly ok, John and Jim could handle the milking and Dan could process the half of the milk that was going into cheese.
If the creamery couldn't pick up the milk we sold, we could always turn that into cheese too.
He said that they'd decided to tell the boys the rifles and shotguns were gifts from the farm, rewards for a job well done.
They stopped having kids when Karen got the daughter she wanted; they named her Suzanne.
Jim and Julia were spacing the babies out, I just found out she was expecting for the second time.
Having all the kids would solve a part of our labor problem, in about 10 years.
John and Mary's kids were Randy, John and Jacob, named for John's father.
Those cloth diapers had been one of the best investments I'd ever made.
Kearny County was still debating erecting a memorial to its fallen heroes.
They had several issues to resolve, where to put it and what it would look like.
In 3 years, they'd only managed to agree to erect a memorial but were unable to agree on the other issues.
In addition to The Wall, there was the Three Servicemen Statue, The Vietnam Women's Memorial and the In Memory Plaque, added in 2004.
One problem they couldn't seem to overcome was that the people on our side who were killed were mostly Reserve Deputy Sheriff's, representing all walks of life.
It appeared that they might go with a plaque, listing the names of the fallen.
The family of the farmer who owned the farm where the fight had occurred didn't want interlopers intruding on their privacy.
LNG is cryogenic, very cold and when warmed, converts to natural gas which is mostly methane.
If you've ever looked at the energy requirements for generators, it's easy to tell that propane contains more energy than natural gas.
Dan and I talked about putting in a second load of coal on each homestead and covering it with tarps, but didn't do it.
We need to look for Christmas presents for the grandchildren and more of the cloth diapers.
We're going to have to give some consideration to what we need for processing equipment too.
According to one source on Walton Feed, a family of 4 would require something like 500+ jars a season to can just for them.
If you divided 12,000 by 500, you'd realize that you are only talking about enough jars for 24 families.
Running 24 canners at a time, 3 times a shift meant we had roughly an 18-day supply of quart jars and a 9-day supply of pint jars, 4-5 day weeks.
We had lunch and went back to the store to get the other gross of diapers, going through a different checkout this time.
I'd make up a list of things that I needed to fill in clothes wise and he could pick anything on the list.
His preferred outerwear in the winter was a military parka with the wolf fur trim.
I wanted to get June the current issue Gortex parka, but it wasn't on her list.
I knew where I could buy them and they were on sale at less than half price.
I rationalized that I was saving enough money on the coat to pay for everything she did have on her list.
She had omitted underwear from her list, probably something she wanted to try on to ensure proper fit.
June was doing the grandchildren and I wanted to something extra for the kids, g., Jim and Mary and their spouses.
Not a large blade at 7"" but they could serve as both a hunting knife and a fighting knife.
Hunger was becoming a problem in some parts of the United States as the winter wore on.
I wouldn't doubt that more than one family was happy to have Spam for Christmas dinner.
We'd run plenty of meat through the locker plant and sold all the steers and extra hogs to the plant in Garden City.
To save fuel, we brought back lumber, counter top burners and plumbing supplies.
As far as the cooktops went, we bought the cheapest we could find, Admiral 30"" with 9,000BTU burners.
We'd also need stainless steel counters for the preparations area, a standard restaurant kitchen item.
It was fine for riding the snowmobiles, but it was too warm to work in.
It was rated to -50 F, and if it got that cold, I wasn't going anywhere.
He was, however, content to wear the 50 year old parka most of the time.
The diapers and pins were greatly appreciated, presents for the babies to be.
Randy always said if you got close enough to an opponent that you had to use a knife, you were far too close.
Gunny and he had been huddling since they came back with the lumber, plumbing and cooktops.
Dan said they were figuring out how to layout the canning huts, but if you ask me, they were also figuring out how to defend the 3 farms should it come to that.
When the war came, there was a reasonable amount of food in the supply chain and it took 3 years before the government was forced, they claim, into redistribution.
Grain destined for livestock feed was available to be reroute into food for human consumption.
This was far different; the year without a real summer we experienced cut the Country to the bone.
I caught a satellite image of the Country on TV; it was hard to recognize it as the good old United States of A It took a lot of planning, the canners were heavy and putting 4 on a cooktop concentrated a whole bunch of weight.
We finally decided to build the counters out of 3 laminations of 3 /4"" plywood topped with Formica.
The counter top looked like a piece of Swiss cheese when it was ready to accept the cooktops.
We wouldn't be running any space heater while we were canning, more likely an air conditioner, a very large air conditioner.
