I described how the president wrestled with the men who had deceived him.
The April 1961 Cuban cataclysm sowed the seeds of deep animosity toward President Kennedy among disparate American circles and it festered for the rest of the year.
That hostility would only deepen further in 1962, and I believe it played a role in the tragedy that took place in Dallas on 22 November 1963.
My intent in this chapter is to open the door to another unnoticed but important accelerant of the incipient sentiment that President Kennedy had to be brought down.
That role was inadvertently played by Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
Khrushchev was not a part of the plot to assassinate President Kennedy—as was alleged by those who originally designed the cover-up of the conspiracy; and by those authors today who, one would hope, inadvertently, keep spinning that old canard, oblivious to the cover they are providing to the real perpetrators of the assassination.
Khrushchev knew he would do much worse with a Lyndon Johnson or a Barry Goldwater in the White House.
Khrushchev did, albeit indirectly, contribute to the tragedy in Dallas by shaping the key events that helped bring it about.
Ironically, it was those same events and the death of JFK that led to Khrushchev’s overthrow on 14 October 1964.
In 1960, Khrushchev had moved quickly to arm Castro’s regime to the teeth, ensuring that the only way it could be overthrown was by a full-scale U.S. military intervention.
Kennedy understood that short of a resort to nuclear war with the Soviet Union, the price for the invasion of Cuba was West Berlin.
Khrushchev’s ultimate goal was to eliminate the “thorn,” the “ulcer,” of West Berlin.
Following the creation of the Berlin Wall , a dangerous standoff between United States and Soviet tanks took place in Berlin at Check Point Charlie.
Through a private channel, Kennedy signaled Khrushchev that he would go easy on Berlin in the future if the Soviet tanks withdrew first.
The Soviet premier was also attempting to draw the Americans into a “containing” position in Southeast Asia.
The idea was to tie up United States military power there and also to put pressure on the Chinese Communist leadership to purge Mao Zedong and end the Sino-Soviet dispute.
Not until the Berlin Crisis appeared to be in remission at the end of 1961 did Kennedy accept the bait in Vietnam—exactly in the manner Khrushchev wanted him to.
The Soviet leader did not seek an immediate overwhelming use of American forces in Vietnam; rather, Moscow’s long-term strategy was a slowly deepening vortex in Southeast Asia that would eventually bring about a SinoAmerican conflict there and resurrect the Sino-Soviet alliance.
In that context—and providing that a nuclear holocaust had not erupted— West Berlin would easily fall into communist hands.
To create a situation in various areas of the world that would favor dispersion of attention and forces by the United States and their satellites and would tie them down during the settlement of the question of a German peace treaty and West Berlin.
He would be willing to negotiate over Laos, Cuba, or the Congo, so long as he came away with Berlin.
Kennedy humiliated the Soviet premier by forcing him to remove his missiles from Cuba.
The 1 Michael Beschloss, The Crisis Years—Kennedy and Khrushchev, 1960-1963 , p.8.
In the months following the Missile Crisis, Kennedy and Defense Secretary McNamara began secretly planning to withdraw the American advisors from Vietnam.
I believe that during this period—in mid to late 1962—a plot to assassinate President Kennedy was hatched.
His grand scheme went up in smoke as the result of the Kennedy assassination in November 1963.
JFK’s death quickly led to a United States congressional blank check for massive direct American military intervention in Vietnam.
Khrushchev’s fall from power in Moscow took place exactly sixty-eight days after the passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in Washington on 7 August 1964.3 That meant that Moscow would need land access through China to Vietnam to sustain North Vietnam, and that the price of Chinese cooperation was Khrushchev’s removal.
In this manner, Khrushchev’s manufacturing of crises to push the West out of Berlin succeeded only in his own overthrow in the aftermath of the assassination of President Kennedy.
The removing of the “ulcer” of West Berlin had been a principal Soviet objective since the end of World War II in 1945.
That goal came to its inevitable and ignominious end with the demolition of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989, and to the revolutions during that year in which all of the socialist regimes in Eastern Europe—except Romania—were peacefully toppled.
The European Chessboard—1945-1960 At the end of World War II, Germany was partitioned into Soviet, American, British and French zones of occupation.
Although the city of Berlin remained deep inside the Soviet zone, it was also split, with the Soviets taking the eastern part of the city.
Stalin’s attempt to blockade West Berlin in 1948 had been thwarted by a massive Allied airlift.
During the Cold War, Europe had become the chessboard upon which the geostrategic competition between Moscow and Washington played itself out.
With the only substantial land army on the continent, France occupied the Western subcenter squares on the chessboard.
France was the key to America’s NATO strategy to contain Soviet influence.
As a result, Washington repeatedly turned its back on African and Asian nations in deference to Paris’ foolish attempt to maintain control of its colonial empire in North Africa and Indochina.
This occurred at a time when independence from colonial rule had become the dominant trend in the world.
Eisenhower did this to newly independent Congo in 1960, turning a blind eye to Belgium’s naked attempt to break up the territorial integrity of that mineral rich African nation.
The center squares on the Cold War European chessboard were occupied by East and West Germany.
Berlin, a lonely pawn at the center of the board, anchored the Cold War in the dangerous reciprocal hostility that would grip the world for three decades.
In 1958, Khrushchev had demanded a German peace treaty to permanently legitimize the division of Germany.
That demand remained when the Paris Summit Conference exploded in May 1960.
And it would become the focal point in Khrushchev’s secret scheme for testing the newly elected forty-four-year-old American president.
The March 1961 CIA Survey of Berlin-Related Clandestine Operations In March 1961, about one month after Kennedy’s inauguration, the CIA Berlin Operations Base Deputy Chief—and also chief of Soviet operations—David E Murphy, visited CIA HQS in Washington.
He took part in a survey being prepared in the Agency’s Eastern European Division on possible clandestine activities to support the United States mission in Berlin.
The ubiquitous Henry Hecksher6 had, as BOB’s chief of operations, supervised the effort to recruit German post office officials who knew the telecommunications wiring for all of Berlin.
Murphy enlisted in the Army during WWII and was sent to California to learn French but due to a clerical error ended up learning Russian instead.
When Murphy arrived at CIA HQS in 1961 to help with the East European Division Berlin survey, the Bay of Pigs landing was just a month away.
In Washington almost no one was aware, except for DDP Bissell, that his two top operations men for the invasion, Jake Esterline and Jack Hawkins wanted to resign because they were certain the plan was doomed.
Ironically, neither Esterline nor Hawkins understood that DCI Allen Dulles and several of the Pentagon chiefs intended that the invasion would fail.
The president had declared that under no circumstances would he authorize the use of United States military forces in Cuba.
However, Dulles and several of the chiefs were certain that once the Cuban exiles were being cut down on the beachhead Kennedy would have no choice but to send in the Air Force and Marines.
In March, however, the unabated exodus of refugees fleeing to the West through Berlin seemed more likely than Cuba to develop into a crisis.
The EE survey of potential clandestine operations in Berlin had been requested by Henry Kissinger, who was in Washington from Harvard to advise the administration on the Berlin problem.
See especially John Newman, Countdown to Darkness—The Assassination of President Kennedy, Volume II , see Chapters Nine and Twenty-One.
The recommendations included a larger presence in Berlin—culturally and militarily—that would increase international interest in the city’s continuing freedom and would also counter communist propaganda.
The final section concerned fomenting an “insurrection” in East Germany.
The CIA had no illusions that it was possible to cause a popular uprising against a Soviet-supported communist regime in Central Europe through the use of externally mounted clandestine operations.
In Chapter Twenty of Countdown to Darkness, I laid out the evidence that shows senior CIA officers and those close to invasion planning knew full well that a Cuban uprising in 1961 was a myth.
Yet, even so, DDP Bissell and DCI Dulles lied to Kennedy by telling him a Cuban uprising would succeed.
Our original concept is now seen to be unachievable in the face of the controls Castro has instituted.
There will not be the internal unrest earlier believed possible, nor will the defenses permit the type strike first planned.
I filed a FOIA request for it in United States District Court for the District of Columbia on 12 October 2016.
The CIA indicated that they would take action by 24 May 2017, but they missed that deadline and revised the completed date to 19 December 2017.
On 28 May 2018, the CIA indicated that they did not locate “any records responsive to your request” regarding the strange note.
On 17 August 2018, the Agency acknowledged that they had received my appeal.
To ensure that the people would become and remain submissive, East German communist leaders saturated their realm with more spies than had any other totalitarian government in recent history.
Using Wiesenthal’s figures for the Nazi Gestapo, there was one officer for 2,000 people.
When one adds in the estimated numbers of part-time snoops, the result is nothing short of 6 As for possible insurrection, the reaction was firm and to the point.
Never before had a Soviet Premier taken such an intense interest in a United States presidential campaign.
In late November, the President-Elect sent campaign advisers Walt Rostow and Jerome Wiesner to Moscow to meet with Soviet disarmament experts.
During test ban talks, the Soviets must be “very generous” about on-site inspections.
The two leaders must meet “before those who would not like to see agreement have had a chance to act and prevent it.
It would not have been unreasonable to assume that at least one Stasi informer was present in any party of ten or twelve dinner guests.
The two survivors were Captain John B McKone and Captain Freeman Bruce Olmstead.
The United States disputed the Soviet claim that the American airplane had entered Soviet airspace.
As the Kennedy inauguration approached, Khrushchev pivoted his policy abruptly toward détente by releasing the American RB-47 pilots and approving other measures to improve Soviet-American diplomacy.
There was much more to Khrushchev’s courting of Kennedy than unassuming congeniality.
The Premier was facing pushback from hardline Soviet leaders over his proposal to reduce the Soviet armed forces by 1. million men and his heated dispute with Beijing.
Khrushchev needed a quick rapprochement with the United States to continue this course, and he had calculated Kennedy would be easier to manipulate than Mao Zedong.
Khrushchev wanted a summit as soon as possible, before Kennedy’s policies on Berlin, a test ban, and the arms race were cast in concrete.
The United States Ambassador to the USSR, Llewellyn Thompson, lobbied JFK to meet Khrushchev and, for his part, President Kennedy was interested in meeting with him.
So, on 27 February 1961 Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev proposing a summit take place in Vienna, Austria.
Kennedy’s failure in Cuba was a bonus for Khrushchev, who interpreted it as a sign of weakness, validating his view that he could manipulate Kennedy on Berlin.
Khrushchev’s May 1961 Secret War Council on Berlin20 Khrushchev had been secretly plotting since March 1961 to close Berlin’s sector borders and build a wall in the city.
But Kennedy’s colossal loss at the Bay of Pigs barely ninety days into his presidency played heavily into Khrushchev’s hands.
The Soviet leader then decided to play for more and test the president straight away on Western access to Berlin.
While publicly feigning a cooperative posture toward JFK, Khrushchev’s plan was to lure the president into a summit meeting and ambush him with an ultimatum on Berlin.
The meeting’s agenda concerned what he planned to do to Kennedy at the Vienna summit.
The premier said he relished the opportunity for a summit with that “son of a bitch” Kennedy to bring “the German question” to a head.
Mikoyan argued that Khrushchev underestimated the American willingness and ability to engage in conventional war over Berlin.
He said America’s European allies and world public opinion would restrain Kennedy from responding with nuclear weapons to any change in Berlin’s status.
He said de Gaulle and Macmillan would never support an American lurch toward war because they understood that the Soviets’ primary nuclear targets, given the range of Moscow’s missiles, would be in Europe.
Kempe’s account is based on a stenographic record of the meeting from the AVP-RF—the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Archives.
However, we consider them illegal, though we won’t use any strong-arm methods for their removal.
We will not cut off delivery of foodstuffs and will not sever any other lifelines.
Khrushchev shot back that Kennedy so feared war that he would not react militarily.
He told the Presidium they perhaps would have to compromise in Laos, Cuba, or the Congo, where the conventional balance was less clear, but around Berlin the Kremlin’s superiority was unquestionable.
Mikoyan countered that Khrushchev was backing Kennedy into a dangerous position where he would have no option but to respond militarily.
Mikoyan suggested that Khrushchev continue to allow air traffic to arrive in West Berlin, which might make his Berlin solution more palatable to Kennedy.
He replied that not only would he be willing to shut down the air corridor but would also shoot down any Allied plane that tried to land in West Berlin.
Khrushchev ended his overbearing performance with a discussion of whether he should follow protocol and exchange gifts with Kennedy in Vienna.
Foreign Ministry officials suggested he give President Kennedy twelve cans of the finest black caviar and phonographic records of Soviet and Russian music.
Among other gifts, his aides had a silver coffee service in mind for Mrs.
The Pentagon and the CIA were not the only executive agencies in disarray after the Cuban fiasco.
The frustrations of the summer over Berlin brought the president’s discontent with his Department of State to a climax.
One muddle after another—the Department’s acquiescence in the Bay of Pigs, the fecklessness of its recommendations after the disaster, the ordeal of trying to change its attitude toward Laos, the maddening delay over the answer to Khrushchev’s aide-mémoire22 and the banality of the result, the apparent impossibility of developing a negotiating position for Berlin—left Kennedy with little doubt that the State Department was not yet an instrumentality fully and promptly responsive to presidential purpose.
Thus, it was not only Kennedy’s youth but also the feebleness of otherwise experienced American diplomats at this critical juncture that gave the wily Soviet premier the element of surprise at the 3-4 June 1961 summit in Vienna.
The 3 June discussion in the American ambassador’s office was a preliminary sparring match by both leaders.
He planned to take the gloves off in the afternoon session the next day at the Soviet Embassy.
As the argument went on endlessly, Khrushchev dug in his heels and became ever harsher.
Although the conversation was civil at first, it had turned into a scuffle by lunchtime.
It began as Kennedy tried to tone down the rhetoric in a final effort to avoid a crisis.
The president began by expressing hope that in the interest of relations between their two countries the chairman would not present him with a crisis so deeply involving the American national interest as Berlin.
Of course, any decision Khrushchev wanted to make about the Democratic Republic was his own.
If the president insisted on occupation rights after a treaty and if East German borders were violated, whether by land, sea or air, force would be met by force.
The United States should prepare itself for this, and the Soviet Union would do the same.
Khrushchev said again that it was up to the United States to decide on peace or war.
Although the Soviet premier’s bullying had failed to win any concessions from the president, at this point the Americans still had no idea that Khrushchev’s original plan—the Berlin Wall—was coming.
Khrushchev planned to restrict that secret to only a few people until the very last moment.
Kennedy’s secret, which he confided to almost no one, was his fear that Khrushchev would move against Berlin.
They almost certainly concluded that Kennedy was so uncertain about the American commitment to the divided city that he was willing to brook the humiliation of the Bay of Pigs rather than face a new Berlin crisis now.
The Soviet premier wore his wartime lieutenant general’s uniform while those participating watched a documentary film about Khrushchev’s life as a military and political champion.
Khrushchev decorated seven thousand others who had contributed to the flight.
Unsuccessful at the Vienna summit, Khrushchev’s pompous demonstration at this anniversary celebration was an act.
Yet Khrushchev knew that he had refused to compromise while Kennedy had signaled he was ready to negotiate.
The premier also knew that the USSR could not keep pace with American military development.
His declaration that the USSR’s military strength would grow so much that the West would suffer complete failure was no more than an empty boast.
The historic truth is that during the assault on Berlin there was not a single American, British, or French armed soldier around it, except for the prisoners of war whom we freed.
Thus, he said, the Allies’ claims to special rights in Berlin so long after surrender are entirely unfounded.
As the crowd cheered, Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky said the U.S. “gigantic military apparatus” and “aggressive blocks” ringing the Soviet Union had to be resisted.
He needed a compromise on Berlin and, more than ever, he needed the American president in order to make it work.
The Washington Reaction to the Vienna Summit Kennedy had suspected that he would have to face more mischief from Khrushchev over Berlin.
The president understood that the costs of unilateral U.S. intervention in Cuba for the cause of freedom throughout the hemisphere far outweighed Castro’s continued presence.
But Kennedy advisor Theodore Sorensen suggested that there was another imperative at work in Kennedy’s ardent refusal to send American forces into Cuba.
And so, those forces were not tied down in Cuba, the Congo, or Laos when Khrushchev sprung his Berlin bluff on Kennedy at the summit.
The president was fully aware, however, that—short of using nuclear weapons— United States force levels were inadequate to deal with the developing Berlin crisis.
Thus, Kennedy responded to Khrushchev’s ultimatum by ordering his administration to undertake a comprehensive review of the situation and make recommendations on the political and military measures to convince the Soviet Union that he meant business in Berlin.
To help him lead this effort the president sought out President Truman’s Secretary of State, Dean Acheson.
Dean Acheson had turned down the president-elect’s offer to be ambassador to NATO; the only appointment he would have accepted was his previous one—Secretary of State.
That changed when the administration had begun to consider its Berlin policy well before the president went to the Vienna Summit.
The United States should try to convince the USSR that it would and could, in event of a Berlin crisis, stir up dissidence in East Germany and Eastern Europe.
On that occasion, Dave Murphy from Berlin Operations Base attended a meeting of East European Division officers.
Given the high efficiency of the East German police state,35 the group had concluded that it was not possible to incite a popular uprising in East Germany.
It is unrealistic to believe that we could infiltrate into the East Zone a sleeper net of sufficient size, reliability, and skill to … play a significant part in organizing resistance groups as well as remain in a state of readiness until called up in connection with military operations.
Our abilities are not equal to this task when balanced against the defensive capability of the [East German] Ministry of State Security.
It was, however, a revealing indication of just how serious the Berlin Crisis had become.
Secretary of State Rusk began the discussion with a summary account of the current state of the department's work on Khrushchev’s 4 June aide-mémoire, and on other pressing matters relevant to Berlin planning.
Acheson began by arguing that Khrushchev’s purpose in starting this crisis over Berlin was to weaken NATO, buttress the East German regime, and legalize the Oder-Neisse Line with Poland.
The Soviet leader had confronted the United States with a test that could not be backed down from, Acheson averred, because Khrushchev would take willingness to negotiate as a sign of weakness.
Kennedy said, wryly, that he thought it difficult to sustain a strong political posture, while, at the same time, being prepared with the right answer if Khrushchev proposed another summit that summer.
In reply to a summit proposal, for example, the president could readily suggest that conversations be undertaken first at a lower level.
Mr Acheson believed that there were plenty of “elderly unemployed” people like himself who could be sent to interminable meetings.
He said American forces in Germany outside Berlin should be reinforced immediately by two or three divisions, to a total of six.
The underlying 40 The Soviet Union had recognized this boundary as the East German frontier.
If anyone was to back down over Berlin, it would have to be the Soviets.
As I mentioned previously, the Acheson report also included a plan to deter the Soviets from provoking a Berlin crisis by stirring up dissident groups to destabilize Eastern Europe.
Some of those present in the NSC meeting were troubled by Acheson’s apparent indifference about the risk of nuclear war.
They preferred negotiation to demonstrate that the West favored a reduction in tension over West Berlin while protecting Western access rights.
The president said very little during the meeting, except that he did not think the American people were prepared for the ambitious course Acheson proposed and, furthermore, that the allies would be even less enthusiastic.
Uncharacteristically, the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, voiced his opposition46 to the scale of the action proposed by Acheson and his opposition to an airlift unconnected with a probe.
Acheson responded that the military force had to be large enough to convince the Soviets that if the fighting continued, nuclear weapons would be used.
The upshot of the meeting was a decision not to make any substantive decisions based on that first discussion.
The president directed his security advisor, McGeorge Bundy, to prepare a list of departmental assignments for proposals that could be tabled for further discussion and decisions in two weeks.
Burke had personally—and unsuccessfully—confronted Kennedy in the oval office while the exile forces were still fighting on the beachhead at the Bay of Pigs.
Two weeks later, after Kennedy refused to send United States forces into Laos, Burke again personally confronted Kennedy in the White House over that decision.
By the time of the 29 June 1961 NSC meeting, Burke was just hoping to hold on to his job.
As I mentioned before, with respect to proposals to use clandestine operations to incite insurrection in the East, the CIA had been at odds with the State Department hawks since at least March 1961.
The Schism in Washington on Berlin Policy Kennedy saw his administration breaking into two camps on the Berlin predicament.
The hard-liners included Acheson and other lesser lights at the State Department, the chiefs at the Pentagon, and Vice President Johnson.
Ambassador to the USSR, Llewellyn Thompson; Kennedy’s adviser on Soviet affairs, Charles Bohlen; White House aide Arthur Schlesinger; White House consultant and Harvard professor Henry Kissinger; special counsel Ted Sorensen; Kennedy security advisor McGeorge Bundy; and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
After the NSC meeting, Schlesinger began to organize a plan to provide a “thinking man’s alternative” to Acheson.
The 1961 Berlin Crisis leadership alignment in the Kennedy Administration was not lost on the chiefs at the Pentagon.
In the ten weeks before the Bay of Pigs fiasco, their boss, Secretary McNamara, was more inclined to take their advice, but less so afterward.
Notably absent from the two groups listed by Kempe was the CIA leadership.
Disgraced by their Cuban performance, their advice was not welcome in the White House.
Another telling absence from the group close to Kennedy was Secretary of State Rusk.
In my book JFK and Vietnam , I concluded that the president did not trust Rusk enough to include him in the plan to withdraw the American advisors from Vietnam.
In any event, that same week in early July 1961, Newsweek published classified information on the Pentagon’s contingency plans for Berlin, including the mobilization of American military forces.
Khrushchev used this news to justify the recension of his plan to reduce the Soviet Army by 1. million men and increase his defense budget by $3. billion.
According to Kempe, Kennedy was “livid” over the Newsweek leak and so upset that he ordered the FBI to find the source.
In a Moscow speech, he scoffed at “reports” of Western mobilization plans.
Both were attending a performance by Dame Margot Fonteyn at the Bolshoi Theater.
With East Germany’s refugee problem spiraling out of control, Khrushchev could no longer wait for an answer on a meeting with Kennedy.
East German refugees who got to West Berlin faced the risk of being arrested for desertion if they travelled by bus or train to West Germany.
However, they were able to fly unmolested to West Germany from airports in West Berlin.
The Soviet Presidium met on 29 June and considered the request of East German leader Walter Ulbricht to do something about the “border-crosser” problem.
Soviet Ambassador Pervukhin argued that once a peace treaty had been signed, control of Western access to West Berlin would be in East German hands. …the goal would be to have all external air traffic from West Berlin channeled through the East Berlin airport at Schönefeld, effectively giving the East control of who was permitted to leave by air.
Unable to leave West Berlin by any means, East Germans would be stuck in West Berlin indefinitely, and the half-city would be unable to cope with a permanent influx.
The growing flood of refugees was increasingly disorganizing the entire life of the Republic.
For Ulbricht and the East German leadership, the open status of the city caused two severe problems, Khrushchev recalled in a book about his recollections, Khrushchev Remembers.
The GDR had to cope with an enemy who was economically very powerful and therefore very appealing to the GDR’s own citizens.
The resulting drain of workers was creating a simply disastrous situation in the GDR, which was already suffering from a shortage of manual labor, not to mention specialized labor.
Residents of West Berlin could cross freely into East Berlin, where they took advantage of all sorts of communal services like barbershops and so on.
Because prices were much lower in East Berlin, West Berliners were also buying up all sorts of products which were in wide demand—products like meat, animal oil, and other items, and the GDR was losing millions of marks.
Khrushchev told his son Sergei that in early July 1961 he asked his German commander-in-chief, General Ivan Yakubovski, to do a study on the feasibility of closing the border between the Western and Eastern sectors of Berlin.
The two men studied special maps of Berlin at Khrushchev’s Dacha in the Crimea.
In July 1961, fear that the West Berlin safety hatch might disappear caused the refugee outflow to balloon to even more disastrous proportions—one thousand people every day.
It was during those July days at his Dacha that Khrushchev made up his mind to build the Berlin Wall.
Super-secret handwritten progress reports were hand-carried to 59 Ibid.
The United States remained focused like a laser on the crisis of Western access to Berlin.
At the Soviet Embassy in Berlin, however, Pervukhin had a much sharper focus on the crisis of the exploding refugee flow, and the predicament of pursuing a peace treaty while that flow intensified.
In that difference of focus there was a seed for a trade—and the potential abatement of the Berlin Crisis.
The 13 July 1961 NSC Meeting In support of the 13 July NSC meeting, two days earlier the intelligence community gathered at CIA HQS for final coordination of a Special National Intelligence Estimate on possible Soviet reactions to United States options with respect to Berlin.
The Soviet leaders are confident of the prospects for advancing their cause by means short of all-out war.
We continue to believe that, so long as they remain vulnerable to United States strategic power, they will not willingly enter into a situation which, by their calculations, the risks of general war are substantial.
In a paragraph devoted to “measures aimed at the Satellites,” the SNIE stated that the Soviets probably believed the West had only a limited capability to stir up dissidence in East Germany.
The SNIE predicted that overt Western actions to stimulate dissidence would probably produce a stiffening of Soviet resolve.
If, however, private Western warning and clandestine activities convinced Moscow that a Berlin crisis could provoke a covertly supported wave of disorders in the Satellites, then the Soviets might be inclined to proceed more cautiously in their moves against Berlin.
In the case of Berlin, I favored calling up the reserves for two reasons: we needed to make clear to the Soviets our determination and will to apply force if necessary to prevent them from taking over West Berlin, which was their objective, and if we were going to apply force, we needed to have that additional force available.
At the 13 July 1961 NSC meeting, the president asked Acheson what he thought about calling up the reserves.
Acheson replied that if they left the call-up of reserves until “the end,” Khrushchev’s judgment about the shape of the crisis would not be affected.
Secretary Rusk agreed that reserve training should not be left until too late.
They argued that taking such action at that time might jeopardize the foreign aid bill then awaiting congressional authorization and appropriation.
Rusk commented that it would be “a great victory for Khrushchev” if he could weaken the foreign aid program with only a memorandum and a few speeches.
At the 18 July meeting of the Interdepartmental Coordination Group on Germany and Berlin, Kennedy’s team debated the merits of a rapid, spectacular build-up versus a slower build-up.
Once again, the pros and cons of declaring a national emergency, modernizing United States conventional forces, and troop deployments were discussed.
Later that day, the president attended a meeting of his senior military advisors on Berlin.
Kennedy said he wanted to postpone the declaration of a state of emergency until American reserve forces had been mobilized.
The chiefs agreed and said it could be postponed until at least 1 September.
He added that the expected increases in Allied forces would provide NATO with a better capability for non-nuclear ground action.
The 19 July 1961 NSC Meeting The president met with the Berlin Steering Group on the morning of 19 July in his study on the second floor of the Executive Mansion.
Secretary McNamara described the military program and stated it was not necessary to declare a national emergency before mobilization.
He added that congressional authorization could be obtained for the reserve call-up without such a declaration.
Kennedy asked whether the proposed military build-up would increase the credibility of the U.S. nuclear deterrent.
At the NSC meeting that afternoon, the president again emphasized his own view that the proposed United States preparations would not be adequate without an effective allied response, especially from the Germans and the French.
And then, as Kempe has observed, the Acheson plan died a quiet death after an exchange between its author and Defense Secretary McNamara.
Secretary McNamara opposed a fixed target date, on the grounds that it would be wrong to accept a rigid time-table in advance.
After some prodding by the president, it was clear that the current preparations would rapidly create a force in being, in the continental U.S., of six Army and two Marine divisions that could be deployed to Europe in the event of a rapidly developing crisis.
It tested Kennedy’s ability to strike an effective balance between intimidating the Soviets and giving them a way out of their dilemma.
One of his principal concerns was the perception that he lacked the will to fight an allout war.
But United States press reports, probably leaked by Pentagon sources to pressure JFK about Menshikov’s opinion, were unhelpful to the president’s Berlin strategy.
McGeorge Bundy believed it was essential for the president to overcome this perception of weakness.
Kennedy’s maneuvering to avoid the intrinsic risks of hardline nuclear missile-rattling and a negotiations-at-all-costs stance exposed him to criticism from both sides.
The president complained to Schlesinger that Acheson was lopsidedly focused on military solutions and tasked Schlesinger with writing a paper to bring balance to bear on Berlin planning.
After working with State Department counselor Abram Chayes and Harvard professor Henry Kissinger, Schlesinger delivered a memo to Kennedy just two hours later, as he was leaving for a weekend in Hyannis Port with Rusk, McNamara and General Taylor.
The memo proposed that the president direct Rusk to explore negotiations and order Acheson to inject “the missing political dimension” to his argument.
Speaking from the Oval Office on 25 July 1961, Kennedy addressed the nation on radio and television.
His speech turned out to be a skillful model of how to give something to both sides of the Berlin debate in his administration.
It is more than a showcase of liberty, a symbol, an island of freedom in a communist sea.
It is more than a link with the free world, a beacon of hope behind the Iron Curtain, an escape hatch for refugees.
But above all it has now become—as never before—the great testing place of Western courage and will, a focal point where our solemn commitments, stretching back over the years since 1945, and Soviet ambitions now meet in basic confrontation.
The Berlin Wall On Monday, 31 July 1961, the leader of East Germany, Walter Ulbricht, attended a meeting in Moscow.
He suggested to Khrushchev that the air corridors between West Berlin and the West should be blocked to stanch the huge flow of refugees flying out every day.
Khrushchev told him to wait until the Warsaw Pact leadership conference, scheduled to meet on 2 September.
At the Warsaw Pact meeting, Ulbricht cautioned Khrushchev that if the drain of valuable East German workers and professionals was not stopped, East Germany would not be able to meet its production commitments to the Soviet bloc.
Ulbricht rushed to East Berlin to seek the necessary assurances from his security chief, Erich Honecker, and other top leaders.
On 5 September, Ulbricht returned to Moscow to give Khrushchev the news.
All communication had to be transmitted orally until just before construction of the wall began.
On 12 August, Ulbricht signed the order to close the border crossings to the West and erect a wall in Berlin.
In the darkness at midnight, police and army units—including units of the East German Army—began laying concertina wire and erecting barricades at the main crossing points.
By morning, the border to 82 CIA Berlin Chronology, 1961; cia.gov/library.
General LeMay's 12 July appeal for retention of the B-52 and B58 production levels and for an increase in B-70 program funding was not reflected in these appropriations figures.
Then, 32,000 combat and engineer troops were brought in to begin building the Berlin Wall, while the Soviet Army stood watch close to the city to discourage Western interference.
Within a few weeks these improvised obstacles would become a formidable heavily fortified, guarded, and boobytrapped cement barrier.
Publicly, Kennedy’s reaction was low key as his administration mulled over what a fully coordinated response should be.
American reporters were saying that the border closure had shocked and depressed Kennedy.
However, the president was actually relieved by the news of the wall and, privately, did not hide this reaction from his closest advisors.
Besides, the optics for the communists were terrible—they were building a prison around West Berlin to lock in its people.
It was an opportunity for the president to display resolve and statesmanship.
Kennedy was now able to undertake an impressive mobilization of American military power with the full backing of Congress, without looking like a warmonger.
On 18 August 1961, he ordered a battle group of 1,500 men to Berlin to reinforce the garrison.
The next day, a plane carrying Vice President Johnson and General Clay landed in Berlin to assure West Berlin that the United States was willing to fight for the city’s survival.
After that, the United States and the USSR engaged in a tit-for-tat escalation of the crisis.
On 22 August, the Western air corridors to Berlin were threatened by Soviet diplomatic demarches, and the access to East Berlin was cut to a single crossing point, Check Point Charlie.
On 5 September, President Kennedy announced resumption of United States tests, and the United States conducted its first test on 15 September.
On 23 September the United States 7th Army was placed on a “combat ready” alert.
On 25 September, President Kennedy, in an address to the UN General Assembly, reaffirmed United States determination to defend the Allied position in West Berlin.
Tank Confrontation at Check Point Charlie On 25 October 1961, United States tanks moved to the border of East Berlin, while General Clay decided to “test” Western access to the east sector that was guaranteed by the Potsdam Agreements of 2 August 1945.92 Throughout the day, several official American civilian vehicles were escorted on short tours of East Berlin.
After initial East German harassment, the vehicles were allowed to proceed unmolested.
That evening, unidentified tanks were spotted … in a bombed-out lot in the Eastern sector of the city.
When a soldier popped up out of the turret, he asked him in German how to get to Karlshorst.
The American asked the same 88 CIA Berlin Chronology, 1961; cia.gov/library.
For the first time in years, an armored Soviet military unit had entered the city limits of East Berlin.
The unit was comprised of thirty-three Soviet-manned tanks, accompanied by troops.
The show of strength by Khrushchev and Kennedy in Berlin rapidly escalated.
Both sides ended up with ten tanks, with engines running, facing each other at Check Point Charlie.
The American tanks with bulldozer blades were conspicuously shown, and American helicopters buzzed over the check point ignoring East German and Soviet protests.
For many years, General Clay’s view—that the Russians unleashed the Check Point Charlie confrontation in order to humiliate America—was generally accepted.
However, the unearthing of new documentary evidence suggests Clay’s view was incorrect and that what had taken place was that Ulbricht’s aggressive anti-Western stance had trapped Khrushchev into a situation he did not want to be in.
The standoff continued through the “chilly” night and lasted for sixteen hours.
During the Check Point Charlie confrontation, four missile-firing atomic submarines of the Polaris class were submerged in the North Sea, Malinovsky reminded his colleagues—each with sixteen warheads aimed at targets in the Soviet Union.
As the crisis in Berlin approached a hair’s breadth from erupting into a violent tank battle, something unseen was also taking place during the dark hours of that night.
At Check Point Charlie the Soviet guard post was communicating, through General Anatoly Gribkov at the Soviet Army High Command, with Khrushchev.
At the same time, the United States guard post was communicating, through the HQ of the 93 Taylor, The Berlin Wall, 280.
Clay recalls that when he spoke with Kennedy that evening, the president asked if he was nervous.
That snarky remark failed to annoy the president who had his feet up on his desk during the entire call to Berlin.
Within hours, Kennedy and Khrushchev were messaging through RFK and Bolshakov.
Kennedy offered to go easy over Berlin in the future in return for the Soviets removing their tanks first.
We also know that the following morning Khrushchev spoke to Marshal Konev in Berlin.
I proposed that we turn our tanks around, pull them back from the border, and have them take their places in the side streets.
I assured my comrades that as soon as we pulled back our tanks, the Americans would pull back theirs.
This was how long it would take for their tank commander to report our move and to get orders from higher up of what to do.
He reported that, just as I expected, it did take only twenty minutes for the Americans to respond.
From the time Khrushchev ordered the erection of the Berlin Wall he knew that “starting a war over Berlin was stupid.
