Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, October 2013.
Aerial photo of the port of Mariel, Cuba showing Soviet missile equipment by the docks and on-board freighters, October 1962.
General Yesin has previously served as chief of staff of the Strategic Missile Forces, department head in the staff of the Defense Council, and in the Security Council of the Russian Federation.
Mr Yesin participated in 1962 Operation Anadyr carried out by the Soviet Armed Forces in the Republic of Cuba.
Why Soviet Leaders Sent Nuclear Missiles to Cuba................................2 2.
Why Americans Succeeded in Detecting Soviet Nuclear Missiles in Cuba..............................................................4 3.
Why Khrushchev Decided to Withdraw Missiles from Cuba..................5 4.
The lessons of the crisis are still of great practical value and interest to government officials who make decisions on political-military and military-strategic issues.
One such lesson is that the outcome of a crisis is often determined by nuances in the way each side makes and executes decisions, and that these nuances are often hidden from view until long after the crisis is resolved.
Indeed, it was this failure of concealment that foiled Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s plan to deploy the missiles in secret and, once installed, to present a nuclear Cuba to the United States and the international community as a fait accompli.
As soon as United States intelligence officials obtained and analyzed photographic evidence of the missile positions, they notified President John F Kennedy, who swung into action.
Not only is he one of contemporary Russia’s most thoughtful military strategists, but he was also a direct participant in the crisis as a young lieutenant serving in the Soviet Strategic Missile Forces.
Yesin’s regiment ended up in Cuba’s Santa Clara Province, where the young officer performed so well as his unit’s chief engineer that he was promoted to senior lieutenant.
He went on to become chief of staff of the Strategic Missile Forces before retiring to pursue an academic career.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School ix General Yesin takes advantage of his unique position as both participant and skilled scholar in drawing lessons from the crisis that are both informative and instructive.
The author attributes the Soviet Union’s failure to conceal the missile launch positions in Cuba to two factors.
The first factor was that “only a very narrow circle” of General Staff officers were involved in the top-secret planning process for Operation Anadyr, and none were missile specialists.
Therefore, no steps were taken to adapt standard concealment procedures to the Cuban landscape, and missiles were deployed with camouflage nets designed to provide cover in the coniferous forests of Russia, not in the palm groves of Cuba.
The second factor was that “the Soviet missile units were forced to deploy with haste, increasing the chance they would violate proper concealment procedures,” according to Yesin.
He argues that this haste stemmed from the unrealistic deployment deadlines that Soviet political leaders placed on the military.
Moreover, because Soviet commanders in Cuba did not have enough engineering equipment to build the launch positions, their units were forced to do so with manual labor, which was easier to see from above.
As a result, United States spy planes were able to detect five of the six launch positions before the nucleartipped medium-range missiles were emplaced.
It is important to note that one of the six launch positions was not detected by the United States, a potentially significant intelligence failure.
If Kennedy followed the advice of his advisors and bombed the Cuban missile positions, the Soviets would have been free to launch a retaliatory strike against the United States from this sixth, undetected site.
For their part, Soviet political leaders should have paid more attention to the planning and implementation of Operation Anadyr, particularly since Khrushchev had some, albeit limited, military experience.
Meanwhile, the Soviet Defense Ministry and its General Staff were led by officers who did not have experience executing operations involving strategic nuclear weapons, and they did not ask for advice from those who understood the intricacies of transporting and installing missiles covertly.
They did not do so in part because widening the circle of participants in Operation Anadyr could have compromised its secrecy, which was the highest priority of the Soviet political leadership.
There is no information available about how Soviet military leaders—to say nothing of the political leaders—assessed the damage done to Soviet national security by these overflights.
However, by failing to better conceal its missile launch sites in Cuba missile, it appears that Soviet leaders underestimated this damage.
This is yet another example of how important nuances in the behavior and thinking of parties in a crisis situation—particularly a nuclear standoff—can remain hidden from political leaders at the time, and yet have an important impact on the outcome of the crisis.
Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences and 6th Secretary of Russia’s Security Council Dr.
Some of the most recent evaluations were given in 2012 in commemoration of the crisis’s 50th anniversary.
However, experts on the CMC have yet to reach consensus on a number of questions related to the crisis.
Furthermore, academics and commentators have missed some of the key lessons from the crisis.
Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences Andrei Kokoshin chaired that roundtable.
With these discussions in mind, the author would like to offer his interpretation of the answers to the most important of the CMC-related questions that remain open.
He would also like to outline a number of instructive lessons of the 1962 crisis.
Na primere Karibskogo krizisa 1962 goda , trans. and ed. by Simon Saradzhyan and Nabi Abdullaev , 528.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 1 1.
Why Soviet Leaders Sent Nuclear Missiles to Cuba Many experts believe that the most important unanswered questions are those regarding the political considerations that prompted Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Four factors informed the decision by the Soviet Union’s political leadership to send a missile division armed with medium-range nuclear ballistic missiles4 to Cuba.
Soviet leaders believed that the United States was preparing to overthrow the revolutionary government of Fidel Castro, an ally of the Soviet Union.
These exercises were code-named Lantphibex and Prompt Strike, respectively.
Khrushchev also believed that the overwhelming American military superiority in the Caribbean made it impossible to defend Cuba with conventional arms.
To Khrushchev, only Soviet nuclear missiles deployed in Cuba could serve as a credible deterrent against United States military aggression.
The Soviet leadership reached this conclusion after the United States placed Thor and Jupiter medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles in Great Britain, Italy and Turkey.
In 1959, two missile batteries of the 72nd Engineer Brigade of the Supreme High Command Reserve were covertly deployed in the German Democratic Republic.
The batteries, which operated R-5 medium-range nuclear missiles with 12 launchers assigned to them, remained on combat duty in East Germany for six months until tensions cooled over access to Berlin.
The politico-military leadership of the Soviet Union understood that deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba would not drastically change the imbalance between Soviet and United States nuclear forces.
Ambassador to Washington during service of six presidents in 1962-1968] , 60.
The Soviet leadership hoped to win political concessions from the United States by placing the missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev believed that placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, despite the risk, would yield significant dividends by allowing the U.S.S.R. to pressure the United States and NATO over Berlin.
At that time, Khrushchev intended to squeeze the United States, Britain and France out of West Berlin.
By placing nuclear weapons in Cuba, the United States could be forced to trade the removal of those weapons for concessions to the Soviets regarding West Berlin.
Above all, the Soviet leadership’s primary reason for deploying Soviet nuclear missile units in Cuba was to prevent United States military aggression against the Cuban government.
Despite the risks, Moscow believed that it was the only measure that could prevent an American attack.
The American installation of Thor and Jupiter missiles in Europe further justified to Moscow a symmetrical Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
It should be noted that as of mid-1962 the geostrategic situation was so tense that the Soviets had to transport nuclear missiles to Cuba in secret.
Otherwise, Soviet transport ships with R-12 and R-14 missiles on board would have been blocked by the United States Navy in the Atlantic while still en route to Cuba.
Chairman Khrushchev wanted to announce the deployment during an official visit to Cuba in November 1962.
During that visit, Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro were to sign an intergovernmental agreement on military cooperation between the U.S.S.R. and the Republic of Cuba.
Soviet and Cuban officials initialed that agreement in Moscow at the end of August 1962.
Once the agreement was signed, the signatories were to reveal Soviet nuclear forces in Cuba in order to present the United States with a fait accompli.
On October 14, 1962 an American U-2 spy plane took aerial photographs of the San Cristobal area when overflying western Cuba.
After developing the film, CIA analysts concluded that a unit of R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles was being deployed in that area.
Washington subsequently increased its efforts to identify other areas in Cuba where missile units might be deployed.
These findings prompted a decision by the United States leadership to introduce what the White House described euphemistically as a “quarantine” of Cuba.
In practice, though, the United States established a 500mile blockade zone around Cuba to prevent the further shipment of offensive weapons to 7 Kokoshin, Razmyshleniya o Karibskom krizise v kontekste strategicheskoy stabil’nosti, 11.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs | Harvard Kennedy School 3 the island.
President Kennedy announced this decision in an address broadcast on radio and television in the evening of October 22, 1962.
There is no one simple answer to this question, but two factors facilitated detection of the missile positions.
The terrain in Cuba was not favorable for concealment, but Soviet commanders did not consider this during preparation for deploying missiles on the island.
The units should have been equipped with specialized means of concealment that would most naturally fit into the Cuban landscape.
Only a very narrow circle of generals and officers of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the U.S.S.R. knew about the pending deployment of missile units in Cuba.
None of the officers were missile specialists and none possessed sufficient knowledge of how to camouflage missile hardware, which required specific skills.
They mistakenly assumed that the standard means of concealment available in missile units would be sufficient to camouflage assets deployed Cuba.
Indeed, the camouflage nets that were brought to Cuba did not blend into the local landscape.
These nets were designed to disguise missile hardware in the coniferous forests.
Unfortunately for them, the Soviet missile crews had to deploy their missiles in Cuba’s palm groves.
Moreover, this hardware had to be positioned in a strictly linear fashion in order to erect missiles in the vertical position on the launch pads.
It was this characteristic line-up that enabled CIA analysts to identify the activities in the San Cristobal area as deployment of a Soviet missile unit.
The analysts compared the Cuban photographs to those taken during reconnaissance overflights of missile units armed with the R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles in the Soviet Union.
These flights stopped only after one U-2 piloted by Francis Gary Powers was shot down in the skies above the city of Sverdlovsk on May 1, 1960.9 Factor 2.
The Soviet missile units were forced to deploy with haste, increasing the chance they would violate proper concealment procedures.
The Soviet leadership set an unrealistic deadline of November 1, 1962 to complete deployment of the missile units.
The late arrival of missile units to Cuba and lack of engineering equipment—needed to perform excavation 9 Powers was captured, tried, and convicted by a Soviet court.
Exacerbating the hurried work, increased seasonal rainfall drenched the missile sites in October 1962.
This increased workload, coupled with the torrential rain, led to heightened fatigue and decreased the missile crews’ focus on ensuring proper concealment measures for the hardware.
These two factors allowed the United States to detect five out of the six missile units deployed in Cuba by October 27, 1962.
I believe that if missile specialists had been involved in planning preparations for deployment of the missile division to Cuba, the missile units would have had a far better chance of concealing their missiles from American reconnaissance overflights.
Why Khrushchev Decided to Withdraw Missiles from Cuba Khrushchev did not see the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba as an end in itself.
His ultimate goal was to deter the United States from attacking Cuba by deploying nuclear missiles on this Caribbean island, but he did not want to go as far as going to war with the Americans.
The Soviet leader thus decided to remove the missiles when President Kennedy assured Chairman Khrushchev that, in return for withdrawing Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba, the United States would not invade Cuba.
Moreover, the United States also made a confidential pledge to eliminate its missile bases in Turkey and Europe a few months later.
Indeed, as soon the Soviet missile divisions began dismantling their launch sites in Cuba, United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara issued a secret directive to render the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey unusable.
McNamara also ordered this process be photographed to personally verify the execution of his October 29, 1962 order.
Along with the ballistic missiles, Washington considered these aircraft to be offensive weapons that could launch nuclear strikes against the American homeland.
Kennedy and Khrushchev’s agreement about American nonaggression toward Cuba were formalized in the form of an inter-governmental agreement when, in 1970, the United States State Department and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R. exchanged appropriate notes.
Then-President Richard Nixon officially confirmed that the United States committed as a state to refrain from aggression against Cuba as long as the U.S.S.R. did not deploy offensive weapons on that island.
Indeed, that belief was even articulated in their respective military doctrines.
Having found themselves on the edge of nuclear abyss during the CMC, Soviet and American leaders realized that there could be no winners in a nuclear war.
Moreover, no one could guarantee against the deaths of millions more as a result of the subsequent environmental catastrophe caused by nuclear war.
This realization led to the creation in 1963 of a direct communications link between the Kremlin and the White House so that the leaders of the U.S.S.R. and the United States could quickly resolve any crisis before it could escalate to a military confrontation.
Further on, the countries signed the Agreement on Measures to Reduce the Risk of Outbreak of Nuclear War between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialists Republics in 1971 and the Agreement between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialists Republics on Prevention of Nuclear War in 1973.
These agreements are open-ended and they continue to contribute to maintenance of strategic stability and international security to date.
In a nuclear confrontation, both sides must compromise in order to find a mutually acceptable solution.
The United States and U.S.S.R. only found a way out of the CMC when both sides expressed a willingness to compromise and make mutual concessions.
This created a window of opportunity to find mutually acceptable solutions rather than corner the opposing party with ultimatums.
Both sides gradually formed views on how to ensure strategic stability and that was reflected in a number of official Sciences.
Make sure there is clear and timely communication between you and your adversary during a crisis.
It also illustrated the need for timely communication of those decisions to an opposing side.
A number of setbacks occurred in decisionmaking process of the United States and U.S.S.R. that made resolution of the CMC far much more difficult.
For example, Kennedy received through the United States embassy in Moscow a private letter from Khrushchev on the evening of October 26, 1962, in which the Soviet leader stated that the U.S.S.R agreed to withdraw nuclear missiles from Cuba if the United States would guarantee that it would not invade Cuba.
The American president and his entourage began to draft a reply to Khrushchev, in which they agreed to offer a guarantee of non-aggression to Cuba in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet nuclear missiles.
However, Kennedy then received another letter from Khrushchev on the morning of October 27.
This message, which Americans believed to be a follow-on to the letter he received on October 26, changed the whole atmosphere of the negotiations.
The Americans began to think that either there had been a coup in the Kremlin or that Khrushchev had come under such strong pressure from Kremlin hawks that he had to abandon his conciliatory position.
In reality, the ‘second’ message that Kennedy received on October 27 was supposed to have been first.
It was only due to the sluggishness of employees of the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs—who delayed sending Khrushchev’s original letter—that Kennedy read the conciliatory follow-on letter first and heard the aggressive, original message second.
The confusion over the sequence of Khrushchev’s messages could have led to disastrous consequences if were not for Robert Kennedy, brother of the American president and United States Attorney General.
On the evening of October 27, Robert Kennedy met with Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to the United States.
Both the United States and Soviet intelligence agencies made mistakes when drawing conclusions from their analysis of the situation during the crisis.
Erroneous intelligence analysis led to erroneous decisions that increased the chances for the outbreak of hostilities.
For example, General Thomas Power, head of the United States Strategic Air Command, issued an order on October 24, 1962 to put subordinate units on full alert, even though the situation did not require this.
On October 27, 1962, General Stepan Grechko, who at that time served as deputy commander of the Soviet forces in Cuba with responsibility for air defense, gave the order to open fire at an American U-2 spy plane.
Two missiles launched from the Dvina air defense system hit the reconnaissance plane, killing the pilot.
This study is intended neither to be exhaustively comprehensive nor to represent the ultimate truth.
It is the result of the author’s purely personal reflections, inspired not only by his memories as a direct participant in the menacing events of 1962, but also by the information on these events that has become available to him in recent years.
