Subscribe to the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation's Sunflower newsletter and Action Alert Network.
We were fortunate to have survived that crisis, thanks largely to the restraint shown by President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev.
Now, fifty years later, there is no immediate crisis such as that in 1962 over Soviet nuclear-armed missiles being placed in Cuba.
Approximately 95 percent of these weapons are in the arsenals of the United States and Russia.
Some 2,000 of them are kept in a state of high alert, ready to be immediately launched upon an order to do so at any moment of any day or night.
We run an unacceptably high risk of our bluff again being called and finding ourselves, once more, teetering on the brink of the abyss.
Each individual risk may be small, but taken together over an extended period of time, the risk becomes unacceptably high.
Blair addresses issues including high-alert nuclear weapons, a United States China conflict, the history of U.S. arms control treaties, the modernization of United States nuclear forces, and his transformation to believing that the abolition of nuclear weapons is the only way to ensure national and global security.
Page 3 of 8 United States Nuclear Weapons Policy Militarizing Nuclear Security Rep.
Mike Turner , chairman of the House Armed Services Strategic Forces Subcommittee, has unveiled a bill that seeks to militarize security at nuclear weapons production sites.
Turner's legislation proposes shifting security responsibility from the Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration to the United States military.
Turner's legislation was largely triggered by an incident in July, in which an 82-year-old nun and two other peace activists infiltrated the Y12 National Security Complex in Tennessee.
Passed in 1878 during the Reconstruction era, the law constrains United States armed forces from working on United States soil to enforce domestic law.
Guarino, Douglas, ""Plan to Militarize Nuclear Security Could Face Legal Obstacles, Critics Say,"" Global Security Newswire, September 26, 2012.
Congress Cuts Funding for New Plutonium Pit Facility On September 22, funding for a new nuclear bomb plant at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico was terminated by a Continuing Resolution passed by Congress and signed by President Obama.
The envisioned nuclear bomb plant, called the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement Nuclear Facility, would have given the United States the capacity to produce 80 plutonium pits for nuclear weapons each year.
In a review conducted by the Government Accountability Office, the CMRR's estimated cost was found to run between $4 to $6 billion nearly six times more than the initial price tag.
Many local and national groups, including the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, worked to stop this facility from being built.
While there appears to be no funding currently in the pipeline for the CMRR, it could potentially resurface at any time.
United States to Allow New Zealand Ships to Dock The United States has lifted a ban that forbade New Zealand naval ships from docking at United States bases.
The ban was imposed in 1984 in retaliation for New Zealand's nuclear-free policy.
New Zealand restricts United States ships that carry nuclear weapons or are nuclear-powered from entering New Zealand waters and ports.
Whether New Zealand will reciprocate the gesture by easing its anti-nuclear law toward the United States appears unlikely, however. "" is in place and will remain in place,"" stated Jonathan Coleman, the Defense Secretary of New Zealand.
Page 4 of 8 Nuclear Disarmament Mongolia Recognized as a Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone On September 17, Mongolia was officially recognized as a single-state nuclear weapon-free zone.
A declaration pledging ""to respect the nuclear weapon-free status of Mongolia and not to contribute to any act that would violate it"" was signed by the UN ambassadors for the United States, the United Kingdom, China, France and Russia the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.
Mongolia has identified itself as a non-nuclear weapon territory for the past 20 years.
However, because it is physically landlocked between Russian and China, the country was prevented from joining a regional nuclear weapon-free zone.
The recent declaration was ""tantamount to recognition of Mongolia's neutrality in nuclear powers' possible power politics or designs,"" stated Jargalsaikhan Enkhsaikhan, Mongolia's ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The conference, which has support from the Obama administration and many countries around the world, is to take place in Helsinki, Finland, sometime in late 2012 or early 2013.
Shaul Horev, director of the Israeli Nuclear Energy Committee reporting directly to Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu, expressed his sentiments against the conference at the 56th general convention of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna.
He stated that Israel would not partake in a nuclear weaponfree Middle East due to the ""volatile and hostile situation"" in the region.
Oren, Amir, ""Israel Rejects U.S.-Backed Arab Plan for Conference on Nuclear-Free Mideast,"" Haaretz, September 20, 2012.
Nuclear Insanity Exxon to Drill for Oil in Nuclear Waste-Infested Waters Exxon Mobil and its Russian partner, Rosneft, are taking steps to begin drilling in the Kara Sea, a remote body of water north of Siberia in the Arctic Ocean.
The Arctic seabed is next to the location where the Soviet navy dumped its nuclear reactors along with 17,000 containers of radioactive waste over the span of 25 years.
Even more dangerously, a K-27 submarine with a nuclear reactor that was discarded by the Soviet navy in 1981 lies at the bottom of the sea.
Although there is currently no sign of increased radiation from the submarine, Norwegian and Russian scientists are worried that corrosion of the submarine will damage its nuclear reactor and lead to radioactive releases.
Exxon Mobil and Rosneft issued statements assuring that ecological protection norms will be followed, but Greenpeace members and other activists are preparing to campaign against the Arctic drilling.
Page 5 of 8 Gismatullin, Eduard, ""Arctic Oil Near Soviet Toxic Waste in Exxon-Rosneft Plan,"" Bloomberg Businessweek, September 25, 2012.
Nuclear Testing United States Announces Numerous Nuclear Tests The United States has announced the completion of nuclear weapons tests at the Nevada Test Site (now known as the Nevada National Security Site) and Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico.
Bush declared a moratorium on United States full-scale nuclear testing in 1992.
The test in Nevada took place in September at the Joint Actinide Shock Physics Experimental Research Facility.
According to NNSA, scientists use data from the tests to determine how plutonium would react under specific pressures, temperatures and strain-rates.
The tests at Sandia Lab used the ""Z Machine"" to mimic the fusion reactions of nuclear warheads, which allows scientists to analyze plutonium reactions under conditions similar to those of a detonating nuclear bomb.
Kazumi Matsui, President of Mayors for Peace, wrote a letter of protest to President Barack Obama.
He wrote, ""These repeated tests compel us to believe that the United States intends to cling to its nuclear stockpile indefinitely.
War and Peace Netanyahu Calls for Red Line on Iran at UN General Assembly Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu made a speech to the United Nations General Assembly in which he called for a ""clear red line"" to be drawn to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.
Israel, the only country in the Middle East that has nuclear weapons, believes that Iran is pursuing nuclear weapons capability.
All known intelligence reports say that Iran ceased pursuit of nuclear weapons in 2003.
The report explains that disarming Trident, the UK's submarine-based nuclear weapons system, is not an impossible task.
The report examines votes on select nuclear weapons issues by the nine countries that possess nuclear weapons (United States, Russia, United Kingdom, France, China, Israel, India, Pakistan and North Korea), as well as Iran and Japan.
This report makes it easy to compare these countries' positions on specific issues and also maps how each country's position toward the issues has changed over time.
The report provides information on the military exploitation of science, on the responsibility of science to serve society, and the demand for a peaceful orientation of universities.
The video details the catastrophic global consequences of even a ""limited"" regional nuclear war on the other side of the planet.
Page 7 of 8 Standing Together for Our Common Future The Nuclear Age Peace Foundation will honor Senator Tony de Brum of the Marshall Islands with its 2012 Distinguished Peace Leadership Award on October 21 in Santa Barbara, California.
Senator de Brum has worked tirelessly for peace and justice on behalf of his country.
He and his fellow Marshall Islanders seek a peaceful world, free of nuclear weapons.
They have directly experienced the impact of 67 powerful nuclear weapon tests – the equivalent explosive power of one-and-a-half Hiroshima bombs daily for 12 years.
They know first-hand about the tragic effects of a world that uses and maintains nuclear weapon systems and how we as citizens of the world can make an impact to end the nuclear-weapon threats that confront us all.
It furthers our mission by shining a light on peace leadership and raising awareness and support for important education and advocacy work.
NAPF Statement to the UN Human Rights Council On September 13, Christian N Ciobanu, NAPF's Geneva representative, delivered a statement at the 21st session of the United Nations Human Rights Council.
The statement called on the United States to respect the human rights of Marshall Islanders who continue to be adversely affected by United States atmospheric nuclear weapons tests conducted between 1946 and 1958 on their territory.
War Does Not Bring Peace NAPF Peace Leadership Program Director Paul K Chappell recently appeared as a guest on the nationallysyndicated David Pakman Show.
Paul discussed his new book Peaceful Revolution and explained the theories that underlie his work with NAPF's Peace Leadership Program.
Click here to see the full ten-minute clip of Paul's appearance on the David Pakman Show.
Paul will be traveling around the United States throughout the fall giving lectures and workshops on peace leadership.
Quotes ""If there was going to be a new park, it should serve as a solemn monument to Japanese American friendship that rose from the ashes and the worldwide work for nuclear disarmament that continues to this day, rather than a celebration of a technology that has brought such destruction to the world.
Failure to recognize this dimension, even in its first iteration, really is a significant injustice."" -Rep.
Dennis Kucinich , speaking about the failed bill to create a National Park to commemorate the Manhattan Project.
Page 8 of 8 ""I’m grateful to him for formulating his stance so clearly because he has once again proven the correctness of our approach to missile defense problems.
The most important thing for us is that even if he doesn’t win now, he or a person with similar views may come to power in four years.
