Continue Thirteen days movie worksheet pdf SUBJECTS — UNITED STATES/1945 – 1991; World/Russia and Cold War; SOCIAL-EMOTIONAL LEARNING — Leadership; Brothers; Peace/Peacekeepers; MORAL-ETHICAL EMPHASIS — Responsibility.
This film is on TWM's short list of the best films to complement United States History classes, High School Level.
In 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States discovered that the Russians are secretly installing nuclear missiles on the island of Cuba.
President John F Kennedy convenes a team of advisers to help decide how to respond.
Thirteen days shows President Kennedy's leadership to tackle the challenge as he resists demands for airstrikes and invasion that would have triggered a nuclear holocaust.
Kevin Costner , Bruce Greenwood , Steven Culp , Dylan Baker , Kevin Conway , Bill Smitrovich , Henry Strozier , Elya Baskin Director: Roger Donaldson.
Thirteen days catches the tension caused by the crisis and gives as an example of how foreign policy was made in the last half of the 20th century.
It allows students to understand the importance of diplomacy and leadership in senior office.
Students will get a glimpse of this period in United States history and the Cuban missile crisis.
They will exercise research and writing skills in the expression of these ideas.
Thirteen days can be a valuable supplement to the study of the Cold War, but only if serious deapressions are left and discussed.
The Useful Background section of this Tutorial provides the information needed to make these corrections.
You may want to read the useful background information in this guide if your children want more details about this period of risk in the history of the Cold War.
Thirteen days is the story of humanity's closest brush with nuclear armageddon.
The film undertays the tension that the crisis caused and provides an example of how foreign policy was made in the latter half of the 20th century.
Complemented by the information provided in this Tutorial, the film shows how wise leadership during the crisis saved the world from nuclear war, while errors and errors in judgment led to the crisis.
The film is an excellent platform for discussions about the Cuban missile crisis, the weapons during the Cold War, and current foreign policy problems.
With the corrections described in this Tutorial, the film can serve as a motivator and supplement for a unit about the Cold War.
As terrified as the world was in October 1962, not even policy makers had realized how close the situation really was.
Kennedy thought the likelihood of nuclear war was 1 in 3, but the administration didn't know many things.
For example, he believed that the missiles were not operational and that there were only between 2 and 3,000 Soviet people.
Consequently, the airstrike was planned for the 30th, before nuclear warheads could be installed.
In 1991-92, Soviet officials revealed that 42 had been in place and fully operational.
These could force United States cities all the way to the Canadian border.
In addition, 9 SRBMs were ready to be used against the Americans in the event of an invasion.
The Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons that local commanders were authorized to use to repel an attack.
This meant that a U.S. invasion had been carried out... there was a 99 percent chance that nuclear war would have started.
Although the crisis began and ended in October 1962, the story began much earlier.
Almost immediately after World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending cooperation that allowed the allies to defeat Nazi Germany.
Russian occupying forces survived their tour of duty in the Middle East.
In response, Britain and America thwarted the Soviet Republic's expansion from Azerbaijan to Iran and began containment policy by trying to restrict Soviet expansion.
As the Cold War took hold, Americans were alarmed by the spread of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and East Asia.
The Soviets were concerned about postwar unity between the United States and the powerful nations of Western Europe.
Both the communist bloc and capitalist democras paraded from crisis to crisis.
These go from the Soviet blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace, Chinese bombardment of taiwanese islands Quemoy and Matsu, and confrontation between the ally Egypt and western allies Israel, France and Britain over the Suez Canal.
More than a hundred million people would have died in the United States and NATO countries.
While there were defenses to the long-range bombers, there were no defenses at ICBMs or IRBMs.
In 1962, while the United States government knew that its nuclear forces were much stronger than those of the Soviet Union, it realized that losing its major cities with victims approaching 100,000,000 people was not acceptable.
Moreover, through treaty obligations and as a practical matter, no United States government could allow Europe to be destroyed.
However, the Soviets acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrence.
The effort to place missiles in Cuba was an effort by the Russians to improve their nuclear capability quickly and economically.
Missile conveyors and missile-ready tents where fuel and maintenance took place.
The US, under the Kennedy Administration, increased military spending and increased its leadership in nuclear weapons over the Russians, while at the same time refusing to deauthorize a first nuclear strike.
In addition, despite the Bay of Pigs debacle, the United States continued its efforts to destabilize Cuba and assassinate its dictator, Fidel Castro.
The Soviet leadership did not realize how much the United States feared Russia's nuclear deterrent.
In an attempt to redress the imbalance in nuclear missiles and ensure that the United States would not mount another Cuban invasion, Nikita Khrushchev, dictator of the Soviet Union, began a program to secretly place intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
These missiles would be capable of reaching nearly all continental United States dollars.
The CIA learned of suspicious activity from intelligence sources on the island and the United States sent U-2 spy planes to investigate.
When a U-2 returned with photographs of missile sites under construction, President Kennedy summoned his advisers before announcing the discovery to the world.
While some recommended diplomacy, others lobbied for military options, such as airstrikes or the invasion of Cuba.
President Kennedy adopted a middle-of-the-ground approach in which the United States Navy quarantined the island of Cuba, preventing any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island.
Meanwhile, the United States mounted a diplomatic offensive trying to use world opinion to the Soviets to eliminate the missiles.
The Soviet ships tested the blockade, but eventually chose not to challenge the quarantine.
The United States for its part allowed ships with food and fuel through quarantine. acting without moscow's approval, a The missile battery will shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot.
In secret negotiations, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in Cuba.
In a confidential side agreement, the United States promised the future withdrawal of 15 obsolete Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
President Kennedy had ordered these missiles removed months earlier, but because of the Turkish's objections and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles had remained in place.
After the Cuban missile crisis, superpowers moved to reduce the risk of a nuclear confrontation.
Difficulties in communications found during the crisis led to the installation of direct telephone communications between the leaders to avoid future misunderstandings.
Future United States presidents and Soviet leaders conducted Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in the 1960s and 1970s to limit the number of nuclear warheads willing to attack the other side.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1969 attempted to limit the spread of nuclear weapons to other countries.
Never again would the United States and Russia reach the same level of threat that characterized these thirteen days in October 1962.
The following additional backgrounds will be useful for understanding the concerns of the participants and their statements, as set out in the film.
At a conference in Munich held to consider Hitler's demands, leaders of western powers agreed to the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia to appease Hitler.
Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed Sudetenland, he would not seek any additional territory.
British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain returned home saying he brought peace back in our time.
The Munich conference convinced Hitler that France and Britain were weak, leading to the German invasion of Poland.
Realizing their mistake with Czechoslovakia, Britain and France declared war on Germany.
His father, Joseph P Kennedy, had been one of the few millionaires to support Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election.
On private wires at the State Department and in public speeches, Ambassador Kennedy supported the Munich compromise.
From munich time until long after the United States had declared war on Germany, Joseph P Kennedy advocated a commitment to Hitler and isolated foreign policy.
President Kennedy, as a young man, had written a best-selling book criticizing the appeasement.
Despite this fact, until the end of the missile crisis, John Kennedy carried the burden of his father's position in favor of appeasement.
On December 7, 1941, the Imperial Japanese Navy mounted an attack on the United States naval base in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
Japan had not declared war on United States President Roosevelt labeled December 7 as a date that will live in infamy.
First, the lesson that an adversary could mount a sneak attack had been absorbed by United States intelligence and was partially responsible for U-2 flights and aerial reconnaissance that discovered the missiles.
Second, throughout Excomm's deliberations, fear of losing moral ground by mounting a sneak attack on missile bases served as a constraint on politicians.
President Kennedy, for example, volunteered for combat, hiding back problems that would have easily earned him an exemption from military service.
When the PT ship he commanded was sunk and sunk by a Japanese destroyer, Kennedy took his men to a small island several miles away, saving a seriously injured sailor holding the leash to a lifesaver between his teeth while swimming off the coast.
Kennedy was awarded the Marine Corps Marine Medal for his leadership and courage.
Russia had suffered more from war than any other nation in terms of casualties and property destruction.
The men making the decisions during the Cuban missile crisis, in Moscow and the United States, knew firsthand the terrible effects of a major war.
Importantly, Fidel Castro had only experience in a relatively painless civil war.
As you will see, Castro's willingness to provoke a nuclear war was one of the destabilizing factors of the crisis.
After World War II, the Allies (USA, USA, Great Britain and divided the German capital, the city of Berlin, into four occupation zones.
Shortly after the war, western powers consolidated their zones into a new state called West Germany.
Berlin's western sector, although deep in East German territory, became part of West Germany.
The status and prosperity of West Berlin increasingly upset russians and East Germans.
The U.S.-led Western powers mounted an effective air elevator to bring supplies to the city.
Western democras made it clear that if the Soviets interfered with the airlift there would be war.
Finally, when the Russians became convinced that the West would not back down, they dropped the blockade.
West Berlin became a symbol of United States determination to resist Soviet expansion.
As such, it was a cornerstone of Western containment policy that sought to block the expansion of Russian influence and communist ideology.
Over the years, West Berlin became a brilliant rich oasis standing in contrast to the stubborn and relatively impoverished life of East Germany.
West Germany also became an economic power, dwarfing its eastern rival.
Many East Germans, seeking a better life in the West, fled to West Berlin on their way to West Germany.
Increasingly, well-educated and highly trained East Germans used this escape route.
The situation had become intolerable for the Russians and the East German government.
Khrushchev had committed his personal prestige and that of the Soviet Union to action against Western interests in Berlin.
As Khrushchev said colorfully, Berlin was a bone in the throat of the Soviet Union.
Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko declared to President Kennedy when they met during the crisis that, after the November elections in the United States, Russians would be required to take steps to end the Western presence in Berlin.
In August 1961, to stop the exodus through Berlin to West Germany, the Russians and East Germans sealed off in West Berlin and began construction of the Berlin Wall.
Its defenders were surrounded on all sides by East Germany and a higher number of Russian and East German troops.
Should the United States allow the Russians to take West Berlin, its Western European partners would feel betrayed and the NATO alliance severely weakened, if not destroyed.
In response to the need of Western Europeans to maintain the status quo in Berlin and due to the to defend the city using conventional forces, United States policy, e announced by President Kennedy, was that West Berlin would be defended, if necessary, with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union.
For the US, maintaining the NATO alliance was, militarily, more important than the elimination of Cuba's missiles.
However, the American public would not tolerate the presence of Russian missiles in the Western Hemisphere, nor would the United States have had any credibility with its allies or its enemies if it allowed the missiles to secretly be introduced to the island.
In April 1961 the CIA, with the approval of President Kennedy, mounted an invasion of Cuba using Cuban exiles as an initial landing force.
President Kennedy had relied on the advice of experienced men in government who told him the invasion would succeed.
The invasion was an unsigested disaster for the United States government and for President Kennedy.
Responsible officials, CIA chief and an assistant told President Kennedy that they should resign after a decent interval.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose that attempted to actively destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro.
Robert Kennedy, in the president's direction, personally oversaw these activities and was very persistent in pushing the CIA for more aggressive action against Cuba and against Castro personally.
This was a massive operation with 6000 acts of sabotage committed in Cuba.
After the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy analyzed his decision-making process.
I now knew before making important decisions I needed to explore the possible consequences of each alternative course of action and seek advice from a variety of sources, within the government and outside.
He used this process in the summer of 1961 when the Soviets made their first threats against West Berlin.
Excomm's deliberations shown in the film were the means by which President Kennedy gained advice during the Cuban missile crisis.
Excomm was an unusual body because it included representatives from outside the government, in this case former Secretary of State Dean Acheson.
Government officials at agencies did not usually participate in critical military decisions were included in the committee.
As shown in the film, Adlai Stevenson, the UN ambassador and former Democratic candidate twice for the presidency, advocated appeasement from the Russians.
President President he protected Stevenson from being expelled from excomm and removed as ambassador to the UN, as Bobby Kennedy advised.
In the end, Stevenson proved immensely valuable to the United States by showing dramatically that the Russians were lying to the world about the missiles.
His speech was the single most important victory in the propaganda war that was such an important part of the Cuban missile crisis.
In contrast to the way President Kennedy reached out to a wide range of advisers to help make decisions in the crisis, President Khrushchev had very few advisers.
He saw the members of the Presidium, which would have provided the most experienced and logical group of advisers, as political adversaries.
For more on Khrushchev and the fact that he conceived the policy and extended the crisis to try to gain more leverage against the US, see the discussion below.
President Kennedy and Khrushchev had spent a considerable amount of time together in Geneva.
As it turned out, when faced with the likelihood that its occupation in Cuba would lead to nuclear war, and given one out by the US, Khrushchev acted civilly and withdrew the missiles.
But when we said we're not going to and then go ahead and do it, and then we don't do anything, then I would think our risks increase.
He modifies his web reservation The military vision was not monolithic.
Well, actually, it was a pretty dangerous game, but quite useful of yours.
If we do nothing, they have a missile base there with all the pressure it brings to bear on the United States and damage to our prestige.
If we attack Cuba, the missiles, Cuba, somehow, then gives them a clear line to take Berlin, as they were able to do in Hungary Hungary Anglo war in Egypt.
We have been regarded as think we have this fixation on Cuba anyway it would be regarded as the trigger-happy Americans who lost Berlin.
And that we let Berlin go because we didn't have the guts to withstand a situation in Cuba.
So they would say that we jeopardized their interests and security and reunification and everything else, because of the preventive action we took in Cuba.
And third, if we do nothing, then they will have these missiles, and they will be able to say that every time we try to do anything about Cuba, they will fire those missiles.
So I think it's dangerous, but quite satisfying, from your point of view.
Even last night talked about Cuba for a while, but Berlin that's what Khrushchev has personally committed to.
If we go in and take them on a quick airstrike, we will neutralize the possibility of the United States being used for these missiles, and prevent a situation from emerging, at least within Cuba, where Cubans themselves have the means to exercise some degree of authority in this hemisphere.
On the other hand, we greatly increase the opportunity as I believe that there must be a retaliation from the Soviet Union, there always is of its just coming in and taking Berlin by force at some point.
Which leaves me only one alternative, which is to fire nuclear weapons which is a hell of an alternative and start a nuclear exchange with all this happening.
On the other hand, if we start the blockade we're talking about, they'll most likely start a blockade and say we've started it.
So, once again, they will say that there will be this feeling in Europe that the Blockade of Berlin has been initiated by our blockade.
When we balance that our problem is not only Cuba, it is also Berlin and when we recognize Berlin's importance to Europe, and we recognize the importance of our allies to us, that is what has made this thing a dilemma for three days.
He also knew that there would have been a very strong reaction, probably an all-out war, if nuclear weapons were used on United States troops.
There was an additional fact that Khrushchev knew it was very important and this was a fact he had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba.
The United States population was not willing to tolerate nuclear missiles hostile to Cuba.
It was therefore impossible for any United States government to allow the missiles to remain, and the United States would go to war, if necessary, to remove the missiles.
The failure to measure the reaction of ordinary United States citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev's key mistake in his planning for the crisis.
It was certainly an understandable mistake for a Russian leader to make.
The United States had missiles in countries relatively close to Russia, including Turkey.
Khrushchev forgot that the United States mainland had not been invaded since 1812.
In 1962, with the advent of nuclear ballistic missiles, this sense of isolation might have been irrational, but it was still very real.
Khrushchev never dreamed that the United States population would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba.
As a result, Khrushchev had only incomplete control over Russian military units in Cuba.
The main example of this was the landing of the United States U-2 spy plane over Cuba on October 27.
This occurred when a Russian commander violated orders and acted on his own initiative.
Khrushchev had trouble controlling Castro, who, significantly, was the only head of state involved in the crisis who had not seen service in the army the army Wwii.
Given the massive military buildup in Florida, and a story that included the attempted invasion of the Bay of Pigs and Operation Mongoose with his sabotage and assassination attempts, Castro had good reason for that belief.
He also knew the Red Army regiments in Cuba and its nuclear capabilities.
He may not have been entirely aware of the great advantage the United States had on ICBMs, but he knew that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow to their hated enemy in the North.
Castro thought that if an invasion were to trigger a nuclear war, the Soviets had the best chance of winning if they struck first with their nuclear weapons.
Castro knew Cuba would be cremated, but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the sake of his friends in the communist bloc.
When Castro proposed to Khrushchev that the Russians start a nuclear war before the invasion, Khrushchev was horrified.
Khrushchev had already decided to withdraw the missiles, he was waiting for the right time.
After learning of Castro's position, Khrushchev decided that Russia should dismantle the missiles immediately.
Decades later, at a conference on the Cuban missile crisis, Castro told Kennedy's Defense Secretary Robert McNamara that in 1962 he had advocated a first Soviet nuclear strike with the knowledge that it would lead to an American nuclear attack on Cuba.
Finally, Khrushchev backed down because President Kennedy was willing to provide a formal compromise that if the missiles were withdrawn, the United States would not invade Cuba and that would not help others do so.
He gave Khrushchev a way of claiming that he had achieved an important goal despite eliminating the missiles.
President Kennedy is credited with forcing the Russians to withdraw the missiles without provoking a nuclear war.
With the disclosure of secret documents once, our understanding of Kennedy's triumph has changed, but the crisis is still seen as a huge success for him and United States foreign policy.
In the initial aftermath of the crisis and for many years afterwards, it appeared the removal of the missiles had been achieved without the United States making any real concessions to the Russians.
The scope of Operation Mongoo was not known and had not been official United States policy to invade Cuba.
Therefore, the commitment not to invasion was nothing more than a reaffirmation of existing policy.
Over the years, as the crisis became public, it has become clear that the commitment not to invasion was concession.
The Kennedy brothers were actively working to change Cuba's government and assassinate Castro.
However, as more information has come out, Kennedy's role in restricting forces in the US who wanted to carry out airstrikes or invade Cuba has been revealed.
As shown in the film, while preparing for war if he were to come, President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war.
He ratified the pressure on the Soviet Union with steps that always left room for the Soviets to maneuver and time to rationally decide what to do.
Through his willingness to formally agree not to invade Cuba, President Kennedy gave Khrushchev a way out of the crisis.
Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly carry out a massive military buildup in Cuba, introducing 40,000 Red Army troops, and that the 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis, demonstrate the wisdom of President Kennedy's approach.
By restricting those who wanted to start airstrikes or an invasion, and initiating the United States response with a naval quarantine, President Kennedy avoided war.
A prime example of Kennedy's containment occurred on October 27, when an air-to-air Russian surface missile goes down a U-2 U-2 spy plane killing the pilot.
It could treat the incident as an intentional escalation ordered by the Kremlin or see it as unauthorized action by a Soviet commander.
One election brought the world much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive hopes of a peaceful resolution.
If he had been wrong, and ordered the United States Air Force to remove the Sam battery he had fired on U-2, we would have been several steps closer to the war.
Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited extremely poor leadership initiating the crisis.
It put his country and the whole world at great risk of nuclear holocaust.
However, by backing up and removing the missiles with only the promise without invasion, Khrushchev showed foresight and political courage.
Both sides contributed to the crisis, although the consensus among the historian is that the greatest responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets.
Khrushchev appears to have had several targets when he ordered IRCBMs to be installed in Cuba.
I wanted to increase Russia's nuclear capability without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build their own fleet of missiles Russia.
At the time of the crisis, Russia had fewer than 40 ICBMs, while the United States had approximately 170.
The United States had an even bigger advantage in strategic bombers and submarine-based missiles.
If IRBMs could be immediately installed in Cuba instead of waiting to build the ICBMs that could attack the United States from Russia, the Soviet Union would save billions of rubles.
President Kennedy did not believe the United States advantage in ICBMs meant the United States could safely engage in nuclear war with Russia.
Even with the great United States advantage, there was no defense against the 40 Soviet-possessed ICBMs.
Casualties in this exchange, tens of millions, were unacceptable to any United States leader.
President Kennedy also realized that the United States advantage was only temporary and that the Russians would soon increase their ICBM fleet.
That the Russians achieved nuclear parity a year or two earlier, placing missiles in Cuba, was not very important to him.
Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from United States invasion in the service of Russian neo-imperialism and communist solidarity.
Even before the crisis, with the history of the Bay of Pigs invasion and Operation Mongoose, russians and Cubans had reason to fear United States intentions.
After the crisis, Khrushchev claimed that protecting Cuban sovereignty was Khrushchev's only goal in placing missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev is said to have made several remarks to close aid indicating that improving Russia's nuclear capabilities and reducing United States advantage were important to him.
Castro's reasons for accepting the missiles were based on solidarity with the other communist countries rather than defending Cuba from a United States attack.
The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba would hamper many of Castro's other targets, such as exporting the revolution to other Latin American countries.
For example, Khrushchev may have sent the 40,000 Red Army troops with a mission to defend the island.
Everyone knew that an attack on large numbers of Red Army troops would have triggered a larger war.
After all, if they were confined to the island they would only be Defensive.
The only reason for the massive buildup of Soviet service officers on the island was to protect missiles, not Cuba.
Khrushchev wanted to change the status quo in West Berlin and damage NATO by using the missiles to force the United States to back off to Berlin, or trade West Berlin to take the missiles out of Cuba or to distract the United States from reacting to a Russian takeover of West Berlin.
Any of these situations, if they had come to pass, would have shown Europeans that they could not trust the United States to look after their interests and would have undermined the NATO alliance.
The idea for the installation of the missiles was that of Khrushchev and his own.
At that time he was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union and while the entire Presidium signed the plan to put missiles into Cuba, Khrushchev's word was definitive.
Secretly placing offensive nuclear weapons outside the Soviet Union, 90 miles from the United States mainland, was a clandestine military offensive that attempted to change the nuclear balance of terror.
The United States and the Kennedy Administration contributed to the Cuban missile crisis through a series of policies.
Cuba's attempted invasion of the Bay of Pigs followed by Operation Mongoose, which attempted to subvert Castro's government and assassinate Castro, certainly helped set the stage for the crisis.
However, due to the numerical superiority of the Red Army and the Chinese Army, the US would not deauthorize a first nuclear strike as a military option.
American policy makers felt, with substantial justification, that their nuclear shield was all that kept the peace in Europe.
The expense of maintaining an army large enough to counter the Red Army in Europe and the Chinese Army in Asia would have put a great deal of strain on Western economies.
On the other hand, the western outpost of Berlin would have fallen and perhaps the entire NATO alliance would have failed, had the Russians not been convinced that the United States would wage a nuclear war to protect Berlin.
However, the United States refusal to deauthorize a first nuclear strike made the Russians justifiably nervous.
On balance, responsibility for events that put the world's future at risk falls more sharply on the Soviet side than in the US; more to Khrushchev than to Kennedy.
We believe this played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down and was his saving grace.
He vividly recalls a confrontation in which nuclear war was truly possible, reminding us of a lasting truth about the nuclear age.
He invites spectators to enter the room as president and his advisers to struggle with a seemingly intractable problem that does not offer good options.
Most of the incidents described in the film occurred, including meetings in which Russian Foreign Minister Gromyko lied directly to President Kennedy when he assured him that the Russians were not installing missiles in Cuba, the evening meeting between Bobby Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in which he made the offer to withdraw obsolete missiles from Turkey. , confrontation with the UN, subsequent channel efforts to communicate with Khrushchev, and some of the specific exchanges between President Kennedy and his advisers.
The language of many important conversations has been taken to the right of transcripts or reports from participants.
That said, the film leaves the viewer with several important mispressions.
According to the film, the Kennedy Administration was required to risk nuclear war in order to recreate the pre-existing balance of nuclear power.
The installation of the missiles 90 miles from the United States mainland destroyed the sense of security enjoyed by the United States population for a hundred and fifty years.
The Kennedy Administration would not have been able to govern if it had allowed the missiles to remain in Cuba.
Believing that Russian guarantees that they had no plans to place missiles on Cuba, the president had gone on to history by stating that the United States would never accept missiles in Cuba.
Thus, the credibility of the Kennedy Administration, with its friends and enemies, had been tied to keeping Cuba free of Russian missiles.
The missile installation in Cuba was the opening gambit in the long planned move by the Russians against West Berlin.
An attack on Cuba would give the Russians an excuse to overthrow West Berlin.
The Europeans would take these events as proof that the United States valued getting the missiles out of Cuba more than preserving Berlin.
The strains of the NATO alliance would have been serious and perhaps fatal.
The secret nuclear missile placement in Cuba was an aggressive move by the Soviets.
Note that none of these reasons for forcing the removal of the missiles had anything to do with the actual damage they could inflict on the US, but were side effects of placing the missiles.
An adequate assessment of the actions of President Kennedy and his administration should refer to these goals.
While important, it is necessary to answer the question of whether it is worth risking nuclear war.
To achieve the political goals of the United States government, the Russians had to be forced to withdraw the missiles in terms that appeared to be a United States foreign policy victory.
At the same time, the crisis could not afford to escalate to World War III, a very different possibility if the Russians had refused to withdraw the missiles and the United States had invaded Cuba.
On thirteen incredibly tense days in October 1962, President Kennedy and his advisers achieved these goals.
After this time, Superpowers introduced new procedures to defuse crises and acted more cautiously.
Although they maintained their competence and the wars were fought in places like Vietnam, Angola and Afghanistan, after the Cuban missile crisis, neither Superpower made a sudden, surprise and radical move that endangered its opponent's population, or leadership.
The film does not show the role played by United States foreign policy to help create the atmosphere in which the crisis occurred.
Even after the Bay of Pigs debacle, the United States attempted to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro.
Given the historic United States tendency to invade Latin American countries and the ongoing Mongoose operation, Russians and Cubans justifiably feared for Cuba's territorial integrity.
In addition, the ongoing United States nuclear weapons buildup had resulted in a missile breach in favor of the United States The United States had completed the installation of 15 Jupiter missiles in Turkey in 1962.
This infuriated the and it was totally unnecessary because, as President Kennedy repeatedly said, the missiles were already obsolete and added little, in any case, to United States military power.
United States politicians clearly understood that Russian nuclear forces could inflict unacceptably high casualties.
The friction between the United States military and President Kennedy was exaggerated in the film.
There were certainly disagreements and mistrust between President Kennedy and General LeMay, Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
General LeMay thought nuclear war with the Soviets was inevitable and wanted it to occur before the United States loses its 18-to-1 superiority in nuclear delivery devices.
There was also friction between Secretary McNamara and the Chief of Staff of the Navy.
We are unaware of the evidence demonstrating a concerted effort by the military to maneuver the United States into a war.
Our reading and our own interview with a high-ranking State Department official who served during this time makes it clear that The Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Maxwell Taylor had the confidence of President Kennedy before, during and after the crisis.
O'Donnell's subplot contacting American pilots, asking them to bypass the chain of command and make false statements to their superiors, is simply fiction.
The events of the Cuban missile crisis are a clear example of the importance of civilian control over the military.
If they had left it to the military, there probably would have been a war.
The film recognizes the importance of the vote of the Organization of American States that supports quarantine.
It should also be noted that this vote had a great psychological and practical effect on the Russians and changed our position from that of an outlaw acting in violation of international law in a country that acts in accordance with twenty allies who legally protect their However, the film glosses over the importance of the rapid support of NATO allies the United States and even African countries that would have played an important role if the Russians had tried to send nuclear nuclear weapons Cuba by air to avoid naval blockade.
The only landing strips available to refuel were in two countries, Guinea and Senegal, which had agreed not to allow flights.
O'Donnell's role was exaggerated and the roles of other advisers were minimized, the contribution of which was very important to President Kennedy.
One is the scene in which O'Donnell's character asks Bobby Kennedy if he believes the second Russian letter, the most aggressive letter, was caused by the Kennedys' proposals to trade the obsolete United States missiles to Turkey for Russian missiles to Cuba.
However, it is true that the second, tougher charter was prompted by the Kennedys' proposals for trade.
After offering to withdraw the missiles in return only for United States assurances that it would not invade Cuba, Khrushchev tried to switch horses mid-current when informed by Kennedy's feelers that the United States could also trade missiles to Turkey.
There is no defense of what Khrushchev did by delaying resolving the crisis by a day or more just to gain some advantage.
At that time, an American under-2 pilot was killed, and it was only President Kennedy's restriction that prevented nuclear war.
We are fortunate that some other incident did not occur that would have caused a general war.
Another beautiful elegant touch is the conversation between McNamara and McCone at the end of the film in which they agree that the United States strategic position had been so reinforced by the outcome of the crisis that they could now run the table on Russians in places like Asia.
Given the United States experience in Vietnam, this conversation demonstrates the dialectic nature of historical struggles.
Just after his administration took office, President Kennedy had everyone on the Security Council read Barbara Tuchman's August Weapons.
According to McNamara in The Fog of War, Tuchman related a conversation between two men who had previously been Chancellor of Germany during different periods of the war.
One asked the other how the war came to be and the other said he wished he knew.
If anyone is about to write after that, they will understand that we have made every effort to find peace all efforts to give our opponents room to move.
Meet your opponent and see the situation the eyes of the opponent; Take into account your needs and give you space to move.
Khrushchev did not look at the missile crisis through the eyes of United States leaders or their people.
For example, the existence of nuclear missiles 90 miles off the United States coast was intolerable to the public in the United States because of its history of isolation and protection behind the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
This may have been irrational since ICBMs launched from Russia would take only a few more minutes to reach the US, but it was a given.
It was also a hypocritical view, given that the United States maintained nuclear missiles in Turkey and several other countries close to the Soviet Union.
The key factor in Khrushchev's decision to back down was that the United States population woke up and would force his government to go to war to eliminate the missiles.
Khrushchev didn't know much about United States history and his United States experts didn't tell him about it.
The person making the final decision, in it is the United States the President, should have the benefit of the best information possible and many recommendations and opinions from both inside and outside the government.
In fact, President Kennedy had learned this lesson from the Bay of Pigs debacle.
This has already been discussed above, but one more example will be useful.
During Excomm's deliberations, President Kennedy called Llewellyn Thompson who had just returned from serving as United States ambassador to Moscow.
Thompson provided President Kennedy with crucial advice on Khrushchev's reactions and how he thought.
At times, Ambassador Thompson directly contradicted President Kennedy's initial ideas by convincing him to change his mind.
But based on the experience of the Cuban missile crisis, we can derive some general principles.
As discussed above, try to see the situation through your opponent's eyes.
Policy makers, while trying to get the best information possible, need to understand that there will be many things he doesn't know.
All diplomatic and peaceful channels must be tried before there is a commitment to war.
A graduated approach that always allows your opponent a face-saving exit is optimal.
Be flexible and engage with small things, but don't appease them by giving away the important points.
After the missiles had been removed, President Kennedy described the crisis management process by stating that one must be firm, get the best possible and act carefully.
During the crisis, he said, there is always some son of a bitch which means there will be people who through stupidity or their own agenda will take measures that push the country towards war.
Although the Cuban missile crisis lasted 13 days in October 1962, the story began much earlier.
At the end of World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending cooperation that allowed the allies to defeat Nazi Germany.
Britain and America thwarted the Soviet Republic's expansion from Azerbaijan to Iran and began containment policy, seeking to restrict Soviet expansion.
The communist bloc and capitalist democras paraded from crisis to crisis.
These range from the Soviet blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace, Chinese bombardment of taiwanese islands Quemoy and Matsu, and confrontation between Soviet ally Egypt and Western allies Israel, France and Britain over the Suez Canal.
IRBMs on Russian soil could not reach the United States apart from Alaska, but could reach Western Europe.
More than a hundred million people may have died in the United States and NATO countries.
In the effort to stop the spread of communism, in April 1961 the CIA, with the approval of President Kennedy, mounted an invasion of Cuba that had been planned during the Eisenhower Administration.
Using Cuban exiles as an initial landing force, the target was the Bay of Pigs off the Cuban coast.
President Kennedy had relied on the men's council in government they told him that the invasion would succeed.
The officials responsible, the head of the CIA, Allen Dulles, and President Kennedy told them they should resign after a decent interval.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose that attempted to actively destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Cuban President Fidel Castro.
With the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion, President Kennedy analyzed his decision-making process.
President Kennedy protected Stevenson from being expelled from excomm and was dismissed as ambassador to the UN, as advised by Bobby Kennedy.
The Soviets, for their part, acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrence.
The Soviet leadership, however, did not realize how much they feared Russia's nuclear power.
In an attempt to redress the imbalance in nuclear missiles and ensure that the United States would not mount a Cuban invasion, Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union, began a program to secretly place intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
These would be able to reach almost all continental United States The CIA learned of suspicious activity from intelligence sources on the island, and the United States sent U-2 spy planes to investigate.
While some recommended diplomacy, others push for military options, such as airstrikes or an invasion of Cuba.
President Kennedy adopted a middle-of-theground approach in which the United States Navy established a quarantine that prevented any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island.
Meanwhile, the United States mounted a public relationship and diplomatic offensive trying to use world opinion to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles.
The United States for its part allowed ships with food and fuel through quarantine.
Acting without Moscow's approval, a Soviet surface-to-air missile battery will shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot and exacerbating tension between Cold War fighters.
Finally, in secret negotiations, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in Cuba.
President Kennedy pledged that the United States would not invade Cuba.
Future Soviet presidents and leaders agreed to strategic arms limitation treaties in the 1960s and 1970s that limited the number of nuclear warheads ready to attack the other side.
Never again would the United States and Russia come to the brink of a nuclear Armageddon.
Looking back on the crisis from a safe distance of decades, it is easy to see the contrast in decision-making styles in both President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.
President Kennedy reached out to a wide range of advisers for help in decision-making, while President Khrushchev had very few advisers. see the members of the Presidium, which would have provided the most experienced and logical group of advisers, as political adversaries.
In the midst of the crisis, United States policy makers rushed to prepare for an invasion of the island unaware that the missiles were already in place and that the island was guarded by 40,000 Red Army servicemen armed with tactical nuclear weapons the size of bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
He also knew there would have been all war, had nuclear weapons been used on United States troops.
Khrushchev mistakenly thought the young president was limestone and weak.
However, faced with the likelihood that its occupation in Cuba would lead to nuclear war, and gave an outlet for the US, Khrushchev withdrew the missiles.
What Khrushchev had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba in the first place was that the United States population was not willing to tolerate nuclear missiles hostile to Cuba.
Not measuring the reaction of ordinary United States citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev's key mistake in his planning for the crisis.
In 1962, with the advent of nuclear ballistic missiles, this sense of isolation was irrational, but it was still in the hands of many Americans.
Another important element in the decisions made by Khrushchev is the fact that communications in 1962 were not what they are today.
During the crisis, Castro was confident that the United States would invade Cuba.
Given the massive military buildup in Florida, the attempted invasion of the Bay of Pigs, and Operation Mongoose with its attempts at sabotage and assassination Castro had good reason for this belief.
You may not have been fully aware of the great advantage that The United States had on ICBMs, but knew that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow to their enemy to the North.
Castro knew cuba would be cremated, but he was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the sake of communists around the world.
When Castro proposed in a letter to Khrushchev that the Russians begin a nuclear war before the invasion, Khrushchev was horrified.
Khrushchev had already decided to eliminate the missiles; I was waiting for the right time.
One last reason Khrushchev was willing to back down can be attributed to President Kennedy's willingness to provide a formal compromise that, if the missiles were withdrawn, the United States would not invade Cuba and that would not help others do so.
Over time, as the crisis became public, it became clear that the non-invasion commitment was a real concession.
However, as more information has come out, Kennedy's role in restricting forces in the United States who wanted to carry out airstrikes or invade Cuba has been revealed.
As shown in the film, while on the one hand preparing for war if it were to come, President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war.
Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly carry out a massive military buildup in Cuba, introducing 40,000 Red Army troops, and that their 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis demonstrate the wisdom of President Kennedy's approach.
The main example of Kennedy's containment occurred on October 27, when a Russian Surface to Air missile shot down an American U-2 spy plane killing the pilot.
Could treat the incident as an orderly intentional escalation Kremlin or see it as an unauthorized action by a Soviet commander.
However, President Kennedy knew that an option much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive the hope of a peaceful resolution.
President Kennedy chose to believe that the attack on U-2 was not authorized.
Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited poor leadership initiating the crisis.
Both sides contributed to the crisis, although most Western historians believe the most serious responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets.
He wanted to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Soviet scientists and engineers to improve Russia's own missile fleet.
In addition, in the service of Russian neo-imperialism and communist solidarity, Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from United States invasion.
However, Khrushchev is said to have made several remarks to close aid indicating that Improving Russia's nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage in I.C. were important to him.
The United States and the Kennedy Administration contributed to the arrival of the Cuban missile crisis through a series of policies.
United States nuclear policy at the time also contributed to the crisis.
However, due to the numerical superiority of the Red Army and the Chinese Army, the United States would not deauthorize a first nuclear strike as a military option.
American policy makers felt that their nuclear shield was all that kept the peace in Europe.
On balance, the responsibility for events that put the future of the world at risk fall far beyond the Soviet side than more to Khrushchev than to Kennedy.
This imbalance of guilt probably played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down and that was his saving grace.
Certainly, the world and Khrushchev were fortunate that the United States had elected a president who had enough wisdom and personal strength to resist demands for an invasion or airstrike and that there was no other escalating incident that would have forced President Kennedy's hand.
After the missiles had been removed, President Kennedy described the crisis management process by stating that one must stand firm, get the best information possible, and act carefully.
During the crisis he warned that there will be people who, out of stupidity or on their own agenda, would take steps to push the country towards a nuclear Armageddon.
What could have been the result prevailed those who wanted military action against Russia.
In democratic countries, many believe that the repository of wisdom is ultimately in the people.
However, in 1962 the American people thought that the installation of intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba would have led to an intolerable change in the balance of power.
The Soviets already had 40 nuclear-armed ICBMs stationed on Russian soil.
These missiles could have destroyed all major United States population centers killing about 100,000,000 people; this was an unacceptable outcome for any United States leader.
So while the United States had more ICBMs than Russia, the two superpowers were in a strit.
The addition of IRBMs to Cuba did not really change this fact and the American people were wrong to consider the installation of missiles in Cuba as a substantial change in the balance of power.
However, it probably would have been impossible for President Kennedy to convince them of that.
President Kennedy's solution was to try to force the Russians to dismantle the missiles through diplomacy and a naval quarantine.
There were other including the need to look strong on the international stage, the need to punish Russia for a reckless bet, etc.
A key episode in the film Thirteen Thirteen it is the confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop.
The navy admiral insists that his ship correctly followed the traditional rules of engagement.
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara argued that the rules had changed, given the importance of the crisis and the chances of misconception and error.
It was a civil matter because the response of the United States warship could have led to war.
Under the United States Constitution, that is a decision to be made by civilian leaders because the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces is the President of the United States 4.
Some may suggest that President Kennedy claimed aggressive action against a small, weak enemy but supported peace when the stakes were high and the enemy was powerful.
In the film, O'Donnell's character asks Bobby Kennedy to consider whether the second hostile letter was the result of the hearers he and his brother had sent to Khrushchev, who offered to trade with Turkey's obsolete NATO missiles for Russian missiles to Cuba.
Khrushchev's second letter was a direct result of President Kennedy's suggestions that he might be willing to add the missiles to Turkey to the agreement.
Khrushchev was trying to take advantage of the situation and change his first offer.
In the film at the end, McNamara's character and McCone's character have a conversation in which they point out running the table about Russians in various places, including Asia.
The United States lost the Vietnam War after many casualties and big spending.
Removing the missiles from Turkey was not like Munich, as President Kennedy knew that missiles in Turkey were outdated and scheduled to be replaced by submarine missiles.
Germany received large amounts of territory, and gained possession of the Czech fortifications on the only natural barrier between Germany and the rest of Czechoslovakia.
The situation in 1962 was like Munich, as the Soviets wanted the missiles out of Turkey, and if they their goal through intimidating and aggressive actions, political victory could have been to make further demands.
President Kennedy worried that a surprise preventive attack on Cuba would be the moral equivalent of Japan's attack on the United States on Pearl Harbor.
In 1941 Japan made an unprovoked attack sneaking into the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor.
Japan felt United States economic sanctions were hampering its expansion war in Asia.
However, there were other reasons to prevent a preventive strike in Cuba, specifically, it had not been proven that it was impossible to force the Russians to withdraw their nuclear missiles using less force than a preventive strike or invasion; an invasion with a preventive strike was extremely risky because the United States could not be sure of having destroyed all nuclear weapons, and it would only take a nuclear strike on the United States to start a nuclear war with the Soviet Union; and it was possible that the invasion was unsuccessful or that it would be much harder than we expected.
In fact, unknown to President Kennedy or the United States government, there were 40,000 Red Army troops in Cuba equipped with battlefield nuclear weapons.
President Kennedy convened a large group of military leaders and foreign affairs experts in a team known as Excomm.
The advantages of involving a large group include: the president is exposed to a wide range of opinions and ideas; a group of people working on a problem can often come up with alternatives and ideas that a single person, no way smart, would not have considered; a large group, if properly managed, would help establish a political consensus and a unified front the Russians.
United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson recommended the option of making substantial concessions to the Russians, in addition to agreeing not to invade Cuba.
If it was simply a choice between peace with some concessions and war, the answer is easy.
Munich taught us that a concession is usually followed by a demand for another, and again and again until the war results from miscalculation or when the aggressor simply goes too far.
Wisdom is knowing the difference between a concession and a legitimate commitment.
History has judged a commitment not to invade Cuba for having been a legitimate compromise, while additional concessions may have been appeasements.
There was no American policy to invade Cuba and while Kennedy wanted to depose or assassinate Castro, he could and said the United States did not give up anything by agreeing not to invade Cuba.
Paradoxically, the threat of nuclear war by both countries preserved peace during the Cold War.
Bobby Kennedy was referring to the situation in which all of the president's top advisers told him that the Bay of Pigs invasion would succeed.
During the Cuban missile crisis, the military predicted success in Cuba, unaware that the United States armed forces would face 40,000 Red Army troops equipped with tactical nuclear weapons.
A large-scale United States invasion would have been very different from the Bay of Pigs fist effort.
The Secretary of Defense of the United States, McNamara observes that America could use a blockade because it had been assigned earlier as a Game.
In this book, a historian argued that World War II was activated, and 13 million people died because the parties adhered to standard operating procedures such as the Schlieffen Plan, which could not be stopped.
The advantage of using previously planned scenarios is that they have developed at a leisure time when the tensions of the current crisis did not deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously.
The United States never signed a peace treaty that took the option of first nuclear strike off the table.
There is no morally defensive reason to use a massive number of nuclear missiles that will kill hundreds of millions.
Nor is there a morally defensive reason to answer whether your country has suffered this attack.
In any case, the vast majority of people killed have been totally innocent.
The only justification for preparing for a first or a retaliatory nuclear strike is to convince the other side that if it hits you, it will be destroyed in turn.
The Soviets insisted that the missiles they were installing in Cuba were defensive weapons, intended only to protect the island of Cuba.
He did nothing to stop the construction of missile sites or the weaponry of existing missiles with nuclear warheads.
This is one of a put the United States in a position to quickly drown oil and other essential imports to Cuba in case of war.
The United States military's quarantine and preparations to invade Cuba, along with public and private assurances that if the missiles were not withdrawn the United States would eliminate them, convinced Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles.
Excomm critics of President Kennedy's plans noted that without a tough policy, the United States would look weak.
Pacifists argue that building a large army and using threats results in wars either because countries decide that war is in their best interest or through miscalculation.
Self-styled realists, who are in the vast majority, believe that looking weak invites others to take advantage of you and, as Munich proved, appeasement results in further aggression.
President Kennedy said an airstrike probably wouldn't destroy all missiles.
Not necessarily because Russia could have struck again, either by taking West Berlin or unilateral action in some other disputed area or by a nuclear attack on United States 25.
As the film accurately shows, the only person killed in the confrontation was Major Rudolph Anderson, the under-2 driver shot down over Cuba.
In an interview with the History Channel, the Soviet leader of the missile battery that will shot down the U-2 stated that he acted without authority from Moscow, deciding to act on his own and let politicians resolve it later.
The joint chiefs wanted retaliation against the surface-to-air battery that will bring down the U-2 spy plane.
A memorable scene from the film involves the demonstration by the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, that the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba and that they were about it.
In 2003 Colin Powell, United States Secretary of State, argued the case for the war against Iraq in the United States Many have noticed the similarities and differences between these two events.
Stevenson presented irrefutable evidence and public opinion of the galvanized world.
He did not unite the usual United States allies in favor of the Iraq War.
It now turns out that much of the information Powell presented was exaggerated, misleading or incorrect.
It turns out that Iraq had no weapons of mass destruction or programs to make them; that there was no operational link between Al Qaeda and Iraq, etc.
Stevenson's speech was decisive in preventing a war and improved United States prestige.
During the Cuban missile crisis, United States intelligence was decisive in making the case that the missiles actually existed.
The next time the United States or Western nations ask the world or the UN to act on the basis of intelligence information, there will be a very strong question as to whether this intelligence is accurate.
Further evidence will be required that will increase the risk of compromising intelligence sources.
This means that in all likelihood for many years, probably for decades, the United States and its allies in Western democraies will have to work harder and give up more information to obtain consent and cooperation in international crises.
This means that on some occasions, we will not have the support we need.
A key point in the film Thirteen Days is the naval confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop.
The not only do they have a valuable perspective, but they have ultimate responsibility.
Therefore, civilian leaders must have absolute control over the military.
The United States Constitution requires this by making the President the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces.
The consensus of the world community, expressed in various treaties, is that nuclear, biological and chemical weapons are special cases, and that their development must be controlled.
However, countries that control arms do not want to relinquish control.
For example, the role of adviser Kevin O'Donnell has been possibly exaggerated and the civil/military conflict has been exaggerated.
The film's approach is too limited to give a balanced view of the crisis.
The subplot of going around the military chain of command and getting pilots to make false reports to their superiors about whether they received anti-aircraft fire is fictitious.
Films are entertainment, but they shouldn't give a false impression of historical events.
As long as the essence of the situation is transmitted, films dealing with historical issues are beneficial.
The correct information should be made available to the public and comparisons with the historical record should be available.
Thirteen days bends the story and requires correction as set out in this Tutorial.
Give your opinion on President Kennedy's leadership the Cuban missile crisis and justify this view.
The general consensus is that President Kennedy showed excellent leadership skills in this crisis that this leadership was key to avoiding nuclear war.
He gave President Kennedy someone he could trust completely and without any reservations.
Of course, there were many other men involved who gave full loyalty to the president.
John F Kennedy was a cold warrior and used force when he felt it was in the U.S. interest.
His policies before the Cuban missile crisis can be criticized as too aggressive and dangerous.
However, President Kennedy understood the horrors of war, especially nuclear war.
He is the only man in history who has guided the world back from the brink of nuclear war.
A good answer will be given to the problems established in the authors' note prior to this question.
Discussion issues relating to ethical issues will facilitate the use of this film to teach ethical principles and critical visualization.
We could argue that President Kennedy acted responsibly during the crisis by making, at every step, the election that minimized the chances of war while preparing for war if it were to come.
It can be argued that Khrushchev acted irresistibly except in his decision to end the crisis by leaning on himself.
On the other hand, the United States and President Kennedy may be flawed in setting the stage trying to destabilize the Castro regime and assassinate Castro.
Research sources and writing an exhibition essay on one of the following topics any of which can be expanded to include a power point presentation at class as a whole.
The personal and political biography of Nikita Khrushchev; Fidel Castro's personal and political biography; An in-depth look at Adlai Stevenson's role in the crisis; The Kennedy brothers' collaboration in resolving the Crisis; Differences in the roles and power of the top leadership positions of the Soviet Union and the US; The history of attempts to rein in the expansion of nuclear power; The state of Cuban and American relations today; Excomm; The U-2 incident; The end of the Cold War.
She writes a review of the film in which she talks about the tension and severity of the situation, as it can be evaluated by viewers who have experienced a considerable number of crises, such as September 11, etc.
Write a proposal for a checklist of steps and decisions that the United States should make before engaging in war.
Consider factors that were important to those facing the Cuban missile crisis, as well as important factors for a modern, more interconnected world.
Teachers are encouraged to review specific standards to ensure that all standards are met over the course of the term.
To John A Tures, assistant professor of Political Science, at La Grange College, La Grange, Georgia, for help with the first drafts of this Tutorial and to Alexander Frieden for correction and commentary.
