Just as the origins of the Big Bang are contested, so too is there is historical debate about the causes of the Cuban Crisis.
Such a question forms part of the Higher History Cold War course and is also examined at National 5 level.
This article examines potential teaching activities which allow pupils to investigate the cause of the crisis, as well as outlining different historical opinions on this issue.
Teaching approaches There are different activities in which pupils can engage to give them a better understanding of the events, including possible causes.
Pupils can be given a list of key events from before and during the crisis, and then research each of these.
This information can be used to design a timeline, including a description of events and also featuring discussion of why this might have caused the crisis.
Relevant events from before the crisis might include the 1959 Cuban Revolution and the building of the Berlin Wall.
The historian quotes included in this article can also be used to provoke discussion and understanding amongst pupils.
For instance, one approach would be to give a quotation from each of the possible causes listed in the article.
Pupils could then undertake a research task to identify evidence which supports and/or opposes this point of view.
A similar task could be used develop pupil skills in historiographical research.
Pupils could again be provided with a quote and then asked to read other historians’ work to identify supporting or counter arguments.
Both these tasks will enhance pupils’ understanding of events, and can also be used as part of assignment research.
After the tasks above, pupils could participate in a ‘Triangle’ discussion of events, developing their evaluation skills.
This would involve pupils considering all possible causes, along with historian views and other research.
They should complete the triangle by ranking the causes in order of importance, making a decision about which factors were most and least important, and why this is the case.
Having an ideological opponent so close to home caused outrage in the USA, leading to American attempts to kill Castro.
In October 1962, an American U-2 spy plane took photographs of weapons sites in Cuba.
Analysis of the images showed that the unthinkable – for the United States – had happened; the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The USA demanded that the Soviets remove the weapons and imposed a naval ‘quarantine’ (essentially a blockade) of Cuba.
The USSR refused to bow to this pressure, although secret negotiations were taking place between both sides.
At points each country came close to giving the order for a nuclear ‘first strike’, something which had hitherto seemed impossible.
Later accounts suggest such an instruction was only minutes away from happening.
This followed provocations such as the shooting down of a United States spy plane, and the American navy dropping depth charges on Soviet submarines.
As the world watched with horror, events came to a swift – and peaceful conclusion.
Following behind-the-scenes discussions, the Soviets agreed to remove the Cuban weapons.
The USA committed to do likewise with their nuclear missile sites in Turkey and Italy, although this deal was not made public at the time.
Soviet actions as a response to strategic missile inferiority Given that the crisis almost became a nuclear disaster, it is pertinent to consider as a cause the impact of the arms race.
This was a key feature of the Cold War; indeed, just one year before Cuba events the Soviets detonated the world’s largest nuclear weapon, the Tsar Bomba.
In his book, The Bomb Gerard de Groot argues in that eradicating this military gap was a primary influence on Soviet actions.
He sees the Soviet strategy of placing weapons as a ‘quick-fix solution to a severe strategic imbalance’ which would be relatively inexpensive, in a financial sense at least, which was important given domestic spending pressures.
He states that the Soviet military were alarmed by a growth in United States weapons spending, and worried that this huge military advantage would be used to take control of areas of Soviet influence.
Since the USSR had limited ability to launch ICBMs from its own soil, the placing of cheaper medium range weapons in Cuba made it possible for the USSR to present an immediate credible threat.
The Soviets believed that even 19 if the United States had more weapons, the fact Russia could devastate large areas of the United States would remove any American advantage.
It would take almost a decade to establish parity in ICBMs; but parity could be achieved overnight through the back door, by installing medium-range missiles in Cuba.
David Hoffman goes further in his 2011 book, The Dead Hand, when he writes, The Soviet Union, looking through an entirely different prism from the United States, saw nuclear weapons as a blunt instrument for deterrence.
Perhaps most tellingly of all, achieving a form of parity in terms of a nuclear threat is what Nikita Khrushchev himself claims influenced him.
The Americans had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us with nuclear weapons and now they would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you.
Soviet actions as an attempt to spread communism The Cuban revolution sparked fear across the USA that this would lead to similar events across the Americas, leaving the United States encircled by its enemies.
Not only did Kennedy and his advisors conceptualise Cuba in terms of a monolithic view of communism, they also placed the country in the context of the domino theory.
So desperate were they to see the end of Castro that they were prepared to enlist the help of the Mafia , even as publicly Bobby was trying to shut down the Cosa Nostra’s activities.
America wanted to rid itself of a neighbouring Red Menace, and over the years contrived many elaborate attempts to remove the Cuban leader.
Most famous was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, an American-backed coup which failed and brought humiliation onto the new president.
Michael Burleigh highlights the central role this played in the brewing of the crisis.
As a result of this they would pursue Castro with a vengeance, up to and including repeated conspiracies to murder him, and when he and his Soviet patrons went to the brink of war they would match them move for move during the most deadly moment of the entire Cold War.
American attempts to isolate Cuba threatened economic disaster for the island, so the USSR’s commitment to instead buy Cuban sugar was desperately needed by Castro’s government.
With Cuba’s communist revolution under threat from America, the Soviets then acted to support their new partners.
John Lewis Gaddis – using materials from Soviet archives released years after the crisis – claims that defending Castro’s government was in fact the main priority for Khrushchev’s government.
This was in the belief that Cuba’s revolution could be used to inspire similar revolts across South America.
The USSR was hugely excited by Cuba’s revolution, which they saw as a spontaneous communist uprising brought about without outside interference, an action they hoped to see repeated elsewhere.
However, they worried that the USA would eventually succeed in removing Castro from power, ending these dreams.
Khrushchev intended his missile deployment chiefly as an effort, improbable though it may seem, to spread revolution throughout South America (Gaddis, 2005) According to Gaddis’ book, The Cold War, Khrushchev’s own private papers say: We had to think up some way of confronting America with more than words.
We had to establish that a tangible and effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean.
Khrushchev allowed his ideological romanticism to overrun whatever capacity he had for strategic analysis.
He was so emotionally committed to the Castro revolution that he risked his own revolution, his country and possibly the world on his behalf.
Robert Dallek, a United States historian who specialises in presidential chronicles, sees additional motivations connected to Castro’s revolution.
For Dallek, the Soviet Union had concerns about China’s growing influence, and worried for Russia’s position as the world’s primary communist state.
Khrushchev felt that Castro’s support of subversion would eventually persuade Kennedy to act against him.
In addition, concern that Castro was moving closer to communist China gave Khrushchev another reason to strengthen Soviet-Cuban 21 links.
To do this, he decided to turn Cuba into a missile basis from which he could more directly threaten the United States.
Khrushchev decided that the USSR should ride the doctrinally unpredicted wave or else be left behind in what could well be the Marxist-Leninist dream of world revolution.
To do so involved co-opting the Cubans, who had won enormous prestige by defeating the Americans, in order to halt their drift towards the perfidious Chinese and to curb the Castro-Guevara combine’s pretensions to becoming an autonomous ideological force in their own right.
Soviet Actions as a response to United States Foreign Policy In order to analyse the extent to which United States foreign policy influenced events in Cuba, it is important to understand actions America had taken which might drive the Soviets to risk an annihilatory war.
Not only did they have soldiers based in West Berlin (something the Soviets particularly hated), they also had their own nuclear Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey.
Khrushchev could not understand why the United States assumed the right to place missiles in Turkey and Western Europe but would not allow the Soviets to place missiles in Cuba This is a point echoed by other historians who identify Soviet anger at US hypocrisy as an inducement to Cuban events.
Khrushchev told a visiting member of Kennedy’s cabinet that the Soviet Union had armed Cuba and would continue to arm Cuba.
And of course the fact that America was trying to remove Castro, a Soviet ally, encouraged action from Moscow.
The Soviets could hardly hope to see a spread of world communism if they were not seen to defend countries following that path.
Kennedy, he added, was far too sensible to start a nuclear war, so the point was solely to deter any American invasion.
Russian strategy may have been to manipulate this American desire to avoid a spread of communism on their continent.
Whilst the Soviets wished to see a global revolution, a more immediate priority was reducing or even removing the United States’ influence in Europe, especially in Germany.
Once the Cuban missile sites were operational, Khrushchev planned to announce their existence during a speech at the United Nations.
And then he would offer to remove them – if NATO agreed to leave West Berlin.
Soviet actions as misguided opportunism The personal dynamics between Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy are worth examining too.
At the time of the crisis, Khrushchev was age 68 and had led his country for almost a decade; by contrast, Kennedy was age 45 and had been in office fewer than three years.
Khrushchev and Kennedy talked on different occasions, with the first meeting taking place at the 1961 Vienna summit.
Khrushchev is said to have liked Kennedy, although also believed him to be inexperienced.
Such episodes may have led Khrushchev to see Kennedy as someone to be exploited.
This could help the Soviet Union in different ways; not only might it reduce America’s military advantage, it could also bring Khrushchev added prestige domestically.
He knew that if he permitted the deployment to stand, the American people, Congress and the United States’ NATO allies would interpret it as a complete unwillingness on his part to defend American interests.
Soviet actions as a distraction from domestic problems The possibility that events in Cuba were planned by Khrushchev as a distraction from his own domestic problems is a theory some historians have also considered.
Famously his 1956 so-called ‘Secret Speech’, where he denounced Stalin, caused controversy; it angered many Stalin supporters and others believed that it showed Khrushchev’s limited commitment to communism.
These had partly risen owing to higher military spending taking precedence over social policies.
Khrushchev’s Cuban plan also rested on a hope of regaining political influence lost because of domestic and foreign setbacks.
Most important he had failed to close the missile gap between Russia and the United States.
Conclusion In reality, none of the multiplicity of events which contributed to the Cuban Crisis can be seen in isolation; whilst each has an individual influence, they also contribute to and affect one other, in explaining why the world came so near to disaster.
Khrushchev did want to defend Castro’s government, however this also offered opportunities to overcome the military disadvantages the Soviets had compared to America.
Furthermore, the prospect of making real Marx’s dream of spreading global communism was appealing, especially if it also helped Khrushchev fight off domestic discord.
Equally the Soviets were genuinely angered by the American contradiction of having their missiles in Europe, whilst stopping the Soviets doing likewise in Cuba.
Nevertheless, this had been the case for many years, so Khrushchev’s actions suggests he saw an opportunity to challenge what he viewed as a new and inexperienced United States president.
All of these events converged to create the conditions in which the roots of potential tragedy and horror could grow.
Fortunately for the world at large, the story serves as a cautionary tale of how to avoid disaster, rather than how to deal with its aftermath.
