The U-2 Affair THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT David Wise & Thomas B Ross JONATHAN CAPE THIRTY BEDFORD SQUARE LONDON First published in Great Britain 1965 © 1964 by David Wise and Thomas B Ross Quotations from the following are reprinted by permission: Six Crises, Richard M Nixon. © 1962 by Richard M Nixon.
The White House Years, Mandate for Change 19531956, Dwight D Eisenhower. © 1963 by Dwight D Eisenhower.
My War with Communism, Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes with Mario Rosenthal. © 1963 by Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Excerpts from copyrighted interview with Robert F Kennedy, January 28, 1963.
Printed photolitho in Great Britain by Ebenezer Baylis and Son, Limited The Trinity Press, Worcester, and London on paper made by John Dickinson and Co.
The first is the government that citizens read about in their newspapers and children study about in their civics books.
The second is the interlocking, hidden machinery that carries out the policies of the United States in the Cold War.
This second, invisible government gathers intelligence, conducts espionage, and plans and executes secret operations all over the The Invisible Government is not a formal body.
It is a loose, amorphous grouping of individuals and agencies drawn from many parts of the visible government.
It is not limited to the Central Intelligence Agency, although the CIA is at its heart.
The Invisible Government includes, also, many other units and agencies, as well as individuals, that appear outwardly to be a normal part of the conventional government.
It even encompasses business firms and institutions that are seemingly private.
To an extent that is only beginning to be perceived, this shadow government is shaping the lives of 190,000,000 Americans.
Major decisions involving peace or war are taking place out of public view.
An informed citizen might come to suspect that the foreign policy of the United States often works publicly in one direction and secretly through the Invisible Government in just the opposite direction.
It was a much graver challenge than any which had previously confronted the Republic.
It employed an espionage network that was dedicated to the subversion of the power and ideals of the United States.
To meet that challenge the United States began constructing a vast intelligence and espionage system of its own.
This has mushroomed to extraordinary proportions out of public view and quite apart from the traditional political process.
By 1964 the intelligence network had grown into a massive, hidden apparatus, secretly employing about 200,000 persons and spending several billion dollars a year.
Because of its massive size and pervasive secrecy, the Invisible Government became the inevitable target of suspicion and criticism.
It has been accused by some knowledgeable congressmen and other influential citizens, including a former President, Harry S Truman, of conducting a foreign policy of its own, and of meddling The Invisible Government ((5 deeply in the affairs of other countries without presidential authority.
The American people have not been in a position to assess these charges.
Congress provides money for the Invisible Government without knowing how much it has appropriated or how it will be spent.
A handful of congressmen are supposed to be kept informed by the Invisible Government, but they know relatively little about how it works.
Overseas, in foreign capitals, American ambassadors are supposed to act as the supreme civilian representatives of the President of the United States.
They are told they have control over the agents of the Invisible Government.
But the CIA maintains more than a score of offices in major cities throughout the United States; it is deeply involved in many domestic activities, from broadcasting stations and a steamship company to the university campus.
The Invisible Government is also generally thought to be under the direct control of the National Security Council.
But, in fact, many of its major decisions are never discussed in the Council.
These decisions are handled by a small directorate, the name of which is only whispered.
The name of this group, even its existence, is unknown outside the innermost circle of the Invisible Government.
The Vice-President is by law a member of the National Security Council, but he does not participate in the discussions of the Special Group.
As Vice-President, Lyndon B Johnson was privy to more government secrets than any of his predecessors.
But he was not truly involved with the Invisible Government until he was sworn in as the thirty-sixth President of the United States.
On November 23, 1963, during the first hour of his first full day in office, Johnson was taken by McGeorge Bundy—who had been President Kennedy’s personal link with the Special Group—to the THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((6 Situation Room, a restricted command post deep in the White House basement.
There, surrounded by top-secret maps, electronic equipment and communications outlets, the new President was briefed by the head of the Invisible Government, John Alex McCone, Director of Central Intelligence and a member of the Special Group.
Although Johnson knew the men who ran the Invisible Government and was aware of much of its workings, it was not until that morning that he began to see the full scope of its organization and secrets.
This book is an attempt, within the bounds of national security, to reveal the nature, size and power of the Invisible Government.
It is not intended to be an exposé, although much of the material has never been printed anywhere else before.
It is an attempt to describe a hidden American institution which the American people, who finance it, have a right to know about.
And there can be no meaningful consent where those who are governed do not know to what they are consenting.
In the harsh conditions of the mid-twentieth century, the nation’s leaders have increasingly come to feel that certain decisions must be made by them alone without popular consent, and in secret, if the nation is to survive.
The area of this secret decisionmaking has grown rapidly and the size of the Invisible Government has increased proportionately.
If the American people are to try to answer these questions they must first achieve a greater level of understanding about the secret government itself.
It discloses how the Invisible Government has operated in Washington to expand and consolidate its power, and how it has operated overseas in attempts to bolster or undermine foreign governments.
For beyond the mere gathering of intelligence, the secret government has engaged in “special operations,” ranging from political warfare to para-military activities and full-scale invasion.
Under certain conditions, and on a limited, controlled basis, such special operations may sometimes prove necessary.
But they cannot become so unwieldy that they are irreconcilable with the kind of society that has launched them.
Because it has now passed into history and because it is a deeply revealing example of how the Invisible Government works, we shall begin with the story of the Bay of Pigs.
Mario Zuniga edged his B-26 bomber onto the runway at the edge of the Caribbean Sea.
Only the sound of the twin engines broke the stillness of the darkened airfield at Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua.
The tall, thirtyfive-year-old Cuban exile pilot sat alone in the cockpit of the big bomber.
In his pocket he carried a pack of Cuban cigarettes, borrowed from a fellow pilot at the last moment to lend a final authentic touch.
At a signal, Zuniga took off, his bomber roaring down the 6,000-foot runway.
His mission, upon which hinged the success or failure of the most ambitious operation in the history of the Central Intelligence Agency, was under way.
Their target was Cuba, and their mission—to smash Castro’s air force before it could get off the ground.
These planes, too, bore a replica of the FAR insignia of Castro’s air force.
Flying in three formations, under the code names of “Linda,” “Puma” and “Gorilla,” the eight B-26s were to strike at dawn in a surprise raid, It was to be the first of two strikes at Castro’s air bases, to pave the way for the secret invasion of Cuba scheduled to take place forty-eight hours later at the Bahia de Cochinos, the Bay of Pigs.
The operation had the approval of the CIA, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President of the United States, Zuniga was to land in Miami shortly after the bombing raid.
He was to announce to the world that the attack had been carried out from bases inside Cuba by himself and other pilots who had defected from Castro’s air force.
In reality, of course, all nine planes had left from Happy Valley, the CIA code name for the air base at Puerto Cabezas.
The Nicaraguan Government had secretly agreed to let the United States use the air base and port as a staging area for the invasion.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((10 As he flew northward through the night to Miami, Zuniga had time to go over the prepared story once more in his mind.
He had been especially selected by the CIA’s American instructors from among the Cuban exile pilots.
A CIA agent known simply as “George” had asked for volunteers for a special mission.
The CIA fired questions at them to test their reactions under stress, Mario was then selected for his intelligence and quick thinking.
There followed endless rehearsals of the cover story that Zuniga came to know almost in his sleep.
He was instructed not to reveal the truth about his mission, even years afterward.
As his plane carried him toward Florida, Zuniga was flying also toward his wife Georgina, his two young sons, Eduardo and Enrique, and his daughters, Beatriz and Maria Cristina.
He had left them behind in the safety of Miami, in an apartment on South West 20th Avenue, when he had joined the exiles who were training in Central America to invade their homeland.
To the southeast, the strike force droned onward toward Cuba and the new day.
The attack was to be led by Luis Cosme, a wiry, crew-cut former Cuban Air Force and Cubana Airlines pilot who had fied Cuba eight months before.
At the controls of the other two planes in Cosme’s “Linda” wing were Alfredo Caballero, a stocky twenty-five-year-old, and Rene Garcia, They, too, were Cuban Air Force veterans.
Their target was San Antonio de los Banos, the vital military airfield twenty-five miles southwest of Havana.
Jose Crespo, short and handsome, led the “Puma” flight that was to strike at Camp Libertad airfield on the outskirts of Havana.
The other two B-26s in Crespo’s wing were flown by Daniel Fernandez Mon, Spanish-born and the only bachelor in the flight, and “Chirrino” Piedra, at twenty-five one of the youngest and bestliked of the exile pilots.
None of these three pilots or their co-pilots survived the Bay of Pigs.
All six men in the “Puma” wing had less than forty-eight hours to live.
They were flown by Gustavo Ponzoa and Gonzalo Herrera, Their target was the airport at Santiago de Cuba, in Oriente Province, where Castro had begun his climb to power in the Sierra Maestra five years earlier.
Unable to sleep on the crowded deck of the Houston, nineteen-year-old Mario Abril, a private in E Company, 2nd Infantry Battalion of the exile brigade, heard the drone of the bomber fleet overhead.
Two months before he had been in Miami, preparing to leave for the training camp in Guatemala.
And yet, when his mother had awakened him on February 26, his nineteenth birthday, instead of the present he expected she gave him a rosary.
Now, aboard the Houston in battle dress, the slender youth switched on his transistor radio to hear whether Havana would describe the bombing raids.
In Washington, Richard M Bissell, Jr., an urbane, six-foot-four former economics professor, waited anxiously for word of the bombing strike and for news of Zuniga’s arrival in Miami.
Bissell was the CIA’s deputy director for plans , “plans” being a cover name for covert foreign operations.
In intelligence parlance, “black” means secret, and Bissell directed the blackest of the black operators.
He was the CIA man in charge of the clandestine Bay of Pigs operation from the beginning.
From a secret office near the Lincoln Memorial, across the reflecting pool from the White House, he was linked by high-speed coded teletype circuits to Happy Valley.
On this Saturday, April 15, Bissell’s boss, the CIA director, Allen W Dulles, was in Puerto Rico.
He had gone there that day to keep a long-standing engagement to speak at a convention of young businessmen Monday morning.
The CIA chief decided that to cancel it would look peculiar and might attract attention.
Moreover, Dulles reasoned, his presence in Puerto Rico would be good cover.
The public appearance of the head of the CIA in San Juan, rather than in Washington, might divert any suspicion that the CIA was directing the drama which was now unfolding.
At 11:37 A.M. he spoke at an African Freedom Day celebration at the State Department.
Early in the afternoon he got into a helicopter and flew to Middleburg.
The largest secret operation in American history was already beginning.
But neither the President of the United States nor the director of the Central Intelligence Agency was in Washington.
But then anti-aircraft guns opened up and the sleepy residents of the Cuban capital realized that an air raid was in progress.
From their windows and balconies, Cubans could see tracers from the anti-aircraft shells shooting in great arcs across the sky.
In Miramar, a suburb near Camp Libertad, early risers watched as the three B-26s in Jose Crespo’s “Puma” wing attacked with bombs, machine guns and rockets.
A series of explosions followed and continued intermittently for forty minutes.
Bomb fragments hit the administration building and gouged huge holes in the airport runways.
The attack lasted only fifteen minutes, but the guns kept firing for an hour.
Simultaneously, Luis Cosme’s “Linda” flight of three B-26s was bombing San Antonio de los Banos.
One of Castro’s T-33 American-made jet trainers sitting on the end of Runway 11 blew up and some Castro B-26s were caught on the ground.
At Antonio Maceo Airport in Santiago de Cuba, on the eastern end of the island, the “Gorilla” wing destroyed a hanger containing one British-built Sea Fury and two smaller planes.
A Cubana Airlines C-47 parked in front of the administration building was also demolished.
Less actual damage to aircraft was inflicted at Camp Libertad by the “Puma” flight.
The B-26 piloted by Daniel Fernandez Mon, mortally crippled in the taid over Havana, wheeled out to sea north of the city and burst into flames, It crashed into the ocean within sight of Havana’s Commodoro Hotel.
The red-haired bachelor pilot had pleaded for five days to be allowed to take part in the first raid.
Perez would have celebrated his twenty-sixth birthday in thirteen days.
He decided he could not make it back to Happy Valley, and nosed his bomber north to Key West.
Crespo and his co-pilot, Lorenzo Perez, made an emergency landing at the Boca Chica Naval Air Station in Key West, to the consternation of Navy officials there.
Key West high schools were to have held an Olympics Day at Boca Chica, with track events, bands and parades, and the public invited.
In “Linda” flight, Alfredo Caballero discovered, after dropping his bombs on San Antonio de los Banos, that one fuel tank was not feeding.
He headed south and landed on Grand Cayman Island with his co-pilot, Alfredo Maza.
Shortly after 8:00M. the Federal Aviation Agency control tower at Miami International Airport picked up a mayday distress signal from a B-26 bomber.
He called the tower at a point twenty-five miles south of Homestead, Florida, or about twelve minutes from Miami.
At 8:21 A.M. he landed, his right engine feathered as if it had been put out of action by gunfire.
Zuniga, wearing a white T-shirt and green fatigue trousers, climbed out.
Whisked into Immigration Headquarters and “questioned” for four hours, Zuniga was successfully kept from reporters.
Edward Ahrens, the district director of the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, solemnly announced that the pilot’s name was being withheld to prevent reprisals against his family still in Cuba.
But, oddly, in view of the tight security measures that surrounded Zuniga’s arrival, photographers were allowed to take pictures of the unidentified pilot and of his bullet-pocked bomber.
Across the nation the next morning, newspapers carried photographs of the mysterious pilot, a tall, mustached man wearing dark glasses and a baseball cap.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((14 Ahrens released a statement from the nameless pilot.
FAR9g15, had been seen talking to an agent of Ramiro Valdes, the G-2 chief.
My comrades had broken off earlier, to hit airfields which we agreed they would strike.
Then, because I was low on gas, I had to go into Miami, because I could not reach our agreed destination.
Jose Miro Cardona, the professorial, softspoken president of the Cuban Revolutionary Council, could not resist issuing a flowery Latin statement.
Not until 9:00 A.M., three hours after the attack, did the Cuban radio in Havana announce the bombings.
But at 7:00M. the Soviet Ambassador to Cuba, Sergei M Kudryavtsev, an old hand in the KGB, the Soviet intelligence network, was seen hurriedly leaving his official residence in a Cuban military car with two Cuban Army officers.
But at noon, with militiamen armed with Czechoslovak automatic weapons stalking the streets of Havana, and others posted on roofs, the foreign diplomatic corps was summoned to the Foreign Ministry and told that Cuba had proof that the United States had “directed” the attack.
At the White House, presidential press secretary Pierre Salinger denied any knowledge of the bombing.
Raul Roa, the excitable Cuban representative, marched to the THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((16 speaker’s rostrum at the start of the General Assembly session that was meeting on the Congo crisis.
Valerian Zorin, the Soviet representative, then proposed an emergency session of the Assembly’s political committee to hear the Cuban complaint.
The United States, he added, was “cynically attempting” to assert the attack was carried out by Cuban Air Force defectors.
Cardona’s statement that he had been in touch with those who did the bombing was in itself a violation of United States neutrality laws, Roa said.
Only his closest advisers were aware of exactly how delicate and difficult a position Stevenson was in.
Initially, Stevenson had become aware of Cuban exile training from newspaper stories.
Some time before the invasion, he had expressed some misgivings about these published reports in an informal conversation with President Kennedy, which took place in the White House living quarters.
Kennedy assured Stevenson on that occasion that whatever happened, United States armed forces would not be used in any Cuban operation.
He was Tracy Barnes, the CIA man assigned to keep the State Department informed of the Bay of Pigs plans as they progressed.
Barnes talked on about how the Cubans were operating from abandoned airfields; he mentioned the exile radio on Swan Island in the Caribbean.
Stevenson was aware that Barnes was from the CIA; and the more he listened to Barnes’s ambiguous assurances, the more convinced he became that the United States was involved.
Barnes did not mention that an invasion was about to begin over the weekend.
As a result, it is possible that Stevenson did not immediately connect the April 15 bombings with the CIA man’s briefing of two days earlier.
It has the markings of the Castro air force right on the tail, which everyone can see for himself, The Cuban star and the initials FAR—Fuerza Aerea Revolucionaria—are clearly visible.
Steps had been taken to impound the Cuban planes that had landed in Florida, he added; they would not be permitted to take off.
Spring is in many ways the loveliest time of the year in the rolling hills of the Virginia hunt country.
But on Sunday, April 16, President Kennedy had little time to appreciate it.
At his Glen Ora estate in Middleburg, the President was deeply worried.
He and his advisers had not anticipated the volume and nature THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((18 of the publicity that was being given to the bombing raids and to the story of the mysterious “defecting” pilot who had landed in Miami.
Across the nation, the morning papers had played the story of the bombing raids with varying degrees of caution.
HAVANA, April 15—Pilots of Prime Minister Fidel Castro’s air force revolted today and attacked three of the Castro regime’s key air bases with bombs and rockets.
He wondered, for example, how the Cuban Revolutionary Council had advance notice of the flier’s defection, since the pilot who landed in Miami said their escape was hasty.
And the Times Washington Bureau this Sunday was trying to reach administration officials at their homes.
Other newsmen in Washington and Miami were asking where the third plane was if three pilots had defected.
Further, while the B-26s in Castro’s air force had plexiglass transparent noses and guns in the wing pods, this B-26 had eight .50-caliber machine guns in a solid nose.
What had occurred was the inevitable collision between the secret machinery * When the Times story appeared the next day, it particularly irritated President Kennedy.
He was angered because he felt it had systematically listed flaws in the CIA cover.
It was at this point of contact between the Invisible Government and the outside, real world, that the Bay of Pigs plan began to deteriorate.
As President Eisenhower had discovered during the U-2 fiasco a year earlier, and as President Kennedy was now finding out, it is an extremely difficult and precarious business for the government to try to deceive the press and the country to protect a covert operation.
At a military funeral for the “Cuban heroes” killed by the bombing raids, he compared the attack to the raid on Pearl Harbor.
But in Miami, Immigration Director Ahrens was sticking to the scenario.
He announced that the three fliers who had landed in Florida had been granted political asylum.
One was shot down, and three had landed, respectively, at Key West, Grand Cayman and Miami.
Despite the heavy air losses, the trouble over Zuniga’s cover story and the UN debate, Richard Bissell was encouraged by the partial success of the April 15 raid.
From the beginning the CIA understood the rather elementary military principle that no amphibious landing can take place without either air cover at the beaches or complete destruction of the opposing air force on the ground.
In actual fact, the pilots flew back to Happy Valley in a C-54 on April 16, and participated in the air operations during the invasion.
Alfredo Caballero, who had landed on Grand Cayman Island, was flown to Miami, and then to Retalhuleu, the CIA’s Guatemalan air base.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((20 In the case of the Bay of Pigs, the latter course was chosen, Castro’s air force would be destroyed on the ground by the exile B-26 force, so that air cover at the beaches would be unnecessary.
The second strike was scheduled to take place at dawn, Monday, April 17, as the 1,400-man exile invasion force fought its way ashore.
The CIA had estimated before the first raid that Castro’s air force included at least four T-33 jet trainers, six to eight B-26s and several British Sea Furies, fast propeller-driven fighters.
Estimates by the returning exile fliers of how many of Castro’s planes were destroyed varied.
Pilot claims are often inflated, but Bissell knew that at least a number of Castro’s B-26s were destroyed.
Hopefully, the next raid, on Monday, would finish the job of demolishing Castro’s air force.
But political and foreign policy considerations began to outweigh the tactical plan.
The CIA plan had hinged on the assumption that Zuniga’s cover story would hold for at least forty-eight hours.
In that event, the second air strike would either seem like the work of the rebelling Castro pilots, or would be overlooked in the general confusion of the invasion.
The CIA reasoned that if the airstrip at the Bay of Pigs could be captured and held, photographs could be released by Tuesday, April 18, showing exile B-26s operating from inside Cuba.
This, the CIA assumed, would divert attention from the question of where the bombers had taken off from on April 15 and 17.
The problem was to get by with the “defecting” pilots’ tale from Saturday to Tuesday.
After that, the cover story told by Zuniga would not matter; it would be overtaken by events.
It was McGeorge Bundy, the patrician Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
Alarmed by the President’s eleventh-hour decision, Bissell and General Charles P Cabell, the CIA’s deputy director, hurried to the State Department to appeal to Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
The air strike was vital to the invasion plan and should be reinstated, Bissell and Cabell argued, otherwise Castro would have jets and other planes to attack the invaders.
From his office at the State Department, Rusk telephoned Kennedy at Glen Ora.
He told him that Cabell and Bissell were there and believed the strike should go ahead as planned.
Rusk asked whether Cabell wished to say anything to the President directly, but Cabell declined.
Twelve hundred miles away, the invasion fleet was already approaching the beaches.
In retrospect, some CIA officials felt Bissell should have hopped into a car and driven to Glen Ora to plead with the President; because the operation was secret he would have been able to speak more freely in person than he could have over a telephone wire, and he might have been able to present his case more fully.
But it would have been close to midnight before he could have arrived at Middleburg, and D-Day would then have been at hand.
Or Bissell and Cabell might have gotten on the telephone in Rusk’s office and pleaded with the President directly at this point.
Bissell returned to his office from the State Department, and about 11:00 P.M. he flashed the word to Happy Valley that the B-26s were not to strike at Castro’s air bases.
Messages flowed back and forth between Nicaragua and Washington, and as it was finally resolved, the bombers were only to try to fly support missions over the beaches.
At Happy Valley the change in orders caused dismay and considerable confusion.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((22 So secret was the Bay of Pigs operation that many high officials of the government were not let in on it.
Roger Hilsman, the director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research had also been kept in the dark.
But the Joint Chiefs of Staff, headed by General Lyman L Lemnitzer, had been consulted and had given their qualified approval.
The second air strike was a vital part of the plan that had been approved by the Joint Chiefs.
In Rusk’s apartment he again expressed his fears over the cancellation of the air strike.
Despite the hour the Secretary of State called the President once more in Middleburg.
In answer to the CIA official’s pleadings, the President’s reply was still negative.
The light burned late in Rusk’s suite K-608 in the otherwise quiet Sheraton Park.
A light spring breeze caressed the pale, new green leaves on the trees.
But Castro still had planes, and they were about to raise havoc with the exile brigade on the beaches.
It was forty-eight hours since Mario Zuniga had taken off from Happy Valley.
Build-Up Ir HAD BEGUN one day early in April, 1960, when two visitors walked into the office of Roberto Alejos in the Edificio Townson in Guatemala City.
Alejos, a handsome, athletic businessman, was one of the wealthiest coffee-growers in Guatemala.
He owned two huge fincas, plantations, in Guatemala, both in remote areas, And he was the closest friend, backer and adviser of Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes, the highly individualistic and unpredictable President of that Central American Republic.
Davis bore the title of First Secretary of the American Embassy in Guatemala City.
A charming Californian of forty-three, graying at the temples, he looked the part of a THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((24 diplomat.
But it was an open secret in sophisticated political and diplomatic circles in Guatemala City that Davis was the CIA station chief in Guatemala.
The CIA agent who accompanied him was less well known; he had recently returned to Guatemala after a three-year absence.
They wanted to know if Alejos would help arrange secret training sites in Guatemala for Cuban anti-Castro exiles.
They also wanted to know whether Alejos could fix it for them to talk to President Ydigoras.
They were aware that he felt the United States regarded him as politically erratic.
His election two years before had been greeted by Washington with less than enthusiasm, and Ydigoras knew it.
Late in January, 1958, according to Ydigoras, a mysterious visiting American had called on him at his suite at the Maya Excelsior Hotel in Guatemala City.
At this point, the Guatemalan Congress had not yet officially chosen him to be President.
As Ydigoras later related the story on nation-wide television, the visitor, who gave his name as “Mr Karr,” opened a suitcase containing $500,000 in United States currency and offered it to Ydigoras if he would withdraw.
The CIA knew that rightly or wrongly Ydigoras, who declined the money, became convinced that “Mr Karr” was a CIA agent, although he possessed no evidence of that.
Now the CIA was asking Ydigoras to risk his political career by permitting the United States to establish secret training camps in Guatemala.
Nevertheless, when Alejos approached him, Ydigoras agreed to meet discreetly with Davis at the President’s private residence, the Casa Crema, located on the grounds of a military school.
Castillo-Armas had come to power in 1954 in a CIA-engineered coup that overthrew President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, whose regime was honeycombed with Communists.
He designated Roberto Alejos to handle the details of the project for him.
Build-Up ((25 Now Guatemala was to become the staging area for the overthrow of Fidel Castro’s regime in Cuba.
The CIA told Alejos that it would like to find privately owned land, with trustworthy owners, for use as training sites.
CIA, after looking over several other possible sites, selected as its main base Helvetia, the Alejos coffee ranch in the Boca Costa, the Pacific slope region of southwestern Guatemala.
The estate rose to 8,000 feet along the slopes of Santiago Volcano, which had erupted in 1928 and was still active.
The training area, or “Trax Base,” as the camp came to be known, was at 4,000 feet.
Retalhuleu, the other town in the area, was twenty-five kilometers from Helvetia.
Guns could be fired and military maneuvers held at the ranch with complete security and safety.
The entire plantation was heavily guarded, so there was little chance that any curious outsider would stumble into the Cuban exile camp, or penetrate its secrets.
If the volcano behaved, the CIA would have an ideal mountain hideaway to begin training the exiles who would topple Fidel Castro.
The Americans who called on Roberto Alejos in the Edificio Townson that day in April, 1960, were acting on the authority of the President of the United States.
Their visit was a direct result of an order given by President Dwight D Eisenhower on March 17, 1960.
The President turned over the task of arming and training the Cuban exiles to Allen Dulles.
A highly articulate, highly intelligent man, Richard Mervin Bis*The date was revealed by Eisenhower at a Cincinnati press conference June 13, 1961, following the Bay of Pigs disaster.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((26 sell did not fit the popular conception of a master spy, any more than did Dulles.
Bissell liked to refer to himself as a “high risk man,” and it was he who ran the U-2 spy plane program.
In 1948 he joined the Marshall Plan, rising to the post of Acting Administrator.
The CIA’s original plan, as it evolved under Bissell’s direction, was to build up the underground within Cuba through a long, slow period of guerrilla infiltration by exiles trained in Guatemala.
The CIA designated one of its most energetic agents, with the cover name of Frank Bender, to be the top agency representative in dealing with the fragmented Cuban exile groups.
Bender, whose real identity was carefully protected, became an almost mythical figure to the Cuban refugees.
Another account had Bender as an assistant to top Allied planners during the North African invasion in 1942.
He smoked a Pipe, wore glasses, was well mannered and displayed a good knowledge of history.
The CIA’s first task was to try to weld the squabbling and emotional exile groups into some semblance of cohesion, and to select promising leaders.
The Cuban who looked most promising was Manuel Artime Buesa, a young firebrand orator who had fought in the hills with Castro in 1958.
Artime accepted a job with the Institute of Agrarian Reform when Castro overthrew Dictator Fulgencio Batista on New Year’s Day, 1959, and became Premier.
But Artime broke with Castro later that year and fied Cuba in a Build-Up ((27 boat.
Another Cuban leader contacted by the CIA early in the planning stage was Manuel Antonio de Varona, former Premier of Cuba under President Carlos Prio Socarras, the man Batista had overthrown.
By the end of May, 1960, five exile groups had been organized as a revolutionary frente, or front, with Varona as co-ordinator.
The CIA began pumping what eventually became millions of dollars into the frente and its successor, the Cuban Revolutionary Council.
The CIA funds were deposited in a Miami bank and drawn by the frente through checks signed by an accountant named Juan Paula.
In the back streets of downtown Miami, in the bars, hotels, old rooming houses and apartments of the Cuban refugee community, the exciting word began to spread that something big was afoot.
In May of 1960, less than a month after Davis had approached Alejos, the first Cubans arrived at Helvetia.
Alejos already had radio facilities for communication with the rest of the ranch; these were now greatly expanded by the CIA and installed in a warehouse near the main building.
The first group of Cubans lived comfortably in the Alejos guest * Besides Artime’s MRR and Varona, who headed the Movimiento de Rescate Revolucionario, the frente members were Jose Ignacio Rasco of the Movimiento Democratico Cristiano; Justo Carrillo of the Asociacion Montecristi; and Aureliano Sanchez Arango, former Foreign Minister of Cuba and head of the Triple A, which later pulled out of the frente.
But as more trainees flowed into Helvetia, the Trax Base was built on the mountainside, with barracks completed in June.
The base was also known by its code name, “Vaquero,” which means cowboy in Spanish.
They doubled as armed guards to keep potential snoopers and the 1,300 coffee workers out of the Trax area.
CIA instructors, as well as logistics and accounting officials from the agency, were also housed at the base.
Alejos owned a sugar plantation at San Jose Buena Vista, halfway between Retalhuleu and Guatemala City.
The terrain proved excellent for parachute jump training and mass maneuvers.
Amphibious landings were practiced on the Pacific coast below Retalhuleu.
The existing strip there was inadequate for the C-46s, C-54s and B-26s that would be brought in.
The firm, already in operation in Guatemala, had the necessary heavy equipment available in the area.
Alejos fronted for CIA on all financial transactions in Guatemala, and it was he who signed the airstrip contract.
Before it was over, the airstrip and air-base facilities at Retalhuleu cost the CIA $1,200,000.
President Ydigoras, his son and adviser, Miguelito Ydigoras, and the foreign diplomatic corps journeyed to Retalhuleu to cut the ribbon.
A few of the more observant diplomats noticed that, curiously, there were no markings at all on the planes that were to transport the fruit and seafood delicacies.
In Miami the CIA instructed them in weapons handling and guerrilla tactics, The training took place in the Everglades and even in Miami hotels.
In Louisiana one group trained under the leadership of Higinio “Nino” Diaz, an MRR leader.
Once the airstrip had been completed at Retalhuleu, the airlift of trainees from Florida to Guatemala could begin in earnest.
If he passed preliminary screening, he would be picked up, brought to a CIA “safe house” at night, and from there, with elaborate hocus-pocus, flown from the mysterious, guarded Opa-locka Airport in Miami to Retalhuleu.
Sometimes other airstrips in Florida were used for the clandestine flights, and the CIA had occasional troubles with overzealous local police officers.
The Hendry County sheriff’s office once investigated a report that unmarked, unlighted planes were picking up groups of men at night from an abandoned airstrip at Clewiston, Florida, near Lake Okeechobee.
The CIA had another narrow brush with local guardians of the law shortly before midnight on October 27, 1960, when a plane without lights landed at Opa-locka.
Since the place had not been used as an airfield by the Navy for five years, a Miami patrolman radioed Opa-locka police to investigate.
Jones had once worked for Twentieth Century-Fox and Spyros P Skouras, but nothing had prepared him for the production he was about to get into now.
He decided to call him to make sure that his representation of the Cuban exiles would be in the national interest, He gave him the names of some of the Cubans in the frente.
A man would call in a half-hour and say he was a mutual friend and would meet Jones alone.
It was the beginning of a series of cloak-and-dagger meetings between Jones and the CIA men.
Sometimes the meetings took place in hotel rooms; the CIA also favored Grand Central Terminal.
The CIA financed and organized the caravan, which was to end with the mothers praying in Saint Patrick’s Cathedral.
But when the chartered Greyhound buses left Miami, the CIA did not have a man aboard.
Jones had made elaborate preparations for television and newspaper coverage along the way, but somehow the two busloads of mothers got lost for two days.
Only one woman on the bus spoke English, and she had her problems as the caravan inched northward.
Four of the women were pregnant and the buses had to stop every few miles for them.
The next day the “Caravan of Sorrow” reached Philadelphia, where Jones had it halted.
As Richard M Nixon and John F Kennedy battled across the Build-Up ((3r autumn landscape for the presidency,* the CIA plan, under Bissell’s guidance, was undergoing a gradual metamorphosis.
From the original concept of isolated guerrilla landings, it moved toward the idea of a larger operation that really amounted to a pocketsized invasion.
By October it was decided that a force of perhaps four hundred men would make a landing in Cuba in the late autumn.
This group would be a major, well-trained and well-supplied guerrilla unit within Cuba.
At the same time, there would be a large-scale program of air drops to resupply and strengthen the guerrillas in the Escambray, the Sierra Maestra and other areas inside Cuba.
To fly the clandestine air-drop missions over Cuba, the CIA needed pilots.
The story of Sergio Garcia, one of the men who flew these missions, is fairly typical.
In August, 1960, Garcia managed to smuggle his wife and newborn son out of Havana into Miami.
He was screened by Americans, who also gave him a lie-detector test in a motel on Segovia Street in Coral Gables.
For a time Garcia practiced dropping paratroops and cargo near Retalhuleu.
In November he began flying a C-46 over Cuba, dropping supplies in the Escambray.
The C-46s had no guns and there were Castro air force markings on them.
At that time the air operations at Retalhuleu were under the supervision of an American CIA man known as “Colonel Billy Carpenter,” a cover name similar to his real one.
In all, dozens of overflights of Cuba were carried out by the exile pilots between November, 1960, and March, 1961.
The men flying these missions over Cuban territory were told that if they were captured they were to say they worked for an air transport company owned by the Alejos brothers and had strayed off-course.
The pilots were given the telephone number of a Mr G in * As will be shown in a later chapter, the invasion preparations played a major part in the secret behind-the-scenes calculations of both the Nixon and Kennedy camps during the 1960 presidential campaign.
When Garcia was briefed at Retalhuleu by the American CIA advisers, he was told to look for lights that would shine at a designated place and time for about ten minutes.
The flights would come in over the sea at fifty to a hundred feet to avoid Castro’s radar.
Garcia climbed to 1,000 for the drop, then zoomed back down to sea level and headed for home, chasing the wavetops.
Since he frequently encountered anti-aircraft fire in areas supposed to be friendly, Garcia concluded that the CIA’s contacts with the underground were not as good as they might be.
Back in Washington, Bissell and the other CIA operators were dismayed at the lack of success of the air drops.
Almost without exception they were flown properly, but the guns and ammunition seldom reached their targets.
He realized that unless the guerrillas had radios, small beacons and one or two trained people on the spot, the drops would miss their targets.
To make an air drop successful, a guerrilla unit has to be able to communicate in code ten to twelve hours before a drop, in order to notify the senders of any change in location.
But the guertillas inside Cuba were communicating by runners back to Havana, a slow, ineffective means.
The CIA was unable to get radios, beacons and trained experts into Cuba, partly because Castro moved much more rapidly than had been anticipated in creating an effective counter-intelligence and counter-guerrilla network.
As Castro had learned when he fought against Batista in the Sierra Maestra, militiamen sent into the mountains in small groups tended to defect to the guerrillas when they made contact.
Instead of sending his troops in small groups into the Escambray, Castro deployed them in large numbers around the mountains.
He cordoned off the area and prevented the movement of couriers and food into the hills.
The CIA’s troubles were compounded by what the Americans considered to be the impossibility of organizing a clandestine operation among “talkative” Cubans, There were leaks, and as a result, Build-Up ((33 agents were being picked up by Castro’s intelligence men.
In the late fall, bad weather set in and prevented small boats from landing with equipment for the guerrillas.
Later, tons of supplies were landed by boat, but the CIA was never sure they were being properly distributed once inside Cuba.
This was a vitally important factor, because it led directly to the decision by the CIA to abandon the guerrilla concept and to invade Cuba in strength.
On November 13, 1960, a portion of the Guatemalan Army rebelled against President Ydigoras and captured Puerto Barrios, a banana port on the Caribbean.
The Cuban exile pilots at Retathuleu were enlisted to help put down the rebellion.
Apparently, the CIA reasoned that if Ydigoras were overthrown, the new government might shut down the training camps.
One Cuban pilot flew a C-46 loaded with troops to Puerto Barrios, as the CIA’s B-26s bombarded the rebel stronghold.
He actually touched down at the airport in Puerto Barrios, in the mistaken belief that it was in government hands.
When his plane drew gunfire, the pilot immediately took off again without unloading any troops.
Cuban and American pilots flew the B-26s in this secret sidelight to the Bay of Pigs operation.
The Guatemalan Army rebellion quickly collapsed and the potential threat to the CIA camps was averted.
But some Guatemalan politicians later blamed the uprising on the existence of the training camps.
And, unknown to the world, CIA aircraft and pilots had been used to put down an internal uprising in Guatemala.
On November 18, 1960, ten days after his victory, Presidentelect Kennedy summoned Dulles and Bissell to Palm Beach and received a briefing on the state of the Cuban operation.
Guatemalans were soon gossiping about the CIA’s operation at the Alejos ranch.
The cocoon of secrecy in which the CIA had, of necessity, wrapped the Cuban operation, was beginning to unwind dangerously, In January, as the change-over from the Eisenhower to the Kennedy Administration was taking place, things began to happen all at once, on several levels.
On January 3, as one of his last diplomatic moves, President Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with Castro.
In its January 7 issue the Nation unveiled a detailed story about the Retalhuleu base by Don Dwiggins, the aviation editor of the Los Angeles Mirror.
The exile training posed an extremely knotty problem for those newspapers which had learned something about it.
The day after the Times broke the Retalhuleu Build-Up ((35 story, the Miami Herald published a story on the Guatemalan camp, and another on the Opa-locka air traffic.
Publication of the accompanying story on the MiamiGuatemala airlift was withheld for more than two months by the Herald.
Its release was decided upon only after United States aid to anti-Castro fighters in Guatemala was first revealed elsewhere.
The lid was off now, but despite the Times and Miami Herald stories, the fact that the United States was training Cuban exiles for a return to their homeland did not penetrate the mainstream of news.
Most Americans remained quite unaware that an invasion was in the making.
Official Washington ignored the deep snow that blanketed the capital and attended a round of gay parties ushering in the New Frontier.
With this collapse, any lingering thoughts of guerrilla infiltration disappeared.
Recruiting was stepped up and more men and material began to flow into Retalhuleu.
Parallel to this development, pressures began to operate on President Kennedy to approve the invasion as soon as possible.
The CIA warned him that the rainy season would hamper the landing and make the Guatemala camps unusable if the invasion was postponed much beyond the spring; the CIA also felt that the exiles could not be held together much longer because of morale factors.
The operation was surfacing in the press, and President Ydigoras was urging that a decision of some sort be made.
Most important of all, the CLA concluded that between six months and a year from January, 1961, Russian-trained Cuban pilots would be returning to Cuba, and that that alone would make this invasion impossible.
President Kennedy and his advisers were tasting the wine of victory and of power.
The young, energetic administration suffered from a bad case of overconfidence; virtually no one at the THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((36 White House stopped to think about possible failure.
And deep inside the secret bureaucracy, the exile operation had acquired something of a life of its own.
In Washington it is not simple to stop a project, overt or covert, once it is under way.
Politically, if President Kennedy had halted the invasion plan, he would have risked criticism for abandoning a project started by President Eisenhower, a project designed to overthrow Castro and rid the hemisphere of Communism.
But beyond all that, the President relied on the strong assurances of the CIA and the less enthusiastic assurances of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the operation could succeed.
He was not an expert, so he would have to take the word of the experts.
It was to be the town of Trinidad, in Las Villas Province, on the southern coast of Cuba.
A landing on the south coast was mandatory, since the jumping-off point for the invasion would be Central America.
The north coast of Cuba would have been too far away for the invading planes and ships to operate effectively.
But along the south coast of Cuba the charts showed a barrier reef, except at the mouths of rivers.
Trinidad was located at such a river mouth, and it also had a small port which could be made usable.
The terrain near Trinidad offered a good chance of sealing off and securing the beachhead.
If something went wrong, it was thought, the invaders could melt into the hills to carry on the fight.
And there was a detachment of Castro’s militia at Trinidad, which could offer immediate resistance.
On the other hand, the CIA hoped that shortly after the landing, it could recruit about 1,000 troops from the local population of approximately 5,000.
Under Eisenhower, there had never been any plan to use United States armed forces in the Cuban operation.
Kennedy reached the same decision, even though the operation had changed in scope and size.
Because it was later to become a point of confusion and controversy, it should be understood that Kennedy’s decision was that Build-Up ((37 the formal, overt armed forces of the United States—the Ammy, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps—would not be used in the invasion.
Since the operation was secret, or was supposed to be, it remained under Bissell’s and the CIA’s direction and control.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon, the nation’s top military commanders, were consulted as the plans developed, but they did not have primary responsibility.
The Joint Chiefs were briefed on the operation for the first time in January, 1961, although the Office of Naval Intelligence had earlier stumbled on the fact that some kind of CIA operation was under way.
The CIA’s proposal for a landing at Trinidad was sent to the Joint Chiefs for their consideration.
After studying it, they submitted an opinion signed by General Lyman L Lemnitzer, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, saying that the plan for a landing at Trinidad would have an even chance of success.
A sensitive youth of nineteen, Mario had soft brown eyes and a quiet nature.
Many of my friends from Cuba were getting training and I heard about it and that’s how I got into it.
Roger gave us training in explosives and * Lemnitzer acted for himself, Admiral Arleigh Burke, Chief of Naval Operations; General Thomas D White, Chief of Staff of the Air Force; General George H Decker, Army Chief of Staff; and General David M Shoup, Commandant of the Marine Corps.
Later, some of the chief's papers were signed by Burke, in the absence of Lemnitzer.
Sometimes he did it right in the hotel, and sometimes he took us to the Everglades to shoot with .45caliber guns.
I went to the recruiting office for those camps at 27th Avenue and roth Street, South West.
They were dressed just like the rest of us, khaki uniforms and blue baseball caps.
It had no seats, you know, just seats along the side, and we were packed in on the sides.
When there was no more room, they put the rest of them on the floor of the plane.
We had a real good breakfast there, bacon, ham, everything we wanted, That felt real good, so I began to like the looks of this place, you know, because we had such a good breakfast.
But no, the same day we started shooting with M-1 rifles and they took us up eight, nine thousand feet to practice.
So that night I thought we were going to bed, because we started out the whole day before with no rest, but we had lessons in machine guns.
After about five days they gave us a choice of battalions we could join and I chose the Second Battalion because I had a couple of friends there in E Company.
Bob was the second battalion instructor, Another was Jim and another was Juan, who was the only one who spoke Spanish.
Later some CIA analysts concluded it would have been wiser to choose a commander Build-Up ((39 the same uniform we did.
But he had a .38-caliber revolver on his hip, like all the American instructors.
We took hikes and learned to shoot .50-caliber machine guns and mortars and Browning automatic rifles and bazookas.
It would do so by knocking out Castro’s air force on the ground, thus making air cover over the beaches, during the landing operations, unnecessary.
During the invasion eight more were added, making a total of twenty-four.
These transports were used in the air drops over Cuba prior to the invasion, and would drop paratroops during the invasion.
To head the Cuban pilots, the CIA selected Manuel Villafana Martinez, an ex-Cuban Air Force pilot who spent three years in jail on a conspiracy charge against Batista.
Luis Cosme, the exwith experience in battalion-strength landings rather than a massive assault like Iwo Jima.
The first commander of Trax Base was “Colonel Vallejo,” a high ex-Philippine Army officer who had fought the Huks.
He was replaced by “Colonel Frank” when the CIA shifted from a guerrilla operation to a larger amphibious landing.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((40 Cuban Air Force fighter pilot who led the April 15 B-26 strike, was named deputy chief.
There were sixty-one Cuban pilots at Retalhuleu, plus navigators, radio operators and maintenance men.
Six American instructors stayed with these pilots throughout the months of training and the invasion.
Other American advisers included “Billy Belt,” a young blond instructor; “Stevens,” who told Cubans he had false teeth because the Chinese Communists had pulled out his real ones during the Korean War; and “Seig Simpson,” a tall, ruddyfaced man who had a Japanese wife.
None of the CIA advisers used their real names, although Several used correct first names.
General G Reid Doster, the chief of staff of the Alabama National Guard, at Birmingham, used the name “Reid” when he was at Retalhuleu as a CIA adviser.
Several of the Americans were recruited by the CIA through a Miami front from among National Guard pilots who had flown B-26s in World War I The B-26s had two-man crews and no tail gunners or guns.
These were eliminated to make room for extra fuel to increase the range of the bombers.
Although the normal take-off weight for a B-26 is 36,000 pounds, these bombers lumbered off the runways at 40,000 pounds.
They were formidable machines of war, but Castro’s jets could fly higher and faster.
By now the training camps had become a sensitive political issue in Guatemala.
Early in February, President Ydigoras wrote a letter to President Kennedy, saying that morale in the camps was high and the troops ready for action.
Behind his move was the private alarm of the Guatemalan Government over the unrest in the camps.
From Build-Up ((4z their viewpoint, the sooner the invasion, the sooner the camps could be closed and the whole thorny issue removed.
He called on President Kennedy at the White House and also met with Allen Dulles.
As the pressure mounted, in late February and early March, the CIA and the Joint Chiefs were having trouble behind the scenes in agreeing on a landing site for the invasion.
About two weeks after the Joint Chiefs had given a landing at Trinidad a fifty-fifty chance, three alternative sites were submitted to them by the CIA, which had decided it no longer favored Trinidad, partly because the airstrip there was too small for B-26s.
The Joint Chiefs studied the three alternate sites overnight, then held one meeting.
They then said the best of the alternate sites would be the Bay of Pigs, but that there would be less chance of ultimate success at the Bay of Pigs than at Trinidad to the east.
The Chiefs selected the Bay of Pigs mainly because there were only two access roads leading to the beach.
Castro’s forces would have to come this way, and the roads could be bombed by the invaders.
By the same token, the Chiefs warned that it would be more difficult for the invaders to break out of the beachhead at the Bay of Pigs than at Trinidad.
The CIA’s military experts, however, felt the Bay of Pigs was at least as good a site as Trinidad, or better.
While this was going on in Washington, in Guatemala the CIA was having trouble with a group of Cubans who objected to Artime and Captain Jose Perez San Roman, the CIA’s handpicked leaders.
Actually, it was a CIA prison from which the bitter Cubans were released only after the Bay of Pigs.
From the beginning the CIA had taken political as well as operational control of the exile movement, and it tended to favor the more conservative elements in the community.
In May, 1960, Manolo Ray, the Minister of Public Works under THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((42 Castro, broke with the regime and went underground.
Ray maintained that he believed in the original social aims of Castro’s revolution, but he took the position that Castro had betrayed those aims by leading Cuba down the Communist path.
It presented a strong competitor on the left to the CIA’s frente on the right.
With the target date for the invasion fast approaching, something had to be done to prevent a political split in the exile ranks.
Under CIA prodding, the frente and the MRP were tenuously patched together in a new organization, the Cuban Revolutionary Council.
Jose Miro Cardona, a colorless but dignified fifty-nine-year-old former Havana attorney.
The son of a Spanish general who fought for Cuban independence, he was Premier of Cuba for the first six weeks of Castro’s regime.
He had resigned as Premier but was named Ambassador to the United States by Castro in July, 1960.
Instead of taking the job, Cardona went into asylum in the Argentine Embassy.
He came to the United States three months later on a safe-conduct pass.
It was not generally realized at the time, but the document was designed to prepare public opinion at home and abroad for the secret invasion now only two weeks away.
Clearly, it was an attempt to provide a form of philosophical underpinning for the imminent clandestine invasion.
Behind the scenes in Washington, a few voices were raised in opposition to the invasion.
Senator J William Fulbright, the outspoken Arkansas Democrat who headed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was invited by the President to ride with him to Palm Beach on March 30.
Fulbright, who had heard rumors of the invasion plans, handed a memorandum to the President when he boarded Air Force One, the presidential jet.
Build-Up ((43 Millions of people still think the United States instigated the Castillo-Armas invasion of Guatemala in 1954; but the United States hand in that enterprise was far better covered than it is today with regard to the Cuban exiles.
The prospect must also be faced that an invasion of Cuba by exiles would encounter formidable resistance which the exiles, by themselves, might not be able to overcome.
The question would then arise of whether the United States would be willing to let the enterprise fail (in the probably futile hope of concealing the United States role) or whether the United States would respond with progressive assistance as necessary to insure success.
This would include ultimately the use of armed force; and if we came to that, even under the paper cover of legitimacy, we would have undone the work of thirty years in trying to live down earlier interventions.
Fulbright also suggested that “even covert support of a Castro overthrow” probably violated the treaty of the Organization of American States as well as United States neutrality laws.
On April 4 the President met with his top advisers at the State Department.
Only Fulbright, who had been invited by the President to attend, spoke up firmly against the operation.
From the start the CIA had established liaison with the State Department to keep the tight circle of officials privy to the plan informed of its progress.
Late in 1960, when Christian A Herter was still Secretary of State, he had named Whiting Willauer, former Ambassador to Honduras, as his special assistant for the Cuban operation.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((44 The CIA assigned Tracy Barnes* to maintain liaison with Willauer.
After the Kennedy Administration took over, Willauer was dropped, but Barnes continued to report to the State Department.
Principally, he spoke to Adolf A Berle, a Latin American adviser to the President, and Thomas C Mann, then Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American affairs.
They were among the few department officials besides Dean Rusk who knew about the invasion.
Late in March, Under Secretary of State Chester Bowles, during a period as Acting Secretary, learned of the invasion plan.
He also asked Rusk to guarantee him half an hour to present his opposition to President Kennedy in the event the plan was approved.
However, Bowles came away from his talk with Rusk with the belief that there would be no large-scale invasion.
In the remaining two and a half weeks Bowles paid little attention to the matter; he had formed the impression it would be, at most, a small guerrilla landing.
Early in April the Cuban pilots at Retalhulen were handed sealed envelopes and told to open them only after they were in the air.
The orders were to proceed to Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, the misnamed Happy Valley that was to be their home for the next few weeks.
The entire air operation, including the American advisers, moved from Guatemala to Happy Valley.
The exile brigade was airlifted to Puerto Cabezas, their port of embarkation.
The twenty-five-year-old company, headed by Alfredo Garcia, owned half a dozen vessels.
It also had branch Offices in Houston, Texas, and Lake Charles, Louisiana, cities for which two of its ships were named, In the pre-Castro era it plied between East Coast ports, Havana and Central America, carrying rice and sugar.
Build-Up ((45 After Castro, Alfredo Garcia’s five sons, Eduardo, Marcos, Alfredo Jr,, Lisardo and Francisco, came to the United States.
The CIA needed a navy, and the Garcia Line, since it was Cubanowned and the only Cuban shipping company still operating from Havana, was perfect cover.
Working chiefly with Eduardo, the agency then mapped out a complex plan to get the vessels to Puerto Cabezas at the last possible moment.
Alfredo remained behind in Cuba, which further served to divert suspicion.
Their crews were told nothing at first, and believed they were on a normal voyage to Central America.
At Puerto Cabezas they were informed about the invasion and given the choice of leaving.
A few did—they were held by the CIA at Puerto Cabezas until the invasion was over.
Each of the ships had about twenty-five crewmen, so there were more than a hundred seamen in all who suddenly found themselves in the middle of a shooting war.
The CIA also purchased two World War II LCIs, the Blagar and Barbara J., and added them to the invasion fleet.
The Garcia Line provided cover as well as transportation; some of the exiles recruited by the CIA were handed papers to fill out that led them to believe they were signing up, technically at least, as able-bodied hands with the Garcia Line.
While the CIA assembled its secret navy, there were important political moves back in the United States.
The same day Federal Immigration agents in Miami arrested Rolando Masferrer, a notorious Batista henchman who, * The day after the invasion Castro seized the company, but, of course, Alfredo had already fled.
Later, disheartened by the failure of the invasion, he sold the ships that weren’t sunk and liquidated the steamship line.
Masferrer, who had fied Cuba the same day as Batista, was spirited to Jackson Memorial Hospital after his arrest and placed under guard.
Two days later a Federal grand jury indicted Masferrer on charges of conspiring to outfit and send a military expedition against Cuba, a violation of the United States neutrality laws.
Masferrer’s character and reputation are irrelevant to the cynical manner of his arrest.
Ten days after the Bay of Pigs disaster Federal Judge Emett C Choate ordered Masferrer released and accused the Federal Government of having shipped him off to a “government concentration camp” in Texas.
Assistant United States Attorney Paul Gifford said the Immigration Service acted on direct orders from President Kennedy.
Seven months later, on November 9, 1961, the government quietly dropped the case against Masferrer without explanation.
No activities engaged in by Cuban patriots which have been brought to our attention appear to be violations of our neutrality laws,” Build-Up ((47 final stage of preparation.
It was a case of a straight political arrest, something not normally associated with life in the United States.
In addition, the President believed that Masferrer’s arrest would demonstrate to the exiles and the world that the United States had no sympathy for Batista supporters.
On April 10, at a White House meeting, the final decision was made to change the landing site from Trinidad to the Bay of Pigs.
The CIA believed that this was a political and foreign-policy decision by the President, prompted by concern over potential world reaction.
There would be no shooting of civilians at the Bay of Pigs because hardly anyone lived there, while at Trinidad there was a sizable local population.
It was also thought that the landing at the Bay of Pigs would be virtually unopposed and would have the appearance of an effort to resupply guerrillas, of being a smaller and more spontaneous operation.
Despite the fact that the Joint Chiefs predicted the invasion would have Jess than an even chance at the Bay of Pigs, they went along with the choice.
The Chiefs normally make a distinction between the initial chances of success and ultimate success.
In this case, they pointed out that success after the establishment of a beachhead depended upon certain psychological factors inside Cuba, factors which it was not the responsibility of the military to assess.
The CIA predicted there would be such an uprising if the beachhead could be established and held.
Rather, it argued that all would depend on the success of the operation.
If the landing was THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((48 successful, Bissell expected defections among Cubans, although he did not expect them for at least a week after the invasion.
The plan was to establish a beachhead; then use the Bay of Pigs airstrip to strike at Castro’s communications, and other vital installations.
A new Cuban government would be declared at the beachhead by the Council members, and it would then be recognized by the United States.
Some of them were irritated by the continual changes in the invasion plan.
Accustomed to the strict discipline of an Eisenhower, they were bewildered by what they considered the informality and lack of procedures of the new administration.
Although Admiral Arleigh Burke has declined to comment on the Bay of Pigs, he was disturbed at the way the plan was being constantly modified.
At one point Burke was told that the Navy would have to stay outside the three-mile limit off Cuba.
He was first told that the Navy would not make contact with the invasion fleet at all; then that three destroyers could escort the ships, then two destroyers.
The Chiefs were told that the invasion was not a Pentagon operation and that they could give advice only when called upon.
Because of the secrecy involved, they were not allowed to take their staffs into their confidence; this, of course, cut down on their overall effectiveness.
It was made crystal-clear to the Pentagon that no United States armed forces were to be used in the actual invasion; however, Burke’s destroyers could escort the exile fleet to a point offshore, If the ships were spotted en route to Cuba from Puerto Cabezas, * After the invasion failed, the CIA was accused of making a faulty prediction that there would be an uprising.
In this event, United States ships and aircraft had the authority to protect the fleet against attack as it returned to Nicaragua.
In April, Burke was acting as the executive agent for the Joint Chiefs, In that role, and in his capacity as Chief of Naval Operations, he ordered elements of the Atlantic Fleet to move into position off Cuba.
Moving with the fleet was a battalion of Marines from their base at Vieques Island, off the eastern end of Puerto Rico.
The President had made it clear the Navy was not to take part in the invasion itself.
But it was possible that if the landing ran into trouble the President would change his mind and order the Navy and Marines to help.
For this reason Burke moved his ships into position off Cuba; he informed both Allen Dulles and the President of his action.
On April 12, at his news conference, he served notice that no United States forces would invade Cuba.
The next day Cuban crew members of the eight B-26s that were to fly in the April 15 raid went into security isolation at Happy Valley.
If forced down outside of Cuba, the pilots were instructed to say they were defecting FAR pilots.
This was so that their statements would dovetail with Zuniga’s cover story in Miami.
They were warned not to land at the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo.
Now, four days before D-Day, the CIA’s fleet sailed from Puerto Cabezas.
The second and fifth battalions were crammed aboard the Houston, along with large quantities of ammunition.
The third and fourth battalions, both heavy-weapons detachments, and the sixth infantry battalion were aboard the Rio Escondido and the other ships.
Their objective was Giron Beach, on the eastern edge THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((50 of the wide bay, which pokes like a finger into the southern coast of Cuba.
The first battalion, the paratroopers, would be going in by air behind the beaches.
On Saturday, April 15, as the fleet steamed for Cuba, the B-26 bombers struck.
Now, on Sunday, April 16, at Happy Valley, the CIA assembled the Cuban pilots.
The American advisers told the Cubans that Castro’s planes had been destroyed by the raid the previous day.
It showed gravel piled on the runways of the airstrip at the Bay of Pigs.
Aboard the Houston this Sunday, Private Mario Abril and the other men of E Company attended briefings by their commanders.
They were shown aerial photographs to help them memorize landmarks, “They gave us whiskey in little cans, real bad, yeah, black.
He told us not to smoke, not to light a light or anything, because we were getting near Cuba.
My squad leader woke me up, and when I got up, I saw the coast over there.
I saw, on my right, some lights, like a storm, you know, and they told me those were the other guys.
Invasion IT WAS MIDNIGHT in Manhattan, Sunday, April 16, when the telephone rang in the fashionable East Side apartment of Lem Jones.
The CIA man dictated the first communiqué, to be issued to the world by Jones in the name of the Cuban Revolutionary Council.
It had been a peaceful Sunday for Jones, and he had received no advance inkling that midnight would be the start of D-Day.
He knew the Council had met during the early afternoon at the Hotel THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((52 Lexington on 48th Street and Lexington Avenue.
In midafternoon Jones had called the hotel and tried to reach Miro Cardona.
He was puzzled when he was told that there was no answer, but thought little about it.
At about 3:30 P.M., CIA agents, avoiding the main exit, spirited Cardona, Hevia and the other members of the Council out of the hotel.
The Cubans were told only that they were being taken to Miami for something important.
They were driven by the CIA to Philadelphia, where they boarded a plane and were flown to Opa-locka.
There, for three days, the men who were to lead a free Cuba were virtually held prisoner in a barracks-like house, all but barren of furniture.
The call from Washington had instructed him to take the communiqué across town to the Hotel Statler and show it to Antonio Silio, the secretary treasurer of the Council, and Emesto Aragon, Cardona’s right-hand man.
He grabbed a taxi outside of his apartment at 39th Street and Second Avenue and took it to the Statler, where he showed the announcement to the two Cubans.
Then, at 2:00M., he started distributing it, still by taxi, to the wire services.
Invasion ((53 At Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, at 1:15 A.M. on Monday, April 17, six B-26 bombers were lined up on the runway, ready to carry out the second strike against Castro’s air bases.
Their targets were Camaguey, Cienfuegos, San Antonio de los Banos, Camp Libertad, Santa Clara and also Managua, an Army base where U-2 photos had shown more than forty heavy tanks lined up in the open.
They would strike just before dawn, finishing the destruction of Castro’s air force that had begun with the first strike two days before.
The men in the B-26s had not yet learned of Richard Bissell’s message from Washington, canceling the air strike on orders from the President.
But when 1:40 A.M. came and went with no clearance to take off, they realized something had gone wrong.
At 1:55 A.M. the Cuban pilots were told their mission had been canceled on orders from Washington.
Instead, they were to fly to the beaches to try to provide air cover for the landing.
Aboard the Houston, Mario Abril noticed the ship had come almost to a complete stop.
My squad was one of the first to get there, Company E We got in @ boat and run for the coast.
It was a wood boat, like you might use for water skiing, with an Evinrude outboard motor, with gray paint, the motor I mean.
It stopped in the middle of the Bay of Pigs when we were two miles away from shore, so we had to start it up again and they were shooting.
An unexpected reef was encountered as the ships moved in, and it slowed down the landing operation.
At Happy Valley the disappointed B-26 pilots climbed down from their cockpits.
New plans had to be drawn up on the spot because of the changed nature of the mission.
It took a B-26 two hours and fifty minutes to fly from Happy Valley to the Bay of Pigs.
The bombers had enough fuel to stay over the beaches for two hours if need be and still make it back to base.
So it was decided that the bombers would fly over the beaches in pairs, every half-hour.
As exile Brigade 2506 was moving ashore, Castro received word of the invasion.
He ordered his T-33 jets and Sea Furies to take off before dawn for the Bay of Pigs.
At 4:00 A.M., as General Cabell was pleading with Secretary Rusk at the Sheraton Park Hotel in Washington, Mario Abril’s E Company made contact with the enemy.
An army of liberation is in the island of Cuba to fight with you against the Communist tyranny of the unbalanced Fidel Castro . . . attack the Fidelista wherever he may be found.
Listen for instructions on the radio, comply with them and communicate your actions by radio.
On the Houston, the prow machine-gunner Manuel Perez Salvador had his hands full.
Perez Salvador, a former catcher for the Fort Lauderdale Braves, a Class C team in the Florida International League, could hardly believe he had been in Miami only twelve days before.
He had been recruited for the invasion at the last moment and flown to Happy Valley on April 5 with forty-seven others.
After one day’s training as a machine-gunner, Perez Salvador was assigned to the Houston.
Now, at 5:30 A.M., he peered through his gun sights and saw the first T-33s and Sea Furies begin a series of attacks on the ship.
Sergio Garcia had taken off from Happy Valley at 1:16 A.M. at the controls of a C-46 transport loaded with paratroopers.
Their target was the strategic Y-shaped crossroads at San Blas, inland behind Giron Beach.
When all the cargo and all but the last paratrooper had been dropped, the cable running the length of the plane snapped.
It broke the leg of a parachute drop officer, jammed the tail controls of the plane and left one young paratrooper dangling helplessly from the plane at the end of the cable.
He and another man managed to pull the paratrooper in and discovered he was only a young boy.
An hour later, as they were winging back to Happy Valley, THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((56 Gomez cut open the boy’s boot and saw that his leg had been badly gashed when the cable snapped.
Because Cuban Revolutionary Council members are now totally occupied with the dramatic events unfolding in Cuba, their views will be made known to the press solely through the Cuban Revolutionary Council’s spokesman, Dr.
The Council may have been totally occupied, but it was not totally free.
Held in their barracks house at Opa-locka, the Cuban leaders were chafing.
They were told they had been brought there so they could be flown to the beachhead as soon as it was secured.
The United States would then recognize them as the legitimate government of Cuba.t The Council leaders donned their khaki uniforms, in readiness.
They were allowed to take walks along the hard-surface road in front of the house.
But when Carlos Hevia, who was to be the foreign affairs minister of a free Cuba, went to take a stroll, a CIA man warned him not to go very far.
The area was rough and wild, the CIA man insisted, and the surrounding shrubbery was full of rattlesnakes.
Mario and the men of E Company had pushed back the militiamen and seized a T-shaped crossroads near Playa Larga.
We shouted the * Although Jones and the Council later came in for some criticism for issuing press releases from a Madison Avenue office, the truth is that he did not write any of them.
Each of the six bulletins was dictated directly to Jones by the CIA. t Castro had realized the danger of this.
Then we saw there were three women and two girls, little ones, that’s all, in the truck, and a couple of militiamen.
By dawn Castro’s air force was taking a heavy toll of the invasion fleet.
About 9:00 A.M., following a direct hit from the air, the Houston began to sink.
Captain Luis Morse managed to edge the transport onto a reef a mile and a half from shore to keep it from going under completely.
The onetime professional baseball player stripped to his shorts, kicked off his shoes and jumped into the Bay of Pigs.
At 9:15 A.M. in San Juan, Puerto Rico, CIA Director Allen Dulles mounted the speaker’s rostrum in the La Concha Hotel to the applause of the thousand members of the Young Presidents Organization.
Joaquin Varela, a slight, twenty-eight-year-old former Cuban Air Force pilot, led the relays of B-26s over the beaches.
With Castro’s air force still in action, the bombers were flying straight to disaster.
They were just leaving the beach, after firing all their rockets, when their bomber was hit in one engine by a Castro fighter.
Crespo feathered the engine, radioed Happy Valley and began limping home at low altitude.
Chirrino Piedra, the twenty-five-year-old pilot so well liked by * The two words together mean black eagle.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((58 his comrades, was also turning from the beach when his B-26 was hit in the tail.
The plane exploded instantly, killing Piedra and his co-pilot, Jose A Fernandez.
Matias Farias, only twenty-two, tried to make a forced landing at the little airstrip now in exile hands at Giron Beach.
The piles of gravel that had alarmed the CIA when spotted by the U-2 on Sunday had been cleared away.
But Farias, coming in for a landing, flipped over and his B-26 lost its tail.
Farias, slightly wounded, survived and was flown out in a C-46 two days later.
Crispin L, Garcia, a short, dark-haired pilot, fought over the beaches but ran short of fuel.
He landed at Key West, refueled and took off for Happy Valley with his co-pilot, Juan M Gonzalez Romero.
About a year later, during a search for a missing P-51, Crispin Garcia’s mangled B-26 was found on a hillside eighty miles northwest of Happy Valley.
Antonio Soto, a small chestnut-haired ex-Cuban military pilot flew as “Paloma II” and was hit in one engine.
He and his co-pilot, Benito R “Campesino” Gonzalez, were flown back to Puerto Cabezas, but their plane remained behind on British territory.
Demetrio Perez, riding the co-pilot seat of one of the bombers, looked at his watch as he crossed the south coast of Cuba en route to the Bay of Pigs.
He and the pilot, thirtyfour-year-old Raul Vianello, were only two minutes behind schedule.
The two fliers had been plagued by bad luck since Saturday, when one engine of their bomber burst into flames as they were taking off for the first strike against Castro’s bases.
Now, on April 17, they made it off the ground, but ever since take-off they had noticed a persistent smell of gasoline in the cabin.
Remembering their previous embarrassment, the two did not want to return to Happy Valley to face their friends.
They radioed Soto to come closer for a look, but when he did, he was unable to spot the trouble.
Perez and Vianello met Varela as the squadron leader was reInvasion ((59 turning from the beaches.
As they reached the beach, another pilot warmed that a “T-bird” was loose in the area.
The bomber turned inland, flew low over the swamps and blew up a Castro machine-gun nest that commanded a highway to the beach.
Then the two fliers spotted a large convoy about to enter the sugar-mill town of Australia.
By the time the bomber received radio confirmation that it was, the convoy was in the town.
Rather than shoot at civilians, the fliers waited until the convoy emerged on the other side.
As it came out, Perez saw a white ambulance with a red cross on its roof, followed by a jeep, a truck and a tank.
As they swooped low over the convoy for a better look, they were amazed to see Castro’s militia waving their caps and guns at the plane in greeting.
Then they realized the militiamen had not noticed the blue stripes under the wings, the only distinguishing marks between the exile bombers and Castro’s B-26s.
Some of the militiamen were still waving when the bomber made a second pass, this time with its .§0-caliber machine guns blazing.
Perez later claimed the attack was justified because the ambulance had armed militiamen in and around it.
At 2:15 P.M., its ammunition gone and fuel running low, the bomber turned for home.
Just as Vianello attempted to climb into a bank of clouds for cover, a T-33 caught the bomber with a storm of bullets.
Then, before Perez jumped, Vianello, who had a wife and three children, reached over and shook hands.
As he plummeted through the air he was unable, at first, to find the D-ring on his chute.
The parachute billowed open, and the orange and white silk overhead was a beautiful sight to Perez.
He looked THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((60 up in time to see the bomber burst into flames and nose-dive into the ocean.
Mario Zuniga, who had returned secretly from Miami the previous day, flew support over the beaches with Oscar Vega Vera, his co-pilot.
They returned safely, as did the B-26s flown by Gonzalo Herrera, Varela, Mario Alvarez Cortina and Rene Garcia.
Crespo, with one propeller feathered and no compass, maintained radio contact as Happy Valley tried to guide him home.
Crespo was also in contact with a C-54 pilot who attempted to persuade him to land at Grand Cayman Island.
They were never told why their mission had been changed at the last moment from an air strike against Castro’s bases to air support over the beaches.
Their valiant efforts at such a high cost had not really been very effective over the beaches.
With the Houston out of action, the men of the second battalion were Critically short of the ammunition and supplies the ship car* It was the start of a weird adventure for Perez, who followed orders and stuck to his cover story that he was a defecting Castro pilot.
From there he was flown to Guantanamo, smuggled across the bay in a launch to the main Navy base and grilled by Navy Intelligence, whom he exasperated by repeating his CIA cover story.
Only after the Navy threatened to send Perez “back” to Havana, did he tell the truth.
He met General Maxwell D Taylor, the President’s military representative, and even made it to the White House.
All the while Perez was being kept in a luxurious Alexandria, Virginia, motel.
Still wearing the parachute boots in which he had jumped, Perez returned to Miami.
Invasion ((6r ried, In the Zapata swamps Mario Abril, with no food and little ammunition, skirmished with the enemy on Monday afternoon.
They were only ten or fifteen guys, but they were giving us a hard time because they didn’t shoot all the time.
And so this guy in a tree, I shot him down, he kept hanging from there.
Grim-faced and chain-smoking, he charged that the CIA had poured $500,000 a month into the invasion preparations.
On Monday afternoon, for the second time in forty-eight hours, Adlai Stevenson rose and denied the Cuban’s allegations.
Bundy, following developments on the AP ticker, had hastily briefed Stevenson that morning in the office of the United States mission to the UN, Then he accompanied Stevenson over to the UN, donned his hat and coat and flew back to the White House.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((62 “The American people are entitled to know whether we are intervening in Cuba or intend to do so in the future.
On the other side of the globe, at his Black Sea villa near Sochi, Nikita S Khrushchev conferred with his impassive Foreign Minister, Andrei Gromyko.
They drafted a note threatening to come to Castro’s aid unless Kennedy halted the invasion.
In the Roman era persecuted Christians would draw a fish to indicate a clandestine meeting was to be held.
To Cubans, a phrase about fish rising or standing could have an earthy and much more graphic meaning.
The principal battle of the Cuban revolt against Castro will be fought in the next few hours.
Our partisans in every town and village in Cuba will receive, in a manner known only to them, the message which will spark a tremendous wave of internal conflict against the tyrant . . . before dawn the island of Cuba will rise up en masse in a co-ordinated wave of sabotage and rebellion which will sweep Communism from our country . .. our clandestine radio has been giving instructions to the insurgents throughout the island.
When the fish is placed in a vertical position it is a sign that internal revolt is in full swing.
Invasion ((63 By this hour on Monday night, Dulles was hurrying home from Puerto Rico.
In Washington, the full disastrous effect of the cancellation of the second air strike was being felt.
The exiles had, in the two days since April 15, lost ten of their original force of sixteen B-26s.
Daniel Fernandez Mon, Gaston Perez, Jose A Crespo, Lorenzo Perez, Chirrino Piedra, Jose A Fernandez, Crispin L Garcia, Juan M Gonzalez Romero, Eddy Gonzalez and Raul Vianello.
Under the circumstances, Washington permitted a second air strike against Castro’s bases to be reinstated.
The whole point of that strike had been to catch Castro’s air force on the ground before dawn.
The strike was led by Joaquin Varela, despite the fact that he and his co-pilot, Tomas Afont, had flown that morning.
Under orders to hit only military targets, he dropped no bombs and returned to Happy Valley.
The second plane, piloted by Ignacio Rojas and Esteban Bovo Caras, developed engine trouble and turned back before reaching the target.
So did the third plane, piloted by Miguel A Carro and Eduardo Barea Guinea.
Two hours later, at 10:00 P.M., two more B-26s took off from Happy Valley.
The start of Tuesday, April 18, found the exile brigade strung out along three separate beachheads on Cuba’s southern shore.
To the east of the Bay of Pigs, the exiles held Giron Beach and had moved inland behind it.
The battalion was alone, because the men of the fifth battalion, swimming ashore from the Houston, had been carried by the current to a point about twelve miles farther south of Playa Larga.
As a result, the second and fifth battalions never joined up as planned.
Our tanks moved into position on both sides of the road, The first Castro tank showed up with its lights on and the hatch closed.
One of our tanks shot him and stopped him right in the middle of the road.
Our tank had no ammunition, so it started pushing him on the side and threw him out of the road.
The guys came out of the tank with their hands up and that was real great.
Help the brave soldiers of the liberation army . . . electrical plants must Invasion ((65 not supply power today to the few industries that the regime is trying to keep in operation.
Today at 7:45 A.M., when we give the signal on this station, all the lights in your house should be turned on; all electrical appliances should be connected.
Mario and the second battalion got the bad news; they would have to retreat.
I think we won that battle during the night against tanks with no ammunition, no support, no fifth battalion, which was in another place.
So I got on a truck and I was riding to Giron Beach, twenty miles away down the line of the coast.
There we got rest and I got a couple of crackers and a bottle of water.
The exile air force was still in action, despite the long odds against it.
A thunderstorm swelled the little river behind the airstrip at Happy Valley on Tuesday afternoon, and sent the scorpions and snakes near the operations building scuttling for cover.
Their target was a large Castro armored column moving toward the shrinking beachhead at Giron.
Mario Zuniga flew in one of the bombers, with the chief of the exile air operations, Manuel Villafana, as his co-pilot.
Luis Cosme, Villafana’s deputy, took over as the operations officer at Happy Valley.
Rene Garcia, Antonio Soto and Gustavo Ponzoa flew three of the B-26s in the strike force.
Despite the presidential pledge that no Americans would participate in the fighting, the other two bombers were flown by American CIA pilots.
His co-pilot was THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((66 Gustavo Villoldo, a Cuban.
Alberto Perez Sordo, a twenty-twoyear-old exile, flew as co-pilot with the other American.
It took the six bombers only twenty-five minutes to destroy the Castro convoy on the road to the beach.
The same day, April 18, the exile air force received four P-51 Mustangs from the Nicaraguan Government.
Cuban freedom fighters in the Matanzas area are being attacked by heavy Soviet tanks and Mig aircraft | which have destroyed sizable amounts of medical supplies and equipment.
Meanwhile, the note Khrushchev had drafted at Sochi the day before was transmitted to Washington.
The Soviet Premier charged the United States had armed and trained the exiles.
He threatened to give Castro “all necessary assistance” unless Washington stopped the invasion.
Soviet Ambassador Mikhail A Menshikov was handed a note by Rusk at the State Department.
In the event of outside intervention, Kennedy declared, the United States would “immediately” honor its treaty obligations to the hemisphere.
In the UN, Soviet Ambassador Zorin mocked Stevenson’s continued denials of United States responsibility for the invaders.
A few moments earlier Carlos Alejos, Roberto’s brother, rose in the UN and said he had just retumed from a trip to Guatemala, and wished to state, in answer to Cuba’s charges, that the forces which * During his June 16 tour of the battlefield, Castro admitted to newsmen that his forces had made the error of advancing on the open road that cuts through marshes, and as a result were an easy target for the exile air force. t Castro had no Migs in the air during the invasion.
Invasion ((67 had landed in Cuba had not been trained in Guatemala and had not come from Guatemalan territory.
Guatemala, Alejos solemnly assured the UN, had never allowed and would never allow its territory to be used for the organization of acts of aggression against its sister American republics.
At the White House, that Tuesday night, more than a thousand guests had gathered for the President’s traditional reception for members of Congress and their wives.
At exactly 10:15 P.M. the President and Jacqueline Kennedy descended the main stairs.
Kennedy wore a lovely sleeveless floor-length sheath of pink and white straw lace, with matching pink slippers.
Vice-President Lyndon B Johnson and his wife Lady Bird, wearing her salmon-pink inaugural gown, joined in.
Midway through the first number the Kennedys and the Johnsons switched partners.
Still in his formal dress, the President met at midnight at the White House with his highest military and civilian advisers.
The invasion was now near collapse, At the meeting Richard Bissell maintained that the operation could still be saved if the President would authorize the use of Navy jets from a carrier then stationed offshore between Jamaica and Cuba.
But the President had repeatedly stated, both privately and publicly , that no United States armed forces would be used in Cuba.
Bissell, who had been so deeply engaged in the Cuban operation for more than a year, argued desperately in favor of United States airpower to save it now.
General Lemnitzer, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, supported Burke’s plea for Navy jets over the beaches, as did General White, Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
Then Burke suggested that Navy planes be allowed to fly over the beaches, but that there be no United States markings on the planes.
As the group talked, the clock ticked past midnight and into Wednesday, April 19.
The President authorized the unmarked Navy jets from the carrier Essex to fly over the Bay of Pigs for one hour just after dawn.
They were to support an air-toground strike that morning by the B-26s from Happy Valley.
The Navy jets were to fly “dead cover,” which meant they were to interpose themselves between the bombers and any enemy aircraft.
In this way they were to try to protect the B-26s against attack by Castro planes.
Under the President’s authorization, however, they could fire back if fired upon.
If the Castro planes fired, the Navy jets would not be able to make the fine distinction of whether the attackers were firing at the bombers or at them.
By interposing themselves between the B-26s and Castro’s planes, in other words, they would draw fire and be able to fire back.
It was telephoned to the Joint Chiefs communication center at the Pentagon, sent immediately to CINCLANT, in Norfolk, Virginia, relayed from there to the Commander, Second Fleet, and thence to the carrier.
At Happy Valley a 1:00 A.M. meeting was also in progress, in the building that served as the air operations center.
Among those present were General Doster, Riley W Shamburger, Jr., a CIA pilot who was a close friend of Doster’s and on leave as a major in the Alabama Air National Guard, and Luis Cosme, the Cuban operations deputy.
Invasion ((69 All realized that the situation was grim and that something had to be done.
The American advisers agreed to fly night missions starting that night, to relieve the weary Cubans.
The Americans were not ordered to do so; they volunteered, although it was understood when they signed up with the CIA that they might at some point have to fly combat missions.
Now the pledge that no United States armed forces and no Americans would be involved was doubly violated, since American CIA pilots were flying in the invasion and Navy jets were to screen them against attack.
Two more Americans, Thomas Willard Ray and Leo Francis Baker, flew in another.
One was a tall, skinny pilot known simply as “Joe,” whose co-pilot was also an American.
Three more Cubans, including Zuniga, were scheduled to fly, but operations were halted before they took off.
Bissell left the White House meeting with the understanding that the Navy jets would appear over the beaches at dawn simultaneously with the B-26s.
What happened next has since become clouded in a welter of conflicting interpretations.
Bissell, of course, did not have the responsibility of ordering the Navy jets into the air, but he did have the task of notifying the exile air force.
From his secret office he relayed the news that United States air cover would be available for one hour at dawn to support the air-to-ground strike by the CIA B-26s.
He repeated it verbally to the colonel on duty at the CIA office, who in turn transmitted it to Happy Valley.
Bissell’s message reached Happy Valley shortly before Shamburger, Gray, Ray and Baker took off.
Somewhere along the line there was a fatal mix-up between the CIA and the Navy.
At first the CIA thought that the President’s order had reached the carrier so conservatively worded that the jets THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((7o had been unable to take hostile action against Castro’s planes because the jets had not been fired upon.
In the secret post-mortem over the Bay of Pigs, it was officially concluded that the bombers had arrived after the jets had already come and gone, after the clock had run out on the one hour of air support.
How this happened may never be entirely unscrambled (there has been no public explanation), but the evidence pointed directly to the incredible conclusion that the mix-up had occurred because of confusion over time zones.
The Bay of Pigs and Washington were both on Eastern Standard Time, but Nicaragua time was an hour earlier.
But because of the difference in time zones, it was 7:30 A.M. at the Bay of Pigs —an hour too late.
The CIA and the Navy did not co-ordinate their respective orders to the fleet and to Happy Valley.
Burke simply sent his order to the fieet and Bissell sent an order to Happy Valley.
In any event, the Navy pilots reported they never made contact with CIA bombers.
He heard the cries for help of the four American fliers as they were shot down, and he turned back.
The pilots were called together by Luis Cosme, the Cuban operations deputy.
They were willing, but since another trip over the Invasion ((71 beaches meant almost certain death, they understandably demanded to know why they were being sent out.
It was the sort of vague promise that the Cubans, by this time, were fed up with.
In four days of combat the exile air force had flown more than thirty-six missions, against overwhelming odds.
It had fought an air battle against faster, more maneuverable planes, jets and conventional fighters that were supposed to have been destroyed on the ground.
It had suffered fifty-percent losses—twelve of its twenty-four B-26s were gone.
This final day of the invasion found Mario Abril with his battalion west of Giron Beach fighting against the militia as the perimeter was gradually pushed back.
At that time Erneido Oliva, the battalion commander, he told us everything was real bad and we were doing pretty bad, no support at all from the Americans.
At Giron Beach I got water, and with a couple of friends of mine, I started running for the woods.
This would have been long after the one hour of air cover at dawn ordered by the President, however.
Castro’s forces were engaged in mopping-up operations at the Bay of Pigs.
At the same hour the indignant members of the Cuban Revolutionary Council, free at last from their Opa-locka confinement, were meeting secretly with Kennedy at the White House.
Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., the Harvard historian and assistant to the President, and Adolf Berle had flown to Miami during the night to placate the Cuban leaders, after which the Council was flown to Washington for a meeting that was both emotional and difficult.
Regretfully we admit tragic losses in today’s action among a small holding force which courageously fought Soviet tanks and artillery while being attacked by Russian Mig aircraft—a gallantry which allowed the major portion of our landing party to reach the Escambray mountains.
And it is certainly true that we did not expect to face, unscathed, Soviet armaments directed by Communist advisers.
Mario Abril, together with hundreds of his fellows, was captured the next day.
He returned to the United States with the rest of the brigade in the prisoner exchange of Christmas, 1962.
Manuel Perez Salvador, of the Fort Lauderdale Braves, lived for ten days on land crabs and muddy water after he had swum ashore from the Houston.
He still bears round black scars the size and Invasion ((73 shape of kitchen-faucet washers.
He and a companion had just found a tin of Russian canned meat on the beach and were trying to open it when a militia speedboat rounded the bend with a machine gun trained on them.
A few managed to escape in small boats and were later picked up at sea by American Navy and merchant ships.
Sergio Garcia, the pilot who had refused to drop the wounded young paratrooper over San Blas, was assigned to a final mission.
The leaflets were meant to have been dropped over Cuba ahead of the advancing and victorious invaders.
Hundreds of miles off the Nicaraguan coast, out of sight of land, Garcia banked and began the last air drop of the Bay of Pigs.
The Case of the Birmingham Widows Four wibows whose husbands had died at the Bay of Pigs were living in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963.
During the long, hot summer of that year, Birmingham was a city of fear and violence.
But some of the widows lived in a special atmosphere of fear that had nothing to do with the city’s racial troubles.
There was danger that if they said too much the same invisible hand might cut the payments off.
Margaret H Ray, a soft-spoken, attractive brunette, these fears were also compounded by talk of lie-detector tests, suspicion that her telephone was being tapped, that she was under surveillance.
For The Case of the Four Birmingham Widows is, in some respects, a twentieth-century tragedy.
The husbands of these four women were Thomas Willard Ray, Leo Francis Baker, Riley W Shamburger, Jr., and Wade Carroll Gray, the American CIA airmen who had died on April 19, 1961, while flying in combat at the Bay of Pigs.
One key to the mystery of all that has since happened to the widows could be found in a small two-story building on a quiet palm-lined street in Miami Springs, Florida, not far to the north of Miami International Airport.
It was, the sign out front proclaimed, the law office of Alex E Carlson.
Carlson, a big, blond, heavy-set man, towering well over six feet, saw three years of combat during World War II in New Guinea, the Philippines and Okinawa.
Most of his clients appeared to be obscure airline and air-cargo firms operating out of Miami International Airport.
But Carlson’s most intriguing business activity was the DoubleChek Corporation.
The “resident agent” was listed as “Wesley R Pillsbury,” at the same address.
In 1960 the CIA, having been given the green light by President Eisenhower to organize the Cuban exiles, began looking about for American pilots to serve as PIs—pilot instructors.
Because the Cubans would be flying the CIA B-26s, the agency wanted Americans who had flown the plane in wartime.
The CIA decided to do its recruiting through Alex E Carlson and the Double-Chek Corporation.
The agency uses cover of this THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((76 sort when it recruits pilots for a covert operation.
To find the pilots, the CIA naturally turned to the Air National Guard in Alabama, Virginia and Arkansas, the last state units to fly the obsolescent B-26.
From these states, some two dozen pilots were signed up by the CIA, acting through Double-Chek.
The majority were from Alabama, and, in turn, the bulk of these were from the Birmingham area.
General Reid Doster, the congenial, bulldog-faced commanding officer of the Alabama Air National Guard, was a key man in the CIA operation at Retalhuleu.
Because the Alabama Air Guard was under the supervision of the oth Tactical Air Force at Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina, Doster went to see Major General David W Hutchinson, the commanding general there.
Hutchinson approved the leaves of absence; the men, including Doster, joined the CIA as civilians.
Each of the American pilots was sworn to secrecy by the CIA, with the exception of Doster, who gave his word as a general officer.
All pledged they would never talk about what happened in the training camps or at the Bay of Pigs.
Thomas Willard Ray, age thirty when he died, was born in Birmingham on March 15, 1931.
He began dating Margaret Hayden while he was still in Tarrant High School.
He served in the Air Force from 1950 to 19§2 and was discharged as a staff sergeant.
In December of that year “Pete” Ray joined the Hayes International Corporation, a large aircraft modification company with its main plant at the Birmingham airport.
Ray was a technical inspector at Hayes, but he kept up his pilot’s proficiency by flying the B-26s and F-84s at the Alabama National Guard.
Thomas, a crew-cut blond-haired boy of eight when his father died, and Janet Joy, six.
Five years before the Bay of Pigs, the Rays built * Hutchinson later retired from the Air Force and became an oilman in Oklahoma City.
He said, on March 8, 1963, that five, not four, American pilots had died flying in the Cuban operation but implied that the fifth pilot was not lost in combat.
The Case of the Birmingham Widows ((77 a handsome brick home in Center Point, a Birmingham suburb.
Ray did not particularly like flying jets, and, with several buddies, he switched to the Army Reserve.
Margaret wrote to her husband c/o Joseph Greenland, and he wrote back, with his letters bearing the return address of different Air Force bases.
Pete came home only once, on April 10, for a two-day visit; he had a deep suntan.
During that time he did not tell his wife what he was doing, but she had begun to piece it together from newspaper stories and her own suspicions.
He indicated that “they” might do this in order to check on whether there had been any security leaks from the wives in Birmingham.
On April 15 Margaret was fixing a girl friend’s hair at her mother’s house when her friend showed her a newspaper telling of the B-26 strike against Cuba.
Leo Baker, thirty-four at the time of his death, was a native of Boston.
A short, dark-haired, handsome man, he was thought to THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((78 be Italian by many of his friends because of his appearance and the fact that he owned two pizza shops in Birmingham.
Actually, he was the son of a French mother and a father who came from Newfoundland.
He entered the Air Force in 1944, served as a flight engineer and was discharged as a technical sergeant.
Baker flew in the Korean War, then, on Lincoln’s Birthday, 1957, joined Hayes as a flight engineer.
The following year an attractive, blue-eyed brunette walked into Leo’s Pizza Shop.
Although born in Kentucky, she was raised in Birmingham and was graduated from Woodlawn High School there.
He worked hard—he could not abide lazy people—and his small restaurant business prospered.
He told Cathy he was expecting a phone call and it came while he was gone.
But he told her she could write to him c/o Joseph Greenland at the Chicago address.
His return mail came once from Washington, but usually it was postmarked Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
One picture post card from that city showed a motel with a tropical-fish pool.
One weekend Leo returned to Birmingham carrying a plastic bag full of tropical fish.
During this period Baker told his wife he was dropping supplies over Cuba and training pilots.
He arrived on a Saturday and left on a Sunday, and that was the last time Cathy ever saw him.
The Case of the Birmingham Widows ((79 Cathy believed he then went to Guatemala.
She later learned he had won $300 in a poker game in Central America before the invasion.
Riley W Shamburger, Jr., the oldest of the four fliers, was born in Birmingham on November 17, 1924.
They had dated for twelve years before their marriage, through grammar school and Woodlawn High.
A combat pilot in World War II and Korea, Shamburger was a big breezy extrovert who loved to fly.
A test pilot at Hayes, he was also a major in the Alabama Air National Guard, and was its operations officer at the Birmingham airfield.
The Shamburgers were part of a beer-and-barbecue, happygo-lucky crowd of Air Guardsmen and their wives who frequently socialized together.
Aside from flying, Riley liked nothing better than to sit in front of the TV set with a case of beer, eating his favorite food, “parched” peanuts.
He did not say where he was going, but about once a week he returned to Birmingham, He and Doster would fly in together.
Sometimes they would bring news of other Birmingham acquaintances—such as Colonel Joe Shannon—who were part of the mysterious operation.
Once, when Riley returned for a visit, he told how the boys had rigged up a beer joint in Central America named after their favorite bar in Birmingham.
Over the makeshift saloon a pair of red panties flew in the breeze as a cocktail flag.
Wade Carroll Gray, born in Birmingham on March 1, 1928, and thirty-three when he died, had also once been employed at Hayes, as a radio and electronics technician.
They settled down in Pinson, a suburb where Wade had lived all of his life.
Gray left home on February 5, 1961, the same day that Pete Ray said good-bye to Margaret.
Some of the letters Violet Gray wrote were returned to her with her husband’s effects after his death.
Among these effects were matchbooks indicating he had been in both Guatemala and Nicaragua.
This, then, is the background of the four Americans, and of how they came to be in Happy Valley on Wednesday, April 19, 1961.
On that day all four volunteered to fly B-26s over the beaches to relieve the exhausted Cuban pilots.
Shortly before they took off, the four CIA fliers were told they would receive air support from the carrier-based Navy jets.
Because of the mix-up over time zones, the B-26s got to the Bay of Pigs after the Navy jets had already gone.
Exactly how the two planes were shot down is a subject of varying accounts, but most versions agree that Shamburger and Gray crashed at sea and that Ray and Baker crashed inland.
At 10:30 * Albert C Persons, managing editor of the weekly Birmingham Examiner, said on March 8, 1963, that the plane carrying Shamburger and Gray was shot down by a T-33 jet.
Doster canceled his mission because Persons had experience flying carrier aircraft rather than the B-26.
His documents reveal his flight license number, 08323-LM, which expires 24 December 1962.
The registered address of the Yankee pilot is 48 Beacon Street, Boston.
A Havana wire-service dispatch identified the pilot as Leo Francis Berliss.
In Oklahoma City the Federal Aviation Agency said it had no record at its headquarters there of the pilot’s license as reported by Havana.
Reporters in Boston who checked the Beacon Street address found an apartment house.
The State Department in Washington said it had no one by that name in either the civilian or military branch of the government.
What Castro had in his hands, of course, was Leo Baker’s CIAprepared credentials, made out with a fake last name.
Presumably, the papers were recovered from Baker’s body after the bomber crashed inland.
One week later, on April 26, Margaret Ray received a visit from Thomas F McDowell, a Birmingham lawyer who was the law partner of Frank M Dixon, a former governor of Alabama.
Ray that it was believed her husband had been lost at sea in a C-46 transport plane.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((82 For the next week Margaret Ray went about her normal life, going to church, to the PTA, to the supermarket.
This time he brought with him a big blond man he introduced as an attorney from Miami.
Ray the story about the C-46, but on this visit they said there was no longer any hope that her husband was alive.
Carlson said he would tell the same story to the Birmingham newspapers the next day.
Carlson and McDowell visited Margaret for about thirty minutes at her mother’s home.
He announced that the four fliers were missing and presumed dead after their C-46 had left on a cargo mission from an airstrip somewhere in Central America.
Carlson said he was an attorney representing the Double-Chek Corporation of Miami.
He said Double-Chek had put some anti-Castro Cubans in touch with the fliers early in April.
He said the Double-Chek Corporation had contacted the four on behalf of an organization which requested that its identity remain confidential.
He said that Double-Chek had hired the four at a monthly salary to fly cargo.
To cover its role, the CIA was willing to imply that the four dead Americans were mercenaries.
He was an operations officer for The Case of the Birmingham Widows ((83 the Air National Guard.
Gray told a newspaper interviewer her husband was no soldier of fortune either.
She said he was paid $1,990 a month during the short period of time he was away.
He said they had spotted one of the plane’s engines floating in the water.
Three days after he returned to Miami, Carlson told the press he was sure the C-46 had been flying a support mission for the Cuban invasion.
But he said the mission was not connected with the main exile organization, the Democratic Revolutionary Front.
Carlson’s partner in Double-Chek, Raymond W Cox, told Miami newsmen that the corporation originally was formed to buy a race horse.
Shortly after Carlson’s appearance in Birmingham in May, 1961, mysterious checks began arriving for the four widows.
At first the checks were issued by the Hialeah-Miami Springs Bank and were signed by Carlson.
Later they were increased to $245, or a bit more than $6,000 a year for each of the widows.
The checks from Bankers Trust were simply signed by an officer of the bank.
On May 17, 1961, Carlson wrote to Cathy Baker on his law-office letterhead.
Double Check Corporation has decided to extend the regular monthly salary through the 4th day of June, 1961, but is regretably convinced of the finality of your husTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((84 band’s fate.
Nevertheless, beginning June 5th, on a monthly basis, you will receive regular benefit allotments, as provided for by your husband’s employment contract.
Again let me express my sincere feelings of condolance in your time of bereavement, and should you have any questions or problems, please feel free to call upon our attorneys in Birmingham for help.
Very truly yours, Alex E Carlson, Attomey for Double-Check Peculiarly, Carlson seemed unsure both in this letter and in numerous public statements of whether the firm of which he was president was called Double-Check or Double-Chek, as it was incorporated in the State of Florida.
By “our attorneys in Birmingham,” Carlson meant McDowell, who continued to act as a sort of self-appointed overseer of the widows’ affairs.
The widows were under the impression that McDowell had a background in Navy Intelligence, and believed he had something to do with the checks that they receive.
As this surrealistic chain of events unfolded, Riley Shamburger’s mother began to try to do something about it.
Riley’s father was a retired city fireman, a semi-invalid who moved about their Birmingham home in a wheel chair.
But Riley’s mother, who refused to believe her son was dead, carried on an energetic correspondence with the Federal Government.
She even wrote to the Swiss Government, which handled affairs for the United States in Cuba after the break in diplomatic relations between Washington and Havana.
She received a reply, dated August 11, 1961, from Denman F Stanfield, the acting chief of the Protection and Representation Division.
Reference is made to your letter of July 9, 1961, concerning the welfare and whereabouts of your son.
If you will provide your son’s full name, date and place The Case of the Birmingham Widows ((85 of birth, last known address here or abroad, and any other pertinent information that would assist in locating him, the Department would be pleased to make inquiries.
A few weeks later she received a letter, dated September 14, 1961, from Major Sidney Ormerod, United States Air Force, Division of Administrative Services.
Your letters to the Department of State concerning your son have been referred to me for reply.
The records in this office do not contain the circumstances surrounding your son’s accident.
For more detailed information it is suggested you contact the Hayes Aircraft Corp.,* Birmingham, Alabama, since he was under their jurisdiction at the time in question.
She received a letter in reply, dated July 14, 1962, on CIA stationery and signed by Marshall S Carter, Lieutenant General, United States Army, Acting Director.
In Mr McCone’s absence, I am replying to your letter of June, 1962, requesting information concerning your son.
I am sorry to disappoint you, but this agency is unable to furnish you any such information.
Also, we have made inquiries of other government departments, and these, too, have no pertinent information.
We have every sympathy for you in your natural concern * Hayes was not notably communicative.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((86 for the fate of your son, and I am sorry as I can be that we cannot help.
Please be assured that if at any time we are able to furnish information we will contact you promptly.
On October 4, 1962, Brigadier General Godfrey T McHugh, the Air Force aide to the President, wrote back.
If any information is ever obtained on the circumstances surrounding the loss of your son, you will be informed immediately.
Unfortunately, at present neither CIA nor any other government agency possesses the slightest pertinent information on your son’s disappearance.
Shamburger’s correspondence with Washington, of course, was going on behind the scenes.
After the brief flurry of publicity right after the Bay of Pigs, the story of the four missing Americans dropped out of the news for almost two years—until it reappeared dramatically on February 25, 1963.
On that date Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen, Illinois Republican and minority leader of the Senate, revealed that four American fliers had been killed at the Bay of Pigs.
He said he had learned this in the course of a one-man inquiry into the Cuban invasion.
Dirksen’s disclosure was extremely embarrassing for the Kennedy Administration.
In the second place, on January 21, 1963, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the President’s brother, had said in an interview with David Kraslow of the Knight newspapers that no Americans died at the Bay of Pigs.
Andrew T Hatcher, the assistant presidential press secretary, issued a statement.
However, the White House carefully did not make public the actual text of its letter to Mrs.
Senator Mike Mansfield, the Democratic leader of the Senate, tried to blunt Dirksen’s political thrust.
He noted that Carlson’s * Prior to this, the clearest statement by the administration was made by President Kennedy in an interview with the three major TV networks on December 17, 1962.
He also said that a few, selected members of Congress had been told at the time that four Americans were killed in the invasion; but Mansfield said he did not know how the fliers met their deaths.
On March 4, 1963, following Dirksen’s disclosure, Carlson told newsmen who inquired about the widows’ checks that a “Central American group authorized Double-Chek to set up a trust fund for payments in case the men died.
Then Carlson backed away from his “nest egg” remark of two years earlier, The four men, he said, “never were considered soldiers of fortune.
Two days later, on March 6, the administration, under pressure, finally made its first oblique admission about the real role of the four airmen.
A Well, I would say that there are a good many Americans in the last fifteen years who have served their country in a good many different ways, a good many abroad.
The flight that cost them their lives was a volunteer flight, and that while because of the nature of their work it has not been a matter of public record, as it might be in the case of soldiers or sailors, I can say that they were serving their country.
It could not admit very much more about the four fliers because to The Case of the Birmingham Widows ((89 do so would be to admit that it had misled Mrs.
And if it opened up the record on the four fliers, this would lead directly to questions about why the carrier-based Navy jets and the B-26s, in which four Americans died, had not arrived over the beaches together.
This, in turn, would raise the question of why the President, having stated on April 12, 1961, that “United States armed forces” would not be used “under any conditions,” relented seven days later to the extent of permitting one hour of air support by the unmarked Navy jets.
In March of 1963, the case of the four CIA fliers, in short, held the key to a host of explosively difficult questions for the White House.
Suppression of information about the fliers was justifiable only if national security was involved.
The need for security before the Bay of Pigs operation was understandable, once the President had committed himself to the invasion.
It might be argued that in the immediate aftermath of the invasion it was still necessary to protect the position of the United States by fuzzing up the role of the fliers.
But once the role of the United States and the CIA was freely and publicly conceded by Robert Kennedy in the two interviews in 1963, it is difficult to see how security could any longer have been a factor in cloaking the story of the four Birmingham fliers.
It had already informed her, in writing, that it knew nothing about her son.
In a private interview in Miami Springs in the summer of 1963, he said that he continued to feel the four men were, basically, flying for money.
He pulled out a thick file, and, consulting it, said that Shamburger and Ray had been paid $2,200 a month, Gray $1,500 and Baker $1,700.
They had been recommended to him, Carlson said, by “someone at the Miami airport,” whom he declined to identify.
Carlson said Double-Chek had originally been formed to hold real estate for a client.
Double-Chek then proceeded to recruit pilots for the “Central American front,” he said.
Next thing he knew, said Carlson, he got a telephone call from Central America and was told that a C-46 cargo plane had gone down with the four men.
Carlson professed to know nothing about the source of the money for the widows’ checks.
There had been no written notification to the wives that their husbands died while employed by, and fighting for, the United States.
They had nothing Official to show their children to explain their fathers’ deaths.
A History Tue INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT was born December 7, 1941, in the smoke and rubble of Pearl Harbor.
It was still a child when the Cold War began after World War II, an adolescent during the 1950s, and it reached its majority a year after President Kennedy took office.
Whatever else the multitude of inquiries into Pearl Harbor proved, they did show that the United States was badly in need of a centralized intelligence apparatus.
There were plenty of warning signs before Pearl Harbor of the coming Japanese attack, but they were not pulled together, analyzed and brought forcefully to the attention of the government.
The United States shed its isolationist traditions and emerged from World War II as the leader of the West.
Regardless of Pearl Harbor, its new global responsibilities and objectives would have, in any event, led to the creation of a global American intelligence network.
Added to this, the early emergence of the Soviet Union as an adversary almost before the V-J celebrations had ended made the growth of an Invisible Government in the United States virtually inevitable.
Even in the absence of a clash between Western democracy and international Communism, the conduct of United States foreign policy in the postwar world would have required intelligence information upon which the policy makers could base their decisions.
On November 21, shortly after President Eisenhower’s election, Truman stole away from the White House to deliver a talk behind closed doors at a CIA training session.
No central intelligence organization existed when he became President in 1945, Truman continued.
Out of this emerged the Office of Coordinator of Information, with General Donovan as its head.
On June 13, 1942, this was split into the Office of Strategic Services, under Donovan, and the Office of War Information.
By 1944 Donovan had prepared for Roosevelt a plan to establish a central intelligence agency.
But after Truman became President (and dug his way out from under the stack of papers he later complained about) he sent for Admiral William D Leahy and asked him to look into the whole problem.
There they formed the nucleus of what became the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, an important branch of the Invisible Government.
The Authority’s members were Secretary of State James F Byrnes, Secretary of War Robert P Patterson, Secretary of the Navy James V Forrestal and Admiral Leahy.
To head it, Truman selected Rear Admiral Sidney W Souers, the deputy chief of Navy Intelligence.
Louis before the war; the nation’s first Director of Central Intelligence once headed the Piggly Wiggly Stores in Memphis.
Souers was anxious to get back to his business interests, and five months later, in June, Truman named Air Force General Hoyt 8.
He served until May 1, 1947, when Truman appointed Rear Admiral Roscoe H Hillenkoetter.
An Annapolis graduate who spoke three languages, Hillenkoetter had THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((94 several years’ experience in Navy Intelligence.
He had been wounded while aboard the battleship West Virginia at Pearl Harbor.
Later he set up an intelligence network for Admiral Chester W Nimitz in the Pacific.
When the CIA was created by the National Security Act of 1947, Hillenkoetter became its first director.
The Act is the same as that which established a Department of Defense and unified the armed services.
On the face of it, the law appeared simply to give the CIA the task of correlating, evaluating and co-ordinating the collection of intelligence.
The answer lies in the “other functions” which the CIA may * As constituted in 1964 the NSC was composed of the President, the VicePresident, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning.
A History ((95 perform under the 1947 Act, at the discretion of the National Security Council.
Almost from its inception, the agency has engaged in special operations—clandestine activities, sometimes on a military scale.
In 1948, after the Communist take-over in Czechoslovakia, James Forrestal, as the first Secretary of Defense, became alarmed at signs that the Communists might win the Italian elections.
In an effort to influence the elections to the advantage of the United States, he started a campaign among his wealthy Wall Street colleagues to raise enough money to run a private clandestine operation.
But Allen Dulles felt the problem could not be handled effectively in private hands.
He urged strongly that the government establish a covert organization to conduct a variety of special operations.
Because there was no specific provision for covert political operations spelled out in the 1947 Act, the National Security Council—in the wake of the events in Czechoslovakia and Italy—issued a paper in the summer of 1948 authorizing special operations.
A decision was reached to create an organization within the CIA to conduct secret political operations.
Frank G Wisner, an ex-OSS man, was brought in from the State Department to head it, with a cover title of his own invention.
Under this innocuous title, the United States was now fully in the business of covert political operations.
This machinery was in the CIA but the agency shared control of it with the State Department and the Pentagon.
On January 4, 1951, the CIA merged the two offices and created a new Plans Division, which has had soie control over secret operations of all types since that date.
It is doubtful that many of the lawmakers who voted for the 1947 Act could have envisioned the scale on which the CIA would engage in operational activities all over the world.
President Truman later maintained that he had no idea that this was going to happen.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((96 “For some time I have been disturbed by the way CIA has been diverted from its original assignment.
Although the machinery was not established until 1948, one small hint of what was to come was tucked away in a memorandum which Allen Dulles submitted to Congress back in 1947.
Like the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, the ‘other functions” proviso of the National Security Act has been stretched to encompass activities by the CIA that are not even hinted at in the law.
It is not generally realized that the CIA conducts secret political warfare under interpretations of that law.
Nor is it widely understood that under the law and subsequent presidential fiat, the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency wears two hats, Not only is he the head of the CIA, but more important, as Director of Central Intelligence he is in charge of the entire intelligence community, of which the CIA is only one, albeit the most powerful, branch.
It granted him the unique right to spend the hundreds of millions of dollars in his secret annual budget simply by signing his name.
In that year the Intelligence Advisory Committee was created as a board of directors of the covert government.
Later its name was changed to the present United States Intelligence Board.
Although the names of the men represented on the board have changed, the main components of the secret government have remained fairly constant.
Code-breaking and cryptology were consolidated in 1952 in the new National Security Agency, established by presidential directive as part of the Defense Department.
And, finally, the military intelligence agencies were brought together under the newly created Defense Intelligence Agency in 1961.
What has really changed since 1947 is not the general amorphous shape of the Invisible Government, but its size, technology, scope, power and importance—all of which have increased in geometric progression with a minimum of Congressional or public examination or understanding.
During the first three years of the CIA’s life Admiral Hillenkoetter remained its director.
Army who was never graduated from West Point or any other military school.
The agency became more aggressive under “Beedle” Smith, who played an important role in the Korean conflict and its intelligence post-mortems.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((98 personal stamp upon the Invisible Government more than any other was Allen Welsh Dulles.
The next year Truman named him to head the three-man committee to see how well the new agency was working.
Soon after President Eisenhower was elected, he appointed Smith as Under Secretary of State and on February 10, 1953, named Dulles as Director of Central Intelligence.
To the post he brought a brilliant reputation as the wartime OSS chief in Switzerland.
The emergence of the Invisible Government in the 1950s to a position of unprecedented strength cannot be comprehended unless a word is said about the Dulles brothers and their relationship.
Whitney & Co.; and Mathias F Correa, a former OSS man and a special assistant to Forrestal.
A History ((99 evil tactics of subversion and secret manipulation practiced by the Communist enemy.
In this, Foster Dulles reflected the American ethic; the world as we would like it to be.
While he took this public position, his brother was free to deal with nastier realities, to overturn governments and to engage in backstage political maneuvers all over the globe with the CIA’s almost unlimited funds.
He was, as Allen Dulles once put it, able to “fight fire with fire”‘ in a less than perfect world.
Because he was equally dedicated in his own secret sphere, it was under Allen Dulles’ stewardship that the CIA enjoyed its greatest expansion, particularly in the field of governmentshaking secret operations overseas.
In pursuing this dual foreign policy, these special operations were largely kept secret from the American people.
The exception, of course, was when something went wrong, as at the Bay of Pigs.
This is not to say that the same two-sided foreign policy would never have evolved had the director of the CIA and the Secretary of State not been brothers.
But the natural friction between the objectives and methods of the diplomats and the “spooks,” between the State Department and the CIA, was to an extent reduced because of the close working relationship of the Dulles brothers.
In a sense, one might say the Dulles brothers were predestined to take over the levers of power in the conduct of U S. foreign affairs.
Their mother’s father, John Watson Foster, was Secretary of State under Benjamin Harrisont in 1892-3.
Robert Lansing, an uncle by marriage, was Secretary of State under Woodrow Wilson.
Another uncle, John Welsh, was Minister to England under * Some evidence of the closeness of Foster and Allen Dulles was provided even after the Secretary of State had died.
President Kennedy had been thinking of changing the name of Washington's new jetport from Dulles, so designated in honor of Foster, to Chantilly, which is the name of the Virginia community where it is located.
Allen Dulles and his sister, Eleanor Lansing Dulles, a former official in the German section of the State Department, heard about it and raised hob with the President.
Kennedy called it Dulles Airport. t And later a private adviser to the Empress of China, Tz’u Hsi.
He taught English for a time in an agricultural school in Allahabad, India, and in China and Japan as well.
Then he joined the diplomatic service in 1916, serving in Vienna and, during the war, in Berne, chiefly as an intelligence officer.
Three years later the two brothers were together in Paris as staff members of the American delegation to the Versailles Peace Conference.
Their uncle, Secretary of State Lansing, was a member of the delegation.
As an international lawyer, he knew the political and industrial elite of Europe, and of Germany.
This became useful during World War II when General Donovan assigned Dulles as chief of the OSS mission in Switzerland.
He had diplomatic cover as an assistant to the minister in the American Legation.
But he operated as a master spy from a fifteenth-century house in Berne overlooking the Aar River.
He has been credited with two outstanding feats for the OSS— first, penetrating the German Abwehr, Hitler’s intelligence service, and second, negotiating the surrender of German troops in Italy.
After the war it was natural enough that Allen Dulles would soon gravitate away from his law practice into the more exciting world of espionage.
While it is impossible to make any definite judgment about the talents of a man who operated, for the most part, out of view, the constant and bitter personal attacks upon him by the Communist bloc provide one significant indication of his effectiveness.
President Hayes had assured Senator Simon Cameron of Pennsylvania (who had been in Lincoln’s Cabinet during the Civil War) that he would appoint anyone Pennsylvania wanted to the London post.
A History ((zor The CIA director projected a deceptively grandfatherly image, with his white hair, rimless glasses, his pipe and his sense of humor.
Beneath this outward Mr Chips demeanor was a man fascinated by the world of intelligence, by secret operations and by espionage and all of its ramifications.
Although he seemed to fumble a good deal with his pipe and his tobacco, Mr Dulles perhaps quietly enjoyed the incongruousness of his appearance and his vocation.
Dulles was occasionally accused of being too much of a public figure for the head of a secret service.
But if the CIA was run in a tweedy, relaxed, pipe-and-slipper manner under Dulles, it was also true that morale was high, and he was well liked within the agency as well as outside of it.
Except for his closest friends, few people knew of the great personal tragedy in Dulles’ life.
His son, wounded in Korea, suffered brain damage that left him with very little recognition of people or events, and it was finally necessary to place him in an institution in Germany on Lake Constance, just over the Swiss border.
Charles Pearre Cabell, a gray-haired but youthful-looking fourstar Air Force general and West Point graduate, was his deputy director.
A Texan from Dallas (where his brother Earle was the mayor), he was the former head of Air Force Intelligence.
Richard Bissell, the deputy director for plans, who joined the CIA in 1954.
Robert Amory, the brother of the writer Cleveland Amory, and a former Harvard Law School professor.
This was the group which led the CIA during its period of greatest expansion in the 1950s.
But even before this, it was evident THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((102 that the agency was involved in a wide range of activities in many parts of the world.
Bogota Only six months after the CIA had come into existence, it found itself under fire for what would become a familiar complaint over the years—alleged failure to predict a major international upheaval.
In this case, it was the assassination of Jorge Eliecer Gaitan, the popular Liberal Colombian leader, on April 9 on a street in Bogota.
The shooting touched off the “Bogotazo,” two days of bloody riots that disrupted the Ninth Inter-American Conference and greatly embarrassed Secretary of State George C Marshall, who headed the American delegation.
In the first place, expecting the CIA to forecast an assassination, is, in most instances, to endow it with supernatural powers.
In the second place, Admiral Hillenkoetter, hauled before a House Executive Expenditures Subcommittee on April 15, read the text of secret CIA dispatches into the open record for the first and only time in history.
This action, which raised hackles at the time, would, if done today, cause pandemonium.
The admiral maintained that although the Communists seized on Gaitan’s assassination, the Colombian leader was slain in “a purely private act of revenge” by one Jose Sierra.
The CIA chief said Gaitan, as an attorney, had just successfully defended in a murder trial the killer of Sierra’s uncle.
Hillenkoetter testified that, furthermore, the CIA had predicted trouble at Bogota as far back as January 2.
He charged that a March 23 CIA dispatch from Bogota, warning of Communist agitation, was withheld from Secretary Marshall by Orion J Libert, a State Department advance man in Bogota, acting with the support of Ambassador Willard L Beaulac.
Have confirmed information that Communist-inspired agitators will attempt to humiliate the Secretary of State and other members of the United States delegation to the PanAmerican conference upon arrival in Bogota by manifestations and possible personal molestation.
Libert, who has been apprised of above, does not consider it advisable to notify the State Department of this situation, since he feels adequate protection will be given by police and does not want to alarm the delegates unduly.
Possibly Hillenkoetter was egged on by the fact that a few hours before he testified, Truman had told a news conference that he was as surprised as anyone about the Tiots in Bogata.
The government had received information that there might be picketing or demonstrations.
But, he added a trifle plaintively, there had been no indication that anyone was going to get shot.
At the State Department, Lincoln White said it was “inconceivable” that the department had suppressed any CIA communications.
It did not, however, end the recurring question of the adequacy of the CIA’s forecasting abilities.
Korea To an extent, the CIA’s role in the Korean War became clouded and fuzzed because it was caught up in the emotional storm touched off when Truman finally decided to fire General Douglas THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((104 MacArthur.
What the CIA had or had not predicted, and its freedom or lack of freedom to operate within MacArthur’s command, became a subject of dispute between the imperious general and the angry chief executive.
Yet the main outline of the CIA’s performance and the precise issues in dispute are not difficult to pinpoint from the record.
It was Secretary of State Dean Acheson, calling to say that the North Koreans had invaded South Korea.
On Monday he summoned to the White House the man he assumed should have had the most advance knowledge about what had happened— Admiral Hillenkoetter.
It was something like Bogota all over again, although of course much more serious.
The intelligence agency again had to defend itself for not precisely predicting a future event.
And once again the CIA had become a subject of domestic political controversy.
After the meeting with Truman, Hillenkoetter told reporters at the White House that his agency had predicted the possibility of such an attack for a year.
He then hurried to Capitol Hill to give the same explanation to the Senate Appropriations Committee.
Before testifying, he talked to newsmen about the Communist build-up along the 38th parallel.
One of the members said afterward that Hillenkoetter had read a series of reports on troop and tank concentrations in North Korea.
The question became crucial just about the time Truman replaced Hillenkoetter with Walter Bedell Smith.
The conclusions of the estimators were that it was a toss-up, but they leaned to the side that under certain circumstances the Chinese probably would not intervene.
However, some two weeks later, in November, according to Truman, the CIA did warn that Communist China had 200,000 troops in Manchuria and that their entry into Korea might push the UN forces back.
Truman also wrote that MacArthur had * Actually, the Chinese had begun crossing the Yalu four days earlier.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((106 launched his ill-fated home-by-Christmas offensive on November 24 despite the CIA summary made available to the general that very day.
The summary, Truman went on to say, had warned that the Chinese were strong enough to force the UN armies back into defensive positions.
Truman, who had been gingerly dealing with MacArthur almost as with another chief of state, at last fired the general on April 9, 1951.
If the CIA ever made any such optimistic report in November, replied Truman, it was news to him.
Bogota and Korea raised, but did not answer, the fundamental question of how much should be expected of the CIA in its forecasting role.
They also set a pattern that has since become familiar —when trouble came, the overt, political officers of the visible government almost invariably would say they had no advance warning.
The public would be left to take its choice, provided it could weave its way through the maze of self-serving semantics from both sides.
Air-Drops Over Red China During the Korean War, another war was waged in secret against Communist China.
On November 23, 1954, a broadcast from Peking announced the capture and sentencing of two Americans, John Thomas Downey and Richard George Fecteau.
At Yale, John Thomas Downey was liked and respected for his strength, moral and physical.
He was a quiet, clean-living, athletic lad, an honor student as well as a varsity football player and the captain of the wrestling team.
He spent a good deal of time at home, in nearby New Britain, Connecticut, where his mother taught school.
Richard George Fecteau, of Lynn, Massachusetts, had less of an academic background.
So did Downey, who was recruited off the Yale campus in 1951, at age twenty-one.
That did not seem unusual; with the Korean War on, thousands of young men were being shipped to the Far East.
On November 9, 1952, Jack Downey and Richard Fecteau were captured by the Communist Chinese.
This was not revealed by Peking, however, until the announcement more than two years later.
They were charged with having helped to organize and train two teams of Chinese agents.
The men, Peking said, had been air-dropped into Kirin and Liaoning Provinces for “subversive activities,” and both Downey and Fecteau were captured when their plane was downed as they attempted to drop supplies and contact agents inside Communist China.
It was also claimed that nine Chinese working for the CIA men were taken prisoner with them.
The American consul general at Geneva was instructed by the State Department to make the “strongest possible protest” to PeTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((108 king.
They were believed to have been lost in a flight from Korea to Japan in November, 1952.
Downey and Fecteau,” the Defense Department declared, “were Department of the Army civilian employees.
They were authorized passengers on a routine flight from Seoul to Japan in a plane which was under military contract to the Far East Air Force.
A search instituted at the time failed to produce any trace of the plane, and Messrs, Downey and Fecteau were presumed to have been lost.
In September, 1957, a group of forty-one young Americans on an unauthorized trip to Red China visited Downey and Fecteau in prison.
The following month Charles Edmundson, a former USIA official in Korea, who left the government in a dispute over foreign policy, wrote an article for the Nation, in which he indicated that Downey and Fecteau were CIA operatives.
On August 2, 1955, Communist China notified the United States at Geneva that the eleven airmen had been released on July 31.
During these years the CIA operated on Formosa as Western Enterprises, Inc.
This cover was so thin it became a source of some merriment on the island.
The experience of one State Department employee who arrived on Formosa in 1953 is typical.
A fellow employee was showing her the sights as they drove in from the airport.
State Department employees on Formosa did not get along very well with their counterparts in Western Enterprises, Inc.
For one thing, the State Department workers felt that the CIA people were being paid far too well and had special privileges.
One of the CIA operatives who turned up on Formosa in 1953 was Campbell “Zup” James, a Yale graduate who affected an English accent, mustache and fancy walking stick.
To anyone who asked, he told the outrageously phony story that he was a wealthy Englishman managing a family tea plantation on Formosa.
By continuing to maintain this pose, even though almost everyone knew he worked for the CIA, James became a legend throughout Southeast Asia.
He turned up later in Laos, still masquerading as a pukka Englishman straight out of the pages of Kipling.
He was spotted in Bangkok as recently as the summer of 1963, mustache, cane and Mayfair accent intact.
Despite his unlikely cover, some observers said he was an effective agent.
There is reason to believe that at least in the past, the CIA trained, equipped and financed Chinese Nationalist commando raids on the mainland, launched from the offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu.
Early in 1963 a spate of interesting stories appeared from Formosa about renewed Nationalist guerrilla raids on the mainland.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((110 The Chiang Kai-shek government announced that the frogmen and commando teams were most active in Kwangtung Province, near Formosa.
Tran But guerrilla raids are small actions compared to an operation that changes a government.
There is no doubt at all that the CIA organized and directed the 1953 coup that overthrew Premier Mohammed Mossadegh and kept Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlevi on his throne.
But few Americans know that the coup that toppled the government of Iran was led by a CIA agent who was the grandson of President Theodore Roosevelt.
Kermit “Kim” Roosevelt, also a seventh cousin of President Franklin D Roosevelt, is still known as “Mr Iran” around the CIA for his spectacular operation in Teheran more than a decade ago.
He later left the CIA and joined the Gulf Oil Corporation as “government relations” director in its Washington office.
One legend that grew up inside the CIA had it that Roosevelt, in the grand Rough Rider tradition, led the revolt against the weeping Mossadegh with a gun at the head of an Iranian tank commander as the column rolled into Teheran.
General Fazollah Zahedi,* the man the CIA chose to replace Mossadegh, was also a character worthy of spy fiction.
A six-foottwo, handsome ladies’ man, he fought the Bolsheviks, was captured by the Kurds, and, in 1942, was kidnaped by the British, who suspected him of Nazi intrigues.
During World War II the British and the Russians jointly occupied Iran.
A History ((11r an illustrated register of Teheran’s most exquisite prostitutes, After the war Zahedi rapidly moved back into public life.
Mossadegh nationalized the British-owned Anglo-Jranian Oil Company in April and seized the huge Abadan refinery on the Persian Gulf.
The refinery was shut down; thousands of workers were idled and Iran faced a financial crisis.
The British, with the backing of Western governments, boycotted Iran’s oil and the local workers were unable to run the refineries at capacity without British technicians.
Mossadegh connived with the Tudeh, Iran’s Communist party, and London and Washington feared that the Russians would end up with Iran’s vast oil reserves flowing into the Soviet Union, which shares a common border with Iran.
Mossadegh, running the crisis from his bed—he claimed he was a very sick man—had broken with Zahedi, who balked at tolerating the Tudeh party.
It was against this background that the CIA and Kim Roosevelt moved in to oust Mossadegh and install Zahedi.
At the time of the coup Roosevelt, then thirty-seven, was already a veteran intelligence man.
Kim was graduated from Harvard just before World War II, and he taught history there and later at the California Institute of Technology.
He left the academic life to serve in the OSS, then joined the CIA after the war as a Middle East specialist.
His father had died in Alaska during the war; his uncle, Brigadier General Theodore Roosevelt, died on the beaches of Normandy a year later.
The British and American governments had together decided to mount an operation to overthrow Mossadegh.
The CIA’s estimate was that it would succeed because the conditions were right; in a showdown the people of Iran would be loyal to the Shah.
The task of running the operation went to Kim Roosevelt, then the CIA’s top operator in the Middle East.
He drove across the border, reached Teheran, and then dropped out of sight.
Shifting his headquarters several times to keep one step ahead of Mossadegh’s THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((112 agents, Roosevelt operated outside of the protection of the American Embassy.
He did have the help of about five Americans, including some of the CIA men stationed in the embassy.
In addition, there were seven local agents, including two top Tranian intelligence operatives.
These two men communicated with Roosevelt through cutouts—intermediaries—and he never saw them during the entire operation.
As the plan for revolt was hatched, Brigadier General H Norman Schwarzkopf, who used to appear on radio’s “Gang Busters,” turned up in Teheran.
He was best known for his investigation of the Lindbergh baby kidnaping case when he headed the New Jersey State Police in 1932.
On August 13 the Shah signed a decree dismissing Mossadegh and naming Zahedi as Premier.
The unco-operative Mossadegh arrested the unfortunate colonel who brought in his notice of dismissal.
Mobs rioted in the streets; the thirty-three-year-old Shah and his queen fled to Baghdad by plane from their palace on the Caspian Sea.
For two chaotic days, Roosevelt lost communication with his two chief Iranian agents.
Meanwhile, the Shah had made his way to Rome; Allen Dulles flew there to confer with him.
Princess Ashraf, the Shah’s attractive twin sister, tried to play a part in the international intrigue, but the Shah refused to talk to her.
In Teheran, Communist mobs controlled the streets; they destroyed statues of the Shah to celebrate his departure.
Early on August 19 Roosevelt, from his hiding place, gave orders to his Iranian agents to get everyone they could find into the streets.
The agents went into the athletic clubs of Teheran and rounded up a strange assortment of weight-lifters, muscle-men and gymnasts.
The odd procession made its way through the bazaars shouting proShah slogans.
By mid-morning it was clear the tide had turned against Mossadegh and nothing could stop it.
In August, 1958, an international consortium of Western oil companies signed a twenty-five-year pact with Iran for its oil.
Under it, the former Anglo-Iranian Oil Company got 40 percent, a group of American companies* got 40 percent, Royal Dutch Shell got 14 percent and the Compagnie Frangaise des Petroles 6 percent.
Iran got half of the multimillion-dollar income from the oil fields under the deal, and Anglo-Iranian was assured a compensation payment of $70,000,000.
The United States, of course, has never officially admitted the CIA’s role.
The former CIA chief also hinted at the CIA’s Iran role in his book The Craft of Intelligence.
Although Iran remained pro-West after the 1953 coup, little was done to alleviate the terrible poverty in that ancient land.
A total of $1,300,000,000 in United States aid poured in during twelve years since 1951, but much of it appeared to stick to the fingers of the hopelessly corrupt officialdom.
A typical Iranian scandal involved a close friend of Princess Ashraf, Ehsan Davaloo, the “Caviar Queen,” who earned the sobriquet by paying officials to get a $450,000-a-year caviar monopoly.
With this stark contrast-—-caviar and utter poverty side by side * Gulf Oil, Standard Oil of New Jersey and California, The Texas Company and Socony-Mobil.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((114 —Iran remained a ripe breeding ground for Communism.
With the help of a President’s swashbuckling grandson, the Invisible Government had brought about a political coup d’état.
But the United States seemed unable to follow this up with badly needed social and economic reforms.
Mr X Goes to Cairo Two years after his operation in Iran, Kim Roosevelt turned up across the Red Sea in a mysterious episode in a new setting.
On September 27, 1955, Egyptian Premier Gamal Abdel Nasser announced to the world that he had concluded an arms deal with the Soviet bloc.
Washington had been unwilling to sell weapons to Egypt on Nasser’s terms, and the Arab leader turned to the East.
It was one case, however, where John Foster Dulles had not been inclined to take too seriously the reports coming from his brother.
The State Department and the CIA had agreed to send Roosevelt to Cairo for a first-hand look.
Roosevelt, by now the assistant director of the CIA for the Middle East, did so, and reported back that the negotiations were about to be completed.
Roosevelt fired back a pointed message advising the Secretary of State to read his morning papers, which would carry Nasser’s announcement.
Roosevelt was right, On September 28, the day after Nasser’s defiant disclosure, George V Allen, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, was summoned to the office of Herbert Hoover, Jr., Under Secretary of State.
In George Allen’s presence, Hoover telephoned the Secretary of State; it was agreed that George Allen should be sent to see Nasser right away.
With him, George Allen carried a letter from Secretary Dulles, warning that the arms deal could hand Egypt A History ((115 over to the Communists.
While Allen was winging his way to the land of the Sphinx the United States wire services sent out dispatches speculating that he took with him an “ultimatum” to Nasser.
At this point, the CIA’s “Mr Iran” became the central figure in some shadowy backstage maneuvering in the Egyptian capital.
British newspaper accounts of the episode later referred to a “Mr X,” a mysterious American official.
One version of the affair that became widely accepted was given by Nasser himself in a blood-and-thunder speech at Alexandria on July 26, 1956, the same day he seized the Suez Canal.
I assure you that this note will have no effect because we shall be able to remove its effect.
But the disturbing story circulated in Washington that a certain “Mr THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((116 X,” a high CIA official, had undercut the official foreign policy of the United States by getting in ahead of George Allen and telling Nasser to forget whatever the special envoy told him.
When Allen’s plane landed in Cairo, he was unaware of the storm kicked up there by reports that he was bringing an ultimatum from the Eisenhower Administration.
Ambassador Henry A Byroade sprinted aboard the plane to warn George Allen of the situation.
Forearmed, the Assistant Secretary of State was cautiously noncommittal to newsmen who surrounded him when he stepped off the plane.
He nodded to the CIA man, but they kept their distance from each other in public.
Before Allen’s arrival, Byroade and Roosevelt had agreed that it would be an intolerable loss of face if the envoy were refused an interview with Nasser.
So, in the seclusion of the embassy, Roosevelt, Byroade and Eric H Johnston, who was there negotiating a water agreement, sat down with Allen and went over the letter from Secretary Dulles.
They told Allen it was so patronizing that Nasser would take it as an insult and throw him out of the office.
They urged that at the very least, he read the letter instead of handing it to Nasser formally.
As a result of this, George Allen sent a cable to Secretary Dulles recommending that he deliver the tough message orally.
They maintain that he joshed Nasser, told him to act like a grown man and not blow up, and asked him to listen politely when George Allen read his letter.
Roosevelt did not, they say, ask Nasser to disregard Allen’s message, as Nasser indicated later.
At his own meeting with Nasser on October 1, Allen was accompanied by Byroade.
Allen told Nasser that the United States recog* The story was sufficiently upsetting to Senator Paul H Douglas, the Illinois Democrat, so that he quietly investigated it later during a trip to the Middle East.
A History ((117 nized Egypt’s right to buy arms where it wanted, but pointed out that the United States had refused to sell jets to Israel and was anxious not to escalate the arms race in the Middle East.
Nasser was vague when Allen pressed to find out whether the arms deal was a prelude to something bigger.
Finally, Allen pulled out the letter and formally read its text to Nasser.
There was no translation, since the Egyptian Premier’s English was entirely adequate.
What is clear, at any rate, is that the assistant director of the CIA saw Nasser ahead of the Assistant Secretary of State.
Eisenhower could not have known of this at the time, because he was under an oxygen tent in Denver, having suffered his heart attack there on September 25.
If by this the Secretary of State meant that through the intervention of “Mr X,” the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs had not been thrown out of the office of the Premier of Egypt, he was correct.
Suez With Soviet arms flowing into Egypt, relations between Nasser and Washington deteriorated rapidly.
On July 19, 1956, Secretary of State Dulles pulled the rug out from under the fiery Arab leader.
Israel invaded Egypt on October 29 and Britain and France joined in with a Hallowe’en Day attack.
The United States condemned the invasion, Moscow threatened to rain missiles on London and Paris, and the assault was called off.
All of this happened in the midst of the Hungarian revolt and the windup of the presidential campaign in the United States.
When the sands had settled in the Middle East, Allen Dulles was in a difficult position; the question, once again, was whether the CIA had failed to predict an event—in this case, the Suez invasion.
There were many times, said Allen Dulles, when intelligence had guessed correctly, but could not advertise the fact.
Here intelligence was well alerted as to both the possibility and later the probability of the actions taken by Israel and then by Britain and France.
The public received the impression that there had been an intelligence failure; statements were issued by United States officials to the effect that the country had not been given advance warning of the action.
Our Officials, of course, intended to imply only that the British and French and Israelis had failed to tell us what they were doing.
On February 1, 1957, Secretary Dulles was being questioned by Senator Mansfield before a joint meeting of the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services committees.
He was asked whether Washington had knowledge of the Israeli attack on Egypt or of the British and French participation.
It is true that this testimony, if taken alone, could be interpreted to mean simply that there had been no advance warning to Washington by the invaders.
But two weeks earlier, on January 15, testifying before the same Senate committees, Secretary Dulles was more specific under questioning by Senator Henry M Jackson, of Washington, who asked whether “the people within the executive branch of the government” knew of the impending Israeli attack on Suez.
In England, France and the United States, there had been suggestions that the Eisenhower Administration had known in advance of the invasion plans, and had been hypocritical in its outraged reaction and intervention, Democrats felt the pre-election crisis had helped defeat Adlai Stevenson and re-elect Eisenhower.
Jackson’s questions seemed designed to explore whether the CIA had known all along that the invasion was coming.
If this had been the case, Secretary Dulles could ill afford, for political reasons, to say so.
But Jackson’s question and the Secretary of State’s answer are on the record.
Dulles was clearly saying that “the executive branch of the government”—which of course includes the CLA—had “no knowledge” in advance of the Israeli attack which began the Suez invasion.
The truth is always elusive; the truth about a secret agency doubly so.
Costa Rica The Invisible Government’s activities have not been restricted to chaotic countries, dominated or threatened by Communism.
In the mid-1950s CIA agents intruded deeply into the political affairs of Costa Rica, the most stable and democratic republic in Latin America.
The CIA’s purpose was to promote the ouster of Jose Figueres, the moderate socialist who became President in a fair and open election in 1953.
His warning had no noticeable effect on the CIA’s anti-Figueres activities, however.
Figueres had risen to national prominence as the leader of a THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((120 guerrilla movement organized to install Otilio Ulate as President in 1948.
Ulate had won the election, but a right-wing government and a packed legislature had refused to recognize him.
In April of 1948, however, Figueres forced them to back down and the following year Ulate was installed.
But Ulate organized an opposition movement against his former political ally.
Their major grievance was that Figueres had scrupulously recognized the right of asylum in Costa Rica—for non-Communists and Communists alike.
The large influx of questionable characters complicated the agency’s job of surveillance and forced it to increase its staff.
An effort to produce evidence that Figueres had been in contact with leading Communists during a trip to Mexico was unsuccessful.
But CIA agents had better luck with the first part of their strategy—stirring up trouble for the Communists.
Unaware that the letter was a CIA plant, the leading officials in the American Embassy held an urgent meeting to ponder its meaning.
The political officer then dispatched a long classified report to Washington, alerting top policy makers to the possibility of a startling turn in Latin American Communist politics.
The Khrushchev Speech The CIA’s manufacture of bogus Communist material has not * While the CIA was plotting to get rid of Figueres during this period, Ambassador Robert F Woodward was urging President Eisenhower to lend his prestige to the Costa Rican President by inviting him to Washington.
Figueres stepped down in 1958 when his candidate lost the Presidential election.
But the agency has had one noteworthy success in obtaining a real Communist document.
He assumed there had to be one, because Khrushchev had spoken for seven hours.
First, analysts determined what individuals and what Communist nations might have been given a copy—in other words, where to go looking for it.
One top CIA operator turned up in Belgrade with an intriguing scheme—he would make a direct pitch to the Yugoslav Government to bootleg him a copy.
With the permission of Ambassador James W Riddleberger, the CIA man called on a certain high Yugoslav official.
For nearly two hours he argued his case, listing the reasons why Washington deserved a copy of the top-secret document.
The sales talk must have been convincing, for at one point the Yugoslav seemed ready to hand over a copy.
The man who made the deal to deliver the speech claimed he needed the money, not for himself, but to make arrangements to protect others who might be involved.
Dulles did not want to release the 26,000-word text unless he could be sure it was genuine.
For several weeks during May, 1956, the CIA had the text in hand, but said nothing.
CIA analysts pored over the text, examining every word, each phrase in an attempt to authenticate it.
The experts finally decided that the document contained information that only Khrushchev could have been in a position to know.
Together with other clues buried in the text, this convinced the analysts the document was THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((122 bona fide.
Dulles gave his approval, and on June 4 the State Department released the text.
The CIA does not know which it is because the text-asdelivered was never published by Khrushchev.
The CTA felt a deserved sense of satisfaction in having run the speech to ground.
For it was the first tangible evidence of the historic split between Communist China and the Soviet Union.
The U-2 The U-2 spy plane was developed by Richard Bissell, Trevor Gardner of the Air Force and Clarence L Johnson of Lockheed, after initially being turned down by the Pentagon on June 7, 1954.
The Defense Department finally did approve the ultra-secret espionage project in December of that year.
The summit conference of Eisenhower, Macmillan, De Gaulle and Khrushchev was scheduled to take place on May 16, 1960.
As the date approached, the intelligence technicians who ran the U-2 program decided to get one last U-2 flight in under the wire before the conference.
They feared the Paris meeting might result in a de* Although Dulles had hinted previously at the CIA's role, he publicly and unequivocally disclosed the CIA’s tour de force in a speech in Washington in June, 1963, and in a television interview two months later.
It was a startling statement, because it was one of the few times that the CIA had openly taken credit for an espionage feat.
The feeling within the intelligence community was that a successful conference, followed by Eisenhower's planned trip to Moscow, would make flying the U-2 impossible.
These groupings allowed considerable flexibility for a set number of missions to be flown within a given time span.
On May I, 1960, Francis Gary Powers, a CIA pilot from the hill country of Virginia, was downed in his U-2 over Sverdlovsk,* in the Urals.
At first, Washington insisted it was a NASA weather plane that had drifted over the border from Turkey when its pilot had oxygen trouble.
After waiting two days for this explanation to sink in, Khrushchev triumphantly revealed he had the pilot and the plane.
At that, the State Department admitted the spy flight, but said it had not been authorized in Washington.
Two days later Hisenhower reversed this position, took responsibility for the U-2 program and issued a statement widely interpreted to mean that the flights over Soviet territory would continue.
Eisenhower finally announced at the summit table that no more U-2s would be sent over Russia.
One important reason was that Powers had been instructed to blow up his plane in the event of trouble over Russia.
The U-2 contained a destructor unit with a three-pound charge of cyclonite—enough to blow it up.
U-2 pilots were instructed in the event of trouble to activate a timing device and eject from the plane.
It would then explode, so they were told, But Allen Dulles was aware that some of the U-2 pilots were worried about the workings of this intriguing and delicate destructor mechanism.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((124 were not really sure how many seconds they had to get out.
Jt was obvious that the CJA did not relish any close scrutiny of the fascinating workings of the destructor mechanism.
Some of the weightier political analyses of the confusion in Washington during the U-2 affair have failed to pay enough attention to the vital business of the destructor unit.
The cover stories were based on the assumption that Francis Gary Powers had actuated those destructor switches.
Trouble for General Gehlen Any casual newspaper reader knows that 1963 was a banner year for spy cases, but one of the most significant received the least attention in the United States, considering that it deeply involved * A few days after his Senate testimony, however, Powers seemed less certain of this.
In a radio interview at his home in Pound, Virginia, with James Clarke, then of WGH, Norfolk, he said he thought he had seventy seconds on that particular U-2.
The fact is the pilots did not know precisely how much time they had before the explosion.
On July 11, in a Karlsruhe courtroom, Judge Kurt Weber sentenced three former West German intelligence agents to prison terms for spying for the Soviet Union.
All three had been employed by the West German Federal Intelligence Agency , better known as the “Gehlen organization” for its founder and chief, the mysterious ex-Nazi general, Reinhard Gehlen.
The defendants confessed they had systematically betrayed state secrets from 1950 until their arrest in 1961.
Ironically, their work was so pleasing to both sides, that shortly before their arrest Felfe and Clemens received citations for ten years of meritorious service from both of their employers.
From General Gehlen they received a plaque bearing an illustration of St.
From Alexander N Shelepin, then Chairman of the Soviet KGB,* they got a letter of commendation and a cash bonus.
Since the Gehlen organization was financed and controlled by the United States Central Intelligence Agency, the Felfe-ClemensTiebel case meant nothing less than that the CIA’s most vital European subsidiary had been penetrated at the top, virtually from its inception.
The CIA poured millions into the Gehlen apparatus, but the 1963 case raised grave questions about the effectiveness and worth of the whole operation.
It also raised moral and political questions in West Germany, where some newspapers were asking why exNazis were running the Bundesrepublik’s intelligence service in the first place.
It is one arm of the Soviet espionage apparatus, the other being the GRU, or Glavnoye Razvedyvatelnoye Upravlenie, the Soviet Military Intelligence.
The KGB is the successor to the Cheka, OGPU, NKVD, MVD and other initials used over the years to designate the often reorganized, purged and renamed Soviet secret police and espionage network.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((126 Gehlen, a member of the German General Staff under Hitler, was placed in charge of wartime intelligence for Foreign Armies East.
This meant that he ran Germany’s espionage against the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
He is said to have surrendered his organization and files to the United States Army Counter Intelligence Corps when the Nazi empire collapsed in 1945.
With his knowledge of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, it was not long before Gehlen was back in business, this time for the United States.
When the CIA was casting about for a network in West Germany, it decided to look into the possibility of using Gehlen’s talents.
And while they were making up their mind about the ex-general, Henry Pleasants, the CIA station chief in Bonn for many years, moved in and lived with Gehlen for several months.
He also probably had the distinction of being the only top United States spy to become the center of a literary storm.
He had continued to write books after joining the CIA, and in 1955 his Agony of Modern Music caused considerable controversy for its attacks on all contemporary music except jazz.
After that Gehlen consolidated an intelligence network that operated in utter secrecy—-as far as the West German public was concerned—from a heavily guarded villa in Pullach, outside of Munich.
No picture of Gehlen has been taken since 1944—and that one shows him bemedaled in his Wehrmacht uniform.
During the war Felfe ran the Swiss department of the Reich security service, and Clemens and Tiebel were his assistants.
Felfe, while awaiting possible war crimes prosecution, suddenly was given a clean bill of health by a British Zone court and was hired by the Gehlen organization in 1951.
Otto John, head of West Germany’s Office for the Protection of the Constitution.
Since John was the head of West Germany’s official counter-intelligence organization, it was as astounding as if J Edgar Hoover had suddenly turned up in Minsk.
Otto John chose the tenth anniversary of the unsuccessful bomb plot against Hitler to do his vanishing act.
He had been active in the plot himself and managed to escape afterwards; his brother Hans was executed.
On the day of his disappearance he had attended memorial services at the site of the executions.
Washington, stunned by the news, described John as one of the “two or three best-informed persons in West Germany” on intelligence operations.
With John’s defection and the official recognition of the FIA by Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, Gehlen was the unchallenged spymaster of West Germany.
He was tried, convicted of treasonable conspiracy and served nineteen months of his four-year sentence.
During the trial the three defendants admitted that they supplied the Soviet Union with the names of West German agents of the FIA as well as other secret information that was smuggled out in canned baby food, trick suitcases and on special writing paper.
Felfe and Clemens testified they were paid about $40,000 each during the ten-year period.
He did not have to spell out the initials CIA to make his meaning clear.
The extraordinary growth of the clandestine activities of the United States in all parts of the world has been pointed up in this brief review of the important operations of the Invisible Government in Germany, as well as in Bogota, Korea, Communist China, Formosa, Iran, Egypt, Costa Rica and the Soviet Union.
The Innocent Ambassador AS HE PREPARED to leave Japan in 1952, at the end of a seven-year assignment, William J Sebald developed misgivings about his new post as Ambassador to Burma.
Sebald’s worries centered on a band of 12,000 Nationalist Chinese troops who were squatting on Burmese territory in defiance of the Burmese Government.
The Nationalist troops had fled to Burma in 1949 as the Chinese Communists advanced toward victory.
The troops made one concerted effort to return by force to Yunnan, their native province in China.
But they were easily turned back, and settled down in Burma to a life of banditry and opium-running.
The Burmese Government demanded that they lay down their arms, but the Nationalist troops repulsed the sporadic efforts of the THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((130 Burmese Army to subdue them.
In the more recent fighting they had displayed new equipment and a greater sense of discipline.
And they had just acquired a new commander, General Li Mi, an intelligence officer who was spotted commuting between Formosa and Burma by way of a landing strip in Thailand, just across Burma’s southeastern border.
To the Burmese Government, burdened by catastrophic World War II destruction and continuous domestic rebellions, the Nationalist troops had long been an intolerable foreign nuisance.
Now, revived as a military force, they became a menace to Burmese independence.
The troops might easily provide a pretext for an invasion by the Communist Chinese or a coup by the 300,000 Burmese Communists.
Officially, Burma pleaded with the United States to apply pressure on Formosa to withdraw the troops.
Ambassador Sebald had spent more than a third of his fifty years as a naval officer and diplomat in the Far East.
He knew he would have trouble enough with a touchy new nation of ancient oriental ways without being undermined by another agency of his own government.
On home leave in Washington, Sebald demanded assurances from his superiors that the CIA was not supporting the Nationalist troops.
He was told emphatically that the United States was in no way involved.
From the very first days of his two-year assignment in Rangoon, Sebald regularly warned Washington that the troops threatened Burma’s very existence as a parliamentary democracy which was friendly to the West.
If United States relations were not to turn completely sour, he insisted, the Nationalists would have to be removed.
Each time, the State Department responded that the United States was not involved and that Burma should logically complain to Taipeh.
Dutifully, Sebald passed along these assurances to the Burmese Foreign Office.
But he never succeeded in convincing the Burmese of American innocence.
Fresh from a meeting with his field commanders, Ne Win confronted Sebald at a diplomatic gathering and angrily demanded action on the Nationalist troops.
When Sebald started to launch into his standard disclaimer of United States involvement the general cut him short.
As Sebald was to learn, and as high United States officials now frankly admit, Ne Win was indeed correct.
The CIA was intimately involved with the Nationalist troops, but Sebald’s superiors—men just below John Foster Dulles—were officially ignorant of the fact.
Knowledge of the project was so closely held within the CIA, that it even escaped the notice of Robert Amory, the deputy director for intelligence.
He was not normally informed about the covert side of the agency’s operations but he usually received some information about major projects on an unofficial basis.
Yet on Burma he could honestly protest to his colleagues in other branches of the government that the CIA was innocent.
Though Sebald was never able to secure an official admission from Washington, he discovered through personal investigation on the scene that the CIA’s involvement was an open secret in sophisticated circles in Bangkok, Thailand.
In Rangoon public resentment at the CIA’s role became so pervasive that the most irrelevant incidents—an isolated shooting, a power failure—were routinely ascribed to American meddling.
Sebald persisted in his denials, but by March, 1953, they had turned so threadbare that Burma threw the issue into the United Nations.
In New Delhi, Chester Bowles, finishing his first tour as Ambassador to India, had also been beset by the rumors.
To silence the anti-American rumbling, Bowles, like Sebald, sought assurances from Washington.
Bowles conveyed this message to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who stated publicly that, on Bowles’ word, he had convinced himself that the United States was not supporting the Nationalist guerrillas.
At the same time, it conceded paradoxically that Taipeh did have “some influence over General Li Mi” and would exercise its “moral influence” to resolve the problem.
With the UN on the verge of an embarrassing inquest and the Nationalist Chinese in a more conciliatory mood, Sebald’s pleas finally began to be heard in Washington.
He was instructed to offer the services of the United States in mediating the issue between Burma and Taipeh.
In May the United States suggested that Burma, Nationalist China and Thailand join with it in a four-power conference to discuss the problem.
After first balking at sitting down with Nationalist China, Burma finally agreed.
The procedure called for the Nationalist guerrillas to cross over into Thailand for removal to Formosa within three or four weeks.
When the commission demanded his presence in Bangkok, the general pleaded illness, then announced he would under no condition order his troops out.
Negotiations and fighting continued inconclusively throughout the summer of 1953, and Burma again brought the issue before the UN in September.
If something more than that, such as the threat of an ouster from their seat in the United Nations were conveyed to the authorities on Formosa, or if the United States would go a step further and threaten to suspend aid, I assure you the Kuomintang army would disappear overnigh ee Nevertheless, Burma agreed reluctantly to a cease-fire when Nationalist China pledged to disavow the guerrillas and cut off all aid to them after those willing to be evacuated had started out by way of Thailand.
The withdrawal, which began on November 5, was disturbing to the Burmese from the start.
The Innocent Ambassador ((133 volved with the guerrillas in the opium trade.
And he refused to allow Burmese representatives to accompany other members of the joint military commission to the staging areas.
The suspicions of the Burmese were stirred anew when “Wild Bill” Donovan, the wartime boss of the OSS and then Ambassador to Thailand, arrived on the scene, flags waving, to lead out the Nationalist troops.
It was largely bungled, in the view of United States officials in Rangoon, mainly because Washington failed to exert enough pressure on Taipeh, About 7,000 persons were flown to Formosa, but a high percentage of them were women, children and crippled noncombatants.
On May 30, 1954, Li Mi announced from Taipeh the dissolution of the Yunnan Anti-Communist and National Salvation Army, but by July fighting had resumed between the guerrillas and the Burmese Army.
Sebald resigned as ambassador on November I, citing the ill health of his wife, and returned to Washington as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs.
He was to spend the next three years struggling to open lines of communication between the State Department and the CIA so that the left hand of the United States might know what the right hand was up to in its international dealings.
But the repercussions of the CIA’s operation remained to complicate United States relations in Burma.
Despite the long and painful negotiations, half of the Nationalist guerrillas, and the best of them, were still deployed in Burma.
They joined with other rebel factions and skirmished repeatedly with the Burmese Army.
It was not until January of 1961 that they were driven into Thailand and Laos.
They left behind them, however, a new source of embarrassment to the incoming administration of President Kennedy.
As the Burmese advanced, they discovered a cache of U.S.-made equipTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((134 ment, and the following month they shot down a United States World War II Liberator bomber en route from Formosa with supplies for the guerrillas.
The captured arms included five tons of ammunition packed in crates which bore the handclasp label of the United States aid program.
The discovery sent 10,000 demonstrators into the streets outside the American Embassy in Rangoon.
Three persons were killed and sixty seriously injured before troops brought the situation under control.
Premier U Nu called a press conference and blamed the United States for the continued support of the guerrillas.
Three United States military attachés were quickly dispatched to inspect the captured equipment.
They reported that the ammunition crates bore coded markings, which were forwarded to Washington for scrutiny.
It insisted the weapons had been supplied by the “Free China Relief Association” and flown to the guerrillas in private planes.
Behind the scenes, however, W Averell Harriman, the new Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, moved quickly and forcefully.
Harriman felt that there was no hope of returning Chiang to the mainland but that Dulles was forced, nonetheless, to commit the United States to a policy of rolling back the Bamboo Curtain in order to redeem his pledges to Nationalist China and the domestic right wing.
With the full backing of President Kennedy, Harriman set out to reverse the situation without delay.
The Innocent Ambassador ((135 pressed with the fact that such ventures were no longer to be tolerated by the United States.
The Nationalist Chinese quickly announced on March § that they would do their utmost to evacuate the remaining guerrillas.
But Harriman’s forceful action had little effect in dispelling Burma’s suspicions about United States policy.
And conditions took a turn for the worse on March 2, 1962, when General Ne Win seized the government in a bloodless army coup.
In 1962, however, the general came to power with a determination to move the nation to the Left and to reduce its traditional ties of friendship with the West.
Burma, which had been created in the image of the Western democracies in 1948, was, a decade and a half later, turning toward Peking.
In 1952, when Ne Win rebuked Sebald for the CIA’s role in support of the guerrillas, Burma was struggling to maintain its neutrality despite the ominous closeness of a powerful and aggressive Communist neighbor.
Now, with Ne Win in control, Burma found its independence increasingly threatened.
The leftward turn of Burma’s policy might have baffled the American people, but it should not have puzzled the American Government.
The pilot, an American named Allen Lawrence Pope, jumped clear and his parachute opened cleanly.
But as he drifted down onto a small coral reef, the chute caught a coconut tree and Pope’s right leg was broken.
It was May 18, 1958, and the twenty-nine-year-old pilot had just completed a bombing and strafing run on the Ambon Island airstrip in the Moluccas, 1,500 miles from Indonesia’s capital at Jakarta.
Three weeks before Pope was shot down, Dwight D Eisenhower had emphatically denied charges that the United States was supporting the rebellion against President Sukarno.
People were going out looking for a good fight and getting into it, sometimes in the hope of pay, and sometimes just for the heck of the thing.
He was flying for the CIA, which was secretly supporting the rebels who were trying to overthrow Sukarno.
Neither Pope nor the United States was ever to admit any of this —even after his release from an Indonesian jail in the summer of 1962.
But Sukarno and the Indonesian Government were fully aware of what had happened.
And that awareness fundamentally influenced their official and private attitude toward the United States.
Many high-ranking American officials—including President Kennedy—admitted it within the inner circles of the government, but it is not something that they were ever likely to give public voice to.
From boyhood he was active and aggressive, much attracted by the challenge of physical danger.
He volunteered early for the Korean War, fiew fifty-five night missions over Communist lines as a first lieutenant in the Air Force, and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross.
After the war Pope returned to Texas, got married, had a daughter, and was divorced.
He worked for a local airline but found it dull stuff compared with the excitement he had experienced as a combat pilot in the Far East.
And so in March of 1954 Pope signed on with Civil Air Transport, an avowedly civilian airline THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((138 based on Formosa.
He spent two months flying through Communist flak to drop supplies to the French at Dienbienphu.
CAT grew out of the Flying Tigers and inherited much of its technique and swagger.
After Dienbienphu he renewed his contract, rising in three years to the rank of captain with a salary of $1,000 a month.
He met his second wife, Yvonne, a Pan American stewardess, in Hong Kong.
They settled down in a small French villa outside Saigon and had two boys.
Big-game hunting in the jungles of South Vietnam was their most daring diversion.
Pope was ready for an even more dangerous challenge when the CIA approached him in December, 1957.
The proposition was that he would fly a B-26 for the Indonesian rebels, who were seeking to topple Sukarno.
In the Philippines the planes would be safe from counterattack by Sukarno’s air force.
His first mission, a ferrying hop from the Philippines to the North Celebes, took place on April 28, 1958.
Sukarno knew he was deeply distrusted by the conservative, businesslike administration in Washington.
A mercurial leader, he was spellbinding on the stump but erratic in the affairs of state.
He was also a ladies’ man (official Indonesian publications spoke openly of his “partiality for feminine charm” and quoted movie-magazine gossip linking him with such film stars as Gina Lollobrigida and Joan Crawford) .and has had four wives.
From the start of its independence in 1949 until 1957 Indonesia was a parliamentary democracy.
The power of the central government was balanced and diffused by the local powers of Indonesia’s six major and 3,000 minor islands stretching in a 3,000-mile arc from the Malayan peninsula, But in February, 1957, on his return from a tour of Russia and the satellites, Sukarno declared parliamentary democracy to be a failure in Indonesia.
He said it did not suit a sharply divided nation of close to 100,000,000 people.
It gave him semi-dictatorial powers while granting major concessions to the Communists and the Army.
The Eisenhower Administration feared that Sukarno would fall completely under Communist domination.
And that, of course, would be a genuine disaster for the United States.
Although its per capita income of $60 was one of the lowest in the world, Indonesia’s bountiful supply of rubber, oil and tin made it potentially the third richest nation in the world.
And located between the Indian Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, Asia and Australia, it commanded one of the world’s principal lines of communication.
Many of Indonesia’s political leaders, particularly those outside of Java, shared Washington’s apprehensions about Sukarno’s compromises with the Communists.
And many in the CIA and the State Department saw merit in supporting these dissident elements.
Even if Sukarno were not overthrown, they argued, it might be possible for Sumatra, Indonesia’s big oil producer, to secede, thereby protecting private American and Dutch holdings.
At the very least, the pressures of rebellion might loosen Sukarno’s ties with the Communists and force him to move to the Right.
At best, the Army, headed by General Abdul Haris Nasution, an anti-Communist, might come over to the rebels and force wholesale changes to the liking of the United States.
On February 15, 1958, a Revolutionary Council at Padang, Sumatra, proclaimed a new government under the leadership of THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((140 Dr.
Sjafruddin Prawiranegara, a forty-seven-year-old Moslem party leader and former governor of the Bank of Indonesia.
A multiparty cabinet was established, with representation from Java, Sumatra and Celebes.
General Nasution promptly asserted his allegiance by dishonorably discharging six high-ranking officers who had sided with the rebels.
A week later Indonesian Air Force planes bombed and strafed two radio broadcasting stations in Padang and another in Bukittinggi, the revolutionary capital forty-five miles inland.
The attack, carried out by four old United States planes, succeeded in silencing the rebel radios.
In testimony to Congress early in March, John Foster Dulles reiterated the United States pledge of strict neutrality.
On March 12 Jakarta announced that it had launched a paratroop invasion of Sumatra, and the next week the rebels formally appealed for American arms.
They also asked the United States and the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization to recognize the revolutionary government.
We try to be absolutely correct in our international proceedings and attitude toward it.
Jakarta responded angrily that it had turned to the Communists only after the United States had refused to allow Indonesia to buy $120,000,000 worth of American weapons.
During the night of April 11, some 2,000 Indonesian Army troops launched an offensive against the rebels in northwest Sumatra, and at sunrise on April 18 a paratroop and amphibious attack was hurled against Padang.
Throughout that month Jakarta reported a series of rebel air attacks against the central government, but it was not until April 30 that the United States was implicated.
Premier Djuanda Kartawidjaja then asserted that he had proof of “overt foreign assistance” to the rebels in the form of planes and automatic weapons.
On May 7, three days after the fall of Bukittinggi,* the Indonesian military command charged that the rebels had been supplied weapons and ammunition with the knowledge and direction * The rebels then moved their capital to Menado, which fell late in June.
Robert Hirsch, head of the company, confirmed that he had offered to sell the arms to the rebels but said he had done so without clearing it with the State Department.
In any case, he said, the arms were of Italian make and none had been delivered.
Our Secretary of State was emphatic in his declaration that this country would not deviate from a correct neutrality.
However, the Indonesian Government withheld for nine days the fact that an American pilot had been captured.
Nevertheless, with Pope in Indonesian hands things began to move rapidly in Washington.
But the Indonesian Army was not prepared to remain permanently silent about Pope.
On May 27 a news conference was called in Jakarta by Lieutenant Colonel Herman Pieters, Commander of the Moluccas and West Irian Military Command at Ambon.
He announced that Pope had been shot down on May 18 while flying a bombing mission for the rebels under a $10,000 contract.
He said Philippine pesos, 28,000 Indonesian rupiahs, and United States scrip for use at American military installations were also found on the American pilot.
Many Indonesian officials were outraged by Pope’s activities, and accused him of bombing the market place in Ambon on May 15.
A large number of civilians, church-bound on Ascension Thursday, were killed in the raid on the predominantly Christian community.
Pope was given good medical treatment, and he could be seen sunning himself on the porch of a private, blue bungalow in the mountains of Central Java.
Although the Communists were urging a speedy trial, Sukarno also saw the advantages in sunning himself—in the growing warmth of United States policy.
Pope’s trial was delayed for nineteen months while Sukarno kept him a hostage to continued American friendliness.
Late the next year, however, Sukarno found himself in a quarrel with Peking over his decision to bar Chinese aliens from doing business outside of the main cities of Indonesia.
Pope was brought to trial before a military court on December THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((144 28, 1959.
He was accused of flying six bombing raids for the rebels and killing twenty-three Indonesians, seventeen of them members of the armed forces.
During the trial, which dragged on for four months, Pope pleaded not guilty.
The other flights, he testified, were of a reconnaissance or non-combat nature.
Contrary to the assertion that he had signed a $10,000 contract, Pope insisted he got only $200 a flight.
Pope contended it listed the activities of all the rebel pilots, not just his.
He replied to the same effect when confronted with a pre-trial confession, noting that he had refused to sign it.
On April 29, 1960, the court handed down the death sentence, but it seemed unlikely that the penalty would be imposed.
It had not once been invoked since Indonesia gained its igdependence eleven years before.
Pope appealed the sentence the following November, and when it was upheld by the Appeals Court, he took the case to the Military Supreme Court.
Pope made a personal appeal to Sukarno on December 28 during the first of two trips to Indonesia, but she was offered no great encouragement despite the prospect of improved relations between Sukarno and President-elect Kennedy.
Sukarno received an invitation to visit Washington a month after Kennedy took office.
The Indonesian leader had been feted by President Eisenhower during a state visit to the United States in 1956; and he had more or less forced a second meeting with Eisenhower at the United Nations in the fall of 1960.
The meeting went well enough, but Kennedy was preoccupied with the CIA’s latest failure at attempted revolution.
Still Sukarno seemed favorably disposed toward the new Kennedy Administration.
The following February, during a good-will tour of Indonesia, Robert Kennedy asked Sukarno to release Pope.
Sukarno’s first reaction to Robert Kennedy’s request was to reject it out of hand, but when the Attorney General persisted, he agreed to take it under consideration.
Six months later, on July 2, 1962, Pope was freed from prison without prior notice and taken to the American Embassy for interrogation by Ambassador Jones and other officials.
Then he was put aboard a Military Air Transport Service plane and flown back to the United States.
Pope was hidden away for seven weeks and the State Department did not reveal his release until August 22.
The State Department’s explanation of the long silence was that Pope had asked that the release be kept secret so he could have a quiet rendezvous with his family.
Back in Miami, Pope settled down to what outwardly seemed to be a happy relationship with his family; but in December, Mrs.
Pope testified that on his return from Indonesia, her husband insisted upon keeping a loaded .38-caliber pistol by their bedside, despite the potential danger to their two young boys.
She also asserted that Pope had sent her only $450 since he had left her seven months before.
A security agent of the government had warned her that it would be detrimental to her case if she talked about her husband’s missions.
Pope won the divorce and custody of the children on grounds of cruelty.
But she received no financial settlement because Pope was declared outside the jurisdiction of the court.
On December 4, 1962, Pope had put his things in storage— some personal items, ten stuffed birds, four animal heads, one stuffed animal, antelope antlers and water-buffalo horns.
The attorney was Alex E Carlson, the lawyer for the DoubleChek Corporation that had hired the American pilots who fiew at the Bay of Pigs.
The Pacifist Warriors WINTHROP G Brown had been Ambassador to Laos for less than three weeks when the right-wing military government, created by the CIA and the Pentagon at a cost of $300,000,000, was overthrown without a shot by a twenty-six-year-old Army captain named Kong Le.
Brown, a tall, thin, gray-haired Yankee, had been transferred from New Delhi on short notice with only a superficial knowledge of the long, tortured and expensive history of the United States experiment in Laos.
Yet even a quick look convinced him that the CIA and its Pentagon allies were wrong in their assessment of the captain.
They had not been paid in three months and were tired of being the only fighting unit in the quasi-pacifist army of 25,000.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((148 Kong Le was personally outraged by the high-living, CIA-backed regime of General Phoumi Nosavan.
He decided to strike while Phoumi and his cabinet were out of town inspecting a sandalwood tree that was to be turned into a burial urn for the late king.
They considered Kong Le to be Communist-inspired, despite his many battles against the pro~-Communist Pathet Lao.
Laos is a pastoral land, blessed with magnificent scenery— soaring mountains, swift rivers, verdant valleys—and populated by a strange mixture of isolated tribes alike only in their distaste for physical labor.
It is the “Land of the Million Elephants,” whose only cash crop is opium, and whose people are 85 percent illiterate.
Almost all Laotians are Buddhists, peace-loving by instinct and precept.
In battle, to the dismay of their American advisers, they were accustomed to aiming high in the expectation that the enemy would respond in kind.
In 1960 the principal attraction of Phoumi’s royal army to a recruit was the pay—$130 a year, twice the average national income.
Although United States aid had amounted to about $25 a head for the two million Laotians, military pay was about all that filtered down to the average citizen.
More than three fourths of the money went to equip a modern, motorized army in a nation all but devoid of paved roads.
All of this, as formulated by John Foster Dulles, was meant to convert Laos from a neutral nation, vulnerable to left-wing pressures, into a military bastion against Communism.
When the French withdrew in 1954, after a futile eight-year war with the Vietnamese Communists, a neutralist government had been organized under Prince Souvanna Phouma, a cheerful, pipe-smoking, French-educated engineer.
He held power for four years, unsuccessfully struggling to integrate the two Communist Pathet Lao provinces into the central government.
The Pacifist Warriors ((149 after Communist election gains and signs of military infiltration by the North Vietnamese, he resigned.
Souvanna was followed by a series of right-wing governments in which General Phoumi emerged as the strongman.
Phoumi then rigged the 1960 elections—not one Pathet Lao was elected—and settled in for a long, U.S-financed tenure.
And he was unshakably convinced that the United States would put him back in power.
As tangible support for that conviction, Phoumi could point to the personal contact man the CIA kept by his side.
Occasionally, Hazey would be challenged for being out of step with public statements of United States policy.
The conflict between the public and secret definitions of United States policy on Laos was particularly pronounced in the summer of 1960.
Shortly after Phoumi and his puppet Premier were ousted, Kong Le called back Souvanna Phouma to form a coalition government.
To reduce the chances of discord, Souvanna then asked Phoumi to join the government as Vice-Premier and Minister of Defense.
Ambassador Brown dashed off a cable to Washington urging unqualified support for Souvanna’s new government.
The decision served to reinforce Phoumi’s conviction that the CIA and the American military mission would in the end put him back in power.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((150 Brown persuaded himself that he had the complete backing of the CIA station chief, Gordon L Jorgensen, and the leaders of the military mission; but Washington’s ambivalent policy put the ambassador in an embarrassing predicament.
He tried to make the best of it by seeking out Souvanna and asking him if he had any objections to the continued support of Phoumi by the United States.
No, the princely Premier replied, provided the equipment was not used against him; he would need Phoumi’s army to fend off the Pathet Lao.
Brown then sent emissaries to Phoumi, assuring him that Souvanna was not scheming to deprive him of his United States aid and pleading with him at least to return to Vientiane and negotiate, But this man who had been highly regarded by the CIA and the Pentagon for his fighting qualities was afraid of venturing beyond his closely guarded stronghold.
He had a broken line in the palm of his hand and a fortuneteller had once warned him that he would die violently, Even under maximum security he wore a bullet-proof vest during all his diplomatic dealings.
Confronted by Phoumi’s intransigence, Souvanna began to despair of his ability to carry on.
He called in the Western ambassadors in mid-September and warned them that he urgently needed the support of the royal army.
Souvanna’s government was also in dire need of rice and oil, which. had been cut off by a blockade imposed by Thailand’s military strongman, Prime Minister Sarit Thanarat, a close friend of Phoumi.
Washington said it was entreating Sarit to lift the blockade, but the vise continued to tighten around Souvanna.
Early in October, J Graham Parsons, former Ambassador to Laos and then Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, flew to Vientiane and demanded that Souvanna sever his relations with the Pathet Lao.
This amounted to a demand that the neutralist government abandon its neutrality.
Then a high-level mission from the Pentagon, including John N Irwin, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Affairs, arrived for secret talks with Phoumi.
Souvanna concluded that the United States was in the process of withdrawing all support from the neutralist government and again throwing its full power behind Phoumi.
The Pacifist Warriors ((1§2 made a final and unsuccessful appeal to Brown for rice and oil.
Without delay the Soviets started an airlift from Hanoi on December 11, 1960.
Souvanna fled to Cambodia and Kong Le retreated to the north, distributing close to 10,000 American rifles to the Pathet Lao along the way.
Phoumi quickly established a government, naming Prince Boun Oum, a middle-aged playboy, as Premier.
But despite his recent military success, Phoumi failed to pursue Kong Le.
He bad never been within fifty miles of the front lines and he saw no need to break with this tradition.
The Russians, meantime, were moving in substantial amounts of weapons by air and truck.
And the North Vietnamese began to infiltrate crack guerrilla troops in support of the Pathet Lao.
Kong Le joined forces with them, and by early 1961 he had captured the strategic Plain of Jars with its key airstrip fifty miles from North Vietnam.
By the time President Kennedy was inaugurated, on January 20, it seemed as if only the introduction of United States troops could keep the Pathet Lao from overrunning Vientiane and the Mekong River Valley separating Laos from Thailand.
Kennedy was so informed by President Eisenhower and Defense Secretary Thomas S Gates, Jr., in his first Laos briefing on January 19.
One of Kennedy’s first official acts was to ask his military advisers to draw up a plan for saving Laos.
They recommended that an Allied force, including United States troops, take over the defense of Vientiane under the sanction of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.
The idea was to free Phoumi’s army for a full-fledged campaign in the Plain of Jars.
While weighing the advice, Kennedy ordered the Seventh Fleet * Deputy Foreign Minister Georgi M Pushkin told Harriman at the Laotian talks in Geneva in 1961 that the airlift had been organized and executed on the highest priority of any peacetime operation since the Russian Revolution.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((152 within striking distance of Laos and promised Phoumi substantial new support if his troops would show some determination to fight.
Early in March, however, a royal army detachment was easily routed from a key position commanding the principal highway in northern Laos.
The Allied occupation plan was further undermined when the British, French and other SEATO powers (with the exception of Thailand) balked at providing troops.
In addition, the President could not obtain assurances from the Joint Chiefs of Staff that United States forces would be able to save Laos without resort to tactical nuclear weapons.
In a nationally televised news conference on March 23 Kennedy warned that the Western powers would “have to consider their response” if the Communist attack continued in Laos.
The clear implication was that the United States was prepared to intervene with military force.
But, privately, the President told Harriman that he decidedly did not want to be faced with the prospect of using troops, that he wanted a political settlement.
On April 1 the Russians, apparently wary of a direct confrontation with the United States, agreed in principle to a British proposal for a cease-fire.
The next month a fourteen-nation conference on Laos was convened in Geneva.
And in the only meeting of minds at their talk in Vienna in June, Kennedy and Khrushchev promised to work for a neutral and independent Laos.
Souvanna Phouma was to be recalled to create a neutralist government including the three Laotian factions, the proWestern royalists, the neutrals and the pro-Communist Pathet Lao.
He refused to relinquish the Defense and Interior Ministries, as was decreed at Geneva.
If he held out long enough, he reasoned, the CIA and the Pentagon would again come to his rescue.
President Kennedy rebuked him in private messages, but Phoumi steadfastly refused to submit.
The Pacifist Warriors ((153 Washington was reluctant to yank out the CIA men abruptly.
Precipitate action could only diminish the agency’s prestige and usefulness.
But Phoumi was proving so intractable that McCone, acting on Harriman’s recommendation, ordered Hazey out of the country early in 1962.
The Communists retaliated against the build-up, smashed into Nam Tha and sent Phoumi’s troops in wild retreat.
The Nam Tha rout finally convinced Phoumi that he could not go it alone; and the Pathet Lao, verging on a complete take-over, halted when President Kennedy ordered 5,000 United States troops to take up positions in Thailand near the Laos border on May 15.
The three Laotian factions finally agreed to the coalition government on June 11 and the Geneva Accords were signed on July 23.
But Communist North Vietnam failed to comply with the Geneva agreement.
It refused to withdraw about 5,000 troops stationed in Laos in support of the Pathet Lao.
On March 30, 1963, the Communists launched a new offensive which brought much of the Plain of Jars under their control.
The Russian leader reaffirmed his support for a neutral and independent Laos.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((154 He also seemed to agree with Harriman that the Pathet Lao was responsible for the renewed fighting.
It was clear that Moscow had lost control of the situation in Laos to Peking and Hanoi.
At the same time, United States policy makers were becoming increasingly convinced that Laos was not the right place to take a stand in Southeast Asia, The assessment of the Kennedy Administration was that most of the country, particularly the northern regions, would never be of much use to anyone.
In the event the neutralist government was about to be completely overwhelmed, the official plan, as it was outlined at a briefing of Pentagon officials by Dean Rusk, called for the movement of a modest American force into Vientiane.
This would be designed to provoke a diplomatic test of the Geneva Accords.
Failing in that, the United States was prepared to strike against North Vietnam as dramatic evidence that the Communist forces in Laos could advance farther only at the risk of a major war.
The Secret War WHEN Nco Dinu DieM was deposed and assassinated in an Army coup on November 1, 1963, a bloody, frustrating decade came to a close for the Invisible Government.
For nearly ten years the intelligence and espionage operatives of the Pentagon, the CIA and the State Department had been intimately involved with Diem, attempting at every turn to shore him up as a buffer against Communism in Vietnam.
But in his last months the Buddhist majority rose against the repressive policies of Diem, a Roman Catholic, and the Invisible Government was forced to reconsider its single-minded support.
Now, with Diem dead, those very American agencies which had helped him stay in power for so long were accused by his supporters of having directed his downfall.
In 1954, at the age of fifty-three, the pudgy five-foot, fiveTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((156 inch aristocrat returned to Vietnam from a self-imposed exile to become Emperor Bao Dai’s Premier.
He had served under Bao Dai in the early 1930s, but quit as Minister of the Interior when he discovered the government was a puppet for the French.
The Japanese twice offered Diem the premiership during World War II, but he refused.
When the French returned after the war, he resumed his anticolonial activities.
He lobbied against United States aid to the French in Indochina and warned against Ho Chi Minh, the North Vietnamese Communist guerrilla leader.
Shortly after Diem’s return to Vietnam, the French Army was routed at Dienbienphu and the Communists seemed on the verge of total victory in Indochina.
President Eisenhower, aware of Ho Chi Minh’s popularity,* was looking for an anti-Communist who might stem the tide.
Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles were impressed by Ramon Magsaysay’s successful campaign against the Communist Huk guerrillas in the Philippines.
They thought the same tactics might work in Vietnam and requested a briefing by Edward Lansdale, an Air Force colonel who had been a key figure in the CIAdirected operation in support of Magsaysay.
Lansdale was called back from the Philippines to appear before a special panel of intelligence and foreign-policy officials, including Foster Dulles.
He emerged from the meeting with a mandate from Dulles to find a popular leader in Vietnam and throw the support of the Invisible Government behind him.
Lansdale arrived in Saigon just after the fall of Dienbienphu and found political and military chaos.
He canvassed the various factions in the city and the countryside and concluded that Diem alone had enough backing to salvage the situation.
He met with Diem almost daily, working out elaborate plans for bolstering the regime.
Lansdale’s free-wheeling activities in Vietnam provoked a mixed reaction.
To some, he seemed the best type of American abroad, a man who understood the problems of the people and worked diligently to help them.
To others, he was the naive American who, failing to appreciate the subtleties of a foreign culture, precipitated bloodshed and chaos.
Graham Greene patterned the protagonist in The Quiet American after him.
In the fall of 1954 he got wind of a plan by several highranking Vietnamese Army officers to stage a coup against Diem.
He alerted Washington, and General J Lawton Collins, former Army Chief of Staff, was rushed to Saigon as Eisenhower’s personal envoy to help Diem put down the uprising.
The coup failed, but Collins became skeptical of the stability of the Diem regime.
He favored a proposal to create a coalition government, which would represent all the power elements and factions in the country.
The proposal was sponsored by the French, who were maneuvering to salvage their waning influence in the affairs of Indochina.
In the spring of 1955 Diem moved against the Binh Xuyen, a quasi-criminal sect which controlled the Saigon police.
He ordered his troops to take over the gambling, opium and prostitution quarter run by the Binh Xuyen.
But elements of the French Army which had not yet been evacuated from the country intervened for the avowed purpose of preserving order and preventing bloodshed.
Lansdale fired off a message to Washington through the CIA channel, taking strong exception to Collins’ decision.
Lansdale argued that Diem’s move against the Binh Xuyen had broad popular support.
Collins returned to Washington for consultation, then flew back to Saigon with the impression that his views would be sustained.
But in his absence Lansdale had obtained a reaffirmation of the policy of support for Diem.
Then, at Lansdale’s urging, Diem agreed to hold a referendum designed to give the regime a popular legitimacy.
The ballot presented a choice between Diem and Emperor Bao Dai, who had been discredited as a tool of the French.
Diem polled 98 percent of the vote on October 23, 1955, and was declared President of Vietnam.
His brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, was established as his official political strategist.
But Diem and Nhu refused to grant political freedom to the Opposition parties, despite Lansdale’s warning that the country would be plagued by conspiracy if legitimate parties were not permitted to operate openly.
Lansdale made a special trip to Washington in an effort to induce the Dulles brothers to apply pressure on Diem to institute political reforms in South Vietnam.
He was told that it had been decided that Diem provided the only practical alternative to a Communist take-over and that he was to be supported without qualification.
Overruled, Lansdale lost his influence as the unofficial emissary of the Invisible Government in Vietnam.
Thereafter, the CIA took his place as the secret link with the Diem regime.
It was the start of an intimate relationship which was to last until 1963.
During the next few years the United States committed itself increasingly to the support of the regime.
More than a billion dollars in military and economic aid was provided between 1955 and 1960.
In the early years of Diem’s rule the Communist Vietcong conducted only a hit-and-run guerrilla campaign against him.
The official theory of the State Department was that Diem was bringing off a political and economic “miracle” and the Communists could not bear the contrast to their bad showing in North Vietnam.
The Secret War ((159 populace had become so disaffected by Diem’s repression that the Communists decided the time was ripe for action.
In 1960 a group of young, discontented Army officers felt the same way.
They attempted a coup but Diem put them down without serious difficulty.
In May of that year President Kennedy sent VicePresident Johnson to Saigon.
On May 13 Johnson and Diem issued a joint communiqué stating that aid would be provided for Vietnam on an expanded and accelerated basis.
The United States agreed to underwrite the cost of an increase in the Vietnamese Army from 150,000 to 170,000 men, and to equip and support the entire 68,000-man Civil Guard and the 70,000-man Self-Defense Corps.
But the Vietcong continued to advance, and in October, 1961, Kennedy sent General Maxwell D Taylor to make “‘an educated military guess” as to what would be needed to salvage the situation.
Diem balked at Taylor’s reforms and implied he might turn elsewhere for aid.
However, on December 7 he applied for assistance, and the United States again came to his support.
No limit was placed on the aid either in terms of money or of men, In effect, the United States committed itself to a massive build-up for an undeclared war.
At the same time, the administration took great precautions to keep the build-up a secret, perhaps because it violated the letter of the Geneva Accords,} perhaps be*In April, 1963, at the start of the CIA’s reassessment of its links with the regime, Nhu accused the agency of being involved in the 1960 uprising.
But the commander of the rebels, Colonel Nguyen Chanh Thi, who fled to Cambodia, said United States intelligence men tried to discourage the coup and persuaded the rebels not to kill Diem. t The United States did not formally subscribe to the Geneva Accords, which divided Indochina into Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam after Dienbienphu.
But Bedell Smith, the delegate to the negotiations, declared the United THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((160 cause of the domestic political danger if Americans were sent into another Asian war.
Military Assistance Command was created on February 8, 1962, about 4,000 American military men were already serving secretly in Vietnam.
Additional thousands of troops poured into Vietnam, but the Defense Department continued the deception until June.
In testimony before Congress he confirmed that 11,000 troops were in Vietnam.
The Pentagon also went to great lengths to obscure the fact that United States military men were involved in combat—leading troops, and flying helicopters and planes.
Despite eyewitness reports to the contrary, the Pentagon insisted that American troops were firing only in self-defense.
Military information officers were forced to ludicrous extremes in denying the obvious.
In 1961 a campaign had been quietly started to put 90 percent of South Vietnam’s 15,000,000 people into 11,000 strategic hamlets or fortified villages.
The program, patterned after the successful “new villages” of the British anti-guerrilla campaign in Malaya, was designed to protect the peasants against Vietcong terror.
Many claimed credit for introducing the strategic-hamlet idea to Vietnam, including Nhu, who said he launched it with the blessing States would abide by them.
By 1964 more than three fourths of the Vietnamese were listed as being protected by the hamlets.
But many of the peasants were forced into the program against their will and many of the forts were easily penetrated by the Communists, The Communists had also been successful in keeping open a supply route from North Vietnam.
Although the Vietcong’s best weapons were captured United States equipment, they received some additional supplies by infiltration through Communist-held Laos, which borders on both halves of Vietnam.
To cut the supply routes, the CIA decided to train the Montagnards, primitive mountain tribesmen, as scouts and border guards.
Between 1961 and the start of 1963 the cost of the Montagnard program rose from $150,000 to $4,500,000.
The Montagnard training was carried out by the Vietnamese Special Forces, an elite corps created by the CIA along the lines of the U S, Army Special Forces.
The CIA organized the Special Forces for the regime well before the 1961 build-up and supported them at the rate of $3,000,000 a year.
They were trained in airborne and ranger tactics and were originally designed to be used in raids into Laos and North Vietnam.
But inevitably they fell under the control of Nhu, who held the bulk of them in Saigon as storm troopers for the defense of the regime.
United States aid had reached $3,000,000,000, and was running at an average of $1,500,000 a day.
The government declared itself confident that victory was in sight despite the popular discontent with Diem’s rule.
Two Vietnamese Air Force pilots had bombed Diem’s palace in THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((162 February, 1962.
Admiral Harry D, Felt, the commander of the United States forces in the Pacific, predicted the South Vietnamese would triumph over the Communists by 1966.
This slogan reflected the awareness of many Americans in Vietnam that Diem’s popular support, always tenuous, was rapidly disintegrating.
The discontent broke into the open on May 8, 1963, in Hue, Diem’s ancestral home, when the Buddhists staged a demonstration against the regime’s ban on the flying of their flag.
And in an effort to arouse world opinion, Buddhist monks responded by burning themselves to death in the streets in a series of spectacular public protests.
Diem was warned privately that the United States would condemn his treatment of the Buddhists unless he redressed their grievances.
But to all outward appearances it seemed as if the United States might be supporting the Buddhist repressions.
For on August 2 Nhu sent the Special Forces in a raid on the Buddhist pagodas.
Hundreds of Buddhists were jailed and scores were killed and wounded in a brutal attack by forces which many Vietnamese knew were supported by CLA money.
The Secret War ((163 Immediately after the raids, Henry Cabot Lodge, the Republican vice-presidential candidate in 1960, arrived in Saigon to be the new ambassador, replacing Frederick E Nolting, Jr., who had been closely identified with the regime.
Lodge quickly made it clear to Diem that the United States wanted his brother and Madame Nhu removed from power.
After nearly a decade of support for the regime, the United States was reassessing its position.
Even though the CIA decided to continue its $250,000-a-month subsidy to the Special Forces during September, the funds were cut off in October.
And on October 4 the CIA station chief in Saigon, John H Richardson, was recalled to Washington at Lodge’s request.
Richardson, a dapper, bald man with heavy horn-rimmed glasses, had served as the CIA’s personal link with Nhu.
He was also close to most of the regime’s top officials, including those in the secret police.
From his small second-floor office in the American Embassy, Richardson directed the agency’s multifarious activities in Vietnam.
A hard-liner, he had little use for Diem’s opponents, and was the very symbol of the Invisible Government’s commitment to the regime.
As long as he remained in Vietnam, it was all but impossible to convince either Diem or his enemies of any change in United States policy.
When Richardson was recalled, many took it as evidence that the CIA had been operating on its own in Vietnam in defiance of orders from Washington.
The implication was clear that Richardson’s recall reflected a shift in policy, not displeasure with insubordination.
He charged on October 17 that the CIA was plotting with the Buddhists to overthrow the regime.
The coup against the regime came on November 1, but it was by the Army, not the Buddhists.
He said he had feared for the personal safety of the two men if the military coup was successful in that country.
What was intriguing about this account was the statement that President Eisenhower found it necessary to make an inquiry of this nature.
But the former President, after all, had an intimate understanding of the tactics and workings of the Invisible Government.
The scene was the American Embassy on Octava Avenida in Guatemala City, and the unlikely ambassadorial quote was clearly recalled by one of the participants in the meeting.
The CIA’s coup against the Communist-dominated regime of President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman had begun.
Peurifoy, a tough but soft-spoken South Carolinian, was overly optimistic.
His party to celebrate Arbenz’s downfall had to be postTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((166 poned for two weeks.
What the CIA had planned as an overnight coup dragged on for twelve difficult days.
Before it had ended, Peurifoy was deeply involved in political cloak-and-dagger maneuvering.
And the President of the United States, over the objections of the State Department, found it necessary, clandestinely, to send in three more fighter planes to bail out the CIA’s banana revolt.
Like Iran the year before, Guatemala was one of the CIA’s early triumphs in the field of overthrowing governments.
On June 10, 1963, in Washington, Dwight D Eisenhower made a little-reported but extraordinary speech.
The former President for the first time conceded, for all practical purposes, that the United States had overthrown the government of Guatemala in 1954.
Four days after Peurifoy’s ebullient prediction to the embassy staff in Guatemala City, Eisenhower was told that disaster had overtaken the CIA’s modest air force, which consisted of a few World War II P-47 Thunderbolts.
The Thunderbolts had been bombing Guatemala City to encourage Arbenz to vacate the Presidential Palace.
Henry F Holland, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, was aghast.
Providing the CIA with planes for Castillo-Armas was one thing before the invasion had actually started.
But doing so now, Holland felt, would expose the United States to the hated charge of intervention in Latin American affairs.
Many months of careful preparation had gone into the Castillo-Armas invasion.
CIA’s Banana Revolt ((167 pilot who was flying one of the P-47s for the CIA, had enjoyed astonishing success in his raids on Guatemala so far.
A White House meeting was scheduled in the afternoon to discuss the question of the planes.
He thought we should stop right there, wash our hands of the thing and let it stand right there.
Morton’s remarks in Kentucky did not gain national attention, however, until he repeated them at a party dinner in Baltimore in February, 1963, and on a television program.
Whiting Willauer, Ambassador to Honduras during the Guate~mala coup, had openly discussed the CIA’s role as far back as 1961.
Willauer said that after the Guatemala coup, “I received a telegram from Allen Dulles in which he stated in effect that the revolution could not have succeeded but for what I did.
A Yes, Jack was on the team over in Guatemala; that is the principal man, and we had Bob Hill, Ambassador Robert Hill, in Costa Rica . . . and we had Ambassador Tom Whelan in Nicaragua, where a lot of the activities were going.
A Well, the CIA was helping to equip and train the antiCommunist revolutionary forces.
A I certainly was called upon to perform very important duties, particularly to keep the Honduran Government—which was scared to death about the possibilities of themselves being overthrown—keep them in line so they would allow this revolutionary activity to continue, based in Honduras.
The former ambassador was amazingly explicit in his testimony about the coup in Guatemala, a land best known to the outside world for coffee, bananas and the quetzal, which is both its national bird and the name of its monetary unit.
The Indians are Mayas, descendants of the highly sophisticated culture that flourished a thousand years before the Spanish conquistadors came and ruled all of Central America from the Guatemalan city of Antigua.
The Indians are largely illiterate; they provide a cheap labor force and have little communication with the ladinos.
About 2 percent, of the population owns more than 70 percent of the land.
For decades the most important two words in Guatemala have been la Frutera, the United Fruit Company.
The American banana company owned and ran as a fiefdom hundreds of square miles of land in Bananera and Tiquisate.
It was also a major stockholder in the country’s railroad—and a ready-made gringo political target.
CIA’s Banana Revolt ((169 When Arbenz took office in March, 1951, one of the first demands he faced came from coffee workers, who insisted that their minimum wages be doubled.
This might seem unreasonable except for the fact that their pay was forty cents a day.
The labor unions also demanded more for United Fruit’s banana workers, who were paid $1.36 a day.
After that, President Juan Jose Arevalo, a socialist who turned violently anti-American, paved the way for Arbenz and the Communists.
Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, a professional Army officer, was the son of a Swiss father who migrated to Guatemala and became a druggist.
As President, Arbenz in 1952 tried to do something about the country’s lopsided land ownership.
He pushed through a land-reform program, but, predictably, it ended with small farmers, large finca owners and the United Fruit Company up in arms.
With his high-pitched voice and bad temper, Arbenz was no crowd-pleaser.
And the students, always a powerful factor in Latin America, ridiculed him.
The students had an annual lampooning parade, the Huelga de Dolores , of which Guatemalan officials lived in horror.
Not long before Arbenz’s fall from power, the students paraded by with a float that showed Uncle Sam poking a Guatemalan Indian lady with a banana; Arbenz and his hypodermic needle lurked behind a Russian bear, prodding the Guatemalan lady from the other direction.
Just as there is debate over whether Castro started out a Communist or became one later, there has been some dispute over the political evolution of Arbenz.
But there is little dispute that by 1954 the Communists were running Guatemala.
He trusted the Guatemalan Army, an essentially peace-loving organization little inclined to unnecessary strife and combat.
Unlike Castro, Arbenz did not penetrate the Army politically, and when he needed it most, THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((170 it turned on him.
Late in the game he had placed spies, popularly known as orejas , in various Army posts, but it was too late.
He made one other big mistake—he expropriated 225,000 acres of United Fruit’s best Pacific-slope holdings.
Later the Arbenz regime charged that the United States had supported the CastilloArmas invasion to protect la Frutera’s $40,000,000 investment in Guatemala.
In the era of the Cold War, keeping Soviet power and influence out of the hemisphere, and particularly out of the Panama Canal area, was far more important to Washington than old-style banana diplomacy.
But certainly the seizure of United Fruit’s holdings without adequate compensation forced Eisenhower to take action.
And it was one more indication of the direction things were taking in Guatemala.
Peurifoy, known as “Smiling Jack” around the embassy in Guatemala (although not to his face), was a small-town boy from Walterboro, South Carolina, who had enjoyed a phenomenal rise in the State Department.
This may not have been unrelated to the fact that his father was once an associate of the powerful James F Byrnes, who was a senator at the time Peurifoy landed his first job with the State Department in 1938.
Peurifoy was proud of the fact that he once ran the Capitol elevator and equally proud of his small-town background.
Fresh from Greece, where he had helped shore up that country after its war with the Communists, Peurifoy was just the man to have on the scene if there was to be trouble in the land of the quetzal bird.
Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes, who later became Guatemala’s President, was in exile in E] Salvador early in 1954.
They said that I was a popular figure in Guatemala and that they wanted to lend their assistance to overthrow Arbenz.
When I asked their conditions for the assistance I found them unacceptable.
Among other things, I was to promise to favor the United Fruit Company and the International Railways of Central America; to destroy the railroad workers labor union; . . . to establish a strong-arm government, on the style of Ubico.
The CIA went to Peurifoy and persuaded him to join the operation as Ambassador to Guatemala.
At first, Peurifoy was leery of the idea, but a persuasive CIA official convinced him that the operation offered him his big chance to revitalize his career.
In February, 1954, Eisenhower called in a former high United States diplomat to serve as a secret civilian adviser to the operation.
Milton Eisenhower, to join the clandestine operation, but Milton, pleading his wife’s serious illness at the time, did not participate.
Henry Holland, as the State Department Latin Chief, was privy to the operation.
So was Senator Thruston B Morton, then Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((172 Although Dulles and his deputy, General Cabell, were in charge of the CIA’s participation, the major immediate responsibility for carrying out the Guatemalan operation was placed in the hands of Frank G Wisner, the Mississippi-born CIA deputy director for plans.
Wisner, a dedicated and hard-driving “black” operator, was an old hand in the intelligence business.
In World War II he had been the OSS mission chief in Istanbul and Bucharest.
After the war, commuting from his home in the suburbs to his Manhattan law firm, Carter, Ledyard & Milburn, seemed dull compared to the days of wartime intrigue along the Bosporus.
On November 12, 1947, it was announced that Frank Wisner had been named Deputy Assistant Secretary of State.
Now, in Guatemala in 1954, what Wisner and the CIA needed was someone to serve as a leader of the coup and a focal point around which anti-Arbenz Guatemalans could rally.
The man chosen was Colonel Carlos Castillo-Armas, a dapper, dedicated and ascetic-looking career officer who had tunneled his way out of prison to freedom after leading an unsuccessful revolt against Arbenz in 1950.
Castillo-Armas set up headquarters in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, and with the CIA’s help, began plotting to return to his homeland.
The first evidence that the plot was afoot came on January 29, 1954, when Guatemala released intercepted correspondence between Castillo-Armas and Ydigoras.
The Guatemalan charges had a basis in fact, because the two exile leaders had been in touch and had signed a Pacto de Caballeros at the border between El Salvador and Honduras.
The Arbenz government also surmised that the “government of the North” had endorsed the plan.
It charged that the operation was known by the code name El Diablo and that training of rebels was going forward at El Tamarindo, President Somoza’s plantation, at Puerto Cabezas (which became the air base for the Bay of Pigs operation seven years later) and on the island of Momotombito in Lake Managua.
But the training of Castillo-Armas’ forces was in fact taking place on Momotombito, a volcanic island which had earned its sonorous name from the sound the Indians thought it made when it rumbled.
And “Tacho” Somoza, Nicaragua’s President, was indeed heavily involved in the plans to overthrow Arbenz.
The most powerful military element in the coup was the CIA’s air force.
The handful of P-47 Thunderbolts and C-47 transports operated out of Managua International Airport.
The most daredevil of these, as events later proved, was Jerry Fred DeLarm, a slim, short, hawk-featured man who liked to lay a .45 down on the table in front of him when talking to a stranger.
DeLarm, a native of San Francisco, was a barnstorming, adventurous flier well known in Central America.
He had been flying in the area since he was nine, with his father, a pioneer pilot named Eddie DeLarm.
He was discharged as a captain and shortly thereafter set up an airline in Costa Rica.
In 1948, when Otilio Ulate was elected President of that highly democratic nation, CalderonTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((174 Guardia tried to block him from taking office.
In the revolt that followed, Jose Figueres battled Calderon-Guardia, and emerged as head of a victorious junta.
He flew a DC-3 rigged up with a machine gun in the co-pilot seat and another poking through the floor of the rear bathroom, for ground strafing.
During the election of 1950 he took a job doing sky-writing and aerial broadcasts for Arbenz.
He was promised $20,000 by the man he later helped to overthrow, and was understandably disturbed when the money did not come through after Arbenz won.
That, DeLarm reflected later, was when he first began to suspect Arbenz was a Communist.
Until shortly before the invasion, he remained behind in Guatemala City, giving flying lessons and using this and an automobile dealership as cover.
John Foster Dulles and Henry Holland led the American delegation to the tenth Inter-American conference at Caracas in March.
Dulles pushed for an anti-Communist resolution aimed squarely at Guatemala.
But the American resolution passed, seventeen to one, with Guatemala in opposition.
The CIA learned that a shipload of Czech arms, delivered through Poland, was on its way to Guatemala, The estimated 2,000 tons of rifles, machine guns and other armaments were aboard the Swedish freighter M/S Alfhem, en route from the Polish port of Stettin on the Baltic Sea.
The Alfhem operated out of Uddevalla, Sweden, and her owner was Angbats, Bohuslanska & Kusten, Inc.
But Czech funds paid for a “straw charter” of the Alfhem, through the British firm of E E, Dean in London.
And the ship was taking a route to Guatemala as roundabout as its intricate charter arrangements.
CIA’s Banana Revolt ((175 Puerto Barrios, on the east coast of Guatemala, where it docked on May 15.
The CIA had a difficult time tracking the arms ship across the vast Atlantic.
That made tracking difficult, since the freighter was playing hide-and-seek.
Although the CIA had the help of the Navy, the agency lost the ship as it was going south along the African coast.
It didn’t catch up with the Alfhem until it turned up at dockside in Guatemala.
A week later the United States announced that as a countermeasure, it had begun shipping arms to Nicaragua in giant Globemaster planes.
At least fifty tons of small arms and machine guns were flown in to “Tacho” Somoza.
But Eisenhower's efforts to get the Western Allies to join a quarantine on arms shipments to Guatemala met with less than a rousing success, The United States drew a protest from the Dutch when it searched the freighter Wulfbrook at San Juan, Puerto Rico.
On June 7, with the invasion date approaching rapidly, a strange event took place in Guatemala.
It was disclosed that Ferdinand F Schupp, identified as a “former deputy chief of the United States Air Force Mission” in Guatemala, had fled the country along with Colonel Rodolfo Mendoza Azurdia, the ex-chief of the Guatemalan Air Force.
The United States Embassy announced that Schupp had “resigned” his embassy post in 1952 to go into a “farming project” in southern Guatemala.
Later, Schupp turned up in Guatemala City, like Jerry DeLarm, giving flying lessons.
A few days before CastilloArmas crossed the border, DeLarm also slipped out of Guatemala, aboard a regular Pan American flight.
On June 8 Foster Dulles branded “totally false” Guatemalan charges that the United Fruit Company was at the heart of the disTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((176 pute between Guatemala and Washington.
A couple of days before the invasion commenced the Secretary of State invited Thruston Morton to a White House meeting.
As Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations, Morton was aware of the CIA operation, since it had been his task to brief a few key senators about its true nature.
Morton went along, The breakfast meeting with Eisenhower took place in the second-floor dining room of the White House.
Eisenhower, the Dulles brothers, representatives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other aides were present, as Morton later recalled it.
It is generally agreed by the participants, however, that at no point in the invasion planning did Eisenhower ever discuss sending in United States armed forces should the CIA operation fail.
On June 18 Castillo-Armas and his small “Army of Liberation” crossed the border into Guatemala from Honduras.
He drove in a battered station wagon, leading his men down the road to Esquipulas.
Before dawn the P-47s had bombed San Jose, Guatemala’s major port on the Pacific coast.
In Washington the State Department said it had been in touch with Peurifoy.
CIA’s Banana Revolt ((177 Christ, the country’s major religious shrine.
With the Army of Liberation bogged down just inside the Guatemalan border, “Tacho” Somoza decided to invite Ydigoras to lunch with him at the Presidential Palace in Managua to discuss the situation.
The Nicaraguan President was bitterly complaining about how slowly the freedom forces were advancing.
The most active of the planes represented by the pins on “Tacho’s” map was that of DeLarm.
On the first day of the invasion he dropped propaganda leaflets on Guatemala City, but had orders not to fire or drop any bombs.
On subsequent raids on the capital, however, he bombed and strafed several targets, effectively demoralizing the government leaders.
The CIA’s planes became known among the Guatemalan populace as Sulfatos—the Guatemalan word for laxative—because of the alleged effect their appearance had upon the Arbenz officials.
Then disaster struck the CIA’s force of P-47s, when one was shot full of holes and another cracked up.
On June 20 the Guatemalan Government charged in the UN that two American fliers had crash-landed in Tapachula, Mexico, after having bombed the Guatemalan city of Coban.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((178 categorically that his government was behind the invasion.
It was about this time that Allen Dulles made an urgent appeal for more airplanes.
This led to the meeting of Eisenhower, Allen Dulles and Henry Holland, whose legalistic objections were overruled.
As cover for the transaction, Nicaragua had to put down $150,000 in cash to purchase the planes.
After some interesting financial legerdemain, Nicaraguan Ambassador to Washington Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa managed to come up with cover payment, and the new planes were dispatched to Nicaragua.
At one point during the trouble over the airplanes, General Cabell, the CIA deputy director, learned that one of the P-47s had been shipped to Nicaragua minus a landing-gear wheel.
Air Force rushed the part down and the Thunderbolt flew in the invasion.
On June 24, two days after the secret White House meeting, a P-47 swooped over Guatemala City, strafed gasoline stores and knocked out a radio station.
It was not, as luck would have it, the Communist station, but a Protestant missionary station operated by Harold Von Broekhoven, an evangelist from Passaic, New Jersey.
He said they were keeping in close touch with the company manager in Guatemala City, Mr Almyr Bump.
CIA's Banana Revolt ((179 Bigart reported, clearly did not want them hanging around Esquipulas.
Defying the Army of Liberation ban, Evelyn Irons, a corre~ spondent for the London Evening Standard, rented a mule and loped down the road to Esquipulas.
He would not allow her to proceed to the front, which had by now moved to Chiquimula.
Nevertheless, Miss Irons had scooped her competitors, and mule prices in Nueva Ocotepeque soared.
The defection of Mendoza, the Air Force chief, was proving to be a key factor, because it demoralized the Guatemalan Air Force.
At the front, Arbenz’ reluctant Army commanders sent back messages saying that their forces were being overwhelmed by the invaders, It wasn’t true, but it had a psychological effect on Arbenz.
The CIA was reading the traffic from the front, and it knew what messages Arbenz was receiving.
CIA clandestine radio operators intercepted the military communications and fed back false messages on the same wave length to further confuse the situation.
On June 27 Arbenz capitulated, following a long day of maneuvering by Peurifoy.
The American ambassador first met at the palace with Foreign Minister Toriello.
Then he conferred with Colonel Carlos Enrique Diaz, the chief of the Guatemalan armed forces, and a group of ranking colonels.
Diaz was operating on the radical assumption that it was his duty to fight when his country was invaded, Peurifoy instantly recognized that this would be a disaster.
If the junta, to which the State Department’s ambassador had given THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((180 at least his tacit blessing, went out to fight the CIA’s Army of Liberation, it would be a fine spectacle.
Peurifoy put on a “siren” suit, strapped a .45 to his belt, and began maneuvering to topple Diaz.
The CIA, which of course wanted Diaz out, nevertheless felt that Peurifoy was making himself entirely too conspicuous for the good of the operation.
He knocked out the radio station and then dropped two bombs right in the middle of Fort Matamoros, the major installation of the Guatemalan Army.
Diaz, President for one day, was ousted at the point of machine guns by Colonel Elfego Monzon.
With two other colonels, Monzon took over as head of a new, less bellicose junta, acceptable to Peurifoy.
But the CIA and the State Department were worried that it might break out again at any moment.
Peace talks between Monzon and Castillo-Armas were scheduled to take place in El Salvador.
Washington gave Peurifoy carte blanche to bring the junta and the CIA’s Castillo-Armas together.
With the Papal Nuncio, Monsignor Gennaro Verolino, the American ambassador flew off to El Savador for the talks.
On July 2, with tearful if cautious embraces, Monzon and CastilloArmas signed a peace pact.
It left Monzon top man, but only until the junta voted formally on a chief.
The deal was signed in the Hall of Honor in the Presidential Palace, Castillo-Armas then flew back to Chiquimula to convince his followers that it was not a sellout to Monzon.
The next day Castillo-Armas came home to a huge welcome in Guatemala City.
He arrived not at the head of his conquering troops, however, but in Peurifoy’s embassy plane.
Meanwhile John Foster Dulles addressed the United States on radio and television.
As its first act, the ruling junta canceled the right of illiterates to vote, thereby disenfranchising in one stroke about 70 percent of Guatemala’s population —almost all the Indians.
The ideological basis of the coup was further undercut when the chief CIA man in Guatemala quit the agency and went into the cement business there.
The free election Castillo-Armas had promised when Arbenz fell turned out to be “sé” or “no” vote on whether to continue Castillo-Armas as President.
In rapid succession, the new regime set up a Robespierre-like Committee for Defense Against Communism with sweeping police-state powers.
The government took back 800,000 acres of land from the peasants, returned to United Fruit the land Arbenz had seized, and repealed amendments to a 1947 law that had guaranteed rights to workers and labor unions.
Within a week of Castillo-Armas’ election as head of the junta, the new government announced it had arrested 4,000 persons on suspicion of Communist activity.
This set up the Defense Committee, which met in secret and could declare anyone a Communist—with no right of appeal.
Those registered by the committee could be arbitrarily arrested for periods up to six months; they could not own radios or hold public office.
Within four months the new government had registered 72,000 persons as Communists or sympathizers.
Castillo-Armas was generally regarded as an honest, proud and rather simple man who genuinely loved his country.
But he had a covey of advisers, and some of them were less dedicated than their chief.
After the 1954 coup American gambler types began drifting into Guatemala, and certain of the liberator’s lieutenants were cut in.
Castillo-Armas could not bring himself to THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((182 realize that some of his followers were treacherous.
A gambling casino was built in which various Army officers shared a heavy financial interest with the Americans.
Castillo-Armas closed down the casino, and shortly afterward, on July 26, 1957, he was assassinated by a member of the palace guard.
The crime was first blamed on Communists, then on Castillo-Armas’ enemies within the government.
It has never been solved, The following year, Ydigoras was elected President and settled down for a term that was at least never dull.
At one point, when rumors of official corruption were rife, he went on television with his ministers.
Another time, a newspaperman accused Ydigoras of being a viejo enclenque, or enfeebled old man.
Then he proceeded to skip rope and juggle Indian clubs before the amazed Guatemalan audience.
When the CIA came to him in 1960 asking for Guatemalan bases for the Bay of Pigs training, he said yes—although fully aware that he was risking his political neck.
In fact, the November, 1960, uprising (which CIA pilots helped to put down) was partly blamed on the issue of the Cuban training bases in Guatemala.
On March 31, 1963, Ydigoras was ousted by Colonel Enrique Peralta in one of the first of a series of military coups in Latin America that threatened to make a mockery of the political reforms at the base of the Alliance for Progress, Colonel Peralta’s regime was recognized by Washington in less than three weeks.
If any efforts were made by Washington to save the legally elected Ydigoras government—which had risked its future to provide bases for the CIA for the Cuban invasion—they were certainly not effective.
There is, in fact, no available evidence that any such efforts were made.
And so, a decade after the CIA’s liberation of Guatemala from Communism in 1954, the lot of Guatemalans was about the same.
CIA’s Banana Revolt ((183 illiterate, toiled on for wages still ridiculously low.
As is so often the case, the Invisible Government had moved in, accomplished its task, and moved on.
The yoke of Communism had been thrown off but in its place there remained the yoke of poverty and an indifferent oligarchy.
The abysmal conditions that led to Arbenz in the first place were as apparent as ever.
The Kennedy Shake-Up THE CIA emerged from the coup in Guatemala with a reputation in the Invisible Government as a clever and efficient operator in Latin American affairs.
And despite the agency’s subsequent difficulties in other areas of the world, that reputation was essentially untarnished when President Kennedy took office in January of 1961.
A few days after the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy called in Clark M Clifford, a Washington lawyer and close confidant who later became the chairman of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
Kennedy complained that he had been given bad information and bad advice by his intelligence and military advisers.
The President then set out to gain control of the intelligence establishment and to make it genuinely submissive to his ideas and purposes.
As a first order of business, he decided to conduct an extensive investigation of the Cuban debacle.
But in this moment of extreme political vulnerability, high administration officials began to point out in private post-mortems with reporters that Kennedy had inherited the Bay of Pigs idea from President Eisenhower.
On April 23, Interior Secretary Stewart L Udall made the mistake of giving public voice to the administration line, and the Republicans, predictably, pounced upon him.
Kennedy stepped in quickly the mext day to prevent all-out political war.
He has stated on all occasions, and he restates it now, so it will be understood by all.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((186 Kennedy’s full public acceptance of the blame seemed to be the Republicans’ price for laying off the Cuban issue, at least temporarily.
Eisenhower set the Republican line on emerging from an eighty-five-minute conversation with Kennedy at Camp David on April 22.
Kennedy used the momentary truce to set in motion a sweeping reorganization of the Invisible Government.
He had indicated to several high-ranking officials that he would put Richard Bissell in charge of the agency when Dulles stepped down.
Now, in the shadow of the Cuban fiasco, it was clear that Bissell would have to go and that the shake-up would have to be deferred for a decent interval.
He was replaced by Army Major General Marshall Sylvester Carter, fifty-two.
Bissell resigned as the deputy director for plans on February 17, 1962.
Robert Amory, the deputy director for intelligence, was shifted to the Budget Bureau to become the director of its International Division.
The top-level shake-up at the CIA was not completed until a full year had passed.
But two days after the invasion Kennedy ordered General Maxwell Taylor to head an investigation and to make recommendations for the reform of the intelligence community.
Taylor was a World War II paratroop commander who quit as Army Chief of Staff in 1959 in protest against the refusal of the Eisenhower Administration to adopt his views on conventional warfare.
After the Bay of Pigs investigation, he became Kennedy’s The Kennedy Shake-Up ((187 personal military adviser and, finally, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Joining Taylor in the investigation were Robert Kennedy, Allen Dulles and Arleigh Burke.
It was clear that the Attorney General was to become the untitled overseer of the intelligence apparatus in the Kennedy Administration.
The appointment of Dulles and Burke, holdovers from the Eisenhower Administration, was designed to gather broad political support for the shake-up and to forestall suggestions that a whitewash operation was afoot.
Kennedy moved to take an even tighter grip on the Invisible Government on May 4, when he revived the President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities under a new title, the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
The original group had been set up by President Eisenhower on January 13, 1956, on a recommendation by the Hoover Commission.
It was headed by James R Killian, Jr., the president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Joseph P Kennedy, the President’s father, served on it for the first six months.
The board had disbanded on January 7, 1961, when the entire membership resigned in anticipation of the new administration.
But now Kennedy called it back into existence, again under the chairmanship of Killian.
The original board had met just twice a year and had been only marginally informed about intelligence activities.
Kennedy ordered the new board to meet six to eight times a year and, between times, to carry out specific assignments for him at home and abroad.
The Killian and Taylor groups had scarcely begun their secret * The new members were Frank Pace, Jr., former Secretary of the Army; Dr.
William O Baker, vice-president for research of the Bell Telephone Laboratories; Lieutenant General James H Doolittle, retired, board chairman of Space Technology Laboratories, Inc.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((188 inquiries before the tenuous political truce on the Bay of Pigs began to be breached.
Miller said his accusation was based on comments by Eisenhower to a group of Republican leaders, But the former President corrected him the very next day.
Eisenhower denied that American air power had been approved during his time in office.
He had merely stated, the general explained, that an amphibious operation could not succeed without air support of some kind.
This was the first of many confusing exchanges during the following weeks and months on the issue of air cover.
Republican and Cuban exile leaders charged repeatedly that the Bay of Pigs invasion failed because President Kennedy withdrew American air cover.
The air-cover controversy had grown out of a massive confusion over what was included in the original air plan for the Bay of Pigs.
Castro’s air force was to have been destroyed on the ground by the CIA’s Cuban exile bombers.
In that event, the Cuban invaders logically would not have required aerial protection against nonexistent planes.
But the President canceled the second strike against Castro’s air bases.
Accordingly, Castro’s planes were in the air to harass the invaders on the beach and to sink the ships carrying their equipment, ammunition, fuel and communications.
The real question in the controversy is whether the invasion The Kennedy Shake-Up ((189 could have succeeded if Kennedy had not canceled the second strike.
The Taylor group grappled with this question but failed to reach agreement.
Taylor and Robert Kennedy concluded that the invasion plan had been thoroughly faulty and stood no chance of success in any event.
The invasion might have worked without air support of any kind, the admiral argued, if the first air strike had not been scheduled two days in advance of the landing eliminating the element of surprise.
But Dulles felt the CIA and the Joint Chiefs made a mistake in not arranging for alternatives in case the second strike failed or did not come off.
He thought there should have been a contingency plan to make sure the invaders got ashore with their equipment.
The Taylor committee presented its views, secretly and orally, to President Kennedy in the summer of 1961.
The group interviewed virtually everyone of significance in the Bay of Pigs invasion, including the CIA man who directed the air operations and Mario Zuniga, the Cuban pilot who told the cover story about defecting from Castro’s air force.
The committee reached more than thirty conclusions, including findings that communications were very bad and that there was an overcentralization of the operation in Washington.
At the White House, Bundy and Salinger recommended that it be released to the public in January, 1963.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((190 reached a meeting of minds on another crucial point.
After the Bay of Pigs, there was considerable pressure within and without the government to limit the CIA to intelligence-gathering alone.
It was argued that the agency was inevitably tempted to warp its intelligence estimates to justify its pet projects; and that it would be better to transfer responsibility for all clandestine operations to some other agency, possibly the Pentagon.
They contended that a separation of intelligence-gathering from operations would result in expensive duplication of personnel and facilities, particularly at overseas posts.
They also warned that foreign agents would tend to play off one branch of the spy apparatus against the other, bidding up the price of information and confusing the evidence.
Dulles pleaded that, contrary to popular belief, no intelligence agency in the world is split into separate information-gathering and operational units.
When the British set up a Special Operations Executive in World War II, he maintained, they ran into serious difficulties and had to revert to a CIA-type system.
These pleadings proved persuasive to the Taylor committee, which declined to recommend that all clandestine operations be divorced from the CIA’s responsibilities.
The President agreed and the CIA continued to function essentially in its old ways.
In the future, the CIA was to be limited to operations requiring military equipment no larger or more complex than side arms—weapons which could be carried by individuals.
In other words, the CIA was never again to direct operations involving aircraft, tanks or amphibious ships.
The Bay of Pigs invasion was not plausibly deniable because it was too large and pervasive to escape the notice of alert officials, newspapermen and private citizens in a free society.
It is clear from all this that the leaders of the government had finally come to the realization that certain types of clandestine operations are incompatible with the democratic system.
In a totalThe Kennedy Shake-Up ((19r itarian society, where the organs of communication are tightly controlled, secret ventures can be mounted on a large scale with minimum risk of disclosure.
But this is extremely difficult in an open society in which freedom of speech and the press is constitutionally guaranteed.
Immediately after the invasion failed, the President revealed his concern about the limitations imposed upon the government by the institutions of free speech and a free press.
He went before the American Newspaper Publishers Association on April 27, 1961, with a plea for voluntary censorship.
But despite his chagrin and his momentary impatience with the workings of a democracy, the President had not lost perspective on the dangers of toying with fundamental freedoms.
The Secret Elite THE MOST controversial of President Kennedy’s moves to reorganize the Invisible Government was his appointment of John McCone as Director of Central Intelligence.
The strong-willed, sternlooking multimillionaire was not of the stuff to inspire love among the bureaucrats.
McCone had aroused much fear and antagonism in his rise to the top in the world of business and government.
Influential scientists were outraged by what they believed was an effort by McCone to have ten of their brethren fired from the California Institute of Technology in 1956.
The Caltech scientists had come out in support of Adlai Stevenson’s proposal for a nuclear test ban during the presidential campaign that year.
But some remained unconvinced and still more were embittered by the blunt language of McCone’s denunciation.
Outside the scientific community, many were disturbed by McCone’s big wartime profits in the ship-building business.
Ralph E Casey of the General Accounting Office, a watchdog arm of the Congress, testified in 1946 that McCone and his associates in the California Shipbuilding Company made $44,000,000 on an investment of $100,000.
He insisted that the investment of California Shipbuilding— including loans, bank credits and stock, in addition to the cash—amounted to over $7,000,000.
During the Senate Armed Services Committee hearings on his nomination in January, 1962, McCone told of his former directorship of the Panama Pacific Tankers Company, a large oilcarrying fleet, and of the $1,000,000 in stock he held in Standard Oil of California, which operates extensively in the Middle East, Indonesia and Latin America.
McCone offered to dispose of the stock * Senator Stuart Symington, the Missouri Democrat, also saw nothing amiss.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((194 but the committee refused to consider it.
From the tenor of the questioning it was clear that the great majority of senators was not at all disturbed by McCone’s record.
The biography showed that McCone was born into a prosperous San Francisco family on January 4, 1902.
That year he joined the Llewellyn Iron Works in California and, before moving into the executive suite, served briefly as a riveter, a surveyor, a foreman and a contruction manager.
When Llewellyn merged into the Consolidated Steel Corporation in 1929, McCone assumed a series of executive positions, including vice-president in charge of sales.
McCone left the steel business in 1937 to form a new engineering concern, the Bechtel-McCone-Parsons Corporation of Los Angeles.
This firm specialized in the design and construction of petroleum refineries, processing plants and power plants for installation in the United States, South America and the Middle East.
During the war McCone and his enterprises were also active in the modification of Air Force bombers for combat.
After the war McCone took over the Joshua Hendy Iron Works at Sunnyvale, California, and broadened his business interests in a dozen major corporations, including the Curtiss-Wright Corporation, Standard Oil of California and Trans World Airlines.
He entered government service in 1947 as a member of President Truman’s Air Policy Commission.
In 1948 he became special deputy to James Forrestal, the Secretary of Defense.
The Secret Elite ((195 McCone was named Under Secretary of the Air Force in 1950.
He returned to private life the next year, but was back in the government in 1958 as the chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission.
During his government service, McCone gained a reputation as an uncompromising supporter of John Foster Dulles’ doctrine of massive retaliation, the Air Force’s atomic warfare theories, and the hard-line strategy against the Soviet Union.
A member of the Roman Catholic Church, McCone was designated by Pope Pius XII as a Knight of St.
He and Clare Booth Luce served as Eisenhower's official representatives at Pope Pius’ funeral in 1958.
These credentials—particularly McCone’s reputation as a hardnosed executive who could get things done quickly and efficiently —impressed Robert Kennedy, who had been looking around for a successor to Allen Dulles.
There had been some thought that the Attorney General might take the job himself, but this inevitably would have provoked Republican charges that the Kennedys were creating a dynasty.
And it probably would have stirred up new demands for tighter Congressional control of the CIA—a prospect which the President did not relish.
Serious consideration was given to the possibility of offering the job to Clark Clifford, who had impressed Kennedy mightily when he directed the change-over in the White House staff be~tween administrations.
The President then turned to Fowler Hamilton, a Wall Street lawyer and close friend of Senator Symington.
The foreign-aid job had been scheduled to go to George D Woods, the board chairman of the First Boston Company.
But Woods felt compelled to withdraw his name because of renewed talk about First Boston’s implication in the Dixon-Yates scandal.
Kennedy then tried to fill the AID opening with Thomas J WatTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((196 son, Jr., the president of the International Business Machines Corporation.
But Watson said no and the President named Hamilton as the AID director.
It was then that Kennedy decided upon McCone as Director of Central Intelligence.
The decision, announced on September 27, 1961, shocked official Washington.
After the Bay of Pigs, both Kennedy and the CIA were extremely vulnerable to political attack from the Republicans, particularly from the right wing of the party.
With a conservative Republican at the head of the Invisible Government, the President, clearly, thought the political fire would be somewhat diverted.
A week later, on December 6, McCone’s wife died unexpectedly of a heart attack.
Allen Dulles volunteered to take care of the arrangements for flying the body back to the West Coast.
McCone followed Dulles’ advice and set out almost immediately on extensive tours of agency installations in Europe and Asia.
His nomination came to a vote in the Senate on January 31, 1962, after a brief, bitter debate, and he was confirmed seventy-one to twelve.
As head of the Central Intelligence Agency, while you will continue to have overall responsibility for the agency, I shall expect you to delegate to your principal deputy, as you may deem necessary, so much of the direction of the detailed operation of the agency as may be required to permit you to carry out your primary task as director of Central Intelligence.
The President noted “with approval” that McCone had designated his deputy, General Carter, to sit on the United States Intelligence Board as the CIA’s representative.
He gained experience in international affairs as an important military figure at several wartime and postwar conferences, including the World War II summit meeting in Cairo in 1943.
Kennedy had wanted to put a civilian in the deputy’s job and settled upon Carter only under strong Congressional pressure for the appointment of another military man.
When some of Carter’s old military friends would arrive at the CIA from the Pentagon for an intelligence bricfing, the general left no doubt as to who was the real boss of the agency.
As Director of Central Intelligence, McCone was responsible not only for the CIA but also for all of the other government agencies involved in intelligence work.
McCone directed the intelbeen consulted about the appointment nor given an opportunity to question McCone about his views on foreign policy.
Ten days later, at three o’clock in the morning, Fulbright was roused from bed by a phone call from McCone, who wanted to inform him of the exchange of U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers and Soviet spy Rudolph I Abel.
Annoyed, Fulbright made it clear this was not the type of consultation he had in mind.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((198 ligence community formally through USIB, a committee of intelligence agency representatives, which was called into session each week in a room adjacent to his top-fioor office in the CIA’s new building in Langley, Virginia.
On a bureaucratic level, it did battle with the OSS and the ambitious intelligence men of the Army Air Corps.
After the war the G-2 absorbed many of the OSS operatives under a directive by President Truman.
But it lost air intelligence when the Air Force was created as a separate service.
Office of Naval Intelligence The ONI is the smallest of the intelligence branches of the three services.
Its total complement amounted to 2,600 men in 1961,* * All figures on the number of persons involved in intelligence work are highly classified.
But it makes use of an attaché system, and it deploys intelligence men at all of its installations, ashore and afloat.
The principal mission of the ONI is to collect information on foreign naval forces.
It keeps a special weather eye on the Soviet submarine fleet and compiles elaborate dossiers on the world’s major beaches, harbors and ports.
Air Force Intelligence The A-2 is the most mechanically sophisticated of the service intelligence operations.
It employs the latest electronic gear to determine the missile, bomber, satellite and radar potential of the Soviet Union.
Under a Pentagon directive in 1961, the Air Force controls all reconnaissance satellites orbiting the Soviet Union.
A Target Division is responsible for sorting out the intelligence intake and maintaining a current list of potential enemy targets.
It also compiles and publishes the Bombing Encyclopedia, a compendium of target information.
The A-2 conducts a world-wide attaché system through its International Liaison Division.
It also maintains a Military Capabilities Branch and a Wargame Branch in the Threat Assessments Division of its Directorate of Warning and Threat Assessments.
Atomic Energy Commission The AEC is responsible for making estimates of the atomicweapons capabilities of the Soviet Union and other nuclear powers.
Since 1948 the United States has maintained round-theclock monitoring of the atmosphere to detect radioactive particles from atomic tests.
From an analysis of the samples, the AEC can determine not only the fact that atomic explosions have taken place but also the type and power of the weapons detonated.
The Pentagon censor in testimony released in 1961 by the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((200 AEC also plays an important role in assessing test-ban proposals.
It carries out intensive experimentation in ways to shield atomic explosions from detection and ways to pierce the shielding devised by other nations.
Because of the law which set it up and its close relationship to the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy in the Congress, the AEC is one of the most independent branches of the Invisible Government.
Federal Bureau of Investigation As the investigative arm of the Department of Justice, the FBI is responsible, among its other duties, for catching spies.
In this phase of its work—as opposed to its conventional criminal investigations—the FBI is an intelligence agency, and as such, part of the Invisible Government.
The assistant to J Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, sits on USIB, and the FBI has a liaison man who reports to work at the CIA headquarters in Langley every day.
Actual counter-espionage work is conducted by the FBI’s hushhush division Number 5.
This is the Domestic Intelligence Division, headed by William C Sullivan.
A squad supervisor is assigned to intelligence in each of the FBI’s fifty-five field offices in the United States.
Agents who normally conduct ordinary criminal investigations are assigned to espionage cases when necessary.
About 20 percent of the 650,000 cases investigated by the FBI in 1963 were espionage-internal security cases, although the exact figure is classified.
The Soviets have attempted to obtain every conceivable type of information.
The targets have been allencompassing and have included aerial photographs, maps and charts of our major cities and vital areas, data regarding the organization of our military services and their training programs, technical classified and unclassified information concerning nuclear The Secret Elite ((20r weapons, planes, ships and submarines.
Of prime interest to the Soviets is information concerning United States military bases, including missile sites and radar installations.
This is the division of the Soviet secret police that keeps dossiers on Russian émigrés.
It began on April 6 of that year, when a Soviet citizen arrived in the United States with papers identifying him as “Vladimir Gridnev,” forty-nine, a temporary employee of the Soviet Embassy.
The first move in the game was made at 9:00 P.M. on April 28, when the defector returned from work to his home in an apartment house in a Virginia suburb of the capital.
A Russian whom Volodya introduced as “Ivan Ivanovich,” his embassy “driver,” entered the room.
He was actually Gennadiy Sevastyanov, a thirty-three-year-old Russian agent working under diplomatic cover as an attaché in the cultural division of the Soviet Embassy.
Two days later Volodya met his brother again at a bus stop in Arlington, Virginia.
The entire scene was filmed by the FBI with a sixteen-millimeter movie camera.
The three men drove to a restaurant, where Volodya tried to persuade his brother to stay at the CIA but to work for the Russians.
Sevastyanov made the same proposal, and promised that later on he could return to his homeland and be well taken care of.
Sevastyanov gave the CIA man a password and other instructions for clandestine meetings.
Volodya THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((202 was allowed to return to the Soviet Union on May 4—-since he was regarded by the FBI as a helpless pawn in the Soviet operation.
Since 1950 a total of thirty-four Soviet and seventeen Communist-bloc diplomats have been expelled from the United States for a variety of reasons.
Like Sevastyanov’s activities, many of the espionage efforts of Soviet agents operating as diplomats seem bumbling and almost amateurish.
By contrast, Soviet “illegals’—spies operating under deep cqgver-—are skilled experts and therefore much harder for the FBI to detect.
They slip into the country with false documents, pass for ordinary Americans, and enjoy no embassy protection.
The FBI’s counter-espionage work is concentrated within the continental United States.
Although the bureau operated in the Western Hemisphere and cracked Nazi espionage rings in South America during World War II, espionage and counter-espionage abroad became the province of the CIA and the military intelligence organizations after the war.
Contrary to popular belief, however, the FBI does have some agents overseas.
The FBI had 14,239 employees in 1964 (of whom 6,014 were agents), but its budget of $146,900,000 ranked it as one of the smaller units of the Invisible Government, even though its counterespionage work is vital to national security.
Bureau of Intelligence and Research INR, the State Department's intelligence agency, is really misnamed, in the view of one of its former directors, Roger Hilsman.
It is, in a real sense, not really an intelligence agency as you think of the word and it does not collect as such.
The Secret Elite ((203 it has functions relating to the intelligence community.
As Hilsman indicated, INR relies upon the information of others—the diplomatic service, the CIA, the military attaches and the published documents and maps of foreign nations.
INR analyzes this information for the use of the Secretary of State and the other branches of the intelligence community.
Its main function on USIB is to make sure that the final intelligence estimates reflect the political, social and economic facts of life, as seen from the State Department’s viewpoint.
The absence of cloak-and-dagger in INR is reflected in the fact that it is the only member of USIB whose intelligence budget is part of the public record.
It produces over 16,000 pages of social, political, economic and biographic analyses each year.
By its own estimate, 40 to 60 percent of the raw data for these analyses come from the diplomatic reports of United States embassies abroad.
INR also makes use of the scholarly output of the universities and periodically commissions a study by the academic community.
INR, the FBI, the AEC and the intelligence branches of the military services represent the lesser agencies of the Invisible Government.
The National Security Agency PROBABLY the most secretive branch of the Invisible Government is the National Security Agency.
Even more than the CIA, the NSA has sought to conceal the nature of its activities.
The CIA’s functions were revealed in general outline by Congress in the National Security Act of 1947.
But the NSA’s duties were kept secret in the classified presidential directive which established the agency in 1952.
Nevertheless, it is no secret that the NSA is the nation’s codemaking and code-breaking agency.
It is impossible, however, to receive official confirmation of that obvious fact.
Unlike Allen The National Security Agency ((205 Duiles and other high-ranking CIA men who have occasionally talked to the press and on television, NSA officials have refused to grant interviews under any circumstances.
As a sub-agency of the Defense Department, the NSA is watched over by the deputy director of defense research and engineering.
But the various men who have held this post have been similarly uncommunicative.
During the Eisenhower years, the job of overseeing the NSA was held by military men.
The Kennedy and Johnson Administrations turned to civilians with broader scientific expertise.
Fubini was confirmed by the Senate without difficulty despite a challenge from Senator Thurmond, the South Carolina Democrat.
During the Armed Services Committee hearings on June 27, 1963, Thurmond questioned Fubini closely on his political affiliations in Italy prior to his emigration to the United States in 1939.
Fubini admitted that he had been a dues-paying member of the GUF, the Fascist student organization in the universities, But he explained that membership was “almost a compulsory thing” in Mussolini’s Italy, and that he finally left his homeland in political protest.
Fubini made it clear, to Thurmond’s evident relief, that he had never been associated with Communist or Socialist movements.
He worked on several classified electronic projects and rose to become the vice-president of the company.
By the time he joined the Pentagon in 1961 he was thoroughly impressed with the need for tight security.
He became convinced that a mass of vital national secrets was being given to the Russians through careless public disclosure.
Fubini and his staff maintained a long list of security violations which appeared in the press and elsewhere.
Prominent on the list were public statements by Defense Secretary McNamara and his deputy, Roswell Gilpatric.
In their zeal to defend administration policy, notably in McNamara’s television extravaganza after the THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((206 Cuban missile crisis, Fubini felt his bosses were sometimes imprudent about national security.
Fubini’s dedication to security was matched by the agency he inherited.
The NSA’s U-shaped, three-story steel-and-concrete building at Fort Meade, Maryland, is surrounded by a double barbed-wire fence ten feet high.
The fences are patrolled night and day, and guards with ready machine guns are posted at the four gatehouses.
The interior, including the longest unobstructed corridor in the world , is similarly patrolled.
The building is 1,400,000 square feet, smaller than the Pentagon but larger than the CIA’s Langley headquarters.
It houses highspeed computers and complicated radio and electronic gear.
It is said to have more electric wiring than any other building in the world.
Special security conveyor belts carry documents at the rate of a hundred feet a minute and a German-made pneumatic tube system shoots messages at the rate of twenty-five feet a second.
The NSA headquarters was built at a cost of $30,000,000 and was opened in 1957.
It contains a complete hospital, with operating rooms and dental offices.
It also houses eight snack bars, a cafeteria, an auditorium and a bank.
They are subject to lie-detector tests on application and intensive security indoctrination on acceptance.
Periodically, the indoctrination briefing is repeated and employees are required to sign statements that they have reread pertinent secrecy regulations.
Even so, the NSA has had more than its share of trouble with security violations.
In 1960 two young mathematicians, William H Martin and Bernon F Mitchell, defected to Russia.
They were soon discovered to be homosexuals, a fact which led indirectly to the resignation of the NSA’s personnel director, and the firing of twenty-six other employees for sexual deviation.
Under the legislation, which was introduced by the UnAmerican Activities Committee, the Secretary of Defense was authorized to fire NSA employees without explanation and without appeal if he decided they were security risks.
The bill also required a full field investigation of all persons before they were hired.
Democracy itself is a dangerous form of government and in its very danger lies its strength.
The protection of individual rights by the requirement of due process of law, which has long endured in this nation of ours, is a radical and dangerous idea in most of the world today.
The National Security Agency plays so highly specialized a role in the defense and security of the United States. that no outsider can actually describe its activities.
They are guarded not only from the public but from other government agencies as well.
In 1954 Joseph Sydney Petersen was tried and convicted on charges of misusing classified NSA documents.
The Dutch Embassy in Washington admitted it had exchanged “secret intelligence” with Petersen on the assumption that he had acted with the knowledge of his superiors.
In 1959, during his visit to the United States, Khrushchev bragged that he had obtained top-secret American codes and had intercepted messages from President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Nehru.
Your agents give us the code books and then we send false information back to you through your code.
On July 22, 1963, Izvestia published a letter from Victor Norris Hamilton, a naturalized American of Arab descent who had sought asylum in the Soviet Union.
Hamilton said he had worked for a division of the NSA which intercepted and decoded secret instructions from Arab countries to their delegations at the United Nations.
Hamilton claimed UN Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge had sent a letter to the division thanking them for the information.
Army Sergeant First Class Jack E Dunlap committed suicide when he realized he had been discovered selling top-secret NSA documents to Soviet officials.
Dunlap reportedly received $60,000 during a two-year period for disclosing United States intelligence on Russian weapons advances, the deployment of their missiles and troops, as well as similar information about the NATO countries.
The playboy sergeant, who had a wife and five children, spent the money on several girl friends, two Cadillacs and frequent trips to the race track.
And most of it was indirectly confirmed by the Pentagon in its contradictory statements on the case, and by the House UnAmerican Activities Committee in issuing a public report stressing the seriousness of the Martin and Mitchell defection.
The Office of Production attempted to break the codes and ciphers* and read the messages of the Soviet Union, Communist China, other Communist countries, United States Allies and neutral nations.
The Office of Research and Development carried out research in cryptanalysis, digital computing and radio propagation.
The Office of Communications Security produced United States codes and tried to protect them.
And the Office of Security investigated NSA personnel, conducted lie-detector tests and passed on the loyalty and integrity of employees.
The NSA, at least according to Martin and Mitchell, also provided code machines to other nations and then intercepted their messages on the basis of its knowledge of the construction and wiring of the machines.
The NSA gathered its raw information through more than 2,000 intercept stations around the world.
In addition, the NSA sent its eavesdropping equipment along on flights by the U-2 and other aircraft over the Soviet Union and over Communist China.
Separate flights, called ELINT missions, skirted Communist borders, picking up the location and characteristics of enemy radar * Codes use symbols or letter groups for whole words or thoughts.
Ciphers use letters or numbers for other letters or numbers, THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((210 ” stations.
Occasionally, the planes would play “foxes and hounds, feinting toward or into Soviet defenses so as to analyze the nature of the response on nearby United States radar screens and listening gear.
The Defense Intelligence Agency THE DIA, the newest member of the Invisible Government and the most powerful competitor of the CIA, owes its existence to the post-Sputnik “missile gap” controversy of the late 1950s.
As the Soviets demonstrated the range and accuracy of their missiles in a series of spectacular space shots, the Air Force demanded that the United States embark on a massive ICBM program of its own.
Almost weekly in the period between 1957 and 1960 the Air Force went before the United States Intelligence Board to argue that the Russians were deploying hundreds of ICBMs and were tipping the military balance of power in their favor.
To substantiate the claim, Air Force photo-interpreters introTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((212 duced scores of pictures taken by the U-2 spy plane, which started to fly over the Soviet Union in 1956.
Allen Dulles, relying on the independent interpretation of the photos by the CIA’s Research Division, challenged two thirds of the Air Force estimates.
USIB’s meetings were dominated by long and bitter arguments over the conflicting missile estimates.
Each service tended to adopt a self-serving party line and pursue it relentlessly.
At budget time each year the Air Force would see endless numbers of Soviet missiles and bombers; the Navy would detect the latest enemy submarines just off the East Coast; and the Army would mechanize a few dozen more Russian divisions.
Overwhelmed by the constant bickering, USIB and the civilian leaders of the Pentagon were anxious to find some mechanism for resolving the conflict.
They turned the problem over to a Joint Study Group which was set up in 1959 to conduct a sweeping investigation of the intelligence community.
The group was composed of military men, active and retired, and career intelligence officials in the State Department, the Defense Department and the White House.
A polio victim who was confined to a wheel chair, Kirkpatrick was often spotted overseas, pursuing his many investigations.
The Joint Study Group submitted a comprehensive list of recommendations late in 1960.
The DIA was to serve as the arbiter of the conflicting service estimates and to present its findings to USIB as the final judgment of the Pentagon.
The idea appealed strongly to Thomas S Gates, Jr., the last Secretary of Defense in the Eisenhower Administration.
When the Kennedy Administration took office in January, 1961, Gates forcefully urged McNamara to put the recommendation into effect without delay.
After a thorough study of the missile-gap claims, MeNamara concluded that there was no foundation in the argument The Defense Intelligence Agency ((213 that the United States was lagging behind the Soviet Union in the production or deployment of ICBMs.
The study convinced him of the dangers inherent in the fragmented intelligence operation at the Pentagon.
He saw great value in subordinating the service intelligence branches to a centralized agency directly under his supervision.
Despite his many wrangles with the services, Dulles felt it was imperative that they continue to have a voice in the deliberations of the intelligence community.
Then the CIA would be cut off from direct access to the facts and opinions developed by the military men and would be forced to rely on whatever information the DIA saw fit to give it.
Yes, the services have been guilty at times of analyzing intelligence from a parochial point of view.
But other agencies of the government are no less susceptible to self-serving judgments.
The function of USIB is to serve as a forum for all viewpoints—even extreme viewpoints.
Only then can the Director of Central Intelligence, and through him the President, arrive at comprehensive and objective assessments.
Dissent should be aired at the highest possible level and not suppressed outside the orbit of presidential observation.
If the service intelligence branches were removed from USIB, the DIA would become the sole representative of the government’s biggest producer and biggest consumer of intelligence.
And the DIA as an agency subordinate to a political appointee—the Secretary of Defense—would be more vulnerable to political influences than are the services which have a semi-autonomous status by law.
Dulles was particularly worried about the possibility that the DIA would gain a monopoly over aerial reconnaissance.
The Defense Department controlled the reconnaissance equipment and Dulles feared that the DIA would be tempted to hoard the photographs produced by the equipment.
During the U-2 era, the CIA had built up a skilled corps of THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((214 civilian photo-interpreters and they would surely quit if the Pentagon monopolized aerial photographs.
Without interpreters, the CLA would have no way to verify Defense Department estimates.
At a time when electronic espionage was bulking ever larger, Pentagon control of aerial reconnaissance could result in Pentagon dominance of the entire intelligence community.
Dulles expressed his misgivings to McNamara, who responded with assurances that the DIA would be only a co-ordinating body and that it would not supplant the intelligence branches of the Army, Navy and Air Force.
Some of Dulles’ advisers suspected that the Pentagon had covert ambitions for the DIA which were being suppressed temporarily for tactical reasons.
Named as director was Lieutenant General Joseph F Carroll, who had been the inspector general of the Air Force.
Carroll started his career with the FBI and was a leading assistant of J Edgar Hoover at the time he moved to the Air Force in 1947 to set up its first investigation and counter-intelligence section.
CIA men delighted in pointing out that all of Carroll’s experience had been as an investigator and that he had no credentials as a foreign or military intelligence analyst.
Major General William W Quinn, a former West Point football star, who was named deputy director; and Rear Admiral Samuel B Frankel, a Chineseand Russianspeaking expert on the Communist world, who became the DIA’s chief of staff.
Quinn, the G-2 for the Seventh Army in Europe during World War II, acted as personal courier for the information Dulles gathered in Switzerland on Nazi troop movements.
Although the original list of functions seemed relatively modest, an expansion of the DIA’s responsibilities was clearly implied in its authorization by McNamara to provide “overall guidance for the conduct and management” of all duties retained by the individual services.
And with the inevitability of Parkinson’s Law, the DIA quickly added to its domain.
By 1964, when the DIA became fully operational, it had more than 2,500 employees.
It had acquired 38,000 feet of Pentagon office space and had submitted a request for a separate $17,000,000 building.
It had succeeded in eliminating the separate service intelligence publications and supplanting them with two of its own; and it had launched a Daily Digest, which was viewed by the CIA as duplicatory and competitive to its own Central Intelligence Bulletin.
The DIA had also supplanted the J-2, the intelligence staff of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, both on USIB and in supplying information to the Chiefs themselves.
It had replaced the services in the production of “order of battle” intelligence—estimates of the size and deployment of enemy forces.
The DIA did so on request in 1963 when Kennedy wanted quick intelligence on whether the Guatemalan Army would be able to handle expected Communist riots.
By 1964 the DIA’s control over military intelligence had expanded to such a degree that the services were reduced to the role of providing technical information on enemy weapons, running the attaché system and collecting—but not analyzing—raw intelligence.
Only a veto by President Johnson could prevent the DIA from becoming the sole military voice on the board.
When John McCone took over as CIA director in November, 1961, he must have found a glimpse of an occasional passing fawn a pleasant relief from the cares of office.
He could dine, if he chose, in utter isolation and complete quiet, twenty minutes and eight miles from downtown Washington and the lunchtime hustle and bustle that is the lot of less powerful, and less secluded, bureaucrats, As far as the eye can see, the lovely rolling hills of Virginia’s Fairfax County surround the CIA building on all four sides.
The Pentagon is bigger; but that colossus is easily visible from almost anywhere in the capital.
H THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((218 Appropriately, the CIA’s concrete headquarters is invisible, an architectural diadem set in bucolic splendor in the middle of nowhere and modestly veiled by a thick screen of trees.
The advantages of a rustic retreat were extolled by Allen Dulles when he went before a House Appropriations Subcommittee in June, 1956, to seek funds for the CIA headquarters.
Three years later guests, in response to engraved invitations from Dulles, attended the cornerstone-laying ceremony.
Colonel Stanley Grogan, the CIA’s public information man at that time, handed out a press release.
The fact that the CIA could send out public invitations to lay the cornerstone of its hidden headquarters reflects a basic split personality that plagues the agency and occasionally makes it the butt of unkind jokes.
When Allen Dulles became the CIA director in February, 1953, the agency was housed in a ragged complex of buildings at 2430 E Street in the Foggy Bottom section of the capital.
Once President Eisenhower and his brother Milton set out to visit Dulles.
When he discovered that even guides on sightseeing buses were pointing out the buildings as “the CIA,” he had the printing-office sign taken down and one that said “Central Intelligence Agency” put up.
When the CIA moved across the Potomac to its Langley home in 1961, the matter of secrecy still proved bothersome.
Large green and white signs pointed the way to the CIA from the George Washington Memorial Parkway, which had been extended to the new headquarters at a cost of $8,500,000.
Originally, the signs were erected to guide workmen to the site during construction.
After the CIA moved into the building, some of its officials felt there was no need to leave them up.
In their place, there was only a small green and white marker reading “Parkway,” with an arrow pointing along the highway, and “B.P.R.,” with an arrow pointing to the CIA turn-off.
No outsiders venture into the CIA anyhow unless they are on official business.
A CIA employee cannot tell his wife or mother-in-law to drop in on him.
Another example of the now-you-see-it-now-you-don’t atmosphere surrounding the building is the way the CIA answers the telephone.
Other government-agency switchboards answer with the name of their department.
Only a few officials can be reached by name; for most, the caller must ask for the extension he wants.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((220 Despite the atmosphere of secrecy which surrounds the building, a KGB agent trying to find the CIA headquarters would have no difficulty.
He could drive to the nearest Amoco station and ask for a map of Washington, which clearly identifies the CIA site at Langley.
On the other hand, the Russian spy would not have to drive; he could get to the CIA from downtown Washington by taxi for $4.50.
Or he could make the trip for forty-four cents on a public-transit bus, as do hundreds of the CIA’s regular employees.
Buses leave at 7:12 A.M., 7:46 A.M. and 8:16 A.M., and arrive at CIA thirty-four minutes later.
If the Soviet spy were a top “illegal,” as the Russians call their agents who have no embassy cover, he could check the Washington Post for a suitable location.
In March, 1963, for instance, the paper carried a large advertisement for the Broadfalls Apartments in Falls Church, Virginia.
Early in 1963, an enterprising realtor, who owned thirteen acres adjacent to the CIA, applied to the local zoning board for permission to build apartment houses on his land.
It was with a sense of growing horror that the CIA learned that from the fourth or fifth floor, residents would be able, with a spyglass, to look right into McCone’s picture window and read his classified documents.
Secretly, the CIA ordered the government’s General Services Administration to buy up the land in the area forthwith.
They kept saying they didn’t know who wanted it or why it was wanted and that the only reason for taking it was that there was an established need for it.
The agency killed off the apartment-house project by buying up most of the land, but it finally permitted the doctor to keep his home.
Under the agreement, however, the CIA can screen and reject anyone to whom he wishes to rent or sell.
But in winter, when the leaves are gone, the CIA can be glimpsed through the branches from the Sterrett home.
The headquarters building has been a subject of some difficulty for the CIA from the outset.
When Bedell Smith was head of the CIA, he requested $30,000,000 for a new building.
To preserve security, the request was concealed in the budget the agency sent to Capitol Hill.
When economy-minded congressmen discovered $30,000,000 with no apparent purpose, they cut it out of the budget.
Not until after Dulles had become the director did Congress, in July, 1955, finally vote the funds to begin planning and construction.
Although the CIA’s main headquarters at that time was the E Street complex, which had been used by the OSS in World War II, the agency was scattered about in thirty-four buildings all over Washington.
An elaborate system of couriers and safeguards was needed to shuffle papers back and forth with security.
The CIA estimated it would save $600,000 a year by eliminating time lost shuttling between buildings.
The Budget Bureau slashed this to $50,000,000 and Congress finally authorized $46,000,000.
And he foiled anyone who might try to compute precisely how many people worked at Langley.
Someone could attempt to do so by dividing the standard amount of office space needed by a Washington worker into the CIA building’s net floor space of 1,228,100 square feet.
A visitor to the new headquarters turns off at the “B.P.R.” sign at Langley and comes shortly to a ten-foot-high wire-mesh fence, which surrounds the entire CIA site.
Beyond the gate is a guardhouse, but a visitor who appears to know where he is going is waved through without having to stop and show credentials.
A sharp left, and the building, still halfhidden by the trees, comes into view.
Finally, several hundred feet farther along, near the main entrance, the building emerges from the trees for the first time.
It is massive, grayish-white concrete, several stories high and cold in appearance.
The windows are recessed and those on the lower floors are barred with a heavy mesh.
Off to the right of the main entrance a separate domed structure housing a §500-seat auditorium gives an almost Martian atmosphere to the grounds.
However, as Dulles indicated, the space-per-worker figure can be much lower.
Based on these space-utilization figures, some 8,000 to 10,000 people would work at the CIA headquarters at Langley.
In the summertime, only the hum of the building’s air conditioners and the sound of crickets and birds can be heard.
The building might be a hospital or a huge private sanitarium in the woods.
On this same site, half a century ago, Joseph Leiter, the son of a millionaire Chicago businessman, built a beautiful home and called it the Glass Palace.
He and his wife entertained lavishly and enjoyed the view of the Potomac.
There is still glass in the CIA’s concrete palace, but it is mainly on the second and seventh floors, where the outside walls are formed by continuous windows.
On the grounds, there are twenty-one acres of parking space for 3,000 cars.
On the roof, there are $50,000 worth of special radio antennas, a vital part of the CIA’s own world-wide communication system.
Deep inside the CIA headquarters is a central control room to which alarm systems throughout the building are wired.
Three security incinerators, built at a cost of $105,000, gobble up classified wastepaper.
Inside the vast headquarters, a visitor can get about as far as the inscription in marble on the left wall—‘And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free.
A security escort takes him where he is going, waits until he is through and escorts him back to the front door.
There, just inside the airy lobby, a mammoth official seal with the words “Central Intelligence Agency” is set in the marble floor, with an eagle’s head in the center.
As he walked through the corridors, the visitor might have noticed that most of the doors to offices were closed and unmarked, giving the false impression of a virtually deserted building.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((224 Like a battleship, the CIA headquarters is built in compartments.
An employee in one office would not necessarily know what was happening a few feet away on the other side of the wall.
Among the building’s special facilities is a $200,000 scientific laboratory, where the CIA perfects some of its miniaturized weapons, invisible inks, special explosives and other devices.
One of the really spooky instruments at Langley is the CIA’s electronic “brain,” which stores and retrieves the mountains of information that flow into the building.
A desired document is flashed in front of the CIA viewer by means of a photo tape robot called Intellofax.
Aside from the vast amounts of classified data that come into the CIA, the agency collects 200,000 newspapers, books and other “open” material each month.
When a CIA man wants a particular item, be it a Castro speech or a top-secret report on Khrushchev’s health, he feeds into WALNUT a list of key words—perhaps twenty-five—about the subject.
The brain finds the right microfilmed document and photographs it with ultraviolet light.
The CIA has also been experimenting with another brain called Minicard, developed by Eastman Kodak for the Air Force.
The CIA also has a special spy-fiction library, which it does not advertise.
This library contains thousands of past and current mystery and spy stories.
It should please fans of Ian Fleming, Helen MacInnes and Eric Ambler to know that the CIA makes a point of keeping up with the latest tricks of fictional spy heroes.
Intermarriage is not unusual, the most notable recent example being the U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers, After his release by the Russians, Powers continued to work for the CIA at Langley.
Downey, the mother of a seven-yearold girl, was said to have resigned from the CIA to become Mrs.
In Washington, a highly social city given to much partying and mixing of many diverse circles, it is remarkable how few CIA men are casually encountered on the cocktail circuit.
In bygone years, CIA employees were barred from admitting where they worked.
Nowadays, overt employees are permitted to say where they work—although not to a foreign national.
The CIA is constantly facing little problems that no other agency faces.
For example, suppose an agent in the Clandestine Services breaks his arm in the line of duty.
Ah, but then Group Hospitalization would find out his name when he filled out the in* Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, which built the U-2 and along with NASA served as a front for the CIA, announced on November 3, 1962, that Powers had taken “a routine test pilot job” with Lockheed at Burbank, California.
After the U-2 was shot down in May, 1960, both NASA and Lockheed announced that Powers was a civilian pilot employed by Lockheed.
Actually, he was flying for the CIA under a $30,000-a-year contract he had signed with the intelligence agency in 1956.
And for the first few years after the agency’s creation, that is exactly what happened, much to the CIA’s irritation.
When agents were hospitalized, Group Hospitalization had to know who they were.
It took its business to Mutual of Omaha, which benevolently agreed to waive the paperwork on ailing spies.
Although CIA employees are not technically under Civil Service, they qualify for the government’s normal retirement provisions and their pay is equivalent to those in Civil Service.
In 1963 McCone asked Congress to set up a better retirement system for his top people, similar to that of the State Department’s Foreign Service.
Later, in 1964, Congress passed a law allowing high-ranking agents with twenty years of service to retire at age fifty.
The CIAR, as the pension plan was called, will cost an estimated $4,000,000 by 1969, or $900,000 a year.
The Armed Services Committee, in approving the measure, said that “many CIA employees serve under conditions which are at least as difficult and frequently more onerous and dangerous” than those faced by the FBI and other agencies.
The agency tries to select students standing near the top of their class.
CIA stays quietly in touch with college deans and hires most of its research analysts this way.
On every large campus there is usually someone who serves secretly as the CIA’s talent scout.
At Yale, for example, during the early 1950s, it was Skip Walz, the crew coach.
John Downey, who was imprisoned by Communist China in 1952, was recruited off the Yale campus in 1951.
The booklet’s cover, in yellow, red, brown, violet and white, portrays a handsome young man with jaw on hand, pondering his future.
Of this 20 percent, about 11 percent are screened out because “they drink too much, talk too much, have relatives behind the iron curtain, which may make the applicants subject to foreign pressures; for serious security reasons 4 percent of this 11 percent are screened out.
The polygraph is standard equipment at the agency and all new employees take the test.
I know of people who have said they didn’t for various reasons want to take the lie-detector test, and they have not been dismissed or terminated for that reason.
But generally when people come on board, the general rule is that they take the test.
Criticism that the CIA is an “Ivy League,” institution is only partially accurate.
Although the top twenty executives have always been largely from Ivy League colleges, this is not true of the agency generally.
This is not surprising in an agency that devotes a major portion of its efforts to research and analysis.
To satisfy the interests of its scholarly employees, the CIA publishes its own digest-sized magazine, the most exclusive magazine in the world.
The magazine was begun because the CIA has so many former professors who, for the most part, cannot publish on the outside.
Like any specialized periodical, it has studies of current interest in the field, in this case, intelligence.
There is an attempt to treat on a high academic level such subjects as how to keep a double agent from being tortured and shot by the enemy.
The article, entitled “A Classic Write-In Case,” was a study of Captain Stephan Kalman, a Czech Army officer who in 1936 betrayed secrets to the German High Command until he was caught and hanged.
He can use an intermediary in order to retain some control, especially with respect to his own identity.
He can send a messenger, make a phone call, or establish a radio contact.
One conclusion derives from positive and negative aspects of the Czech performance with respect to security.
Security applies on every echelon of command, There is no place for laxness, even if it may seem overbureaucratic and ridiculous.
The application of security measures has to be executed precisely in every detail.
A discerning CIA reader might come to suspect that, all in all, Intelligence Articles’ academic objectivity leaves something to be desired.
Another excerpt worth quoting in this respect is from the magazine’s review of a book* that presented ideas about foreign policy not at all to the liking of the CIA reviewer.
If the CIA has its cloistered advantages for the scholar at Langley, there are hazards for agents in the field.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((230 ous business and some of the CIA’s clandestine employees crack under the pressure.
One deputy director drove himself so hard, he had to be transferred to a less demanding post overseas.
The agency has a fairly high rate of suicides, which usually get little attention outside of the Washington newspapers.
In October, 1959, for example, a thirty-two-year-old CIA employee and his wife, just back from a two-year tour of duty in Germany, jumped into the Potomac River rapids in a suicide pact.
The CIA man, James A Woodbury, drowned, but his blond wife was pulled out.
Under the 1947 law they can be fired by the director “in his discretion” with no appeal.
In at least one instance, this led to a series of embarrassing disclosures about the agency’s operations and personnel.
On January 30, 1961, Dulles fired a veteran CIA intelligence officer and contact specialist named John Torpats, who then went into Federal Court seeking reinstatement.
In the course of it, Dulles stated that “George B Carey,” an assistant director of the CIA, had notified “Emmet Echols,” the director of personnel, that Torpats was allowed to discuss his case with “Ralph Poole” and “Fred Lott,” both assistants to Echols.
The mission reports were considered to be unsatisfactory in our component.
My superiors felt that I could handle the problem more effectively and expeditiously and decided to send me to do it.
The principal figures in this particular mission were Mr Tracy Barnes, Mr Thomas Parrott and Mr Paul Losher.
At the time of my separation, Mr Barnes and Mr Parrott were employed by the Agency in the Washington, D C., office.
I was given no special instructions before I left; I was to be on my own.
The mission had sent a report on the problem which I later proved was incorrect.
Had the mission report been followed, it would have done incalculable harm to the United States.
The ousted CIA man then detailed a long history of his case as it dragged on through the agency bureaucracy for several years.
He said he was transferred out of the Clandestine Services and eventually fired.
Dulles angrily filed an answer to Torpats on July 2, citing an old Civil War case to support his contention that employees of secret services cannot air their grievances in court.
Torpats, Dulles said, “understood that the nature of his work was secret, and that the disclosure of his duties and the names of fellow employees would not be in the best interest of his government.
If CIA employees can go into court every time they feel they are THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((232 treated unfairly, said Dulles, it would be no way to run an espionage apparatus.
President Eisenhower voiced a similar sentiment when he spoke at the cornerstone-laying at Langley on November 3, 1959.
Despite the fact that he was eased out after the Bay of Pigs, for example, Richard M Bissell received a secret intelligence medal honoring him for his years as deputy director for plans.
There was no public announcement of the award, and Bissell was not allowed to talk about his medal, to show it to anyone or to wear it.
Church had stumbled on some information which he thought John McCone ought to have immediately.
Three and a half hours later a bedraggled and distraught page returned to Church’s office.
He reported that he had fallen into the hands of CIA security police, who had questioned him at length about what he was up to.
Although the Senate messenger, like most Americans, thus never got a peek inside CIA headquarters, the agency’s operations are not a total mystery.
It is possible to piece together a fair idea of its internal workings, and organization, as well as the techniques and methods it uses both at home and abroad.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((234 The CIA is, of course, the biggest, most important and most influential branch of the Invisible Government.
Intelligence, Plans, Research, Support, each headed by a deputy director.
It devises the CIA’s special codes, which cannot be read by other branches of the government.
It provides expert assessments of foreign advances in science, technology and atomic weapons.
It was responsible for analyzing the U-2 photographs brought back from the Soviet Union between 1956 and 1960.
And it has continued to analyze subsequent U-2 and spy-satellite pictures.
In this it works with the DIA in running the National Photo Intelligence Center.
Herbert “Pete” Scoville, who headed the Research Division for eight years, left in August of 1963 to become an assistant director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
The Plans Division is in charge of the CIA’s cloak-and-dagger activities.
It controls all foreign special operations, such as Guatemala and the Bay of Pigs, and it collects all of the agency’s covert intelligence through spies and informers overseas.
He was succeeded as DDP by Frank Wisner, who was replaced in 1958 by Bissell, who, in turn, was succeeded in 1962 by his deputy, Richard Helms.
David’s, Pennsylvania, Helms studied in Switzerland and Germany and was graduated from Williams College in 1935.
When the war ended and some OSS men were transferred to the CIA, he stayed on and rose through the ranks.
Helms’ counterpart as the deputy director for intelligence in the CIA hierarchy after the Bay of Pigs was also an ex-OSS man.
The Inner Workings ((235 Township, Illinois, and was graduated from Harvard, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
With the CIA, Cline served for a period as liaison man with British intelligence, the most important of the sixty-odd foreign intelligence organizations with which the CIA is linked.
Before he was named the DDI, Cline ran the CIA operation on Formosa under the cover title of Director, United States Naval Auxiliary Communications Center, Taiwan.
Information Agency,* the Agriculture, Treasury, and Commerce f Departments, and the Agency for International Development.
The Intelligence Division’s function is to take the mass of information available to it and “produce” intelligence, that is, to draw up reports on the economic, political, social and governmental situation in any country in the world.
Cline and his subordinates pride themselves on their independence and detachment from operational problems.
They maintain that they evaluate information flowing in from the CIA Plans Division on an equal basis with intelligence coming in from elsewhere in the government.
They contend that they do not have any ax to * Donald M Wilson, the deputy director of USIA, was asked by the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on February 21, 1963, to explain what type of contact USIA had with the State Department, the CLA and other intelligence agencies.
In 1959, when the CIA wanted to get translations of Soviet scientific and technical journals into the hands of American scientists and technicians, the Commerce Department's Office of Technical Services agreed to serve as the channel.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((236 grind or any vested interest or operation to protect and, therefore, that they produce the most objective reports of any branch of the government.
The most important of these reports are prepared, sometimes on a crash basis, by the Office of National Estimates , which acts as the staff of the twelve-man Board of National Estimates , long headed by Sherman Kent, a sixty-year-old former Yale history professor.
Kent and his board turn out National Intelligence Estimates and, in times of crisis, quick reports known as Special National Intelligence Estimates.
Thus the Department of State would draft the section on the political, economic or sociological development in a country or an area or a situation, while the Army would deal with ground forces, the Air Force with the air forces, and the Navy with the naval forces, and the Department of Defense under the Joint Chiefs of Staff with the guidedmissile threat.
Under Dulles, Sherman Kent’s board generated its own studies and was under the jurisdiction of the deputy director for intelligence.
One of the changes made by McCone was to bring the Board of National Estimates directly under his personal command.
McCone then controlled the frequency and subject matter of NIE reports.
The Inner Workings ((237 group to McCone and estimates were frequently rewritten at his direction.
The NIE was then transmitted to the President as the estimate of the Director of Central Intelligence.
Ultimately, therefore, deSpite all this vast intelligence machinery, the end product goes to the President as the personal responsibility and personal estimate of one man.
It is in this area that the structure of the Invisible Government is the most complex.
The Director of Central Intelligence is the ultimate arbiter of the vital security information, predictions and evaluations that are placed on the desk of the President.
He presides over the branches of the intelligence community represented on USIB; but, as has been seen, he also heads the CIA, which is one of these branches.
He controls not only the intelligence product of CIA but also the product of the entire Invisible Government.
He is therefgre both umpire and player, the chairman of the board and a member of it.
In addition to producing the raw material for the national estimates, the CIA also provides the President with a daily top-secret checklist of the major world crises.
Copies go to the Director of Central Intelligence and to the Secretaries of State and Defense.
Top-ranking men in the CIA’s Intelligence Division get to work at 3:00 A.M., to read the overnight cables and compile the checklist.
During the Kennedy Administration, the checklist was presented to the President the first thing each morning by Major General Chester V Clifton, the chief White House military aide.
Under President Johnson, McGeorge Bundy initially assumed the responsibility for the morning intelligence briefing.
Special procedures have been established to assure that the President and the three other recipients of the checklist can be reached instantly in an emergency.
An Indications Center is manned twenty-four hours a day by representatives of the CIA, the Pentagon and the State Department.
It works under the guidance of a Watch Committee, which meets once a week to survey crisis situations and, if necessary, to recommend an immediate convening of the Board of Estimates.
Although that board no longer operates directly under the auTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((238 thority of the CIA deputy director for intelligence, the power of his office has been enlarged in another direction.
Ray Cline was the first DDI to be informed about the secret operations of the Plans Division.
The CIA had been rigorously compartmented in the interests of maximum security.
The agency’s left hand was purposely prevented from knowing what the right hand was doing.
The Intelligence Division would receive all of the covert information collected by CIA agents abroad, but it was kept in ignorance about all clandestine operations.
In the parlance of the trade, all cloak-anddagger schemes were “vest pocketed” by the Plans Division.
For example, as already described, Cline’s predecessor as DDI, Robert Amory, was never told in advance about the Bay of Pigs.
And there was a feeling that President Kennedy might have abandoned the operation if all of his intelligence advisers had not been sponsors and, therefore, devout advocates of the plan.
He set up a three-man study group composed of Lyman Kirkpatrick, General Cortlandt Van Rensselaer Schuyler, executive assistant to Governor Rockefeller, and J Patrick Coyne, former FBI agent and executive director of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
Perhaps the most important change decided upon by McCone was his instruction to the Plans Division to keep the Intelligence Division continuously posted on all its activites.
Thereafter, the Intelligence Division received “sanitized” reports (names of agents removed) on all current operations.
The intelligence analysts were thus in a position for the first time to contest the special pleading of the men who were running the operations.
On the basis of the large pool of information available to them from all branches of the Invisible Government, they could recommend changes in or complete cancellation of doubtful schemes.
Although there is some interchange of personnel, a natural suspicion exists between the Plans Division, which tends to attract activists and risk-takers, and the Intelligence Division, which tends to attract academic and contemplative types.
In its political complexion, too, the CIA splits roughly along the lines of its major functional responsibilities.
The Inner Workings ((239 be liberal: they’re at home with people like Schlesinger and Bundy.
A frequent charge against the CIA, justified in part, is that it tends to support right-wing, military governments that it regards as “safe,” ignoring more liberal elements that might, in the long run, provide a more effective hedge against Communism.
Viewed in this context, it is significant that officials in the Plans Division are considered by their colleagues to be by instinct and background more conservative than the pure intelligence analysts.
It is the agents serving in foreign stations under the DDP, after all, who are most directly concerned in the field with the question of where to throw CIA support in a complex political situation.
While the work of all of these divisions is centered at Langley, the CIA also operates inside the United States in many locations and in many guises.
Although few Americans are aware of it, the CIA has offices in twenty cities throughout the country.
Since the CIA was created to deal exclusively with foreign intelligence, the question might be raised as to why it has field offices across the nation.
The answer CIA officials give is that the offices are needed to collect foreign intelligence domestically, principally from travelers returning from abroad.
The CIA operates under a number of classified directives issued by the National Security Council since 1947.
It can also be obtained . . . through the many Americans, business and professional men and American residents of foreign countries, who are naturally and normally brought in touch with what is going on in those countries, It is not unusual for the CIA to contact Americans about to go behind the Iron Curtain as tourists.
Not every tourist is approached, of course, and many decline to get involved in high-risk amateur spying.
In addition to approaching legitimate tourists, the agency also plants its own tourists behind the Iron Curtain, occasionally with disastrous results.
On August 25, 1960, two Air Force veterans, Mark I Kaminsky and Harvey C Bennett, of Bath, Maine, were arrested while touring the Soviet Union.
At a press conference at Idlewild International Airport, Kaminsky denied any spying, and said he had planned to write a book called The Soviet Union Talks Peace While Preparing for War.
He was arrested and sentenced to eight years after the Russians charged he took pictures of military installations in Kiev.
In February, 1962, James Donovan came within an ace of freeing Makinen in the Powers-Abel exchange.
But Makinen remained in Vladimir Prison until October 12, 1963, when he was returned to the United States in a four-way trade.
Aside from tourist-contact work, there are many other types of activities operating from the CIA’s twenty regional offices within the United States.
At least a few whiskers of this particular cat were peeping out of the bag when McCone testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee during hearings on his nomination on January 18, 1962.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((242 Later, Senator Richard B Russell, the Democratic chairman, and Senator Leverett Saltonstall, the Massachusetts Republican, both powerful Congressional protectors of the CIA, attempted to smooth over the delicate and unpleasant question asked by Mrs.
Our enemies are certainly trying to seek to destroy us in every possible way, appealing to all ethnic groups in any way they can get their hands on them.
Actually, for a decade, a $100,000,000 fund was available for this type of activity.
In 1961 Congress repealed the amendment at the request of the Agency for International Development.
The CIA’s domestic field offices are also useful in obtaining intelligence from business firms that have extensive foreign operations.
The Inner Workings ((243 universities; in turn the universities help recruit personnel.
Perhaps even more important, the universities provide a pool of expert knowledge about foreign countries upon which the intelligence agency can, and does, draw.
The agency has been able to obtain the services of almost all of the academic institutions and individuals it has approached.
Harvard has refused to accept money for classified projects, but some of its faculty members have done research for the CIA by the simple expedient of funneling their work through the Center for International Studies at the nearby Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The MIT Center, which was set up with CIA money in 1950, has adopted many of the practices in effect at the CIA headquarters in Virginia.
An armed guard watches over the door and the participating academicians must show badges on entering and leaving.
The Center was founded by Walt Whitman Rostow, an economics professor who served in the OSS in World War II and later as the chief of the State Department’s Policy Planning Staff in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations.
In 1952 Max F Millikan, another economist, became the director of the Center after a twoyear tour of duty as an assistant director of the CIA in Washington.
In a practice which has subsequently become standard procedure at MIT and elsewhere, Rostow and his colleagues produced a CIA-financed book, The Dynamics of Soviet Society, in 1953.
It was published in two versions, one classified for circulation within the intelligence community, the other “sanitized” for public consumption.
One of Rostow’s subordinates at the Center was Andreas F Lowenfeld, who became a legal adviser in the State Department under Kennedy and Johnson.
One of the dangers inherent in the liaison between the universities and the CIA is the opportunity it provides for Communist propagandists to question the intellectual objectivity and detachment of American scholars.
On December 21, 1963, Cyril Black, the head of the Slavic Department at Princeton, was accused by Communist Bulgaria of having acted as the CIA’s contact man with Ivan-Assen Khristov Georgiev, a Bulgarian diplomat who was shot the next month as an alleged spy for the United States.
Although Black’s denial was not questioned by his colleagues, the incident, nonetheless, sent a shiver of discomfort through the academic community.
In addition to its links with the academic community, there is evidence that the CIA subsidizes some foundations, cultural groups and a publishing house as well.
The Inner Workings ((245 Most Americans are totally unaware of the CIA’s domestic activities.
Louis—MA I 6902 New Orleans—-JA 2 8874 Seattle—-MA 4 3288 Denver—388 4757 Minneapolis—FE 5 o811 But the listed offices are only the beginning of the story.
The CIA has other offices in some United States cities in addition to its listed ones.
In Miami, for example, in 1963, besides its listed number in Coral Gables, the CIA was operating as Zenith Technical Enterprises, Inc.
The CIA, the major tenant in the Boston building, which also housed two restaurants, insisted that the landlord insert a nondiscrimination clause into leases with all of his tenants.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((246 In true Jan Fleming fashion, the CIA cover office listed no precise address—the university south campus is a big place.
It can be revealed, however, without imperiling national security, that the CIA has been operating from Building 25.
The point of all this is that the CIA is not simply an agency that gathers foreign intelligence for the United States in far-off corners of the globe.
It can and does appear in many guises and under many names—Zenith, Double-Chek, Gibraltar Steamship and Vanguard in one city alone.
On university campuses and in the great urban centers of America, the foundation, the cultural committee, the émigré group, the Cuban exile organization, the foreign-affairs research center, the distinguished publishing house specializing in books about Russia, the steamship company, the freedom radio soliciting public contributions, the innocent-looking consulting firm—all may in reality be arms of the Invisible Government.
Whether this state of affairs was intended by Congress when it passed the National Security Act of 1947, or, indeed, whether the Congress is even aware of those facts, is another matter entirely.
The CIA’s internal, domestic activities have only rarely surfaced to cause it embarrassment.
At the time, Lattimore was under attack by Senator Joseph R McCarthy of Wisconsin.
The Inner Workings ((247 The Finnish-born defendant in the case, Harry A Jarvinen, worked for the Where-to-Go Travel Agency in Seattle.
Jarvinen’s tip to the CIA reached the State Department on May 26, 1952, and on June 11 the department issued a “stop order” barring Lattimore from leaving the country.
After Jarvinen was indicted, the State Department apologized profusely to Lattimore.
But three months later the two CIA agents involved, Wayne Richardson and Miller Holland, refused on security grounds to testify in Federal Court at Jarvinen’s trial.
Federal Judge William J Lindberg sentenced the two CIA men to fifteen days in prison for contempt of court.
The government, the judge noted tartly, had initiated a prosecution against a citizen with one hand and thwarted it with the other.
President Truman stepped in and ended the farce by issuing full pardons to Richardson and Holland, thereby saving the country the spectacle of two CIA men doing a stretch in a Federal jail.
Overseas, the CIA operates principally under embassy cover and commercial cover.
In several corners of the world the CIA operates what appear to be small business concerns but which are really covers.
No subject is touchier to the agency than the question of cover, for cover is the “cloak” in cloak and dagger, the professional intelligence man’s sine qua non.
In United States embassies across the globe, there is a restricted floor, or a section of the embassy, that houses the CIA mission.
Each mission is headed by a station chief with several intelligence officers reporting to him.
These officers in turn recruit local “agents” to collect intelligence information.
The CIA personnel are listed as State Department or Foreign Service officers.
This is in sharp contrast to the British and Soviet secret service mission chiefs, whose identities are very seldom known.
In the case of the CIA, agents below the level of station chief are usually less well known outside of the embassy.
Within the embassy, State Department employees usually come to know in fairly short order who the CIA people are.
The fact that the CIA operates under embassy cover is not something that the government discusses or would be expected to confirm, Very occasionally, references to it pop up in unexpected places, however.
Everybody in town who had any interest in it knew who they were . . . their cover was so shallow that it was very easily seen through.
He had almost the entire CIA staff at his home for a party one night, and I was about the only non-CIA man there and he knew that they were all CIA and worked with them as such.
Smith, testified before the same committee that “the chief of the CIA section” in the American Embassy in Havana was pro-Castro and that “the Number 2 CIA man in the embassy” had encouraged a revolt of Cuban naval officers in Cienfuegos in September, 1957.
I do not believe that the Number 2 man in the CIA intended to convey that thought.
His story to me was that he had been called over to interview some men believed to be doctors, because they were dressed in white coats, and when they advised him of the revolt that was to take place, they wanted to know what the position of the United States would be.
Smith testified he repeated all this to Batista, The American ambassador’s efforts to explain to the Cuban dictator that the Number 2 CIA man in the embassy could not tell the difference between a Navy uniform and a medical white coat must have made fascinating listening.
For example, Henry Pleasants, widely known as the CIA mission chief in Bonn, West Germany, was listed in the 1963 Biographic Register as an “attaché,” with “S-1” rank, meaning the highest category of Foreign Service staff officer.
Frank Wisner, the former CIA deputy director for plans, who ran the Guatemalan operation in 1954, was listed as an “attaché” I THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((250 and an “R-1” after he was sent to London as station chief on August 6, 1959.
The 1963 Biographic Register lists “govt. ser.-59” for Wisner, to account for the period prior to his London assignment.
Similarly, Robert Kendall Davis, the Guatemala mission chief who set up the Bay of Pigs training camps, was listed as an “attaché” and later as “first secretary” of the embassy.
He, too, was carried on the State Department's rolls as a Foreign Service reserve officer.
William Egan Colby, the former CIA station chief in Vietnam, was listed as a “political officer” in 1959, and later as “first secretary” of the embassy.
By 1963 he had shed his diplomatic cover and was back in Washington as the head of the CIA’s Far East division.
John H “Jocko” Richardson, who became the new CIA station chief in Saigon, was listed as “first secretary” of the embassy when he arrived there after serving in Athens and Manila.
The book also grumbled bitterly about “spy diplomats” on the staff of the United States Embassy in Moscow.
Two years later the Russians ousted five Americans from the embassy in the sensational Penkovsky spy case.
Oleg V Penkovsky was the deputy chief of the Soviet State Committee for the Coordination of Scientific Research, and very likely was also a colonel in Soviet military intelligence.
At his show trial in May, 1963, he confessed passing 5,000 frames of exposed miniature-camera film, containing classified information about Soviet rockets and other secrets, to American and British agents.
The Inner Workings ((251 bassy or Hugh Montgomery, the internal security officer.
If he found the charcoal circle it meant there was something ready to be picked up at the Pushkin Street drop.
According to the Moscow version, Richard C Jacob, the twenty-six-year-old embassy “archivist” from Egg Harbor, New Jersey, would go to the radiator and retrieve the little package.
The Russians also sought to link Penkovsky to Rodney W Carlson, the thirty-one-year-old assistant agricultural attaché at the embassy, and to William C Jones III,* the second secretary.
Wynne supposedly got the chocolates out of Moscow by giving them to the children of a British diplomat.
The Russians convicted Penkovsky and later announced he had been executed.
Considering the fact that no fewer than twelve Americans and British diplomats were linked, one way or another, to a serious charge of espionage, London and Washington were exceedingly quiet about it all.
They also ousted two embassy aides in October, 1962, just before the Penkovsky case surfaced publicly.
They were Commander Raymond D Smith, of Brooklyn, assistant military attaché, and Kermit S Midthun, of San Francisco, first secretary.
Smith was arrested in Leningrad on October 2, carrying a tiny tape recorder, a Minox camera and high-powered binoculars.
The Russians said he was photographing naval installations, The American Embassy said he was taking a walk in the park.
Midthun, forty-one, was accused on October 11 of having tried to get secret data from a Soviet official, The Russians also expelled five British diplomats in the Penkovsky case.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((252 The Kennedy Administration, while Dulles was still the CIA director, made some efforts to reduce the number of agents operating under diplomatic cover in American embassies.
If relations are severed between countries, or war breaks out, then the CIA tends to be cut off from its sources of information.
In January, 1961, for example, when Washington broke off relations with Havana, the CIA lost its embassy base in Cuba.
CIA agents operating abroad under commercial cover pose, as the term implies, as legitimate businessmen, rather than as diplomats.
Not long ago a CIA man in Washington told all his friends he was quitting the agency to go to Switzerland for Praeger books.
Very possibly he was telling the truth and was really leaving the agency, but not all of his friends believed him.
A CIA officer operating overseas under embassy or commercial cover recruits “agents” locally to feed him information.
The most valuable information often comes not from a trusted agent, but from the occasional highly placed defector from the opposition camp.
The most useful defector is a Communist official who can be persuaded to stay at his job, at least for a while, and transmit intelligence to the West.
The most prized defector of all is one who works, or who has worked, in the Soviet intelligence apparatus.
A delicate aspect of the CIA’s work is the care and protection of its colony of important defectors who have fled the Communist world.
Dulles estimated that the number of high-level valuable de* Until Cuba was expelled from the OAS in January, 1962.
Others are given a new identity that, hopefully, will protect them in the United States from the long arm of KGB assassins.
Recently, a resident of McLean, Virginia, near the CIA headquarters, was intrigued when an obviously Russian family moved in across the street; two huge dogs guarded the premises, and a chauffeur-driven car came to take the children to school every day.
Not all stories of Soviet defectors under CIA protection come to such happy endings, however.
On October 21, 1952, a lieutenant in the KGB, Reino Hayhanen, entered the United States under the name of Eugene Maki and became an assistant to Rudolf Abel, the Russian master spy who posed as a mousy photographer-artist in Brooklyn under the alias of Emil R Goldfus.
After Abel’s trial and conviction that October, Hayhanen dropped out of sight.
The CIA gave him a new identity and kept him in a house in New England, guarded by a dog.
Two “lawyers” who lived next door were actually CIA bodyguards almost constantly at Hayhanen’s side.
He continued to imbibe heavily, which made the task of the CIA bodyguards an unenviable one.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, Attorney General Robert Kennedy wondered if there might not be some way to improve the CIA’s then sagging public image.
When the National BroadcastTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((254 ing Company suggested a television program, the Attorney General liked the idea and ordered Hayhanen temporarily released to appear on the show.
In the interim, word spread around the intelligence community that Reino Hayhanen was dead; the CIA’s prize defector had been killed in a mysterious “accident” on the New Jersey or the Pennsylvania Turnpike.
Nevertheless, the filmed NBC program was telecast, as scheduled, on November 8.
Hayhanen’s face was “kept dark for his own protection,” David Brinkley, the narrator, said.
The CIA definitely did not ask NBC, however, to tell its millions of viewers that they had just watched an interview with a dead man.
Like any intelligence agency, the CIA employs methods and techniques that are not normally the subject of polite drawingroom chit-chat.
These techniques include sex, money, wiretapping and the use of hidden microphones.
It had also been disclosed that Profumo and the Soviet naval attaché, Captain Yevgeni Ivanov, shared Miss Keeler’s favors.
At the time, the Powers-Abel swap was secretly in the making; the films may peewee have been shown to reassure the Russians that Abel was alive and well.
Q Whether or not it is involved in the Profumo case, the Soviets have been known to use sex as a lure in espionage.
Four years earlier, the Russians had accused Dulles of using voluptuous women CIA agents to seduce the Soviet Olympic team at Melbourne, Australia, in 1956.
The paper implied that the Soviet athletes scorned the temptresses and stuck to their hammer-throwing and pole-vaulting.
Another tool of the trade—money—is used by the CIA, as it is by other intelligence services, to pay agents, and double agents, and to buy information, where necessary.
Money was no object when Dulles was hunting for Khrushchev’s secret speech in 1956.
The CIA is a major purchaser of electronic listening devices and wire-tap equipment.
The most famous case involving such equipment was the CIA’s “Berlin tunnel,” a secret wire-tap installation in a tunnel that led from a mock United States “experimental radar station” across the border into East Germany.
The Russians discovered the tunnel on April 22, 1956, and decided to try at least to recover some propaganda value from the CIA’s coup.
They invited Western correspondents to tour the unTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((256 derground wire tap and turned it into a tourist attraction, Three photographs and a diagram of the tunnel appear in Caught in the Act.
In Montevideo, a few years ago, the Tass man was filing 1,000 words a day, attacking Washington’s policies in Latin America.
The CIA also persuaded the Montevideo chief of police to put taps on the telephones at the Soviet and Czech Embassies.
Later the police chief quit; his successor was less friendly to the CIA and the game ended.
A fascinating case of CIA wire-tapping that received far less public attention than the “Berlin tunnel” began unfolding at 1:00 A.M. on September 15, 1960, when a key turned in the door of a twenty-third-floor apartment in the Seguro del Medico Building, in Havana’s fashionable Vedado Beach section.
Marjorie Lennox, a lovely twenty-six-year-old divorcée with shoulder-length blond hair, was alone in her apartment.
They arrested her; she was accused of being a spy and ordered out of Cuba two days later.
Lennox was expelled from Cuba, Havana arrested six other Americans and accused them, along with her, of being members of a spy ring that had tapped the telephone wires of the Havana office of Hsinhua, the Communist Chinese news agency.
Also arrested were Robert L Neet, who the Cubans said was an employee of the American Embassy, and Mr and Mrs.
On December 17, 1960, a military court in Havana held a oneday trial for the three “engineers” and Mario Nordio.
They were accused of setting wire taps in the Hsinhua office to learn about a trade treaty between Cuba and Communist China and about the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The prosecutor, Lieutenant Fernando Flores, asked for thirtyyear prison terms for the four Americans.
The “engineers” said they had been hired to repair some electronic equipment in Neet’s apartment, which was located in the same building as the Communist Chinese news agency.
On January 10, 1961, the three “engineers” were sentenced to ten years each in prison.
United States Ambassador Philip W Bonsal had filed an angry formal protest over the arrest of Mrs.
He was silent about the three “engineers” and the dancing instructor, however.
Washington was particularly concerned lest the high-ranking Carswell, who knew about similar electronic operations in other parts of the world, be turned over to the Russians for questioning.
The release was finally arranged in April, 1963, by James Donovan, who had successfully “exchanged” the Bay of Pigs prisoners for drugs and food four months earlier.
The primary reason for Washington’s efforts was to get the three CIA men out, and Robert A Hurwitch, the State Department official THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((258 who handled the matter, was perfectly well aware of this.
During the shooting brawl, Molina killed a nine-year-old Venezuelan girl, Magdalena Urdaneto, who was an innocent bystander.
Rockefeller, on the assurance of the Federal Government that he was acting “in the national interest,” released The Hook from the state prison at Stormville.
They were flown from Florida to Havana as Donovan brought back the Americans from Cuba in what amounted, in effect, to a straight swap of three saboteurs and a killer for three CIA men.
And for some reason, unlike the other returnees, they would not tell the American Red Cross their destination.
The Search for Control TO MAINTAIN THE CIA and the other branches of the intelligence establishment, the government spends about $4,000,000,000 a year.
The exact figure is one of the most tightly held secrets of the government and it appears in none of the Federal budget documents, public or private.
It is unknown, in fact, even to many of the key officials in the Invisible Government.
Because the intelligence community is carefully fragmented, those in one branch find it difficult to estimate the budgets of the others, All of the budgets are pulled together by the director of the International Division of the Budget Bureau.
He is assisted by four experts, each of whom handles about $1,000,000,000 of the Invisible Government’s money.
One assistant checks on the National Security Agency, the second on the CIA, the third on the DIA and military intelligence, and the fourth on overhead reconnaissance, THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((260 All of the Invisible Government’s hidden money is buried in the Defense Department budget, mainly in the multibillion-dollar weapons contracts, such as those for the Minuteman and Polaris missiles.
The Comptroller of the Pentagon knows where the money is hidden, but so carefully is it camouflaged, even his closest assistants are unable to guess at the amount It is not startling, then, that even those at the very center of the Invisible Government vary in their estimates of what is being spent.
In a private briefing for high-ranking military men in the summer of 1963 McCone offered a figure of $2,000,000,000* and estimated that 100,000 persons were involved in intelligence work.
However, McCone appeared to be limiting his estimate to the money spent by the CIA and the other agencies on the more conventional forms of intelligence work.
When the two forms of intelligence are included, the total budget reaches $4,000,000,000 and the personnel figure amounts to about 200,000.
It is often assumed that the National Security Council controls this vast intelligence establishment.
But in practice much of the activity of the Invisible Government is never examined at NSC meetings.
The important decisions about the Invisible Government are made by the committee known as the Special Group.
Although the composition of the committee has varied slightly, its membership has generally included the Director of Central Intelligence, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs , and the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense.
In the Kennedy and early Johnson Administrations, the presidential representative— and key man—on the Special Group was McGeorge Bundy.
The other members were McCone, McNamara, Roswell Gilpatric, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and U Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.
On the other hand, Soviet Secret Police Chief Alexander N Shelepin estimated in 1959 that the CIA spent $1,500,000,000 a year and employed 20,000 persons.
The Search for Control ((261 The Special Group was created early in the Eisenhower years under the secret Order 54/12.
It was known in the innermost circle of the Eisenhower Administration as the “54/12 Group” and is still so called by a few insiders.
Its existence is virtually unknown outside the intelligence community and, even there, only a handful of men are aware of it.
The more grandiose of the Invisible Government’s operations have been launched in this exclusive arena.
It is here in this hidden corner of the massive governmental apparatus that the United States is regularly committed to policies which walk the tightrope between peace and war.
CIA men generally have the Special Group in mind when they insist that the agency has never set policy, but has only acted on higher authority.
But, in fact, some decisions of this type have been made by the Special Group in an informal way without the elaborate records and procedures of other high government committees.
And these fateful decisions have been made without benefit of outside analysis.
Little detached criticism has been brought to bear on the natural human tendency of the leaders of the Invisible Government to * The OCB, the Operations Coordinating Board, was composed of the Under Secretary of State, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the President's Special Assistant , and the directors of CLA, USIA, and the old International Cooperation Administration.
They were supposed to make sure the President’s decisions were carried out in their departments.
The OCB was abolished by President Kennedy in his first month in office.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((262 embark upon ventures which might prove their toughness, demonstrate their vision or expand their power.
It is apparent, then, that the two presidential watchdog committees, the Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities of the Eisenhower Administration and the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board of the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, have had great difficulty getting to the bottom of things.
Both committees were composed of part-time consultants who met only occasionally during the year.
The original committee had, in fact, been established by Eisenhower in 1956 at least partly to head off closer scrutiny of the Invisible Government.
In 1955 the full Hoover Commission had recommended that such a presidential committee be established.
But it had also proposed the creation of a Joint Congressional Committee on Foreign Intelligence.
The Hoover Commission’s Intelligence Task Force, headed by General Mark W Clark, had submitted a much stronger recommendation.
It had proposed a single watchdog commission composed of senators, congressmen, and presidential appointees.
By 1954 substantial pressure had built up in Congress for a closer scrutiny of the intelligence community.
Mike Mansfield, then a freshman senator from Montana, submitted a resolution that would have carried out the Hoover Commission recommendation by creating a Joint Committee on the Central Intelligence Agency.
In its final form, the resolution called for a twelve-man committee, six from the Senate and six from the House, and for the appropriation of $250,000 for staff expenditures during the first year.
But by the time the proposal came to a vote on April 11, 1956, fourteen of these sponsors had reversed themselves, and the resolution was defeated, fifty-nine to twenty-seven.
Thirteen of those who had changed their minds were Republicans evidently reflecting White House pressure.
Many of the Democrats who voted against the resolution clearly were worried about disturbing Senator Richard B Russell, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and other Democratic titans who opposed the idea.
Mansfield’s language in introducing the resolution was not calculated to please the conservative inner club of the Senate, which enjoyed special relations with the Invisible Government.
Control of its expenditures is exempted from the provisions of the law which prevent financial abuses in other government agencies.
However, there is a profound difference between an essential degree of secrecy to achieve a specific purpose and secrecy for the mere sake of secrecy.
The Search for Control ((265 “Some of the information gathered by the Central Intelligence Agency and laid before the National Security Council itself was so confidential and secret that the very portfolios in which it was contained were under lock and key.
The members of the National Security Council were not even permitted to take those folders and portfolios to their homes.
Russell also raised the specter of critical national secrets leaking out of the Joint Committee.
He insisted that the CIA was already subjected to adequate scrutiny by members of the Senate Armed Services and Appropriations Committees.
The CIA’s view on whether there should be more Congressional scrutiny was stated officially in a letter to Mansfield from General Cabell on September 4, 1953.
In fact, he was such a good friend and great admirer of Dulles that much of the secret CIA hearings during Dulles’ tenure were taken up with mutual congratulations.
CIA officials came armed with thick black volumes, but the other members of the House Subcommittee* never had time to probe deeply into the agency’s activities.
Some of the members displayed annoyance but could do little about it in view of Cannon’s absolute control over the committee.
Nevertheless, Cannon once sought to have the CIA checked by the General Accounting Office.
In the House there was also a CIA subcommittee of the Armed Services Committee.
It was composed of Carl Vinson, Georgia Democrat and chairman of the Armed Services Committee; L Mendel Rivers, South Carolina Democrat; F Edward Hebert, Louisiana Democrat; Melvin Price, Illinois Democrat; Charles E Bennett, Florida Democrat; George Huddleston, Jr., Alabama Democrat; Leslie C Arends, Hlinois Republican; William G Bray, Indiana Republican; Bob Wilson, California Republican; and Frank C Osmers, Jr., New Jersey Republican.
The decision was to go along with Cannon but to steer the GAO into a non-sensitive area.
The auditors were taken to the facilities of the CIA’s broadcast information service which monitors the radio programs of foreign countries, particularly the Communist bloc.
The GAO spent a year at the foreign broadcast service, but to the satisfaction of the CIA, turned in a harmless set of recommendations.
Prior to 1954 the GAO kept two of its men on permanent assignment with the CIA as consultants.
When a problem arose in a non-sensitive area, the CIA accountants would ask the GAO men to judge whether they were acting properly.
Taking the facts as presented to them, the GAO men would then refer the problem to the Comptroller General’s office for approval.
Since the procedure amounted to a certification of CIA practices without the authority to investigate them, Joseph Campbell withdrew the GAO men from the CIA when he took over as Comptroller General in 1954.
Still, the GAO continued to bump into an occasional CIA project while investigating large defense contracts.
But under the 1949 law, which removed Congress’ power to audit the CIA, the GAO was prohibited from looking further, even if it had suspicions that the contractor might be juggling non-CIA funds.
Congress’ difficulties with the intelligence community have been matched by those of American ambassadors in foreign countries.
In 1959 the Senate Foreign Relations Committee compiled a booklet of anonymous quotations from retired Foreign Service officers.
Without the immunity accorded to diplomatic property, the CIA’s codes, files and communications would not be secure.
The CIA maintains its own codes and an independent communications system (as does the Pentagon through the Defense Communications Agency), and unless CIA agents choose to tell an ambassador what they are up to and what they are reporting to Washington, he has no independent means for finding out.
The Eisenhower order seemed, on the surface, to re-establish the ambassador’s supremacy over all United States agencies operating overseas.
But many were troubled by the possibility of secret “instructions” to the CIA circumventing the ambassador’s authority.
When President Kennedy entered office, he took prompt action to reaffirm the powers of the State Department and the ambassadors.
You are in charge of the entire United States diplomatic mission, and I shall expect you to supervise all of its operations.
I shall give you full support and backing in carrying out your assignment.
Needless to say, the representatives of other agencies are expected to communicate directly with their offices here in Washington, and in the event of a decision by you in which they do not concur, they may ask to have the decision reviewed by a higher authority in Washington.
However, it is their responsibility to keep you fully informed of their views and activities and to abide by your decisions unless in some particular instance you and they are notified to the contrary.
The moving force behind Kennedy’s letter was Chester Bowles, then Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.
In the summer of 1961 Bowles set out on a round-the-world trip to explain the new arrangement.
A fifteen-man team, including leading representatives of the State Department, the CIA and the AID, accompanied Bowles to seven regional meetings with ambassadors and their staffs.
Bowles told the meetings that the ambassadors were to be kept fully informed on all CIA operations and were to receive copies of all CIA messages to Washington.
What, they asked, about situations in which ambassadors do not understand the CIA’s special problems.
Yes, Bowles answered, the ambassador should be in a position to cross-check information if he runs across one of the informants at a diplomatic function.
But a different impression was gained by a staff of experts sent on a world-wide inspection late in 1962 by the Subcommittee on THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((270 National Security Staffing and Operations of the Senate Government Operations Committee.
Ambassadors were still unable to give orders to the CIA or to stop an agency operation.
The only evident change was that the ambassador now appeared to be in a better position to protest about a CIA program and delay it until a decision came back from Washington.
These conclusions were watered down in the staff report published by the subcommittee in January, 1963.
But the report did point out that the military services and the CIA tend to “take a restricted view of the ambassador’s right to interpose himself” between them and their superiors in Washington.
The uneasiness felt in other government agencies over the role of the CIA runs deeper than that, however.
This uneasiness is little known outside of the government, and it is almost never talked about.
During the 1960 campaign, John F Kennedy had promised, if elected, to establish a Peace Corps.
He kept his word, created the new agency by an executive order in March, 1961, and asked his brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver, Jr., to head it.
Shriver accepted, but he very quickly concluded that the Peace Corps, with its thousands of young volunteers dispersed over the globe, could well look like an all but irresistible “cover” to an inTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((272 telligence agency always on the alert for new ways to disguise its people.
At the same time, Shriver knew that the Peace Corps, because it would offer genuine help to the emerging nations of the world, would be an equally tempting target for Communist propaganda, which would seek at all costs to discredit it.
Therefore, Shriver privately proclaimed his determination to take every possible step to divorce the Peace Corps from even the faintest smell of intelligence work.
He was well aware that even one “spy” incident involving a volunteer might destroy the Corps.
An anecdote that went the rounds of the executive suite of the Peace Corps at the time of its birth is revealing.
In the spring of 1961 Shriver made a trip seeking to persuade neutral nations to accept Peace Corpsmen.
He discovered that the leaders of those countries were blunt in asking whether he would let the Corps be used as a cover for intelligence agents.
Shriver replied just as bluntly that he was doing everything he could within the government to make sure that the CIA stayed out of his agency.
He also promised to assist individual countries in any security checks they might care to make.
As a first step in his campaign to prevent the Peace Corps from becoming tarred as an instrument of Cold War intelligencegathering, Shriver went directly to President Kennedy.
President Kennedy followed up this verbal assurance to Shriver by issuing orders to Allen Dulles and later to his successor, John McCone, which continued in effect after President Johnson took office.
In addition, Shriver met with Dulles and later with McCone and obtained their guarantee that the CIA would stay away from the Peace Corps.
Shriver’s dilemma Purity in the Peace Corps ((273 was a peculiar one, bred of the Cold War and inconceivable in the America of even twenty years before.
Shriver must have decided he could not be sure of the answers to these delicate questions, for he did not rely on presidential assurances alone.
It was designed, of course, to catch any Communist or security risk who might try to get into the Peace Corps.
But it was also designed—hopefully— to spot any CIA “volunteer” before he could unpack his cloak and dagger.
Shriver designated William Delano, the Peace Corps’ young general counsel, to ride herd on the problem and make sure no intelligence men slipped through the net.
No one with any intelligence background, even years ago, would be accepted.
Openly acknowledged “overt” employees of the CIA are allowed to say so when they seek a new job.
But covert employees of the CIA are not permitted to reveal it, even years later on a government job application form.
They might put down the name of a commercial cover company or perhaps some other branch of the government for which they had ostensibly worked.
And a routine Civil Service check, Peace Corps officials realized, would not reveal whether applicants had been or were still covert CIA agents.
S Government” to cover a period of a year or THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((274 two.
But the would-be volunteers, in these cases, were questioned by Civil Service investigators, who naturally demanded to know more details.
S Government” on their applications have been turned down since the Peace Corps began.
Screening out persons with a background in intelligence was only part of the problem.
The Peace Corps also decided that it had to guard against the possibility of the CIA approaching a volunteer after he had been accepted into the Corps.
He says he doesn’t want you to spy, but that he’d like you to get together with him and just chat every couple of weeks, and perhaps tell him a couple of things you’ve learned.
Most of the volunteers replied they would have no part of any free-lance spying of this sort.
Because of this orientation, Peace Corps officials felt it was unlikely that their volunteers would be solicited to do any intelligence work, Still, one official admitted, the real problem would be “covert people trying to infiltrate.
Shriver’s concern over keeping his agency “clean” was reinforced in September, 1961, when Secretary of the Army Elvis J Stahr made a speech suggesting that an Army Peace Corps be established.
General Barksdale Hamlett, Army Deputy Chief of Staff, gave Purity in the Peace Corps ((275 added details of the plan, which seemed to envision use of the Army in worthy social projects in underdeveloped countries—but linked to paramilitary activities.
To Shriver, it smacked of precisely the sort of military and intelligence overtones he was trying so hard to avoid.
A high-level meeting was held at the Pentagon, attended by Stahr, Shriver, General Hamlett and a platoon of be~ ribboned Army brass.
The generals at the meeting insisted that the Army Peace Corps would have no relation to any intelligence work.
Lawrence had served with the Agency for International Development in Southeast Asia and was familiar with CIA operations in that part of the world.
He asked the generals to name the officers who would be in charge of the proposed “Army Peace Corps” in Southeast Asia.
United States intelligence obtained, from Eastern Europe, what appeared to be a guide for satellite nations on how to phrase propaganda against the Peace Corps.
Peace Corps officials believed that it served as a primer for subsequent propaganda emanating from various points in the Communist world.
Certainly the Russian and Communist Chinese attacks followed a familiar pattern.
Radio Havana broadcast attacks on the Peace Corps that paralleled the Moscow barrage.
Also in Havana, the newspaper Hoy warned Venezuela to “watch out” for the Peace Corps.
On March 27, 1963, a Polish paper published an article attacking the Peace Corps by charging that girl volunteers were Mata Haris.
About the same time, Tass picked up the sex theme and charged that a wicked Peace Corps woman teacher in Somalia tried to teach pupils the “indecent movements” of the twist.
By the spring of 1963, United States analysts concluded that the Soviet Union, having had little success with this loud, public campaign against the Peace Corps, had embarked on a simultaneous behind-the-scenes campaign against the Corps.
In Ghana, for example, the Soviet ambassador succeeded in persuading the government of President Kwame Nkrumah to impose some restrictions on the Peace Corps.
And in May, 1963, the Ghanaian Times, regarded as the unofficial spokesman for Nkrumah, openly attacked the Corps as an alleged CIA tool.
There seemed no likelihood that the public attacks would stop, but their very intensity logically dictated that Shriver, more than ever, would want to keep the Peace Corps pristine.
A spy incident involving a volunteer would give the Russians a propaganda field day and could possibly wreck the Peace Corps, and Shriver’s political career as well.
The Peace Corps, it should be noted in fairness to the CIA, maintains it does not know of a single case in which it could be sure of an attempted infiltration by an intelligence agent seeking to use the Corps as cover.
But the fact that Shriver felt he had to take the astonishing precautions he did, speaks volumes.
It reflects the atmosphere of mistrust that is felt, rightly or wrongly, by many overt officials of * Actually, the Peace Corps has rather strict rules about sex.
Some unlikely departments of the government have become vehicles for secret operations of various shadings.
A Gray Operation OuTSIDE the high garden wall of the decaying villa in Miramar, on the outskirts of Havana, guards armed with Tommy guns patrolled back and forth.
He took out a black wallet, of the type that was large enough for foreign bills, and reached into an apparently empty pouch.
From a concealed pocket in the wallet he pulled out a typewritten sheet of onionskin paper.
By ordering his “broker” to “sell Quaker City” and by using A Gray Operation ((279 other innocuous key words, Donovan, through his code sheet, was able to convey to the CIA men on the line in the United States the real progress of his negotiations to ransom the lives of more than 1,000 prisoners.
He was playing for high stakes—the freedom of the 1,113 survivors of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Donovan was a silver-haired, forty-six-year-old former OSS man, short but powerfully built.
In February, 1962, on the bridge in Berlin, he had traded the Soviet master spy Rudolf Abel (whom he defended five years earlier in Federal Court) for the U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers and Yale student Frederic L Pryor, held on a charge of espionage by the East Germans.
Donovan’s Cuban adventure began a few months later, early in June, 1962, when Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent to him a delegation of Cubans made up of survivors of the Bay of Pigs brigade and their families.
Up to that time, sixty prisoners had been ransomed for a pledge of cash, but efforts to free the rest had failed in June, 1961, when negotiations between Castro and a Tractors for Freedom Committee collapsed.
The committee, sponsored by the Kennedy Administration, had been unable to reach agreement with Castro on the dictator’s continually shifting offers to trade the prisoners for §00 tractors or bulldozers.
Donovan, after listening to the pleas of his visitors, agreed to become the general counsel to the group.
It was called the Cuban Families Committee for Liberation of Prisoners of War, Inc., a charitable corporation that had been granted tax-exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
On August 29, 1962, Donovan went to Cuba for his first talks with Castro.
He stayed at the crumbling villa in Miramar and conferred with Castro at the Presidential Palace in Havana.
He made it clear he would offer drugs and baby foods for the men, but no cash or tractors.
Castro agreed to negotiate on this basis, provided the Cuban Families Committee came up with the $2,900,000 it had pledged in return for the sixty prisoners released the previous April.
They called in John T Connor, head of Merck, Sharp & Dohme, another friend of Donovan.
The executives of the two drug companies offered to donate medicines to help Donovan get the men out.
The CIA separately approached the drug industry trade association, to explore the chances of large-scale donations by manufacturers.
On September 18, shortly after his return from Cuba, Donovan won the Democratic nomination for United States Senate.
On October 2 the drug-company pledges in his pocket, Donovan returned to Havana, confident he could reach agreement with Castro.
The Pfizer Company quietly began moving $2,000,000 worth of drugs in refrigerator cars to Idlewild International Airport.
It was on this second trip that Castro agreed to trade the men for baby foods and medicines.
All was going well except for a painful attack of bursitis in Donovan’s right shoulder that forced him to fly to Miami briefly for treatment.
He returned to Havana to continue his talks with Castro, but back in the United States there were charges that Donovan was seeking to make political capital out of his role as Cuban negotiator.
And some members of Congress said that the United States ought not to be dickering with Castro at a time when it was asking other countries to cut off trade.
The White House refused to say whether any government funds would be used to ransom the men.
It insisted Donovan was acting as a private attorney but said he was keeping President Kennedy advised of his activities.
Three days later a U-2 plane flying secretly over western Cuba took a photograph of a Soviet mobile medium-range missile site.
The world moved close to A Gray Operation ((28r nuclear war during the latter half of October.
Against this background of tension it looked as though Donovan’s chances of reaching an agreement to free the men had been shattered.
He suffered a personal, although not unexpected, blow when he lost the election on November 6 to Senator Javits.
But now in the wake of the missile crisis, the drug industry was unwilling to take the risk of donating medicines to Castro unless the Kennedy Administration made it publicly clear that the deal was in the national interest.
The drug firms, already hit hard by the Senate investigation of their high prices, had no desire to bring a new wave of public disapproval down upon themselves.
Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and Assistant Attorney General Louis F Oberdorfer represented the Justice Department.
The high-level meeting concluded that Castro’s demand of $53,000,000 in drugs would cost only $17,000,000 at wholesale United States prices.
It was also decided to study the tax angle involved in possible contributions of drugs by the companies.
It was agreed that a memorandum would be prepared over the weekend to be ready for Robert Kennedy on Monday December 3.
It was the kind of reas*The memorandum noted that some drug companies might gain a tax “windfall” by making charitable contributions to the prisoner exchange deal.
K THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((282 surance the drug companies had been looking for.
Donovan's phone began to ring in Brooklyn with additional pledges of drugs from the industry.
In Washington, Robert Kennedy called on the President at the White House, and at noon the Attorney General phoned Oberdorfer to give him the green light to go ahead with the operation.
The American Red Cross then agreed to accept the drugs as contributions to charity and to deliver them to Havana.
The next day Donovan slipped into Washington to confer with Robert Kennedy.
On December 7 the Attorney General met with officials of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association.
He told the drug manufacturers that the Bay of Pigs invasion had been launched by the United States, that the plan had been started by the Eisenhower Administration and continued by the Kennedy Administration, and that both the nation and the government had a moral obligation to get the men out.
Robert Kennedy talked about the courage of forty members of the brigade who had escaped and crossed the Caribbean in an open boat.
He went on to say that the United States could not directly conduct negotiations with Cuba because it would be “misunderstood” by the world and would be a diplomatic disaster if the deal failed.
He said that all departments had received a list of the drugs Castro wanted and that none were considered strategic.
Finally, the Attorney General assured the companies that the sight of the returning prisoners would still any criticism of the drug companies for contributing to Castro.
And on December 9, Robert Kennedy gave the same talk to a group of baby-food manufacturers.
A group of private attorneys, including John E Nolan, Jr., and E Barrett Prettyman, Jr., were brought in to help.
The Justice Department attorneys did not identify A Gray Operation ((283 themselves as government employees, but said they were calling as representatives of the Cuban Families Committee.
The Justice Department team obtained clearances from the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Interstate Commerce Commission to permit charitable contribution of air and surface transportation to haul the drugs to Miami.
The CIA, the Air Force, the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Department of Health, Education and Welfare began making arrangements to receive and process the prisoners in Florida.
The Commerce Department granted export licenses for the food and drugs.
During this time Donovan told the Justice Department that Castro was demanding a guarantee of full payment of the ransom; otherwise he would hold back the brigade officers until the last payment was made.
Katzenbach flew to Montreal on December 14, but the Royal Bank of Canada balked at issuing a letter of credit without some formal guarantees by American banks.
To complete the financial arrangements, the Continental Insurance Company wrote out a $53,000,000 performance bond without charge, guaranteeing that the Red Cross would meet its obligations to deliver the drugs to Cuba.
The CIA provided a pharmacist, Stephen Aldrich, who helped log the drugs as they arrived in Florida.
He stopped off in Washington to confer with officials and then went on to Miami, where he disappeared.
Donovan stayed in a CIA house in Miami on December 16 and 17, telephoning to Havana.
December 17, Donovan called Washington to say that he had arranged to go to Havana in the morning.
He also reported that one of Castro’s negotiators had a sick child who needed a certain medicine immediately.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((284 Katzenbach called Walter Reed Hospital and got ten vials of the medicine.
Shortly after midnight Oberdorfer, his assistant Frank Michelman, John Nolan and a CIA attorney flew to Miami from Washington, taking the medicine along.
They did not arrive at the CIA “safe house” until 5:00 A.M. on December 18.
Shortly after midnight three Cuban Red Cross officials in olive drab flew secretly into Miami.
Scheele and Barrett Prettyman, shown the supplies at Opa-locka and then taken to Port Everglades to inspect the drugs being loaded on the African Pilot, a ship donated by the Committee of the American Steamship Lines.
The Cubans then adjourned to a Howard Johnson’s motel and said to Prettyman they wanted to remain for the day.
Nolan and Prettyman were alarmed at what would happen if the press learned that Castro emissaries were holed up in a Florida motel.
One of the Cuban Red Cross men smoked big cigars and, in his olive uniform, did not project the image of a man of mercy.
That same day the African Pilot sailed for Havana with the first shipload of drugs.
Early on Sunday, December 23, Nolan and Prettyman joined Donovan in Havana.
At 5:00 P.M. the first plane left the San Antonio de los Banos airport for Homestead Air Force Base south of Miami.
A Gray Operation ((285 But, in Havana, it had become obvious to Donovan that the airlift would be halted by Castro unless the Cuban Families Committee came up with the $2,900,000 that had been pledged as ransom for the sixty wounded prisoners released in April before Donovan entered the picture.
Nolan made it clear that unless the money was raised by three o’clock that afternoon, the deal would collapse.
The Attorney General called Richard Cardinal Cushing, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Boston, who pledged $1,000,000.
Robert Kennedy also called General Lucius Clay, who was a sponsor of the Cuban Families Committee.
Clay borrowed the remaining $1,900,000 on his own signature, then solicited contributions from American business firms to cover that amount.
Texaco, Standard Oil of New Jersey and the Ford Motor Company Fund each contributed $100,000.
In Cuba, that Monday, two more planeloads of prisoners were permitted to take off.
First he staged a military air show at San Antonio de los Banos to tie up the airport.
Then, about 1:00 P.M., Castro halted all flights until he received word about the money.
Late in the afternoon Castro was assured the Royal Bank of Canada had deposited it in Montreal.
Donovan and Castro then met at the Canadian consul’s office to accept the financial guarantees.
At 9:35 P.M. the last of the planes carrying the returning prisoners touched down at Homestead Air Force Base.
Clean clothes, a meal and then a bus trip to Dinner Key Auditoium, where their families and friends were waiting.
There, they marched between double lines of fellow members of Brigade 2056 THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((286 as a band played the march from The Bridge Over the River Kwai.
There were some people who were not content to accept the prisoner exchange as a humanitarian act arranged by a private citizen.
Months later, in June, 1963, all thirteen Republican members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee called for a Congressional inquiry into Donovan’s role.
In January, 1963, the Agriculture Department gave 5,000,000 pounds of dried milk to the Red Cross for shipment to Cuba and pledged more as needed.
In all, the Agriculture Department contributed a total of 35,000,000 pounds of surplus food to the prisoner exchange—15,000,000 pounds of dried milk and 20,000,000 pounds of shortening.
But the administration was fearful that it would come under political attack for helping Castro.
In other words, the government was saying that it would be paid back in cash for the surplus food.
The dried milk cost the government $2,505,000 when it was bought from producers as part of the farm price-support program.
Consequently, the government gave away commodities for which it had paid $5,655,000.
A Gray Operation ((287 However, in calculating the value of the milk and shortening given to the Red Cross, the government figured its contribution as worth just under $2,000,000—the lower price the milk and repackaged shortening might have brought had it been sold by the government on the world market.
Normally, the government uses the higher price that it paid to producers when it figures the value of a contribution of surplus food to charity.
In this instance, it obviously sought to minimize the size of the donation because of the domestic political implications of giving anything away to Castro.
Nor was the government paid back any amount in cash for its donation of milk and shortening.
Instead, in a bit of complex bookkeeping that leaves the onlooker breathless, the government accepted as “reimbursement” 4,000,000 pounds of an insecticide called Sevin.
The Union Carbide Company had contributed $2,000,000 worth of the bug-killer to the Red Cross for the prisoner exchange.
The Commerce Department ruled that the insecticides would be of strategic economic value to Castro by helping his sugar-cane crops.
The Red Cross accepted the insecticides, then immediately turned them over to the Agency for International Development, which dispatched them to India, Pakistan and Algeria.
A conservative estimate of what it cost the government to extricate itself after the Bay of Pigs would be $29,793,000.
This consists of a $20,000,000 tax loss* to the government as a result of the drug companies’ charitable deductions; $5,655,000 in skim milk and shortening; $4,000,000 in secret CIA payments to families of the Bay of Pigs prisoners over a twenty-month period; and $138,000 in costs to the Department of Health, Education and Welfare when the prisoners returned.
Because of the political risks at home of dealing with Castro, the government felt it necessary to mask its participation in the prisoner exchange both by acting through Donovan and by a cer* The estimate of tax loss was made by Mitchell Rogovin, counsel to the Internal Revenue Service, on December 28, 1962.
It decided that the realities of the situation were such that even an act of humanity had to be approached with the utmost political caution.
As an unexpected part of the deal, Donovan persuaded Castro not to let the Red Cross ships sail away empty.
Castro began releasing thousands of refugees previously unable to leave Cuba, including over 5,000 members of the families of the prisoners.
Then in March and April of 1963 Donovan won the release of more than thirty Americans held in Cuban jails, including three CIA men.
On July 3, when the last of the medical supplies reached Cuba, the American Red Cross announced that a total of 9,703 persons (including the Bay of Pigs prisoners and the Americans) had been brought out of Cuba under the agreements negotiated by Donovan.
The staggering figure of nearly 10,000 persons rescued by one man is not widely known, because the total figure received less public attention than did the dramatic return of the invasion prisoners.
In all of these missions, Donovan had the assistance of, and worked hand in hand with, the United States government.
In each case, as a private citizen, he was breaking new ground in a form of intelligence diplomacy that is a unique outgrowth of the Cold War.
The writer of the letters claimed to be the wife of the Soviet spy imprisoned in the United States.
Donovan turned each of them over to Lawrence Houston, the CIA general counsel.
But when Donovan eventually went to East Berlin to negotiate the final details directly with the Russians and East Germans, he was technically on his own, a private American citizen with no diplomatic immunity or protection.
The government was unwilling to tell the full story of its role in the Cuban prisoner exchange, as it has been related here, because to have done so during Donovan’s negotiations might have handicapped his ability to deal with Castro.
And, afterward, it might have engendered too many delicate political questions.
In a very real sense, the seeds of one covert operation, the Bay of Pigs, had given rise to another—the return of the invasion brigade.
Those who sought a clear, simple explanation of whether an operation was private or governmental were bound to be disappointed in the case of James Donovan.
His rescue of the Bay of Pigs prisoners was not precisely a “black,”e., secret operation.
It might be most accurately described as a mixture of both—truly a gray operation.
Missile Crisis IN THE SUMMER and fall of 1962, as Donovan was negotiating with Castro to rescue the victims of one of the Invisible Government’s operations in Cuba, another operation was being conducted in the airspace over the island.
In utmost secrecy, the U-2 spy plane was photographing every foot of Cuban territory in search of Soviet missiles.
The U-2 had been flying over Cuba from the earliest days of the Castro regime.
In 1959 a U-2 was sent over the Zapata swamps near the Bay of Pigs to check an erroneous report that missiles were being set up in the area.
That August photographs were taken of SA-2 anti-aircraft missiles being unloaded at Cuban docks.
The overflight program was stepped up and seven U-2s were sent over the island in the five weeks between August 29 and October 7.
Each mission reMissile Crisis ((297 turned with new pictures of short-range SA-2 defensive missiles.
But President Kennedy, citing the information provided him by the intelligence community, insisted there was no evidence that the Russians were moving in long-range offensive missiles that could threaten the United States.
Kennedy gave his assurances despite the fact that John McCone had a suspicion—never passed along to the White House—that the Soviets were deploying ballistic missiles in Cuba.
In testimony before the Senate Preparedness Subcommittee on March 12, 1963, McCone said he had reported this view within the CIA on August 10.
And although as Director of Central Intelligence he could have ordered that his view be made the official view and reported to Kennedy, he did not do so.
McCone left Washington on August 23 to marry Theiline McGee Pigott, the widow of a rich Seattle industrialist and an old family friend.
During his honeymoon cruise to Europe and his three-week stay on Cap Ferrat on the French Riviera, he received daily briefing telegrams.
They deepened his apprehension, and on September 7, 10, 13 and 20 he responded with telegrams expressing his mounting concern.
But, again, he did not direct that the “honeymoon telegrams” be passed along to the President.
During McCone’s absence, the Board of National Estimates was asked to assess the possibility that the Soviets would station offensive missiles in Cuba.
It conceded that the Russians might be tempted to introduce the missiles for psychological reasons, particularly to impress the Latin Americans.
It also alluded to the possibility that the Soviets might wish to strengthen their position in Cuba as a prelude to a move against Berlin.
Nevertheless, the Estimate stated that it was highly unlikely that offensive missiles would be sent in, because the Soviets would THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((292 be deterred by their awareness of the violent reaction which such a move would provoke on the part of the United States.
The chief Kremlinologists in the State Department, Charles E Bohlen and Llewellyn E Thompson, Jr., both former ambassadors to Moscow, concurred with the Estimate.
A CIA sub-agent had spotted a missile part on a highway on September 12, but had experienced delay in getting his information out of Cuba.
Missile experts in Washington, who had rejected hundreds of prior reports by Cuban refugees, concluded that the sub-agent’s description checked out against the known features of Russian offensive missiles.
In retrospect the CIA decided the missile part had arrived in a shipment of Soviet cargo on September 8.
McCone returned from his honeymoon on September 26, and on October 4 an urgent meeting of the United States Intelligence Board was called.
The members took a look at the “mosaic”—a photographic panorama of the entire island of Cuba pieced together from the latest U-2 pictures.
But McCone noted that there had been no pictures of the western sector of the island since September 5.
He ordered that overflights be further stepped up and concentrated on that section of Cuba.
Now, however, the risks would be greatly increased by the expanded schedule of missions and by the presence of the anti-aircraft missiles.
The CIA had concluded that an SA-2 had downed Francis Gary Powers over the Soviet Union in 1960, and that another had accounted for a Nationalist Chinese U-2 over Communist China on October 9, 1962.
Rather than risk another U-2 incident involving the CIA, McCone agreed to McNamara’s recommendation that the overflight operation be transferred to the Strategic Air Command.
But McCone refused to fire him, despite repeated reminders from the White House that the Estimate was wrong.
Then Carroll took two civilian photo-interpreters to dinner at the home of General Maxwell Taylor.
Joining them were Carter, and Roswell Gilpatric and U Alexis Johnson, both members of the Special Group.
When the officials had been convinced that Soviet missiles were in place in Cuba, McGeorge Bundy was notified at his home.
He arranged for the photo-interpreters to report to him at the White House the following morning.
Shortly before nine o’clock on the morning of October 16 Bundy took the pictures to President Kennedy, who was in his bedroom in pajamas and robe, reading the newspapers.
Kennedy quickly indicated those officials who were to be called to the White House.
At 11:45 the group, which was later to be named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, gathered in the Cabinet Room for the first of a running series of meetings during the following two weeks.
Present were Kennedy, his brother Robert, Lyndon Johnson, Rusk, McNamara, Gilpatric, Bundy, Taylor, Carter, Theodore C Sorensen, the presidential adviser, Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary of State George Ball and Edwin M Martin, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs.
Dean Acheson, former Secretary of State, and Robert Lovett, former Secretary of Defense.
In coming to this decision the Excomm was strongly influenced by Robert Kennedy.
Recalling Pearl Harbor, he opposed an air strike against the small island of Cuba.
He argued that the nation might never recover from the moral outrage of the world and the shock to its own conscience.
At first, the discussion centered on the immediate problem of getting the missiles dismantled or removed.
There were detailed technical analyses of what kind of surveillance and inspection would be necessary to make sure the missiles were rendered inoperable.
Stevenson was troubled that the discussion would bog down in details and that the larger problem of eliminating the Soviets from Cuba would be obscured.
He reminded the Excomm that a long period of negotiation would probably follow the removal of the missiles.
And he recommended that some thought be given to possible United States proposals during that period.
Stevenson was aware that the administration had decided the previous year to remove the missiles from Turkey (they were Jupiter IRBMs, obsolescent, clumsy liquid-fuel rockets.
The plan was to replace them with missile-bearing Polaris submarines stationed in the Mediterranean.
As the Excomm deliberated, the President went through with two scheduled campaign trips, lest their cancellation betray the secret maneuvering.
On October 17 he kept speaking engagements in Stratford and New Haven, Connecticut, and on October 19 he campaigned in Cleveland, Springfield, Illinois, and Chicago.
Louis and Seattle that weekend, Missile Crisis ((295 but on Saturday morning, October 20, Pierre Salinger announced that the President would return to Washington immediately because he had a cold and was running a slight temperature.
Kennedy approved the Excomm’s recommendation that a blockade be imposed around Cuba.
The decision was ratified the next day by the National Security Council.
For the next four days the world balanced on the brink of war, watching fearfully to see if the Soviets would continue work on the missiles, attempt to run the blockade, or otherwise defy the President’s ultimatum.
Finally, late in the night of October 26, a message was received from Khrushchev.
He went on to explain that the Pentagon spokesman who issued the denials “was not lying.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((296 of the blockade and a pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba.
But the optimism was quickly shattered by a second Khrushchev message, which was made public in Moscow.
It offered to swap the Soviet missiles in Cuba for the United States missiles in Turkey.
The members of the Excomm knew that President Kennedy would not accept such a deal.
As Kennedy was later to explain privately, he felt it imperative to reject the missile swap in order to preserve the Western alliance.
They looked upon the missiles as symbols of United States determination to defend them against Russian attack.
Kennedy issued a public statement, in effect rejecting the missile swap.
Then he sent off a private message to Khrushchev, ignoring the Turkey proposal and agreeing to the terms of Khrushchev’s first message.
Meantime, the Excomm’s apprehension deepened as reports came in, first, that an SA-2 had opened fire in Cuba for the first time, downing a SAC U-2, and second, that a U-2 had wandered over Siberia while on an “air sampling” mission near the Arctic Circle.
The United States replied that “severe winds” might have forced the plane “unintentionally” to violate Soviet airspace.
After the Powers incident, Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy promised there would be no more U-2 overflights of the Soviet Union.
But their pledge did not rule out flights over Cuba, other Communist countries or along the borders of the Soviet Union.
The Excomm also realized the second incident might have suggested to Khrushchev that Kennedy was planning some type of direct military action against Russia.
Then, shortly after ten o’clock on Sunday morning, October 28, Moscow released the text of another message from Khrushchev to Kennedy.
The Soviet leader said he had ordered a stop to work on the Cuban bases and had directed that the missiles be crated and returned to the Soviet Union.
Kennedy hailed Khrushchev’s decision and responded with an expression of “regret” for the Siberian U-2 incident, which the Russian had complained about in his letter.
And in the November Congressional elections the triumph was reflected in a major Democratic victory.
The crisis had cost the Republicans as many as twenty House seats, said Representative Bob Wilson of California, the chairman of the Republican Congressional Committee.
He insisted that the administration had known in late September that Russian missiles were in Cuba but had delayed announcing the fact in order to go into the election in a time of crisis, when the nation traditionally rallies round the President.
The administration denied Wilson’s accusation, but its credibility was called into question when Arthur Sylvester, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, made a series of statements which suggested that the administration might have been manipulating the facts in its official announcements.
In order to keep a closer watch over government information, Sylvester directed that a representative of his office monitor each interview between a reporter and a Pentagon official.
Alternately, the official could report the substance of the interview to Sylvester at the end of the day.
The State Department instituted a similar practice, but withdrew it a few weeks later under pressure.
Critics accused the administration of “managing the news,” using information as a “weapon,” even lying to protect itself.
Kennedy’s October triumph was further compromised when Castro refused to allow on-site inspection of the missile sites by the United Nations.
The Republicans seized upon this to suggest that the Russian military build-up was continuing and that all of the offensive weapons had not been removed.
Leading the Republican attack was Senator Keating, who had gained something of a reputation as an intelligence expert by virtue of his announcement on October 10, twelve days before Kennedy’s TV address, that there were offensive missiles in Cuba.
And the administration had difficulty gaining public acceptance of its denials.
Its failure to quiet the storm over Cuba was undermining efforts to turn the October triumph into a Cold War breakthrough.
Finally, Kennedy decided he would have to overwhelm his critics with photographic proof.
The original idea was to invite Missile Crisis ((299 the small group of reporters covering Keating to view the special briefing which had been put together for several Congressional committees.
At the last minute, however, the President decided that if classified material was to be released, he might as well go the whole way.
He ordered McNamara to go on nation-wide television that evening—February 6—and display the aerial reconnaissance photos brought back from Cuba.
The decision was reached so quickly that there was no time to check with McCone.
For close to two hours the American people were exposed to some of the “blackest” secrets of the Invisible Government.
Most of the briefing was conducted by General Carroll’s thirty-four-year-old assistant, John Hughes.
He displayed dozens of blowups of reconnaissance photos showing the Cuban missile sites first under construction and then in the process of dismantling, and finally he showed the missile equipment being put aboard ships and carried away from the island.
It was a breath-taking demonstration of the high degree of sophistication which had been achieved in electronic intelligence.
But the presentation prompted two questions which were to prove embarrassing to the administration.
First, no pictures were shown for the period between September 5 and October 14, raising the question of whether the intelligence community had neglected to conduct aerial reconnaissance during this period or whether the administration was suppressing pertinent photos.
And second, the briefing added up to a tacit admission that there had been no photographic count of the number of missiles shipped to Cuba and, therefore, there could be no certainty that the number spotted going out represented the total arsenal.
McNamara sidestepped these problems in answering questions THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (({300 after the briefing.
As to the so-called “photo gap” between September 5 and October 14, McNamara finally explained at a news conference in February that the U-2 missions during that period “didn’t relate” to the areas where the Russian missiles were found.
In plain English, McNamara was saying that the CIA failed to photograph the western half of Cuba during the six weeks preceding the flight which discovered the offensive missiles.
At his news conference on March 6 Kennedy argued that it really didn’t matter very much because the Soviets set up their missiles so quickly, there would have been nothing to see until a few days before October 14.
But many important members of the administration were not so satisfied with the Invisible Government.
They suspected that someone in the Pentagon or high in the CIA had been funneling incriminating evidence to the Republicans, possibly raw intelligence which had not yet been analyzed or brought to the President’s attention.
On March 25, when McCone came for one of his periodic meetings with the President, a third person, McGeorge Bundy, was included for the first time.
The Invisible Government had taken great pride in its perMissile Crisis ((30r formance during the missile crisis, only to find its achievement compromised by suspicions that it was playing politics with intelligence.
There was no denying, however, that the intelligence community had succeeded in raising the art of aerial photography to unimagined heights.
The missile crisis had revealed unmistakably that automation was revolutionizing the spy business as rapidly as it was transforming American industry.
JOHN F KENNEDY on television, December, 1962 “That function can now be assumed by satellites.
NIKITA S KHRUSHCHEV to Paul-Henri Spaak, July, 1963 THE PRESIDENT of the United States and the Premier of the Soviet Union were referring to one of the strangest secrets of the Cold War, a secret which was scarcely a secret at all.
Kennedy and Khrushchev were alluding to a revolutionary tool of espionage, the camera-bearing “spy in the sky” satellite.
And it was clear that neither had been fooled by the elaborate security precautions of the other.
Electronic Spies ((303 The United States had been orbiting SAMOS spy satellites over the Soviet Union since 1961, and the Russians were known to have the capacity to track them.
With similar technique and purpose the Soviets started in 1962 to send up their COSMOS satellites under the vigilant eye of the United States tracking system.
By 1963 aerial reconnaissance had become the most secretive operation of the Pentagon.
Yet, ironically, when SAMOS was first tested in 1960, its virtues were graphically described in official pronouncements.
Indeed, the electronic and optical laws upon which it was founded had long been the property of the scientific community, Russian and American alike.
But a summit meeting in Paris was being held that month and the Eisenhower Administration was emphasizing its determination to keep the Soviet Union under surveillance despite the U-2 incident.
Suddenly, from the depths of the Pentagon, came a spew of previously highly classified details.
SAMOS, the name of a Greek island, was a contraction for Satellite and Missile Observation System.
The project was in an advanced state of development and the White House had given it a “DX” rating, which meant it was one of the handful of Pentagon programs with the highest national priority.
Still, it was to be pushed even faster on a budget of just under $200,000,000 a year.
SAMOS was designed to be operational by 1962 and to take photographs with detail equal to what the human eye could see from a hundred feet.
The satellite was launched* by an AtlasAgena rocket, standing ninety-five feet high, or a Thor-Agena rocket, with a height of seventy-eight feet.
The Agena, or second stage, was made by the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, designers and producers of the U-2.
The satellite weighed 4,100 pounds and was twenty-two feet tall and five feet in diam* SAMOS I failed to achieve orbit on October 11, 1960.
SAMOS was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a polar orbit from which it could photograph every nation in the world as the globe rotated under it.
The camera could be shut off when the satellite was off target, thereby conserving power.
It could pick out radar and communication centers, and pinpoint missile sites by their radio guidance signals.
The SAMOS photographs could locate enemy military tar* In July, 1963, the Outstanding Unit Award was presented to the 6593 Test Squadron at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii.
The Air Force said the squadron had achieved 70 percent success in its capsule recoveries.
Electronic Spies ((305 gets and provide instantaneous indications of troop or supply build-ups.
The reconnaissance satellite would be subject to some of the limitations of the U-2.
It could be frustrated by clouds which cover 60 percent of the earth at all times.
But it could provide pictures of the northern stretches of the Soviet Union that were beyond the reach of the U-2.
But if it were hit by a rocket, it would burn up on re-entry into the earth’s atmosphere and the evidence would be destroyed.
And it would be a considerably more difficult target than a U-2 flying ten times lower.
Besides, SAMOS could carry a rocket motor which, on command from the earth, would enable it to move evasively.
It was to be a maneuverable satellite which would rendezvous with an enemy vehicle in orbit and inspect it by electronic means such as television.
Ultimately, it was to have the capacity to neutralize or destroy an enemy satellite.
It was MIDAS , designed to detect missile launchings with infrared sensors.
It was fired into orbit by the same rocket and it was also produced by Lockheed.
By detecting the intense heat given off by rocket exhaust during take-off, MIDAS was to provide a thirty-minute warning of enemy attack.
This would double the fifteen-minute alert of BMEWS , a massive radar in Thule, Greenland, which would pick up an incoming ICBM halfway between launch and impact.
During one test launching the heat sen* The project proved much more complicated than SAMOS, however, and in 1962 its operational date was extended to 1967 at the earliest.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((306 sors sent out signals set off by a coffee pot on the firing pad.
Its cameras were to televise cloud cover and storm conditions in order to promote better weather prediction.
Such surveillance obviously could be of great value in timing SAMOS launches for moments of minimum cloud cover over the Soviet Union.
He asserted that it was perfectly lawful for satellites to be flown over foreign territory just as ships freely sail the high seas.
The head of NASA was betraying the fears of the administration that United States satellites operating over Russia would be shot down by Soviet propaganda.
They argued that there was a presumption of guilt in surTeptitious activities and that the Soviet Union could play upon this as justification for shooting down a SAMOS or securing a UN resolution condemning the practice.
On the other hand, they contended, if the operation were placed under the UN, the Soviets would be hard-pressed to destroy SAMOS either with rockets or words.
S Fred Singer, director of the National Satellite Weather Center at Suitland, Maryland, declared in a speech on February 20, 1963 that TIROS had been so used to plan U-2 flights over Cuba during the missile crisis in October, 1962.
Electronic Spies ((307 The Kennedy Administration quickly decided that secrecy was a safer course.
When SAMOS II was successfully launched on January 31, 1961—eleven days after Kennedy took office—the Pentagon prohibited the release of any details about it.
This prohibition soon developed into an absolute ban on any discussion of the satellite, even in areas of prior official revelation.
It was thereafter impossible to obtain official confirmation that in fact SAMOS existed.
Since security, if any, had long since been breached by the original SAMOS disclosures, it was clear that the administration had international political purposes in mind in its new crackdown.
Khrushchev had known for years that the U-2 was flying over Russia, but he said nothing until his hand was forced by.the Powers incident.
Their complaint, which was formally carried to the United Nations in March, 1962, was summed up on December 3 of that year by Platon D Morozov, the Soviet delegate to the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
The standard reply of the United States was that a nation’s sovereignty extends only to the air space above it.
Officials noted that in the first three years of the space age neither the United States nor the Soviet Union had claimed its territorial sovereignty was infringed by satellite overflights.
In the absence of protest or international agreement to the contrary, these officials mainTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((308 tained that a common law had been established, giving any nation the right to orbit satellites over another.
The resolution stipulated that international law and the United Nations Charter were to apply to outer space and that celestial bodies were not to be subject to national appropriation.
The United States interpreted this as a contradiction of the Soviet argument that SAMOS violated national sovereignty.
To demonstrate its sincerity in subscribing to UN supervision of space, the United States pledged, shortly after the UN Space Registry was established in February of 1962, that it would list all of its satellites.
Playing upon the deep secrecy surrounding the SAMOS program, the Russians alleged that the United States was concealing some of its launches.
If it were to dispose effectively of suggestions that it was cheating, it would have to open up the SAMOS firings to much greater publicity.
But this would run counter to the basic policy decision not to provoke the Russians.
Or the United States could publicly produce evidence that the unlisted objects in space were of Soviet origin.
But this would expose the fact that the United States possessed a vast electronic network which kept a precise watch on all Soviet space operations.
And the CIA and the Pentagon were opposed to providing the slightest help to the Russians in compromising the network.
First, if it were officially admitted that the United States was eavesdropping along the Iron Curtain, nations providing the clandestine facilities might be subjected to severe Russian pressure, as they were after the U-2 incident.
We know that lots of things that two years ago we assumed our adversaries had, they did not have.
What we are trying to do in this field is to make it as difficult as possible for them.
We are trying to make them spend as much time and effort as we have to,” Defense Secretary McNamara was particularly jealous of the secrecy policy.
He apparently did not comprehend that he himself had exposed SAMOS’ effectiveness when he announced the month before that the United States was in a position to locate and destroy Soviet missile sites.
Arrayed against McNamara and the secrecy policy were those in the State Department who saw great propaganda value in destroying the myth that the Soviets could do no wrong in space and that they had suffered fewer failures than the United States.
This viewpoint prevailed in September, 1962, when the government. claimed that in the two previous years the Russians had failed in five attempts to reach the planets—two to Mars and three to Venus.
In trying to substantiate the claim, the fears of the CIA and the Pentagon were realized.
Out of it came revelations of a world that was unknown to the vast majority of Americans, if not to the Soviet leaders.
It was a complicated network of electronic fences, stretching across the United States, and sensitive radios and radars hidden along the perimeter of the Soviet Union.
The network was so effective that no Soviet rocket could get off the ground without its being known within a few minutes THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((310 at the North American Air Defense Command in Colorado Springs and at the CIA and the White House.
The first point of detection was a radar and communications system in the Middle East.
It was centered in Turkey at small Black Sea towns such as Zonguldak, Sinop and Samsun.
There, powerful radars and listening gear monitored the countdowns and rocket launchings at the main Soviet missile sites near the Aral Sea, The radars, which went into operation in 1955, could reach at least 3,000 miles.
Modern electronic counter-measures are an important deterrent and intelligence tool for the military services.
Another indication of the potential of the eavesdropping equipment got out the following month.
Senator Barry Goldwater, a general in the Air Force Reserve, disclosed that an “electronic ear,” operating in planes off Cuba, was so sensitive that it could pick up the sound of various machines to the point of detecting a small generator in operation.
At the same time, the Pentagon was perfecting super-range “over the horizon” radar and the Air Force had installed highly sensitive atmospheric pressure gear which could provide instantaneous indications of a Soviet missile launching.
After a rocket had been detected by the Middle East system, it would next be picked up by the BMEWS radar in Greenland, which kept watch over the Arctic, or by the large saucer-like radar at Shemya in the Aleutians, which tracked Soviet test rockets as they flew out over the Pacific.
The third point of detection and the most precise was NAVSPASUR , an electronic fence stretching from Georgia to Southern California.
It was also possible to calculate the exact time and place of Jaunch and predict the future path of the satellite.
Many officials felt that too much was being revealed about these secret electronic systems.
Nevertheless, NASA continued until April, 1963, to list Soviet launchings in the Satellite Situation Reports it issued twice a month.
Then there was an abrupt and unexplained return to the previous practice of secrecy.
The House Information Subcommittee sought an explanation, but NASA spokesmen said all they knew was that the tracking system was controlled by the Pentagon, which refused to release the information.
Despite the fact that the policy of secrecy was perpetuating a false image of United States inferiority in space, the administration held to its practice of suppressing the truth about Soviet failures.
Despite the fact that nuclear test-ban negotiations were threatened by public ignorance of the elaborate array of United States detection devices, the administration refused to embark upon even a modest program of education.
The United States was seeking to hold its tongue about secrets that were no longer secret to the Russians.
In November, 1962, the Soviets, indicating their complete awareness, dropped their long-standing demand for a ban on spy-in-the-sky satellites.
This opened the way to a United States— Soviet agreement on the peaceful uses of outer space.
Electronic experts suggested the Russians were developing a spy satellite of their own and did not wish to be inhibited by international prohibitions on such devices.
Khrushchev’s son-in-law, Alexei Adzhubei, the editor of Izvestia, seemed to substantiate this theory in a speech in Helsinki, Finland, on September 2, 1963.
This is the war of words, conducted on the airwaves by combatants who are thousands of miles apart—and who will never meet.
Daily, East and West beam hundreds of hours of propaganda broadcasts at each other in an unrelenting babble of competition for the minds of their listeners.
Millions of people in the Middie East, Latin America and Asia who cannot read, can nevertheless be reached by the propaganda of both sides.
The Invisible Government is heavily engaged in “black radio” * * To intelligence officers, the term “black radio” can have a specialized meaning, to describe a radio that is captured and then operated as if all were normal in order to deceive the opposition.
The Germans successfully underL THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((314 operations of every conceivable type.
United States radio activities have ranged all the way from overt, openly acknowledged and advertised programs of the Voice of America to highly secret CIA transmitters in the Middle East and other areas of the world.
In between, is a whole spectrum of black, gray, secret and semi-secret radio operations.
The CIA’s Radio Swan, because it became operationally involved at the Bay of Pigs, never enjoyed more than the thinnest of covers.
Other radio operations, financed and controlled in whole or in part by the Invisible Government, are more skillfully concealed and much bigger.
In some cases, it is possible, indeed probable, that lower-level employees of such an organization are unaware of the true point of control of the particular activity.
A secret CIA transmitter in Lebanon, to take a random example, would be run directly by CIA officers.
But in a larger, hybrid operation, knowledge of financing and control by Washington might be limited to a handful of top executives.
For purposes of this book, it is sufficient to note that an inevitable by-product—as in clandestine operations generally—is that the American public has been beguiled by some of this allegedly “private” broadcasting work.
Black-radio operations fall into two categories—transmitting and receiving.
Besides broadcasting, both sides carefully monitor each other’s broadcasts to learn what the opposition is saying. mined the British Operation Northpole during World War Il by using this technique.
Parachutists dropped by British Intelligence were lured into traps by Dutch underground radios that had been captured by the Nazis, In this chapter, however, the term is used in its broader sense, to describe radio operations in general where they are controlled directly or indirectly by an intelligence apparatus.
The intelligence agency’s listening posts all over the globe capture every major broadcast of a foreign nation on tape.
Daily, this extremely valuable foreign broadcast information is edited, correlated, mimeographed and distributed to a wide list of consumers from a CIA office in downtown Washington.
However, this broadcast monitoring service, which is more or less openly acknowledged by the CIA, is about the most “overt” operation the agency conducts.
Some idea of the magnitude of the CIA’s task, in monitoring Communist bloc broadcasts alone, can be gained from a speech made on January 30, 1963, by John Richardson, Jr., the president of the Free Europe Committee, which operates Radio Free Europe.
Radio stations of thirteen Communist countries, he said, “transmit more than four thousand hours of radio programming abroad every week in sixty-three languages.
The Soviet Union leads this radio propaganda parade with some thirteen hundred weekly hours of radio propaganda directed abroad.
For the background to this unusual passage in the President’s speech, one must look to 1956 and Suez.
In the aftermath of the * Less well known are the CIA’s mimeographed summaries of the foreign press.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((316 abortive Anglo—-French-Israeli invasion of Egypt, Nasser increased his efforts to bring the entire Arab world under his domination.
Up until 1956, the British-controlled Near East Broadcasting Station at Zyghi, on the south coast of Cyprus, was the most powerful propaganda voice in the Middle East.
NEBS was a British black-radio operation, ostensibly under private ownership.
Cairo spread the most violent sort of propaganda against its Arab neighbors and the United States.
Its “Voice of the Arabs” was on the air from 6:30 A.M. to 1:15 A.M. the next morning, broadcasting throughout the Middle East and as far south as the Belgian Congo from two seventy-kilowatt transmitters on the Mokattam Hills overlooking Cairo, and from two other transmitters on the Nile Delta.
By 1958 Radio Cairo was openly urging bloody revolution in Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon.
In February of that year Nasser had seized power in Syria and proclaimed the United Arab Republic.
Iraq’s King Feisal II countered by joining with his Hashemite cousin King Hussein of Jordan to form the Arab Union.
Since Iraq was the world’s sixth largest oil producer and the only Arab member of the pro-Western Baghdad pact, the CIA felt this kind of talk from Radio Cairo could not go unanswered.
As a result, by 1958 the CIA had set up a series of clandestine radio stations in the Middle East and along its fringes to counteract the influence of Radio Cairo.
Meanwhile, a crisis was brewing in Lebanon over the selection of a successor to President Camille Chamoun, whose term was expiring.
In the coup, twenty-three-year-old King Feisal and his uncle, the crown prince, Black Radio ((317 were murdered.
Premier Nuri as-Said, captured while trying to escape dressed as a woman, was also killed.
The next day Eisenhower, in Operation Blue Bat, sent the Marines into Lebanon to shore up the Chamoun government.
Radio Cairo exulted in the bloodshed in Baghdad and urged the people of Jordan to rise up and butcher King Hussein.
But now, as the CIA transmitters got busy, new voices were heard on the airwaves.
BEIRUT, July 23 —A second mysterious Arab radio station went on the air yesterday calling itself the “Voice of Justice” and claiming to be broadcasting from Syria.
Its program heard here consisted of bitter criticism against Soviet Russia and Soviet Premier Khrushchev.
Earlier the “Voice of Iraq” went on the air with attacks against the Iraqi revolutionary government.
Cairo said two stations were transmitting from the French Riviera, and said others were in British Aden, Jordan, Lebanon, Cyprus and Kenya.
Before the revolt in Iraq, there had been another in Baghdad, the statement said.
These operations are indeed expensive, and one of the most nagging problems for such radio stations is to explain the source of funds.
One short-wave radio station in the United States with an interesting history is WRUL, with offices in Manhattan as the World Wide Broadcasting System, Inc.
In his fascinating book about Sir William Stephenson, the head of British Intelligence in the United States during World War II, H Montgomery Hyde maintains that WRUL was penetrated by British Intelligence in the war years and subsidized by it through intermediaries.
In 1954 WRUL received a letter of commendation from the Castillo-Armas government of Guatemala, thanking the station for its services during the revolt against Arbenz.
The letter was from Jose Toron, who had operated a clandestine “Free Guatemala” radio station before the Communist government was overthrown.
Thus, WRUL has been linked with at least two CIA operations —the Bay of Pigs and the Guatemala coup in 1954.
Not long after Cairo complained about clandestine transmitters in the Middle East, Konstantin Zinchenko, the head of the press department of the Soviet State Committee for Foreign Cultural Relations, told a news conference in Moscow that the United States had set up a whole series of secret radios aimed at making trouble for the Soviet Union.
It broadcasts exclusively to the Soviet Union, twenty-four hours a day, from seventeen transmitters in three locations—Lampertheim, West Germany; Pals, near BarceJona; and Taipeh, Formosa.
Its programing center is a rebuilt former airport building near Munich at Oberwiesenfeld, which was once Hitler’s airfield.
It says it is supported by foundations but does not list them anywhere.
In 1961 it broadcast the fact that the Russians had resumed nuclear tests.
Neither event, of course, had been disclosed to the Russian people by the Soviet government.
In 1954 two Radio Liberty employees died under mysterious circumstances in Munich.
In September, Leonid Karas, a writer on the radio’s Byelorussia desk was found drowned.
In November, Abo Fatalibey, head of the Azerbaijan desk, was murdered and stuffed under the sofa in the apartment of a Russian named Mikhail Ismailov.
At the last moment the coffin—which someone noticed was too short for the six-foot Ismailov—was opened.
The body was definitely identified as that of Fatalibey, the Radio Liberty official.
Another interesting case was that of Anatoli Skachkov, a Russian émigré who joined Radio Liberty on January 1, 1957.
On November 5, 1962, Izvestia carried an article which accused Radio Liberty of being staffed by CIA men.
The next day two Americans, Valerio and Sanker, bearing flowers and a bottle of cognac, visited Skachkov.
The tale of poisoned cognac is colorful, but Radio Liberty tells a different story.
According to the radio station, Skachkov was an alcoholic who developed a persecution complex.
As a result, he was committed to the State Institute for the Mentally Disturbed.
But the continuing Soviet attacks on Radio Liberty and its present and former employees provide some indication that this radio station “supported by a group of private American citizens” is reaching the Russian people in sufficient numbers to be irritating to the Soviet leadership.
One distinction between Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty is that RFE broadcasts exclusively to the five satellite nations, while Radio Liberty broadcasts exclusively to the Soviet Union.
Radio Free Europe was born in 1949, with the formation of the National Committee for a Free Europe.
Berle, Jr., who participated in the Bay of Pigs operation a decade later.
Two locations are in West Germany, at Biblis, near Frankfurt, and at Holzkirchen, near Munich.
RFE, Communist Bloc Operations, Exile Political Organizations, Free World Operations and West European Operations.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((322 In 1953 it set up something called the Free Europe Press, which began wafting rubber and plastic balloons filled with propaganda materials to Eastern Europe.
In February, 1956, the Czech Government charged that a balloon released by RFE had caused the crash of a Czech airliner on January 18 of that year in the Tatra Mountains of Slovakia.
Moscow also protested the balloons, and Hungary chimed in that American balloons had caused three Hungarian air crashes.
RFE figured in another cloak-and-dagger episode in December, 1959, when it charged that “a Communist diplomat” had put lethal amounts of atropine in the salt shakers of the radio station’s cafeteria in Munich.
If taken in sufficient quantity, atropine can cause delirium, convulsions, coma or death.
The case was quietly dropped the next month, when the Munich public prosecutor said the amount of poison in the salt cellars had not been sufficient to cause serious harm.
At times, RFE has come under critical attack for the content of its broadcasts to Eastern Europe.
On July 9, 1959, for example, there were news reports from Warsaw that the United States Ambassador to Poland, Jacob D Beam, had protested RFE’s broadcasts because he felt they contained misinformation and too blatant a propaganda line.
Black Radio ((323 But it was RFE’s role in the Hungarian revolt of 1956 that brought the most criticism and controversy upon it.
At the heart of the issue was the extremely touchy question of whether United States foreign policy should be aimed at the “liberation” of Eastern Europe.
Nevertheless, a recent RFE fund-appeal booklet, Your Money's Worth, illustrates that the radio station still speaks with a militant voice.
The Soviet role in Hungary was a sickening spectacle to civilized men everywhere.
In the first phase, Moscow seemed willing to grant Hungary a measure of freedom.
Then Russian tanks rolled into Budapest and brutally crushed the Hungarian patriots.
In the aftermath of the blood bath, questions were widely faised about RFE’s role.
Various tribunals examined this question, but little was said publicly about some more subtle and basic underlying questions.
It is an organ of the United States Information Agency, and it broadcasts around the globe in thirty-six languages.
In 1963 work was comTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((324 pleted on a gigantic transmitter complex at Greenville, North Carolina, giving the Voice the most powerful long-range broadcasting station in the world.
From all this, it should be obvious that news and propaganda broadcasts across national boundaries to other nations, particularly behind the Iron Curtain, are among the mechanisms of United States foreign policy.
To do so would have opened up the entire sensitive question of whether and/or to what extent RFE received policy guidance, funds and direction from the CIA and the State Department.
A spokesman said broadcasts promising Western military aid to Hungary were the work of a “Communist radio located in East Germany.
RFE turned over to it three miles of tape containing all its broadcasts to Hungary before, during and after the revolt.
On January 25, 1957, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer reported the results of this inquiry at a press conference.
Charges that RFE had promised the Hungarians armed assistance by the West “do not correspond with the facts,” he said.
On the other hand, it said there had been a shake-up at Radio Free Europe.
A second inquiry was conducted by a special committee of the Council of Europe, an organization of Western governments formed in 1949 to deal mainly with social problems.
It would appear that certain broadcasts by Radio Free Europe helped to create an impression that support might be forthcoming for the Hungarians.
The three cautiously phrased reports, in other words, found in varying degree that RFE’s broadcasts, while they did not promise aid in so many words, “helped to create an impression,” as the UN put it, that assistance might be on the way.
Lodge said the Hungarian resistance had given the UN “a brief moment in which to mobilize the conscience of the world on your behalf.
Another RFE broadcast during the revolt gave instructions on how to blow up attacking Soviet tanks.
The effect of RFE’s words is nowhere more heartbreakingly recorded than in the broadcasts from inside Hungary in the dying hours of the revolt.
On the afternoon of November 5, Radio Free Rakoczi broadcast this message from inside Hungary at 13:48 hours:7 “Attention, Radio Free Europe, hello attention.
CIA’s Guano Paradise “THERE ARE THREE coconut palm trees on Great Swan Island at the present time,” the State Department brochure discouragingly told Americans who inquired about retiring to an island paradise in the Caribbean.
The vision of thirty-six-inch lizards slithering underfoot would likely deter any potential visitor who had written to the State Department for travel information about the little-known Swan Islands, which, on the map, beckon attractively as a speck in the western Caribbean near Honduras.
But the department’s brochure, prepared for just such inquiries, had even more hideously disenchanting news.
CIA’s Guano Paradise ((329 The water, the brochure added, “is exceptionally clear and blue and abounding in different types of fish.
The State Department’s disheartening travel folder might, just possibly, have been prompted by the fact that Great Swan Island, as late as 1964, was the site of a covert CIA radio station broadcasting to Cuba, Mexico, Central America and the northern tier of South America.
Not that any prospective tourist would have been likely to stumble on the island.
There is, naturally, no commercial airline service to the CIA’s airstrip.
The only boat takes five days to ply between Tampa and the island and carries a pungent cargo of bananas and fertilizer.
Despite these precautions, the story of the bedeviled efforts to conceal the CIA’s hand on Swan Island provides an episode of comic relief.
The Swan Islands are really two islands, Great Swan (usually known simply as Swan Island), which is a mile and a half long and half a mile wide, and Little Swan.
The islands are due south of the western tip of Cuba, and ninety-seven miles north of Punte Patuca, Honduras.
They are said to have been named for a seventeenth-century pirate who used them as a base.
Like the lair of Ian Fleming’s nefarious Doctor No, the CIA’s Caribbean isle is made entirely of guano, the accumulated droppings of sea fowl.
The United States has claimed the islands since 1863, but then, so has Honduras.
When the CIA received approval to mount the operation against Cuba that grew into the Bay of Pigs, it was decided first to soften up Castro’s island psychologically by means of radio broadcasts.
Initially, its mission was confined to propaganda broadcasts designed to undermine the Castro regime.
Gradually, as the Bay of Pigs invasion planning progressed, the radio station was assigned a more militant role.
During the invasion, as has been seen, Radio Swan broadcast * The boat service is operated by Hamilton Bros., Inc., a Honduran company, according to the State Department brochure.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((330 coded messages, appeals for uprisings among the Cuban populace and armed forces, and instructions in the art of sabotage.
But back in May of 1960, there had to be some public explanation for the mysterious new fifty-kilowatt station that suddenly began to broadcast from Swan Island.
Walter G Lohr, of Baltimore, who said he was a stockholder, identified the president of Gibraltar as Thomas Dudley Cabot, of Weston, Massachussetts, a banker and the former president of the United Fruit Company, and the director, in 1951, of the State Department Office of International Security Affairs.
Appropriately, considering his new capacity, Cabot was also president and director of Godfrey L Cabot, Inc., the world’s largest producer of carbon black.
Another stockholder was publicly identified at the time as Sumner Smith, a Boston businessman who claimed that his family owned Swan Island.
Horton Heath explained that the Gibraltar Steamship Corporation was leasing the land for the radio station from Sumner Smith, who was chairman of the board of Abington Textile Machinery Works, 19 Congress Street, Boston.
Peculiarly, the Federal Communications Commission, which is required by law to license all radio stations operating from United States territory, did not license Radio Swan or the Gibraltar Steamship Corporation.
It firmly listed* Swan Island as a “possession,” and had consistently rejected Honduran claims.
It did not take long for Havana, stung by the propaganda broadcasts, to bark back.
Things were going reasonably smoothly for the CIA, however, until the Hondurans began to get fidgety over the funny business taking place on what they insisted was their mound of guano.
The trouble had its roots in the fact that a 1960 United States census had been taken on Swan Island.
In March of that year, a two-star admiral had been piped ashore to count noses on Great Swan.
Rear Admiral H Arnold Karo, the director of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, stopped off to take the census during a voyage of the survey ship Explorer.
In April, with much fanfare, it was announced in Washington that the population of Swan Island was twenty-eight, a drop of four since 1950.
In Tegucigalpa, Honduras, a group of students reacted indignantly to the claim of sovereignty implied by the taking of the 1960 census, They announced plans to organize an expedition to plant their country’s flag on Swan Island.
It should be understood that the State Department claimed United States sovereignty over the Swan Islands; this did not mean private individuals could not own property on the island, as the Smith family claimed it did.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((332 thirteen armed Hondurans arrived off Swan Island.
The invaders were repulsed single-handedly by John Hamilton, a Cayman Islander who was the Weather Bureau’s native cook.
From their boat, the Hondurans shouted that they were coming ashore to place a marker on the beach claiming Swan Island as their own.
They came ashore, unarmed, sang the Honduran national anthem, took their own census and planted their flag.
In Washington, the State Department announced solemnly that the government was awaiting a report from its embassy in Tegucigalpa on the illegal landing by the Hondurans.
Francisco Milla Bermudez, the permanent Honduran representative to the UN, told the General Assembly, on October 3, that the United States had occupied Swan Island “against the right and will” of his government.
But the United States claim to the islands was solidly based on guano, specifically the Guano Act of 1856.
Under it, the President could issue a certificate when an American citizen discovered guano on an unclaimed island.
This gave the discoverer the right to collect and sell the guano, a valuable fertilizer rich in phosphates.
The President, at his discretion, could then designate the island as United States territory.
Shortly after the turn of the century, the company abandoned the islands.
They were claimed in 1904 by Captain Alonzo Adams, an old salt who sailed out of Mobile, Alabama.
In the 1920s Honduras made several passes at the islands, but Washington warned Tegucigalpa to keep off and sent along a copy of Seward’s Guano Certificate to back up its territorial claim.
For a time the United Fruit Company harvested coconuts on the CIA’s Guano Paradise ((333 island, but the 1955 hurricane swept away all but the three trees alluded to in the State Department travel brochure.
The Weather Bureau maintained a station, staffed by eight men, to take wind direction, wind speed, temperature and humidity pressure.
The FAA maintained a high-powered radio beacon as a navigational aid to pilots.
The Weather Bureau people were rotated every three to six months, since they were not allowed to bring their wives and children to Swan Island.
A favorite pastime of gourmets among the government men was clonking lobsters over the head with stones in the shallow water.
The CIA set up shop in lizard-proof Quonset huts half a mile from the Weather Bureau compound.
They installed their radio equipment in big trailers slung with awnings to protect the delicate electronic gear from the broiling Caribbean sun.
The Cayman Islanders, imported as a labor force, lived nearby with their families in a compound called Gliddenville.
In September, 1960, Walter S Lemmon, the president of the World Wide Broadcasting System, announced that his station, WRUL, would co-operate with Radio Swan in broadcasts to Cuba.
World Wide, besides its Manhattan office, had a short-wave station at Scituate, Massachusetts.
At the same time, Representative Roman C, Pucinski, Chicago Democrat and sponsor of an organization called Radio Free Cuba, announced that his group would also co-operate with World Wide and Radio Swan.
Pucinski described Radio Free Cuba as a privately owned group that had six radio stations in Florida, including the Florida Keys, and Louisiana.
Some prominent Cuban exiles taped programs for the CIA station, including Luis Conte Aguero, a former Havana radio and television commentator.
During the invasion, the CIA station was on the air twenty-four hours a day, transmitting romantic-sounding messages in code.
Even after the invasion had collapsed, Radio Swan continued to broadcast mysterious orders to nonexistent battalions.
On April 22 three days after the end of the invasion, Radio Swan ordered various detachments not to surrender—help was on the way.
In the swamps and forests around the Bahia de Cochinos, some of the weary brigade survivors who heard the broadcasts as they tried to evade capture by the militia were bitter at what they felt was false encouragement by Radio Swan.
By this time, Radio Swan’s cover as a private station owned by the Gibraltar Steamship Corporation had worn perilously thin.
A private station that had broadcast messages in code and instructions to troops during a clandestine invasion—well, it seemed to be time to get out of town.
It kept an office in Manhattan, but moved the entire operation to Miami in September, 1961.
Fred Fazakerley, a spokesman for the Gibraltar line, told a newsman that Horton Heath would be moving to Miami to take over the office.
Several pieces of luggage being moved into the suite were marked with the name “George Wass,” who was identified as an official of Radio Swan.
Gibraltar took this listing in the Miami telephone book:* Gibraltar SS Corp.
Oddly, the Vanguard Service Corporation did not bother to move out of Gibraltar’s quarters or to change its telephone number.
With a whole new dramatis personae, Radio Americas, now managed by one Roger Butts, continued to broadcast from Swan Island.
Mr Crowell’s father had been a chemist for a guano company, and the adventurous couple occupied their leisure time with visits far and wide to the scene of bygone guano operations.
The Crowells were, apparently, innocently unaware of what they had stumbled into.
Once a week, a CIA plane would leave Miami for Swan Island, and it was the only air link with the United States.
About one half-hour before we were to land, the island found out that no preparation in the line of ramp or ladder had been made to get two aged passengers from the high door of the plane.
After much THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((336 scurrying around and various suggestions, a solution was found.
They drove a tractor with a scoop up to the door, raised the scoop, led us onto it, backed away a bit and lowered us.
What happened next was like a scene straight out of a Margaret Rutherford—Alistair Sim film comedy, as the charming couple was turned loose on the CIA’s guano island.
Palm warblers . . . were around our house all the time and I had an excellent view of a vittelina warbler, Nelson’s named for Mr George Nelson and found only on Swan, I believe.
On the runway we enjoyed daily a flock of twenty little blue herons in all stages of color, a few white ibis and one cattle egret.
It seemed like home to hear and see one catbird, also one tree swallow.
There was no question that the CIA had gone above and beyond the call of duty to be hospitable to the delightful Massachusetts couple.
Crowell concluded, “the pilot flew low over and around the islands as a farewell treat.
It called on Cubans to burn cane fields, and to carry matches to be ready for sabotage at all times.
It instructed them to go into offices and telephone booths and take the receivers off the hooks to tie up communications.
The CIA’s reported plan was to curtail the island’s beer supply by creating a bottle shortage.
In Boston, Sumner Smith maintained he was not sure whether or not he was still a director of the Gibraltar Steamship Corpora~CIA’s Guano Paradise ((337 tion.
Smith, explaining his family’s ownership claim, said that he had foreclosed a mortgage on the island that had been acquired years ago by his father, the late Charles Sumner Smith.
Smith said he had since transferred ownership of the island to his four children, and that they in turn had leased the land to Gibraltar for operation of the radio station.
A telephone call was placed to the Vanguard Service Corporation, consultants, in Miami late in 1963.
Gillingham said yes, the FCC does license stations broadcasting from the United States or its possessions.
Despite the fact that millions of persons watched the four televised debates between Richard M Nixon and John F Kennedy, the voters went to the polls without knowing the secret reasons for the public positions the candidates took on Cuba.
Behind the scenes, on both sides, there was deep concern over the pending CIA invasion.
To understand the secret drama that unfolded inside the Nixon and Kennedy camps in 1960 over the planned invasion, one must go back to a tradition that began in 1944.
In that year, wartime intelligence reports were made available to Thomas E Dewey, the Republican presidential candidate, by The 1960 Campaign—and Now ((339 President Roosevelt.
In 1952 President Truman made CIA data available to General Eisenhower and to Adlai Stevenson.
In 1956, following what by now had become an established custom, Eisenhower arranged CIA briefings for Stevenson.
On July 23 Allen Dulles, then Director of Central Intelligence, flew to Hyannis with two aides, James Brooke and Gates Lloyd.
The CIA men arrived in an Aero Commander that had the markings of a private plane.
Kennedy said these had been discussed “in detail” and indicated particular emphasis had been placed on Cuba and Africa.
On July 27 Dulles flew to the LBJ Ranch in Texas and remained overnight to brief Johnson.
Nixon and his aides did not know exactly how much, if anything, Kennedy knew about the invasion plan.
They certainly did not want the Democratic candidate to be able to claim credit for an invasion that might be launched by a Republican President.
It was President Eisenhower, after all, who had ordered the CIA to arm and train the exiles in May of 1960.
Nixon and his advisers wanted the CIA invasion to take place before the voters went to the polls on November 8.
He explained that Nixon was hoping for an invasion before the election because “it would have been a cinch to win” the presidency if the Eisenhower Administration—in which Nixon was the Number 2 man—had destroyed Castro in the closing days of the campaign.
The best documentation of this is an article by Herbert G Klein, press secretary to Vice-President Nixon during the 1960 campaign.
On March 25, 1962, writing in the San Diego Union, of which he was the editor, Klein revealed what had been going on behind the scenes in the Nixon camp in 1960.
We had stern instructions not to talk about this, and, despite many temptations, we protected security by remaining silent.
While the Nixon people were hoping the invasion would take place any day, that was exactly what the Kennedy strategists hoped would not happen.
They were receiving persistent, and disturbing, reports that some kind of Cuban exile operation was in the works.
The reports of invasion training were picked up from several sources, including alert members of the press.
George and Hank Walker went to Florida to shoot pictures for Life magazine of Cuban exiles training to invade their homeland.
George received several telephone calls from William Attwood, a member of Kennedy’s speech-writing staff. t Attwood was calling St.
George, Attwood expressed concern that the Republicans would try to launch an invasion of Cuba before election day.
George said the question, apparently, in the mind of the Kennedy aide was not whether there was to be an invasion, but when.
George told Attwood that there seemed little possibility of an immediate invasion, judging by the state of readiness of the *In April, 1959, after a long meeting with Castro in his office in the Capitol, Nixon drafted a confidential memo for the White House, the CIA and the State Department.
The one fact we can be sure of is that he has those indefinable qualities which make him a leader of men, Whatever we may think of him he is going to be a great factor in the development of Cuba and very possibly in Latin American affairs generally, He seems to be sincere, he is either incredibly naive about Communism or under Communist discipline—my guess is the former and as I have already implied, his ideas as to how to run a government or an economy are less developed than those of almost any world figure I have met in fifty countries.
This word was passed on to Robert Kennedy, who was managing his brother’s campaign.
At one point, there had been discussion among Kennedy strategists of the possibility of the candidate’s giving a speech anticipating the invasion that seemed to be brewing, and thereby neutralizing its political effect.
The idea of a formal speech was dropped, however, when investigation showed there was little possibility that an invasion could be launched before election day.
That afternoon, newsmen accompanying the Democratic candidate were alerted for an important statement by Kennedy.
Now, Nixon felt, Kennedy was trying to pre-empt a policy which the Vice-President claimed as his own.
Nixon wrote that he ordered Fred Seaton, Interior Secretary and a Nixon campaign adviser, “to call the White House at once on the security line and find out whether or not Dulles had briefed Kennedy on the fact that for months the CIA had not only been supporting and assisting but actually training Cuban exiles for the eventual purpose of supporting an invasion of Cuba itself.
I must not even suggest by implication that the United States was rendering aid to rebel forces in and out of Cuba.
He said it would violate “five treaties” between the United States and Latin America as well as the Charter of the United Nations.
All the next day, as the Republican candidate barnstormed through eastern Pennsylvania, members of the Nixon staff let it be known that they felt Kennedy had finally made a serious error.
We would violate right off the bat five treaties with the American States, including the Treaty of Bogota of 1948.
By the time he reached Wisconsin the next day, he was feeling the heat of the Nixon attack.
In North Carolina, Adlai Stevenson, campaigning for Kennedy, was alarmed at Kennedy’s stand on Cuba.
When he got through, THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((344 Stevenson warned that the statement urging aid to the exiles could develop into a political trap for Kennedy if he were elected.
In their conversation, Kennedy seemed embarrassed about the statement and implied it had been issued without adequate clearance.
He told Stevenson he would pull back from it, and regain a safer position.
On November 2 Kennedy had his last CIA briefing, this time from General Cabell, rather than from Dulles.
Kennedy had requested this briefing in order to be brought up to date on any last-minute international developments.
The CIA deputy director flew to Los Angeles and talked with the candidate aboard the Caroline, Kennedy’s Convair, during a flight from Los Angeles to San Diego.
In March of 1962, when Nixon charged in his book that Kennedy had been briefed about the Cuban invasion and had deliberately endangered its security, the White House issued an immediate denial, which was backed up by Allen Dulles.
He said Kennedy was first informed of the Cuban operation when Dulles and Bissell came to see him in Palm Beach on November 18, 1960, ten days after the election.
Eisenhower authorized Dulles to do so, and the CIA chief, with Bissell, flew to Palm Beach for the November 18 meeting.
My briefings were intelligence briefings on the world situation,” he said.
But there is no indication that Goodpaster checked with Dulles, or that Nixon or Seaton ever checked with Dulles directly.
Exactly what transpired during Dulles’ briefings of Kennedy ~—the nuances, the inflections, Dulles’ precise words when the question of Cuba arose—these will never be known for certain, since the meeting was top-secret and unrecorded.
The same applies to General Cabell’s briefing aboard the Caroline November 2.
But there is some evidence that Kennedy did not want to be told about operational matters—such as the Cuban invasion—because of the very fact that this might limit his freedom of action.
In any event, Nixon’s dispute with Kennedy and Dulles over who told what to whom missed the point.
Regardless of the content of the CIA briefings, the Kennedy camp had learned informally from other sources that an exile invasion was hatching.
The candidates for President of the United States were allowing their campaign strategy and public positions to be influenced by a secret operation of the Invisible Government.
Third, the question of whether President Eisenhower should have “apologized” to Khrushchev after the U-2 flight of Francis Gary Powers in order to save the Paris summit meeting.
In the case of the Cuban invasion, both candidates were concerned about a secret plan of which the electorate knew nothing.
In choosing the man to fill the most powerful elective office in the world, the voters were basing their decision, in part, on misleading statements.
As has been noted, one candidate, Vice-President Nixon, confessed considerably later that he took a false public position during the campaign, exactly the opposite of his true feeling, in order, he said, to protect the CIA invasion plan.
But the millions who watched Nixon and Kennedy argue the Cuban issue on television had no way of knowing that the facts were being distorted or suppressed.
This is not to suggest that the invasion plan should have been announced on nation-wide television.
But it does seem reasonable to ask how the voter can make an informed choice when a candidate is not telling the truth, for whatever laudable patriotic motivation.
Those who argue against tighter controls over the secret branches of the government are fond of making the case that the American system already has enough built-in safeguards.
During his term in the White House, he is free to run the government, including its secret machinery, as he sees fit.
But if the voters dislike how he is running the country, they can turn him out of office in four years.
For during every presidential election campaign, the great issues are debated, there is a full public accounting and the people can look, listen and make their intelligent choice.
That is what happened in 1960, and there is no reason to think it could not happen again.
When the public positions of candidates for President are shaped by secret operations which the voters are not enThe 1960 Campaign—and Now ((347 titled to know about, something has happened to the American system, and something for ill.
The Invisible Government participated in the presidential campaign of 1960.
By the midtwentieth century, under the pressures of the Cold War, the primary concern of the nation’s leaders had become the survival of the governed.
The Invisible Government emerged in the aftermath of World War II as one of the instruments designed to insure national survival.
But because it was hidden, because it operated outside of the normal Constitutional checks and balances, it posed a potential threat to the very system it was designed to protect.
He has asserted that he conceived of the CIA primarily as a co-ordinating and intelligence-gathering aid to a modern President who needed concise, centralized information on A Conclusion ((349 which to base national policy.
But by 1963 the intelligence apparatus had taken on dimensions which Truman said he had never anticipated.
Yet the Plans Division, which conducts the CIA’s special operations, was established in 1951 under President Truman.
And it was under Truman that Allen Dulles came to Washington to be the first director of that division.
Since Truman could not have been unaware of these events, the real question is whether the operational activities of the CIA have grown to a size and shape that Truman had not intended when he signed the 1947 Act.
Certainly, in the years since 1951, secret operations have grown greatly in size and number.
Nevertheless, CIA officials have insisted that the majority of these operations have been successful.
THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((350 As in the case of the Bay of Pigs, some of these operations have become so big that they cannot be practicably concealed or plausibly denied.
In other instances, clandestine activity has turned loose forces which have proved uncontrollable.
Around the world, the CIA has trained and supported elite corps designed to maintain internal security in pro-Western countries.
But these police units have sometimes become a source of acute embarrassment to the United States, notably in Vietnam, where CIA-financed special forces raided the Buddhist pagodas.
Despite these wide-ranging clandestine activities, and despite the importance, the power and the vast sums at the disposal of the CIA and the other agencies of the Invisible Government, there has not been enough intelligent public discussion of the role of this secret machinery.
In general, critics of the CIA have been hobbled by a lack of sure knowledge about its activities.
There is a sophisticated notion that the problems raised by a hidden bureaucracy operating within a free society can be resolved by limiting the CIA to intelligence-gathering and setting up a separate organization to conduct special operations.
The argument is that when the two functions are joined, as they are now, the intelligence-gatherers inevitably become special pleaders for the operations in which they are engaged.
There is little question that this has happened in the past and that it poses a continuing, basic problem.
But the difficulty is that an agent who is running a secret operation often is in the best position to gather secret information.
A CIA man involved in intrigues with the political opposition in a given country will very likely know much more about that opposition than an analyst at Langley or even the ambassador on the scene.
If the CIA were to be prohibited from carrying out secret operational activity and that task were to be turned over to another agency, it might be necessary to create another set of secret operatives in addition to the large number of CIA men already at work overseas, Such a situation would probably reduce efficiency, raise A Conclusion ((351 costs and increase the dangers of exposure.
The Taylor committee gtappled with the problem after the Bay of Pigs and came to the conclusion that the present arrangement is the lesser of two evils.
This problem, as important and complex as it may be, is secondary to the larger question of whether the CIA sets its own policy, outside of presidential control.
There are procedures which call for the approval of any major special operation at a high level in the executive branch of the government.
The public comments of Eisenhower on Guatemala and Kennedy on the Bay of Pigs demonstrated that they not only approved these operations, but took part in the planning for them.
However, many important decisions appear to have been delegated to the Special Group, a small and shadowy directorate nowhere specifically provided for by law.
But because the Special Group is composed of men with heavy responsibilities in other areas, it obviously can give no more than general approval and guidance to a course of action.
The CIA and the other agencies of the Invisible Government are free to shape events in the field.
They can influence policy and chart their own course within the flexible framework laid down by Washington.
In Costa Rica, for example, CIA officers did not see fit to inform the State Department when they planted a fake Communist document in a local newspaper.
In Cairo, “Mr X” slipped in to see Nasser ahead of the State Department’s special emissary.
In the Bay of Pigs planning, the CIA men selected the political leadership of the Cuban exiles.
Yet because of the existence of the Special Group and a generalized mechanism for approving operations, intelligence men have been able to claim that they have never acted outside of policy set at the highest level of the government.
In short, even when a clear policy has been established, a President may find it difficult to enforce.
Presidential power, despite the popular conception of it, is diffuse and limited.
The various departments and agencies under his authority have entrenched sources of strength.
In his relations with the Invisible Government, the President’s problems are compounded.
He cannot bring to bear against it the normal political THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((352 tools at his disposal.
He cannot go over the heads of the leaders of the intelligence community and appeal to the people.
A President operates under a constant awareness of the capacity of disgruntled members of the Invisible Government to undercut his purposes by leaking information to Congress and the press.
During the deliberations leading to the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy obviously realized the political dangers of canceling a plan to overthrow Castro which had been brought to an advanced stage by a Republican administration.
Similarly, during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, White House officials suspected that someone high in the CIA was attempting to undermine the President by providing the Republicans with information.
This suspicion reflected the fact that the Invisible Government has achieved a quasi-independent status and a power of its own.
But, on the other hand, it seems inescapable that some form of Invisible Government is essential to national security in a time of Cold War.
Therefore, the urgent necessity in such a national dilemma is to make the Invisible Government as reconcilable as possible with the democratic system, aware that no more than a tenuous compromise can be achieved.
Most important, the public, the President and the Congress must support steps to control the intelligence establishment, to place checks on its power and to make it truly accountable, particularly in the area of special operations.
The danger of special operations does not lie in tables of organization or questions of technique, but in embarking upon them too readily and without effective presidential control.
Special operations pose dangers not only to the nations against which they are directed, but to ourselves.
They raise the question of how far a free society, in attempting to preserve itself, can emulate a closed society without becoming indistinguishable from it.
The implication was that the CIA A Conclusion ((353 could justifiably respond in kind to the unscrupulous practices of the Soviet espionage machine.
It is a multi-purpose, clandestine arm of power that can in the last analysis carry out almost any act that the Soviet leadership assigns to it.
It is more than a secret police organization, more than an intelligence and counter-intelligence organization.
It is an instrument for subversion, manipulation and violence, for secret intervention in the affairs of other countries.
A free society has difficulty in adopting such practices because of its moral tradition that the end does not justify the means.
It must proceed with caution, alert to the danger of succumbing to the enemy’s morality by too eagerly embracing his methods.
Special operations should be launched only after the most sober deliberation by the President, acting upon the broadest possible advice.
This counsel should come not only from those within the intelligence community, but from responsible officials with a wider viewpoint.
Operations such as those at the Bay of Pigs and in Indonesia involved the potential overthrow of a foreign government.
They should be launched only when the alternative of inaction carries with it the gravest risk to national security.
If, nonetheless, it becomes necessary to undertake a secret operation, it is imperative that the long-range repercussions be weighed fully in advance.
Equal consideration must be given to the problems that would result from the success of a special operation.
It is a delusion to think that the problems of United States foreign THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((354 policy in a complex world can be resolved by the quick surgery of a palace coup.
The intelligence and espionage technicians, who have a natural affinity for such activist solutions, should never be allowed to dominate the deliberations leading to secret operations.
Nor should they be permitted exclusive control of the conduct of operations in the field.
Both Eisenhower and Kennedy directed that the ambassador be in charge of all United States activities in a foreign country.
An ambassador should never be put in the position of a William Sebald in Burma.
If he is to maintain the respect of the government leaders with whom he is dealing, he must be kept informed about American clandestine activity.
If circumstances dictate a covert policy that conflicts with the avowed policy of Washington toward a given country, the ambassador must know about it.
Under the Constitution, Congress is supposed to act as a check upon the activities of the executive branch.
Traditionally, the Senate has given its “advice and consent” to major commitments in the sphere of foreign affairs.
But in its relations with the Invisible Government, Congress has all but voted away its rights.
It knows relatively little about what goes on in the $4,000,000,000-a-year intelligence complex for which it appropriates the money.
The CIA subcommittees in the House and Senate are controlled by the most conservative elements in Congress, men who are close personally and philosophically to those who run the Invisible Government.
These subcommittees are now heavily weighted with legislators whose field of competence is military affairs.
They should be reorganized to encompass men with a wider view and expert knowledge of foreign affairs.
Men such as Senator Fulbright should not be purposely excluded from Congressional surveillance of the intelligence apparatus.
The shadowy subcommittees should be replaced by a joint committee, including men from both the House and Senate, There is no reason why secrets should leak in any greater degree from one formal committee than from the present group of informal subcommittees.
There has not been any leak of classified data from the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy.
A Conclusion ((355 Although the need for greater Congressional control is apparent, both President Eisenhower and President Kennedy resisted it as an infringement upon their executive power.
They established a veneer of outside control by creating advisory boards of private citizens.
Selected private citizens are privy to secrets of the Invisible Government, but the elected representatives of the people are denied any meaningful knowledge of the intelligence machinery.
Congress is not only ignorant of operations overseas, but it has been denied information about the increasing involvement of the Invisible Government in domestic activities.
The mandate to gather and analyze intelligence has been broadened into a justification for clandestine activities in the United States.
There should be a thorough reappraisal by private organizations and by the universities of the wisdom of their ties to the Invisible Government.
There is a real danger that the academic community may find itself so closely allied with the Invisible Government that it will have lost its ability to function as an independent critic of our government and society.
These unseen domestic activities of the CIA have become disturbingly complex and widespread.
To the extent that they can be perceived, they appear to be outside the spirit and perhaps the letter of the National Security Act.
No outsider is in a position to determine whether or not, in time, these activities might become an internal danger to a free society.
Both Congress and the Executive ought to give urgent attention to this problem.
In a free society attention should be given as well to the increasTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((356 ing tendency of the American Government to mislead the American people in order to protect secret operations.
U-2:; “There was absolutely no—N-O—no deliberate attempt to violate Soviet airspace.
Misleading statements related to covert operations have even distorted the electoral process, as was demonstrated in the presidential campaign of 1960.
It seems reasonable to suggest that there be fewer righteous declarations and less public misinformation by the government and, perhaps, more discreet silence in difficult circumstances.
The secret intelligence machinery of the government can never be totally reconciled with the traditions of a free republic.
But in a time of Cold War, the solution lies not in dismantling this machinery but in bringing it under greater control.
The resultant danger of exposure is far less than the danger of secret power.
Interview with Robert F Kennedy, in United States News & World Report, January 28, 1963.
Article by Harry S Truman, syndicated by North American Newspaper Alliance, in the Washington Post, December 22, 1963.
Interview with Allen Dulles, “Meet the Press,” National Broadcasting Company, December 31, 1961.
The Hot and Cold Wars of Allen Dulles,” Columbia Broadcasting System, April 26, 1962, 11.
Hearings, The President's Proposal on the Middle East, 446; joint meeting of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and Senate Committee on Armed Services, 85th Congress, 1st Session, February 1, 1957.
Hearings, Events Incident to the Summit Conference, 124; Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, 86th Congress, 2nd Session, testimony by Secretary of Defense Thomas S Gates, June 2, 1960.
Television interview with Allen Dulles by David Schoenbrun, Columbia Broadcasting System, August 18, 1963.
Hearing, Francis G Powers, U-2 Pilot, Senate Committee on Armed Services, 87th Congress, 2nd Session, March 6, 1962.
Statement Concerning Francis Gary Powers, Central Intelligence Agency, March 6, 1962.
This document was made public by Representative Carl Vinson, D., Ga., chairman of the House Committee on Armed Services, in advance of Powers’ public testimony the same day before the Senate Committee on Armed Services.
The former President later related the incident in the first volume of his presidential memoirs.
Interview with Robert F Kennedy by David Kraslow, in Miami Herald, January 21, 1963.
Senate Committee on Armed Services, Hearings on the nomination of John A McCone, January 18, 1962.
House Subcommittee on Appropriations, testimony by J Edgar Hoover, January 24, 1962.
Intelligence Activities, A Report to the Congress by the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, June 29, 1955.
National Security Organization, A Report to the Congress by the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, January, 1949.
Report to President Eisenhower by a special study group, October 19, 1954.
Compilation of Studies on United States Foreign Policy, 86th Congress, 2nd Session, prepared under the direction of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate.
Associated Press dispatch filed by Relman Morin in Cairo, in the Washington Post, August 15, 1958.
Broadcast by Miklos Ajtay, by Radio Free Europe to Hungary, November 3, 1956.
Crowell’s account, from which this and the following quotations are taken, appeared in the Falmouth Enterprise, July 6, 1962.
