The documents given are a map showing the location of Cuba and the range of the Cuban missiles, a photograph of Cuban missiles sites taken in October 1962, an extract of Robert Kennedy’s book, 13 Days describing events on Thursday 18th October, and a cartoon published in 1962 showing Khrushchev and Kennedy facing in an arm wrestling.
Fidel Castro, Ernesto “Che” Guevara and their “freedom fighters“sweep away the corrupted dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista and take over the capital Havana.
After they tried to conclude an agreement with the USA in vain, they turn to the USSR and China.
Cuban-American relationship become aggravated, the Castro regime officially becomes a communist one.
This is indeed under the direct threat of American nuclear missiles and bombers stationed in Europe through NATO and SEATO in Asia.
All those documents show that the USA stays the world leaders in spite of the danger of a 3rd World War weighing above them.
In the first part we are going to study the causes of the Cuban missile crisis and in the second part we are going to describe the crisis.
I] The causes A] The arms race The arms race developed into propaganda and intelligence war as well as a forum for technological rivalry.
Due to its localization, Cuba had an important place in the nuclear part of the war.
The ensuing crisis ranks with the Berlin Blockade as one of the major confrontations of the Cold War and is generally regarded as the moment in which the Cold War came closest to turning into a nuclear conflict.
United States troops leave the island, 28 January 1909, but the Americansretain control of Guantanamo …. montre plus Kennedy 3562 mots | 15 pages This marked the turning of the American National Security State apparatus against its own leadership.
After having overthrown, assassinated leaders, and orchestrated coups around the world, the moment its growing power was threatened by the civilian leadership in America, the apparatus of empire came home to roost.
The affluent society Industries resumed production on a much larger scale than ever.
The relations between these two countries began a long time ago where they were not independent yet.
Indeed, at first, America was a British colony and Cuba was under Spanish domination.
Nevertheless, America gradually gained a certain influence all over Cuba’s economy and politics.
