This season of anniversary and reflection provides us all with a remarkable opportunity to give thanks and to learn from the past.
We give thanks for the fact that, because of the wisdom and judgment of our leaders, we’re all here today, living in a relatively peaceful and prosperous world.
On a personal level, this was brought home to me when I had the chance earlier this afternoon to meet Sergei Khrushchev, who has done so much to increase understanding between the United States and his native country.
It was quite emotional to realize that when our fathers transformed the hours of danger into the beginning of peace they did it for us and for all children threatened by world at war.
Today, it is our collective obligation to carry on that legacy and learn from the past, and to believe in the possibility of peace.
There is no single simple key to this peace, no grand or magic formula to be adopted by one or two powers.
Signing that document was not a victory of one party over another, or one country over another, but a triumph of peace over war, of negotiation over faith, of faith over fear.
And the spoils of that victory are shared by all people wherever they live.
In retrospect, the outcome of the Missile Crisis almost seems preordained, but the lesson for us and our children is that it did not have to work out that way.
In fact, our discussion this afternoon will probably reveal how close the world came to experiencing a nuclear disaster.
In the months that followed, recognizing the dangers that they had so narrowly avoided, President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev agreed to install a hotline to improve communications between their two countries.
And they stood up to the hard-liners in their own governments in order to begin to dismantle the nuclear Sword of Damocles that threatened the entire world.
Let us also direct attention to our common interest and the means by which those differences can be resolved.
And if we cannot end our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity.
For in the final analysis, our most common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
The future that my father, Chairman Khrushchev, and the other world leaders of their time cherished is the present that each of us enjoys today.
We gather this afternoon to understand how, at the moment when we stood on the brink of a nuclear war, catastrophe was avoided.
And consider what lessons we can learn and apply to the perils that confront us today.
We are fortunate to have with us a distinguished panel of experts who bring perspectives from all sides of the crisis.
As the son of Nikita Khrushchev, and an accomplished engineer in his own right, Sergei Khrushchev accompanied his father on a number of major foreign trips, and meetings where Chairman Khrushchev transacted business with key leaders in the Soviet defense establishment.
Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., renowned historian, public intellectual and political activist, tremendous friend of this institution and all of our family.
Theodore Sorensen served as special counsel and advisor to President Kennedy.
He has been practicing foreign affairs in international law for over 34 years as a senior partner, senior counsel in the law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Morton, and Garrison.
He is now a Fellow at the John F Kennedy Institute of Politics at Harvard.
Josefina Vidal is the First Secretary of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington, D.C., the official voice of the Cuban government in our nation’s capital.
In that role, she was appointed this year by the Cuban Foreign Ministry to represent the Interests Section at the conference last week on the Missile Crisis convened by Fidel Castro in Havana, and to represent her country today at today’s forum.
Former Director of this Library Chuck Daly and Ambassador Kenneth Galbraith.
I want to thank all of you for coming and express my gratitude to our panelists for engaging in this historic discussion.
We’re going to proceed in a relatively orderly fashion, I hope, in a way that makes some historical sense.
From Sergei Khrushchev, my colleague at Brown, explaining a little bit of what may have been in his father’s mind when the idea arose to suggest the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
And then Josefina will say some things about why this particular overture was made in the first place.
And from there, I’d like to move to Ted Sorensen to say a few things just in an introductory way about the President’s approach to this problem.
And also something that I think fascinates all of us who know this only after the fact and from far away, of what the mood-what the feeling was like when people are actually sitting around debating what amounts to the fate of the world.
And then Arthur Schlesinger, our anchor man-I’d like Arthur to say some things if he would about this rather unusual President.
I was mentioning to my wife on the way into the Library this afternoon that almost everything we've learned about the Missile Crisis since 1962 suggests that it was much more dangerous than anyone could have imagined at the time.
And that is that we know a lot more now about President Kennedy and the way he managed his own administration and this Crisis.
And the more you know about the way he did that, the more improved you have to be.
So I’d like to turn to Sergei Khrushchev, whose office is just down the hall from mine in our brand new building in Providence, Rhode Island.
And who is the second most famous inhabitant of the state of Rhode Island after the controversial Mayor of Providence.
When we talk about why my father decided to send missiles to Cuba, you have to remember that, at the time of the Bay of Pigs, Fidel Castro announced that now he is on the Soviet side, he will be a part of the Socialist family.
It put obligation on the leader of the family, the same as the United States is the leader of the opposite family, to defend all their allies, all their friends, and all their clients.
We were told that, if we would try to do this diplomatically, no one would listen to us in the United Nations.
If we tried to bring the conversion arms as many as, as much as we can, still communication was so poor that Americans, would they want to invade, they would take over this.
And this way, it was not only our relations to the new revolutionary government and our positive feeling for the things, but it was the understanding, the selfunderstanding of the great nation and the leader.
We could not defend them, you will send the message to the opposite, or the rest of the world that you are weak.
You're just ready to give up this piece and then another piece of your family.
The problem was that he has his Soviet or Russian experience, very different than Americans.
So we didn’t too much care how many weapons were there until this government not making the decision to attack us.
And Americans was very-you and I-now I am also American-we are now very different because this country was secured by two oceans.
So when Americans found that enemies at the gate, just 90 miles from the shore, they went crazy to what they-just American psychological crisis.
Nobody could imagine that the Soviet Union would start the war with Americans.
And it is very important, because you're living in different cultures, you have this misperception and misunderstanding when we are making decisions.
Sometimes bringing us very close to the real war without any intentions.
There is a great deal of speculation around the Khrushchev decision to deliver these missiles secret.
I think what maybe happened, my father never could do that because he was a pragmatic.
If he signed this agreement in June and published this, I think that it was imposed in July before the first ship even left the Soviet port.
That showed that they, at that time, trusted each other more than any in the previous ten years.
They signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, established the hotline, the Soviet Union signed the Peace Treaty with Germany without any crisis.
And they were ready to go forward because my father told that, ""President Kennedy defended his ideology.
And it was some possibility that if they had stayed in power a little bit longer, maybe Cold War would have ended in the late ‘60’s.
Because in 1963, my father announced the program to reduce the Soviet armed forces to half a million, cyclic program, to stop production of the conventional arms.
And we need these resources to increase production of food and apartments.
And we returned to the same Cold War behavior, producing more and more weapons, and tens of thousands nuclear weapons, fully useless.
And it brought the Soviet Union just to the collapse half a century ago.
Would it maybe if they both stayed in power, seven or eight years longer, maybe it would still be reformed Soviet Union and maybe these friendly relations with the United States.
I’d like now to call on Josefina Vidal but, before I do that, I would like to reveal for the first time a piece of classified information about her.
Some of you may remember that, after the Bay of Pigs Invasion and the imprisonment of the members of Brigade 2506, Robert Kennedy took the lead in trying to put together the deal that would bring those prisoners back to the United States.
I’d like now to introduce a woman who, I think, all of us who have worked with her feel that you are now looking at the future of Cuba.
Thank you for inviting me here today to this panel with these prestigious members of the Kennedy administration and Mr Sergei Khrushchev.
But I remember growing up, and my father telling us about not being at home any time me or some of my brothers and sisters were born, because they were difficult times.
And almost every year, he had to go mobilize to different places of the island.
And I was born only two months before the Bay of Pigs and my brother was born during the Missile Crisis.
But we grew up listening to these stories, and I was curious all my life to learn more about all these years at the beginning of the Cuban Revolution.
And for us this crisis did not begin when the United States discovered the presence of missiles in Cuba, nor was this crisis limited to the 13 days that history reports.
After this failure, it became clear to the Cuban government that the United States administration would consider the use of it’s own armed forces in a direct invasion aimed at overthrowing the Cuban government.
We remember that right after the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion under the guidance of the White House, Operation Mongoose was launched in November, 1961.
And the goal of that operation was to overthrow the government of Cuba, provoking a revolt of the Cuban people as a basis for direct military intervention by United States armed forces.
By far, Operation Mongoose is considered the most ambitious and sinister plan against Cuba, as it included acts of sabotage and terrorism, covert operations, subversion, support from armed counterrevolutionary bands, psychological warfare, and assassination attempts against Cuba’s revolutionary leaders.
In parallel, following the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Pentagon developed a number of contingency plans for deploying United States forces in Cuba.
And carried out military exercises to prepare the forces that might be involved.
The military contingency plans, together with the increase of subversive actions against Cuba beginning early in 1962, were interpreted in Cuba as clear indications of an imminent, direct military aggression.
Faced with the likelihood of a direct military attack, the Cuban government adopted measures to strengthen its defensive capabilities and ensure its national security.
And at this moment, the Soviet Union was willing to supply the necessary weapons and military equipment.
On May 29, 1962, the Soviets proposed the installation of nuclear missiles on Cuban territory because they considered it to be the only way to deter a direct military intervention in Cuba.
And Cuba’s leadership decided to allow the missiles to be stationed in the island.
The Cuban government was convinced that missiles were not essential for the defense of Cuba.
And that the same objective could be accomplished by a military pact making clear that any aggression against Cuba would be equivalent to an attack on the Soviet Union.
But Cuba allowed the missiles to be deployed in Cuba in solidarity with the efforts of the Soviet Union in it’s aspiration to improve the balance of power-the balance of nuclear weapons following the deployment of Jupiter missiles bases in Turkey and Italy.
We had many differences with the Soviet Union at the time of the Missile Crisis.
And one of them was the secrecy surrounding the placement of nuclear missiles in our territory.
While the Soviet leadership insisted on a secret and covert deployment of the missile, Cuba argued from the outset the principle of the right of the Cuban people to defend themselves against United States aggression, and expressed the need to work out a mutual military accord, and to announce it publicly at the right moment.
But despite repeated warnings from Cuba, the Soviet leadership insisted the operation should not be announced until it was an accomplished fact which the United States would then have to accept.
And due to the political mishandlings of the secret operation of the Soviet leaders, the deployment of the missiles became the pretext used by the United States to justify the naval blockade of the island that marked the outbreak of the crisis on October 22, 1962.
The Cuban leadership learned from Radio Moscow broadcast about the Khrushchev agreement with Kennedy on October 28, ordering the removal of the missiles from our country.
The news of this agreement produced great indignation in the Cuban leadership who felt that Cuba had become a bargaining chip between the two superpowers.
This decision was taken without informing or consulting the Cuban leadership and without Cuba’s participation in the negotiations.
The withdrawal of the missiles was agreed upon without getting from the United States a firm commitment or satisfactory guarantee that it would not attack Cuba.
For Cuba, the danger did not end with the so-called Kennedy-Khrushchev agreements.
Not only did the United States armed forces maintain its naval blockade of Cuba for a few more weeks and continue low-altitude reconnaissance flights over the island, but the October Crisis led to the November Crisis over the presence of IL-28 planes in Cuba.
Furthermore, Operation Mongoose, the covert action operation, was dismantled.
In early ’63, the United States continued to contemplate proposals for different actions against Cuba as well as a wide range of economic and covert programs including assassination plots.
For the Cuban government, an acceptable resolution of the October Crisis for Cuba was not reached.
For Cubans, the crisis was a lesson that confirmed our belief that the way to defend our country was with our own forces without depending on support from abroad that might be subject to different factors of international politics.
We believed sincerely that, if the United States has not invaded Cuba after the Missile Crisis, it has not been out of respect for the 1962 agreement, but because of the high political and military costs that such an action would present.
The events of 1962 left behind feelings of disillusionment and bitterness in Cuba with regard to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union accepted all demands of the United States in order to solve that conflict, but without obtaining a firm commitment of non-aggression towards Cuba, and in complete disregard of the interests and opinion of the Cuban leadership, leaving the Cuban government completely out of the negotiation process.
From these experiences, the Cubans drew heartfelt lessons regarding the Soviet leadership’s ability in solving international conflicts.
As for the confrontation between the United States and Cuba, the resolution of the Missile Crisis or the October crisis, as we call it, did not go to the root of the problem.
Even though a war was avoided and the danger of direct military aggression against Cuba was pushed back, the roots of the problem were left intact with ever-present potential for aggression and violence.
A significant opportunity, in our opinion, was lost to resolve the conflict between our two countries definitely.
And for Cuba, after 43 years, we can still say that the Cold War is not over.
I’d like now to call on one of the great political writers that the country has ever known, Ted Sorensen.
Three of my students attended the recent Havana Conference and had never met Ted before or been in his presence.
A JFK press conference exchange which, I think, illustrates the question before us today.
There had been a fishing boat in the Caribbean, two U.S.-based fishermen in the boat found themselves being buzzed by a Soviet Mig.
There was somewhat of a mini-crisis in November over the IL-28s following the huge crisis in October over the nuclear missiles.
Obviously, nobody knew whether Cuban or Russian pilots were flying the plane.
But it was an international incident and it came up at President Kennedy’s press conference.
And he was asked the question by a reporter when he was trying to minimize it, because he was trying, of course, to get relations as back to normal as possible.
On October 16, the President and his advisors felt like they were in such a boat.
And Chairman Khrushchev was discovered to have suddenly, surreptitiously, secretly, under cover of deception, moved into Cuba, 90 miles from our shore, Soviet nuclear missiles of the medium and intermediate range class which were perfectly capable of reaching any major city in the United States and most of the western hemisphere.
The fact that it was done secretly, swiftly, and under cover of deception, direct deception by Chairman Khrushchev, himself and his foreign minister on a visit to President Kennedy during that very week made it look all the more like an offensive move, a threat.
And one that the United States had to take seriously and had to respond to if it was to not only protect its own citizens, but show its allies in the world that it was willing to stand up to Soviet nuclear threats.
Because if we would not do so when they were 90 miles off our shores, they could hardly depend upon us to do so if the threat were to Berlin or to some other locale in western Europe, a far distance from our shores.
And he called together those whose judgment he wanted to advise him on that response.
And on October 20, 1962, exactly 40 years ago this afternoon, we called him back from the political speaking tour he was on, on that day being in Chicago.
All the possible diplomatic options, all the possible means of getting rid of the weapons of mass destruction that might be hurled upon us.
Somehow, we didn’t think that removing the Chairman of the Soviet Central Committee regime change would accomplish much by way of safeguarding our interests.
But the President then spoke to the nation on the Monday evening that followed, two days later, including a special address-you weren’t old enough to hear it, Josefina -to the Cuban people, making clear that Cuba was not our enemy, that the Cuban people were certainly not our enemies, and that this was a contest in the Cold War between two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union.
And I must say, with great respect, Josefina, that Cuba was not the highest priority in United States foreign policy in those days.
But President Kennedy had no interest in a regime change in Cuba either.
The threat was the Soviet Union and its weapons of mass destruction poised to strike the United States.
And so, as Sergei said, he did keep the channels of communication open between the White House and the Kremlin.
And negotiations if possible were the only way to obtain the removal of those missiles without a large loss of life on the part of Americans, Russians, or Cubans.
They show that it was the leadership of John F Kennedy-cool, calm, persistent, objective leadership that steered us through those 13 days, insisting that we find a solution that would not lead to nuclear war, insisting that we not drive Chairman Khrushchev into a corner where his only choices were humiliation or escalation.
Because he clearly would be required to choose escalation under those circumstances.
But the conference last week in Havana brought to my mind and Arthur’s and Bob McNamara’s-all of us who participated-as never before, how close the world 40 years ago came to stumbling into a nuclear exchange that would have escalated very quickly on both sides to a nuclear Holocaust that would have left both countries in ruins, and soon most of the world as well.
The Soviets thought they could sneak missiles into Cuba without the United States finding them, or reacting to them.
The United States thought the Soviet Union would never place nuclear weapons outside of it own borders because it never had before.
The Joint Chiefs recommended that President Kennedy invade Cuba, following an air strike against the missile sites and all other relatively potential hostile sites in Cuba.
Because they were certain that no nuclear warheads were in Cuba at the time.
Had President Kennedy followed the Joint Chiefs’ recommendation and launched those air strikes against the missile sites followed by an invasion, we now know-but we did not know at that time-the Chiefs did not know at that time that Soviet commanders in Cuba were armed with tactical nuclear weapons.
And clearly, had they used nuclear weapons against an American force, we would have responded with nuclear weapons and the world would be fast heading for disaster.
We thought that the so-called quarantine, in effect, a blockade against-not against food for the Cuban people, not against oil and petroleum for the Cuban people-but a blockade only against more Soviet military offensive weapons, parts, and supplies for the missiles.
We were convinced that that quarantine, as we called it, was the most peaceful, the least belligerent option of those available to us.
It turned out, as we discovered and discussed in Cuba last week, that the Soviet submarines accompanying the supply ships as they approached the quarantine barrier were equipped with nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
It is now known that the commander of each submarine had the authority to fire such torpedoes in times of extreme urgency.
It is also known that the captain of one of those ships, when discovered by a destroyer in the quarantine barrier that was dropping depth charges on the submarine, felt that the time had come to fire the nuclear torpedoes.
Two other signatures besides the captain’s were required on the order, we were told.
The third one felt that everybody would be better off waiting for a direct word from Moscow.
And it was that one unknown Soviet submariner that probably saved the world from being blown to smithereens.
We like to congratulate ourselves, especially here at the Kennedy Library, on superb crisis management.
As we were coming back last week from the remains of a Soviet missile site in Pinar del Rio in western Cuba, our colleague, who is a chief organizer of that conference from the National Security Archive, leaped to his feet, having forgotten one of the essential things he was supposed to do.
It can be argued further that it was the most dangerous moment in human history.
Because never before had two contending powers possessed between them the technical capacity to blow up the world.
This was an unprecedented moment in the history of humankind, and we’re lucky to have survived it.
Much of the analysis of the Missile Crisis goes back to the Bay of Pigs.
The Bay of Pigs was not an adventure that Kennedy would have initiated.
The disposal problem was what to do with the 1200 Cuban exiles who had been trained for almost a year in Guatemala.
They would say that the Eisenhower administration was prepared to go forward and to take Castro out and the new Kennedy administration was showing the like fetter.
This would, Mr Dulles said, have great impact in Latin America in strengthening the appeal of Fidel Castro.
If he cancelled-a former naval lieutenant vetoed-an expedition ordained, organized, and blessed by the commander of the greatest amphibious landing in history, June 6, 1944, he would have been subject to severe criticism.
The expedition was, as some historian described it, the perfect failure.
It necessarily left the impression on the minds of both Havana and Moscow that the United States would, in time, invade Cuba itself.
Though President Kennedy had no idea of invading Cuba by military force, I do now see how one can easily understand why the Castro government and the Khrushchev government felt otherwise.
Kennedy’s main objective, main policy toward Latin America was the Alliance for Progress.
The Alliance for Progress was a multilateral effort to raise living standards and strengthen democratic institutions throughout South America, throughout Latin America.
A great showcase for the Alliance for Progress was Venezuela which had, at that time, a progressive democratic government under Romulo Betancourt.
Fidel Castro was involved in supporting and arming guerrillas seeking to overthrow the Betancourt regime in Venezuela.
That was one reason why the Kennedy administration regarded the Castro regime in Cuba as an impediment to the peace.
Another reason was that the possibility that Cuba might become a Soviet military base in the midst of the center of American zone of and this, too, should be considered in the background of Operation Mongoose.
But this strengthened the Soviet view and the Cuban view that we were bound on invasion.
Fortunately, the Bay of Pigs, which took place in the first few weeks of the Kennedy Administration, was an important, significant, effective, and expensive education for President Kennedy.
I remember going into his office one day in the spring of 1961, and he said, ""If it weren’t for the Bay of Pigs, we might be deeply involved militarily in Laos,"" he said, showing me some telegrams from the general Lemnitzer, the Chairman of the Joint Chief, urging military intervention in Laos.
And that was why he had not hesitated about rejecting their recommendations during the Missile Crisis.
I think, you look back at the Missile Crisis, I do not think that there was ever a moment when the United States or the Soviet Union would have initiated war.
But the great concern of Kennedy and the great concern probably of Khrushchev, too, was the issue of command and control.
Strangelove situation where the mad general launched a nuclear weapon directed toward Moscow.
And Kennedy understood this, and took every precaution to make sure that nothing would go wrong down the line.
We learned last week at the conference more vividly than ever before the extent of the Cuban resentment of the Soviet Union.
He would have liked to have joined the Warsaw Pact, or have Soviet troops stationed in the island.
By the way, we learned that there were 42,000 Soviet troops in the island.
Fidel Castro then argued for making this a public transaction, doing it in the open.
That would have made it very difficult for the United States to respond, because there was nothing illegal about the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
But Khrushchev’s insistence on secrecy and deceit gave, in a certain sense, a moral advantage to the United States.
Then when Castro, having made this great sacrifice for the benefit of the solidarity of the socialist bloc, when he turned on the radio toward the end of October and discovered, and heard for the first time that Khrushchev had decided to withdraw the Soviet missiles, the solidarity of the socialist bloc did not extend to the consultation or even the notification of Cuba that this was going to happen.
And I got the impression at the recent Havana meeting that Castro was far madder at Khrushchev than he was at Kennedy.
It was this disillusionment of Castro which led to Kennedy’s effort to explore the possibility or normalization of relations in the autumn of 1963.
Castro communicated his rage, his disillusionment, his disenchantment with the Soviet Union to Sekou Ture, the Dictator of Guinea.
And Sekou Ture communicated some of this to the American Ambassador to Guinea, Bill Attwood.
Bill Attwood got polio, a mild attack of polio, and returned to the United States.
And while recuperating, was assigned to work with Adlai Stevenson at the United Nations.
Attwood, having learned that Castro was fed up, or seemed to be fed up with the Soviet Union, conceived the idea of a normalization of relations, at least an exploration thereof.
He got the support of Averell Harriman, of Robert Kennedy, of McGeorge Bundy for this project, and JFK heartily endorsed it.
Bill Attwood and Lechuga, the Cuban Ambassador to the U.N., worked out the modalities of it.
Ambassador Lechuga has written a book about this effort, which seems to be unknown.
If they had ever wanted to invade Cuba, the most reasonable pretext for it was presented by the Cuban acceptance of nuclear missiles.
And JFK who decided, I think was always determined on the peaceful removal of the missiles, decided against it.
I tell you, the Kennedys, in the summer and the autumn of 1963, were all behind the exploration of the normalization of relations.
It’s even scarier now that we know the full possibilities of horror and holocaust.
We were very lucky to have leaders in the United States and the Soviet Union of wisdom and restraint-belated restraint in the Soviet days, perhaps.
If you'd like to ask a question of our distinguished panel, I ask you to step up to the microphone in the center aisle.
Please, if you don't mind, state your name, and it’s always interesting to know where you're from.
Also, please try to be as brief and succinct as possible so that those behind you could also ask a question.
The embargo should have been removed with the end of the Cold War, if not before.
The end of the Cold War meant that Castro was no longer a possibility for the Soviet military base, and he’d long since ceased his support of guerrilla operations of armed conflict in Latin America.
The best way to deal with the Castro revolution would be to drown it in a flood of American tourists, American investors.
I think that all the embargo and blockading with any country only increases tension.
And if you're lifting embargo, it will help this country to the transformation to a better life, and to the democracy, and will help people.
If you impose an embargo, you're just punishing the ordinary people, not the leaders of the countries.
Well, I’ll speak first because that way Josefina can rebut me, which she will want to do.
I agree with Arthur that it’s a long time overdue that the embargo should have been dropped.
American merchants and farmers are having a natural market of theirs taken over by Canadians and French and Germans and Swiss and Mexicans, and everyone else.
Second, I think that Fidel, having been nice enough to invite Arthur and me and others down there last week, I am concerned that dropping the embargo may upset him because he uses the embargo to blame the failure of the Cuban economy.
I don't know whether the Cuban government is interested in negotiating a range of issues between the United States and Cuba.
The embargo is one of them, and I think that we ought to be able to negotiate away.
But I would hope that the Cubans would be able to enter into the negotiations on other issues, including democratization, including the release of political prisoners.
With all due respect, I have to disagree with the idea that the embargo is convenient for us.
This is one of the reasons why we have a staff in Washington, working very hard for many years now in order to educate American people to understand that we want the lifting of the embargo.
At least we are able now to buy food in the United States, which is the first step in many years.
At the panel at the Kennedy School of Government Friday in which Mr Sorensen participated, there were some interesting remarks made regarding whether President Kennedy had authorized attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro.
If that question is aimed at me, let me say I don't have any doubt in my mind.
I testified before the Church Committee that President Kennedy would never have authorized attempts to assassinate President Castro.
Assassination efforts by the CIA began, not only with respect to Cuba, but with respect to Congo and other countries, under the previous administration.
It may well be that those efforts continued during the Kennedy administration.
It is even possible that Robert Kennedy, who headed a special committee, was aware of some of those efforts.
But I do not believe that President Kennedy would have ever endorsed them.
The Eisenhower administration hired ""The Mob"" to-they established Sam Giancana and John Rosselli in a Miami hotel in August of 1960, months before Kennedy became President.
I do not believe that Eisenhower or Kennedy knew about or authorized these assassination projects.
I believe that the CIA, operating under the possible deniability creed, kept the word from the President.
Dick Helms testified before the Church Committee that they had not informed John McCone, who Kennedy brought in to clean up the CIA after Dulles resigned.
They had not told John McCone about the assassination efforts, the assassination operations.
I look at the panel, and there seems to be unanimity against the embargo.
So I’m assuming that the gentleman advised Kennedy to give Cuba to the Soviet Union at the time in order to avoid the crisis.
But I believe that the whole shift in American foreign policies from containment and deterrence on the one hand to preventive war on the other is a most dangerous and ominous shift.
There were people who were in favor of preventive war during the Cold War.
Fortunately, none of them ever came into power in any democratic state.
But the basis of Minority Report was a group of people known as precogs, who were so psychically equipped to foretell crimes that have not yet been committed in time to avert those crimes.
Well, I think that Donald Rumsfeld and Vice President Cheney are a couple of Precogs.
I tell you history is filled with surprises, and continues to outwit our certitudes and to arrest war-life and death-particularly in this dangerous world, on your capacity to foretell the future is a very risky enterprise.
I don't think that I’m the right person to advise President Bush, the American President.
I say what I learned about presidential decision-making I learned at the feet of a pretty good teacher, John F Kennedy.
And I learned from him not to make a decision of life or death, war or peace, without having all the information, and having the opportunity to review all the options.
As I said in the previous remarks, the military options, the diplomatic options, all of the options.
Strangely enough, not having been consulted by President Bush, I don't have all the information, I haven't had any opportunity to see all the options.
And there are other ways to get rid of those weapons of mass destruction than a preemptive strike, I’m convinced.
I would like to-first of all, to say that while I was with the administration at that time, I was not involved.
I had been given charge of war in Asia between the Chinese and the Indians over a territory that nobody knew previously had existed.
It was the kind of military operation-the only kind of military operation in which I could rejoice.
The further observation I have to make was after that fuss in India and China was over, as it suddenly was over, and not through any intervention of us, I was back in Washington.
The advice that we've had here tonight from the people who have assembled for this discussion is very much as I would wish it.
And I end these remarks with my wish in which I trust everybody in this room shares, that we could have the four men and the distinguished woman that have been here tonight take charge of our policy in relation to Iraq.
I don't know what Josefina may be thinking about becoming a member of the National Security Council.
Before we close, I’d like to thank collectively-I’d like all of us to thank collectively our four panelists, our four distinguished and diverse panelists.
On the evening of October 26, 1962, a young 22-year-old man from Minnesota was holed up in a basement apartment in Greenwich Village owned by the folksinger, Dave Van Ronk.
He was known as Bob Zimmerman, but by that time had preferred the name Bob Dylan.
And he wrote that song, so he told a biographer later on, so that each line could serve as the last line in case there was no time to write any more lines.
For you out there who don't recall this, I’d suggest that you think about this event at least every October.
We don't have a physical presence to go to here, but I’d urge you to keep that flame alive long after all of us up here have gone.
