The U.S.A, Soviet Union, and Cuban countries were so close they could feel nuclear war breathing down their necks.
The build up of these missiles, and the problems faced in October of 1962 are known as the Cuban missile Crisis.
On October twenty second, 1962, John F Kennedy, who that evening revealed the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba, the crisis was nearly a weak old.
This declared that the purpose of these bases could be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere.
Kennedy called for a prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons under the United Nations supervision.
Actually taken five months earlier, it was both a high-stakes gamble and the logical product of sustained provocation.
In Fact, the soviet leader had persuaded his politburo colleagues that United States aggression against Cuba was all too likely and could only be overcome by the installation of the medium-range R-12 ballistic missiles and intermediate-range R-14 ballistic missiles and that specially trained people had to go Cuba to make them operational.
Between October fourteenth and October twenty-eighth 1962 the world was never closer to a nuclear war, than the events that happened during those thirteen days of the Cuban missile crisis.
The United States had John F Kennedy, the Soviet Union had Nikita Khrushchev, and Cuba had Fidel Castro, a dictator over Fulgenico Bftista.
Throughout the late summer and early autumn of 1962, Americans became increasingly disturbed at the rapid buildup of Soviet military assistance to the Republic of Cuba.
The situation increased in intensity as the governments of the United States and the Soviet Union exchanged hostile statements.
The Kremlin indicated that the increase of arms and technicians to Cuba was required by the continuous threats by aggressive imperialist circles with respect to Cuba.
On the twenty-fifth of October, U-2 planes took pictures of the missiles in Cuba.
After that, during September, President Kennedy increased the schedule of U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
Each of these flights confirmed that their was more and more to discover in Cuba.
With these cities targeted the Soviets and Cubans had the power to kill two-hundred-million people a day.
The force used for the invasion wasn’t United States soldiers, but about one-thousand five hundred Cuban exiles.
After the crisis, in December of 1962, the United States exchanged $53 million worth of United States supplies to Cuba for the safe return of the exiles.
The United States ships stopped all ships going to Cuba to check for missiles or parts.
He spurned the normal diplomatic channels in favor of a naval blockade, an act of war.
Rather than present to the Soviet Union and ultimatum in private before the presence of the missiles was of the United States was disclosed to the world, Kennedy decided to place the prestige of the United States on the line by public confrontation.
On the twenty-eighth of October, Castro panicked and said he was going to have the missiles fired, Khrushchev thought that was unnecessary and gave into United States demands.
On the twenty-eighth Khrushchev ordered the missiles out of Cuba, and the crisis ended without a nuclear war.
After the crisis was over Kennedy, chose not to say or do anything that might be degrading to Castro, Kennedy didn’t want to humiliate him any more.
The conference went well and the issues were better understood afterward.
