The Soviet decision to cooperate with the Harvard project reflects the new foreign-policy line under Gorbachev.
As Soviet rhetoric shifts from confrontation with the West to cooperation, the missile crisis is being held up as a case study in how the superpowers avoided a nuclear apocalypse by their willingness to compromise.
Until now, scholars have relied on the records and recollections of United States administration officials in reconstructing the most dangerous postwar confrontation between the superpowers.
A sign of the revelations still to come was provided recently by the former Soviet ambassador to Cuba, Alexander Alexeev, who related his reminiscences in a Soviet magazine, Planetary Echo.
The article was the first detailed account of the crisis by a ranking Soviet participant.
Alexeev, who will participate in the conference, asserted that some of the 42 Soviet missiles in Cuba were fully operational by the time the United States announced its blockade of the island.
Alexeev also said a local Soviet commander was responsible for shooting down an American U-2 plane over Cuba on Oct., 1962, triggering the most tense phase in the two-week crisis.
It is now clear that neither President Kennedy nor Nikita Khrushchev, then the Soviet leader, ever learned the truth about this vital episode.
They interpreted it as a sign that Khrushchev was ready to go to war over the missiles.
Khrushchev's memoirs indicate he was convinced the Cubans had shot down the U-2.
Soviet officials have told the Harvard team that a high-level military cover-up kept Khrushchev in the dark.
The six-man Cuban delegation will be headed by Vice President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez.
Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., will head the United States delegation, which also will include John Kennedy Jr., former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, former National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, former White House special counsel Ted Sorensen, former White House press secretary Pierre Salinger and Gen.
William Smith, former chief aide to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
In his article in Planetary Echo, Alexeev gave a dramatic description of a Kremlin meeting in May 1962 at which Khrushchev announced his decision to deploy missiles in Cuba.
Alexeev said the key motivation was the wish to protect Cuba from a United States military intervention.
Alexeev said Castro reacted angrily when Khrushchev decided to dismantle the missiles without consulting or informing him.
At the same time, Putin suggested the tension was much lower that during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis because RussianUnited States relations have moved on since the Cold War.
He also said he believes the United States is listening to Moscow's concerns about its missile plans.
Putin said his relationship with United States President George W Bush helps solve problems in relations with the United States, calling him a friend.
State Department spokesperson Sean McCormack disputed the comparison of the missile crisis with the missile defence system.
The letters revealed that Kennedy was not bound, as Americans thought he was, by a public pledge he made not to invade Cuba in return for the Soviet removal of nuclear missiles they had covertly placed in Cuba in October 1962.
Kennedy never considered the agreement with Khrushchev to be binding and continued to retain the option of an invasion.
But what the letters don't reveal is that it wasn't until 1983 that the secret agreement between the State Department and the White House to keep that option open was reversed.
It happened 21 years after the Kennedy-Khrushchev pact when the United States finally got a president that the State Department feared might actually invade Cuba Ronald Reagan.
It is evident from a series of still-classified documents we have seen on the missile crisis, that State Department legal experts reversed themselves on the interpretation of the agreement, apparently because they were afraid Reagan would use the 21 years of classified, back-and-forth legal debate as justification to invade.
An understanding The Kennedy-Khrushchev letters America's first nuclear weapons agreement with the Soviet Union were not, in fact, an agreement at all, but an understanding.
For years, as far as the American public knew, the United States was under a pledge not to invade Cuba because of the peaceful resolution of the missile crisis.
This year, because of a four-year-long effort by an indefatigable group, the private National Security Archives, the letters were declassified to coincide with a conference in Cuba on the missile crisis.
The National Security Archives is still seeking several hundred related documents, but so far, the State Department is refusing to turn them over.
Our associate Dale Van Atta has obtained several of these top-secret documents.
They reveal that Kennedy was a shrewd bargainer who resisted Khrushchev's attempts to pin him down to a firm promise to leave Cuba alone.
The world thought the crisis ended on Oct., 1962, when Khrushchev blinked and both men said they had reached an agreement.
But it began in earnest again five days later when Kennedy sent the Soviets a new and expanded list of the weapons he wanted taken out of Cuba.
That list went far beyond the nuclear missiles that had sparked the crisis in the first place.
The list is still classified ""secret,"" and it includes surface-to-surface missiles, bombers, missile launching equipment and torpedo boats and a host of support systems.
He sent his brother Robert Kennedy to a meeting with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Room to bargain More classified documents reveal that Kennedy was inflating the list so he had some room to bargain.
But the two men still had no binding agreement about an invasion, and Khrushchev knew it.
Then, the classified record reveals a memo from State Department lawyers changing their minds.
Our sources say they began calling the non-invasion pledge binding because of a trigger-happy president.
The record of agreements between superpowers, particularly when nuclear weapons are involved, should not be kept a secret for 30 years while government officials interpret those agreements based on their own whims.
In several galleries of displays, visitors follow the progress of the crisis while looking at artifacts as a 35foot-long Soviet SA-2 missile; the silvery engineering model of the USSR's Sputnik, the world's first artificial satellite; film canisters from the U-2 spy planes that took the telling photos of missile sites under construction in Cuba; Cuban and American photos; and newspaper pages from the period.
Also on view are props from the new movie ""Thirteen Days,"" starring Kevin Costner.
The film is based on Robert F Kennedy's book of the same name about the crisis.
Ranging beyond a narrow focus on the crisis, the museum paints a picture of the Cold War atmosphere.
There's even a classroom bulletin board re-created by Joan Hammill, a third-grade teacher at St.
A timeline introduces museum visitors to the crisis, which is delineated day by day.
It starts with the first reports of missile sites being prepared in Cuba and follows with President John F Kennedy's sobering announcement to the nation of the situation, the shooting down of an American U-2 plane over Cuba, the messages and negotiations between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the naval blockade imposed by the United States and the almost unbearable tension that followed as millions wondered whether it would lead to war.
That Fidel Castro, for instance, was so angered by Khrushchev's agreement not to attack U-2 planes that he defiantly went to a anti-aircraft site to shoot one down himself.
The huge SA-2 missile will be housed in its own gallery with its nose pointed directly at a replicated window of a home.
The missile is not yet in place; it is to be delivered by the Defense Intelligence Agency after its warhead is removed.
Museum personnel went to Havana to get current and historical materials from the Cuban Museum of the Revolution, the National Library and other sources.
They also bought dozens of well-executed paintings from street vendors.
The props used in the ""Thirteen Days"" movie are extraordinarily detailed.
One is a multipage dossier on Khrushchev, another on Aleksandr Fomin, the KGB chief in Washington who was a go-between in the negotiations.
A Zenith radio from the period was used, along with a Civil Defense siren and bus posters.
Each character was supplied with well-researched personal items, such as the Pall Mall cigarettes smoked by Secretary of State Rusk.
Other exhibits include a Russian general's uniform, a pressure suit and helmet used by U-2 pilot Al Rand and a hat said to have belonged to Raul Castro.
JAMES C ALVORD; Alvord is a San Diego attorney and a free-lance writer.
Brugioni, a world-class aerial reconnaissance expert with 35 years of CIA experience, does make a capable tour guide for this trip back to the Cuban missile crisis.
The author's self-admitted role as a damage-control operative for the CIA and his unabashed pride in carrying out various disinformation assignments for the agency create more than a reasonable doubt about this version of American history.
While we may question the author's hidden agenda, the man does know his aerial reconnaissance.
And, in Brugioni's book, the best view of the crisis is from 72,500 feet above Cuba.
As a member of the National Photographic Interpretation Center, Brugioni's job in 1962 was to make sense of the U-2's long-distance snapshots and to help brief President John F Kennedy on just what it was he was looking at.
On Oct., 1962, what Kennedy was looking at was a series of nuclear-tipped missiles aimed at the Unites States.
Two days earlier, a U-2 flight out of McCoy Air Force Base in Orlando, Fla., conducted a photo mission over Cuba.
From a distance of more than 14 miles straight up, the powerful cameras of the spy plane had captured six long, canvas-covered objects.
Photo interpreters subsequently determined the objects to be offensive missiles.
While the threats, posturing and negotiations that followed have been told many times, Brugioni offers the CIA perspective.
We see a wimpish Adlai Stevenson, adroit at United Nations speech-making but inwardly afraid to stand up to the Soviets.
President Dwight Eisenhower, the man who paved the way for the original U-2 spy missions in 1954, is seen as a most positive fellow, fascinated by the technology of it all and ever supportive of the need for a bigger and better spy paraphernalia.
Tracing the history that brought the world to the nuclear brink, the author describes Ike's role as that of a genuine American hero.
When U-2 pilot Gary Francis Powers is shot down over the Soviet Union, Ike's phony cover story to the Russians and the American public about a weather research project gone bad is dismissed not as a lie or deception but rather as a virtual necessity.
President Kennedy is likewise cast as a tough leader, courageous and unafraid to fight.
Although his mind was seemingly made up from his first exposure to the overhead shots of Cuba, Kennedy sought the advice of many around him.
Most seemed to think a strategic strike to take out the missiles was the least we could do.
Soviets in this tale are consistently portrayed as colossal blunderers while United States military figures are the ultimate straight-shooters awaiting only the order to fire.
Brugioni, a hopeless loyalist when it comes to fellow CIA members, describes the agency's new director, John McCone, as having ice water instead of blood flowing through his veins.
An ironic and possibly crucial bit of information is dished out but then forgotten by the author.
Lee Harvey Oswald, accused killer of President Kennedy, was a 17-year-old Marine assigned to a radar installation at Atsugi Naval Air Station in Japan while that base was used as staging area for U-2 flights.
Despite the fact that Brugioni can't seem to stop cheering for the home team, his book does offer a wealth of inside information that is at once both frightening and fascinating.
Above all, the book serves to remind us that once there was a time when the end of the world wasn't all that far away.
According to a top Soviet officer, the Soviet Union secretly sent short-range nuclear weapons to Cuba during the crisis and authorized their use against a United States invading force.
Gribkov, who was in Cuba at the time of the crisis, made the disclosure at a Havana conference that ended Sunday.
The crisis, precipitated by the United States discovery of intermediate-range Soviet missiles in Cuba, was defused when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the medium-range missiles in exchange for a pledge by President John Kennedy not to invade the island.
Robert McNamara, Kennedy's Defense secretary and a participant at the meeting, said it was ``99%'' sure Kennedy would have ordered nuclear retaliation on Cuba and perhaps the Soviets as well if United States forces had been attacked.
McNama ra was quoted in today's editions of The Washington Post as saying he didn't know about the presence of the short-range warheads in Cuba until the Soviet general's disclosure.
The State Department Monday lamented the death sentence handed down by a Cuban court to three Miami residents accused of subversion.
The three Cuban exiles Daniel Candelario Santovenia, 36, Pedro de la Caridad Alvarez Pedroso, 26, and Eduardo Diaz Betancourt, 38 were arrested Dec. aboard a small boat, reportedly carrying explosives and other weapons.
Relatives have asked President Bush to intercede, but Tutwiler said the task is made more difficult by the fact that none of the three is a United States citizen.
U.S.-China trade talks opened last week over United States claims that China has pirated of United States copyrights and patents.
United States Trade Representative Carla Hill, calling China one of the worst violators of United States copyrights, now has set a Thursday deadline for Beijing to specify how it will assure copyright protection.
China has said it was weighing retaliating by imposing high tariffs on $1. billion worth of United States goods.three dams along the Tigris and Euphrates rivers would have resulted in catastrophic economic damage and put Baghdad under two feet of water, the newspaper said.
As a ruse, the newspaper said the United States planted word in Baghdad that it would be at tacked with nuclear weapons if Saddam Hussein carried out his threat of chemical or biological warfare.
Perhaps the most eye-opening revelation in Garthoff's article is the presence in Cuba of 42,000 Soviet soldiers in the fall of 1962.
Nikita S Khrushchev, then the Soviet leader, decided to secretly place nuclear-tipped SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba without a formal decision by the policy-making Politburo.
Khrushchev considered running a naval blockade ordered by Kennedy but was dissuaded by Anastas Mikoyan, then deputy Soviet premier.
Khrushchev did not authorize a proposal by the KGB station chief in Washington, Aleksandr Fomin, to John Scali, an American journalist, that was long thought to have been the key to ending the crisis.
Soviet leaders hurriedly cut a diplomatic deal to get their missiles out of Cuba because they thought a United States invasion of the Caribbean island was imminent.
The decision to shoot down a American U-2 spy plane over Cuba in the crisis was made by a Soviet one-star general on the scene, Igor Statsenko, and surprised Khrushchev, helping spur him to lower tension.
Fyodor Burlatski, who was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle, and Sergo Mikoyan, who is the son of Anastas Mikoyan and an expert on Soviet-Cuban relations.
Garthoff also quoted a number of unidentified Soviet officials who he said were well-placed but not ready to step into the spotlight.
More disclosures are possible at an international conference on the Cuban missile crisis.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion Associated Press , 'SOVIETS OPEN UP ON CUBAN CRISIS ', St.
In World War II, he was an electrical technician on the USS Oyster Bay in New Guinea, which provided food, fuel and ammunition to torpedo boats traveling to fight in the Pacific theatre.
While he could have left the military after the war, Tarka chose to stay.
His included deployments in the Korean War on the on the aircraft carrier USS Essex, and to the Mediterranean afterward, as the chief electricians mate aboard the USS Halfbreak.
He circumnavigated Africa during the Suez Canal Crisis in 1956, and was part of a blockade along the South American coastline during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
Before he retired in 1967, he deployed to Vietnam as the executive officer on the oil tanker USS Tappahannock.
He work for military contractors in New London, doing technical writing and testing new equipment.
His wife of 59 years, Anna, died in 2010, but he has three daughters, Donna, Cynthia and Julie, plus seven grandchildren and eight great grandchildren.
He does a lot of yardwork around his Griswold home, and in his spare time, he enjoys reading he's rereading his encyclopedia, and is up to Fairbanks and Fair Deal.
While stationed in Key West in the late 1950s, Cary Grant and Tony Curtis were on the island filming ""Operation Petticoat,"" and met the officers and their wives in a reception. compiled by Alison Shea ""All of it was good.
The best part is that I was always busy learning new things and visiting new places.
A failure to diplomatically resolve the crisis, which lasted from Oct.-28, might have developed into a nuclear exchange that turned into a total nuclear war.
At that time the United States had about 27,000 nuclear warheads and the Soviet Union about 3,000.
It is extremely difficult to manage a crisis between countries if communication is lacking and a catastrophic development may ensue.
On Oct., 1962, a United States reconnaissance plane detected the construction of sites for medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba.
On Oct., United States President John F Kennedy publicly announced the discovery of the sites.
Faced with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's inflexible stance, Kennedy initially was inclined to attack the Cuban missile sites by air.
But acting on advice from experts in his administration, Kennedy eventually opted to establish a military blockade of Cuba to prevent the further entry of Soviet nuclear weapons into the island country.
After the United States indicated through talks that it would not invade Cuba and secretly agreed to remove certain nuclear missiles from Italy and Turkey, Soviet Premier Khrushchev announced on Oct. that the Soviet Union would remove its nuclear missiles from Cuba, bringing the crisis to a close.
If Kennedy had carried out the air raid, the Soviet Union and Cuba could have retaliated with nuclear weapons.
Such an act could have triggered a nuclear retaliation by the United States and led to a total nuclear war.
According to the late Robert McNamara, defense secretary of the Kennedy administration, during the crisis the United States Central Intelligence Agency believed that nuclear warheads had not yet been brought into Cuba.
On Oct., a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba.
The United States regarded this as a provocation by the Soviet Union, but later it turned out that a Soviet missile crew had ignored an order by Khrushchev and shot it down.
But Kennedy and Krushchev remained in communication and were able to reach an agreement that ended the crisis.
The United States and Soviet Union subsequently agreed to establish a hot line to allow direct communication between their leaders with the aim of reducing the risk of a nuclear conflict.
Ten years ago, McNamara said that luck also played a role in averting a nuclear war during the Cuban missile crisis.
In a crisis situation, accidents, miscalculations and misunderstandings of the other party's intentions can make a situation uncontrollable.
This is an important lesson for any country, but especially for nuclear powers.
The Cuban missile crisis shows that security based on nuclear deterrence is shaky and that a nuclear crisis can happen.
No efforts should be spared to reduce and eventually abolish all nuclear weapons.
Japan and China, now involved in a diplomatic crisis over the Senkaku Islands, should take the lesson of the Cuban missile crisis seriously and make every effort to ensure that clear lines of communication exist, especially between two countries' leaders.
They were joined at a private screening Wednesday evening by other Soviet-era officials, as well as former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and Theodore Sorensen, a close adviser to President Kennedy.
At a 2 1/2-hour discussion after the screening, McNamara and Gribkov attempted to describe the danger that emerged in October 1962, when the United States disclosed that the Soviet Union was deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Gribkov, who later became chief of staff of the Warsaw Pact joint armed forces, singled out McNamara as one of Kennedy's cooler heads who prevailed over Pentagon hawks.
He praised McNamara for helping push through a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba rather than attacking Soviet positions there.
Cuba had been a source of Soviet-American discord since the 1959 revolution that brought Fidel Castro to power and the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion two years later when the United States unsuccessfully attempted to topple the Cuban leader.
McNamara told his Russian listeners that mistaken beliefs on both sides led to the crisis.
The Soviet Union wrongly believed the United States would invade Cuba and incorrectly thought it could introduce nuclear weapons on the island secretly, while the CIA believed the U.S.S.R. did not have nuclear weapons on the island.
Burlatsky characterized Khrushchev as an ""adventurist"" whose risky actions showed just how dangerous nuclear weapons are in the wrong hands.
He also said the shroud of secrecy made it hard to take responsible decisions.
Wednesday's encounter was friendly, and seemed to reflect a genuine effort at understanding the causes and lessons.
McNamara said both America and Russia needed to understand the value of history, to make deep cuts in offensive nuclear weapons, to reduce alert status of such weapons, and work to contain proliferation among others.
Some Russian viewers said they were disappointed the movie only showed the American side.
The Russians also contested facts in the film, with Gribkov saying the missiles were never deployed in an upright position, were never fueled, and were never set to be fired as shown in the movie.
GARY MARX, CHICAGO TRIBUNE Section: WORLD 1240 Words Page: A-1 OpenURL Link A three-day conference on the 1962 Cuban missile crisis ended yesterday with a visit by former adversaries to an old Soviet missile site and the sobering realization the world was only a ""hairsbreadth"" from nuclear war.
At the same time, several former aides to President Kennedy who attended the conference warned that President Bush is misinterpreting history by citing Kennedy's actions during the missile crisis as justification for a preemptive military strike against Iraq.
While most of the information discussed at the conference, held on the 40th anniversary of the Cold War's worst moment, treaded old ground, newly declassified documents revealed details about a littleknown incident illustrating how close the world came to nuclear confrontation in October 1962.
On October 27, 1962, the most dangerous day of the 13-day standoff, a United States Navy destroyer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine near Cuba without realizing it was carrying a nuclear weapon.
But Theordore Sorensen, a former Kennedy speechwriter who attended the conference, said Kennedy's decision to establish a naval quarantine around Cuba, rather than invade the country as his military advisers were recommending, was the opposite of a pre-emptive strike.
A Political Vision 40 Years Later,"" was a generally friendly affair, more like a 50th college reunion than a sparring among old adversaries.
This is one of a half-dozen conferences held on the missile crisis in recent years.
A few feet from Ecker, Dino Brugioni, a former CIA intelligence officer who interpreted United States spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba, and Anatoly Gribkov, a former Soviet general who in 1962 was in charge of the missiles, peered at forty-year-old spy photographs of the San Cristobal site.
The conference was divided into three major sessions, the first dealing with the period leading up to October 1962, the second dealing with the 13-day crisis itself, and the third dealing with its aftermath.
The sessions themselves, which took place around an enormous square conference table, were generally closed to the media.
At the meetings Castro criticized the Soviets for lying to the United States about placing nuclear missiles on the island -something experts say gave Kennedy the political high ground when he had proof that the contrary was true.
Outside the conference hall, at least one former Soviet military official took a shot at the United States' foreign policy.
Some of the previously classified documents released at the conference provided a startling window into the crisis and showed, again, how close the world came to a nuclear confrontation.
Joint Chiefs of Staff and McNamara, the Defense Secretary, were being inundated with the latest military information -and discussing possible air-strikes and a massive United States invasion of Cuba.
First came a report of ""possible Soviet ground forces with modern equipment"" in Cuba, along with continued construction of strategic missile sites, according to notes of the meeting.
Then came a report of a missing United States spy plane over Alaska, and the downing of another United States spy plane over Cuba.
Maxwell Taylor, the Joint Chiefs chairman, tells the group after returning from a meeting at the White House.
The crisis ended the next day when the Soviets agreed to remove their missiles in exchange for a pledge from the United States not to invade the island.
CASUALTIES At a news conference wrapping up the conference yesterday, McNamara said the figures on Cuba's war readiness and casualty estimate were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo.
Soviet officials had previously been evasive about whether nuclear warheads had actually reached Cuba, according to Raymond Garthoff, a State Department official at the time of the crisis.
The revelation by a senior Soviet military expert came in a conference that brought together for the first time the top-level Soviet, American and Cuban officials involved in the Caribbean showdown.
One of the participants, Sergi N Khrushchev, son of the late Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev, told reporters Saturday that the 20 warheads in Cuba were never attached to the missiles, but that that could have been done very quickly.
The October 1962, showdown between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev over the Soviet attempt to install a nuclear missile force in Cuba, is widely regarded as the closest the world has come to nuclear war.
McNamara and the White House security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, and members of the Cuban ruling Politburo.
Kennedy on the evening of Oct., in which the two men discussed the possibility that the Americans would remove Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey if the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba.
Robert Kennedy, the president's brother and attorney general, wrote in his memoirs that the United States refused to publicly trade the Turkish missiles, although they were scheduled to be removed anyway.
Dobrynin told the conference that he had understood that the two sides had an explicit deal to make such a trade.
The discussion did not resolve the hotly disputed question of why Khrushchev took the seemingly reckless step of sending nuclear weapons to Cuba.
The former Soviet leader said in his memoirs, and many leading Soviets maintain, that he did it to prevent an American invasion of the island, which the Soviets feared was imminent.
Other Soviet and Western analysts say they believe Khrushchev was motivated more by the large American advantage in nuclear weapons, including those deployed in Turkey and other countries bordering the Eastern bloc.
Some American participants said the conference brought home more strongly than previous evidence the fact that the Soviets genuinely believed the Americans intended to invade Cuba.
Recently declassified government documents, made public at the outset of the meeting here, showed that top American officials made active plans for the overthrow of Castro, and seriously contemplated sending American troops to help.
McNamara insisted firmly on Saturday that those plans never reached the point of intent to invade, but he said he had told the gathering he now appreciated the Soviet perception.
But he said that Washington was creating ""threats"" near Russia's borders.
Putin was speaking at a press conference after meeting EU leaders at a summit in a former royal residence in the Portuguese town of Mafra, some 40 kilometres from Lisbon.
Forced to choose between which of the three one would voluntarily sit through again , one would have to go for the missiles.
That's for no other reason than the guarantee that the film would at no point feature any suggestion that anti-gravitational devices and extraterrestrial visitors were involved.
The Cuban missile crisis carries with it an eternal topicality, reminding us of the ever-present threat of nuclear war and of the knife edge we all live on as long as nukes sit silently in silos in the middle of American wheat farms, waiting for the launch vote.
The truly scary thing about the Cuban missile crisis was how global thermonuclear war could have been triggered by such trivial things as a traffic jam, a stalled elevator or a misunderstood nuance.
Despite the ""declassified"" proclamation in the program title, there's very little material presented here that we didn't see in Roger Donaldson's excellent 2000 movie, Thirteen Days.
Looking for Victoria, ABC, 7.30PM Timed to coincide with the impending Australian tour of Prunella Scales' famous one-woman show about Queen Victoria, this bloated yet threadbare BBC two-part sop job has a gliding steadicam dancing around Prunella as she alternates between walking through the cavernous rooms in which Victoria's character was forged and dolling up as the elderly queen to recite letters and utterances of note into the camera.
The sensible thing, of course, would have been for the BBC to either do a solid one-hour documentary featuring, rather than focusing on, Scales, or simply make a high-quality film version of the show.
Instead, what we get is a poorly padded excuse for a historical documentary that looks too much like an extended plug for the tour.
Pardon the cynicism, but this smells like the BBC's thank you to Scales for the royalties from Fawlty Towers tape and DVD sales.
Their fathers, President John Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, were at the center of the 1962 missile crisis, a moment historians believe was the closest the world has come to nuclear war.
He compared the defense of Cuba to the American commitment to defend the former West Berlin.
In 1962, the island nation of Cuba, backed by the Soviet Union, began building missile bases with the intent to pose a threat to the United States, barely 90 miles away.
What ensued was a tense diplomatic tug-of-war that nearly ended in nuclear fallout.
In the end, President John F Kennedy and Soviet Prime Minister Nikita Khrushchev negotiated a deal that the Soviet Union would remove its missiles from Cuba and transport them back to their country, and the United States would agree to never invade Cuba and would also withdraw its missiles from bases in Turkey and Italy.
The effects of this led to further strained relations with the Soviet Union and other Communist countries for decades to come.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War"" by Michael Dobbs details the thoughts of the world leaders involved in the struggle -intelligent men forced to play war games.
It also recounts Khrushchev's plan to destroy the United States naval base at Guantanamo, the accidental flyover of the Soviet Union by an American spy plane, the movement of warheads around Cuba during the height of the crisis, and the work of CIA agents inside Cuba.
For a look at the Soviet perspective on the confrontation, check out ""October Fury"" by naval analyst Peter Huchthausen.
American Secret History from Hitler to al-Qaeda"" by Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Thomas Powers.
We were more aware than ever of threats that existed beyond our borders.
The constant menace of an impending nuclear attack led to bomb shelters being built, a greater sense of suspicion of foreigners, and widespread theories for surviving the attack.
Speaking Volumes, written by Manatee County Public Library System staff members, is published each Sunday.
Ericka Dow is the Supervisor of the Central Library's Adult Services section.
Russian leader recalls Cold War face-off in speech on United States defense plans.
The comments made at the end of a summit between Russia and European Union that failed to resolve several festering disputes were the latest in a series of belligerent statements from the assertive Putin.
Emboldened by oiland gas-fueled economic clout, Russia is increasingly at odds with Washington and much of Europe on issues ranging from Iran and Kosovo to energy supplies and human rights.
Putin reiterated Russia's stalwart opposition to United States plans to put elements of a missile defense system in the former Soviet bloc countries of Poland and the Czech Republic both of which are now NATO members.
We have withdrawn the remains of our bases from Vietnam, from Cuba, and have liquidated everything there, while at our borders, such threats against our country are being created,"" he said.
Khrushchev remove his country's nuclear missiles from Cuba because they could have been used to launch a close-range attack on the United States.
The Americans imposed a naval blockade on Cuba and the world teetered on the edge of war before the Soviets backed down.
Putin also suggested the tension was lower than in 1962 because the United States and Russia are now ""partners,"" not Cold War enemies.
The Russian leader said there has been no concrete United States response to his counterproposals for cooperation on missile defense, but added that the United States is now listening to Russia's concerns about its plans and seeking to address them.
The United States plan is part of a wider missile shield involving defenses in California and Alaska which the United States says are to defend against any long-range missile attack from countries such as North Korea or Iran.
Russia opposes the idea, saying Iran is decades away from developing missile technology that could threaten Europe or North America, and it says the United States bases are aimed at spying on Russian facilities and undermining Russia's missile deterrent force.
Putin traveled to Portugal, which holds the EU's rotating presidency, for talks with leaders of the 27nation bloc.
Putin used a news conference at the summit's conclusion to reiterate Russia's stalwart opposition to United States plans to put elements of a missile defense system in the former Soviet bloc countries of Poland and the Czech Republic both of which are now NATO members.
Now `partners' The October 1962 crisis erupted when President John Kennedy demanded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev remove his country's nuclear missiles from Cuba because they could have been used to launch a close-range attack on the United States.
Putin also suggested that the tension was much lower than in 1962 because the United States and Russia are now ""partners,"" not Cold War enemies.
Russia strongly opposes the idea, saying Iran is decades away from developing missile technology that could threaten Europe or North America, and it says the United States bases are aimed at spying on Russian facilities and undermining Russia's missile deterrent force.
NO MAJOR BREAKTHROUGHS Despite a positive spin put on the Russia-EU summit by Russian President Vladimir Putin and EU President Jose Manuel Barroso who called it ""open, frank and productive"" there were no major breakthroughs.
The EU and Russia have been without a new cooperation agreement for more than a year, during which time doubts have grown in many European capitals about the reliability of Russia's energy supplies and trade policies toward EU member nations.
Topping the list of concerns is Russia's energy policy the reliability of supplies and the intentions of state-run oil and gas companies.
