The Rotonda resident was a radioman aboard a P-2V 'Neptune' United States Navy patrol aircraft that kept a close eye on Russian freighters taking Soviet rockets out of Cuba following the debacle the year before at the Bay of Pigs Invasion, when a small army of Cuban conscripts funded by the CIA invaded the country.
During the closing months of the Eisenhower administration, the CIA cooked up a plan to have Cuban insurgents hired by the CIA invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro and his Communist government.
It became a dismal flop because the president got cold feet at the 11th hour and withheld supporting United States firepower when the Cubans went ashore.
The following year, 1962, Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev secretly proposed putting Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Castro agreed and, unbeknownst to officials in the United States government, Cuba became a Soviet satellite complete with Soviet nuclear missiles.
An American U-2 spy plane picked up the missile sites under construction in Cuba on Oct., 1962.
The United States immediately contacted officials in the Soviet Union and informed them they would not permit offensive nuclear missiles there, blockaded the island nation with Navy warships and ordered them removed.
Khrushchev wrote Kennedy a letter saying that blockading Cuba constituted 'an act of aggression,' but behind the scenes the Russian ruler negotiated with the president to pull the offensive missiles out of Cuba.
He agreed if the United States would remove its missiles pointed at Russia along the Turkish border.
The crisis was averted when Khrushchev blinked first and agreed to pull the missiles out of Cuba.
We had command responsibilities for all of the Navy patrol squadrons flying over the Russian ships pulling the missiles out of Cuba,' Mengel explained.
By the time he was involved in the crisis, the United States and the Russians had choreographed a plan to pull back from the brink of nuclear annihilation.
In return for pulling the Russian missiles out of Cuba the U.S. agreed to pull its missiles out of Turkey,' he said.
We would get behind them and wiggle our wings to indicate we were on an official mission,' he said.
A photographer aboard our plane would open a rear window on the plane and take pictures of the missiles.
When that happened a United States Navy destroyer would be brought up beside the Russian ship.
If they still refused another destroyer was brought up on the other side.
We did encounter several Russian submarines while we were on patrol,' he said.
When the crisis was over we went back to Jacksonville and we continued to make flights to train pilots how to fly P-2Vs.
I was discharged from the Navy a short time later after four years of service.
He and his wife, Darlene, retired to the west coast of Florida three years ago.
They have two children, Christopher and Jennifer, and several grandchildren.
ICBM crew's resolve: ""If you've got to fire this thing, fire it' ZALUSKI: Crisis prompted quick exit from Guantanamo October 14, 2012 | Free Lance-Star, The 2481 Words OpenURL Link By RUSTY DENNEN T he date was Oct., 1962, and then-Air Force Capt.
That day, for the first time ever-or since-the United States military elevated its threat level to an unprecedented Defense Condition Two.
The United States and the Soviet Union were on the brink of nuclear war and Colton and his crew were prepared to kill millions of people, if so ordered.
Two days earlier, President John F Kennedy announced to a stunned nation that spy-plane reconnaissance photos had confirmed the presence of Soviet medium-range nuclear missiles on Cuba, 90 miles from the United States mainland, and he ordered a naval blockade.
We were in a state we had never been in before,"" said Colton, 75, who retired as a lieutenant colonel and now lives with his wife, Linda, off Catharpin Road in Spotsylvania County.
Those Japanese cities were destroyed by the first two nuclear bombs, dropped in August 1945.
Colton's crew was responsible for an Atlas F intercontinental ballistic missile carrying a 4-megaton warhead nearly a thousand times as powerful as those World War II bombs.
He knew that the missile could potentially kill millions of people in Eastern Europe.
After graduation, he was commissioned a second lieutenant and assigned to the National Security Agency at Fort Meade, Md.
While there, he heard about the formation of 12 Atlas ICBM squadrons around the country.
Plattsburgh was a component of the Strategic Air Command based in Omaha, Neb.
The military's Atlas program was so new at the time, he recalled, that ""not all the sites were ready to go,"" so the frequent shifts were necessary.
There were seven Atlas squadrons spread out across the country, each with 12 missiles.
Colton and the crew would arrive at the silo to relieve the previous crew, and change from their uniforms into white coveralls and gray hard hats.
The clothing change ""was so as not to bring any outside contamination inside"" that might affect the consoles and equipment, he said.
Colton still has his helmet, Air Force cap and a few other mementos of his days underground.
Messages would come in from SAC headquarters, an airborne command center known as Looking Glass, the president and Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Through that September and into early October, the crew responded to routine drills.
Colton and his lieutenant carried launch-commit keys and ""go codes"" in sealed envelopes to be confirmed if a launch order was received.
Target information was sent from an early computer to the missile guidance system, the warhead armed and fuel preparation completed.
Giant counterweights hoisted the missile up the silo lift, and massive steel blast doors would open.
We didn't want to do it; statistically, we didn't think we'd ever have to do it,"" he said.
Each man knew that, if the Soviets attacked, they might survive but their families above ground would probably die.
An incoming warhead would take 20 to 30 minutes to arrive; the preparations in the silo-from the time the launch message was received to the actual launch-was about 15 minutes.
Officers carried .45-caliber pistols in case something went wrong underground.
So many safeguards had been built into the system, he said, that an unauthorized attack was considered all but impossible.
Strangelove,"" in which a deranged Air Force general provokes a nuclear strike.
On Oct., Kennedy pulled back the quarantine line around Cuba and raised nuclear forces readiness to DEFCON 2.
Three days later, a U-2 spy plane monitoring the situation was shot down over Cuba, further escalating the crisis.
On Oct., the stalemate broke, with the Soviets backing down and agreeing to dismantle the missile sites.
After his missile service, Colton went to Vietnam as an Air Force adviser, then to Germany, where he worked for John Hughes, the Defense Intelligence Agency official who briefed the nation on the Cuban missiles during Kennedy's speech.
He worked for several defense contractors before taking a sharp career turn-into ministry.
He's been pastor at several churches and currently serves at Triangle Baptist Church.
Colton still thinks back on his days in Plattsburgh, and reflects on how the nuclear arms dynamic has changed.
You never hear about them or read about them,"" though the major superpowers still stockpile thousands of warheads.
Just 90 miles from Florida, that put the missiles well within striking distance of the United States.
For the next 13 days, the world held its breath, as Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy made moves and countermoves.
Kennedy initiated a naval blockade surrounding the island of Cuba and put United States armed forces on alert for a possible invasion of the island.
If a United States warship fired on a Russian vessel or United States forces invaded, the unthinkable could have occurred — nuclear war.
Dick Carr was a first lieutenant at the time and was watching a football game with his wing commander at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo.
Within 24 hours, Carr was seated in a RC-121 reconnaissance aircraft at McCoy Air Force Base, just south of Orlando, a Strategic Air Command Base during the Cold War.
Carr said SAC diversified their planes throughout the country during the emergency so the Russians could not destroy them if war did break out.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff implemented the radar missions as part of their deterrence policy.
Because the radar was not as sophisticated as today’s systems, Carr said they encountered many unknowns.
There were numerous commercial flights heading in and out of Cuba and every so often they would confront an unidentified aircraft.
Carr said he flew at night, accompanied by fighter jets, and on one occasion his relief aircraft did not show and he was running low on fuel.
The Soviets dismantled their missile bases and the United States would remove theirs from Turkey, something that was not revealed until 25 years later.
The organization is raising funds for the site work for the Wall, which will be built in Laishley Park.
SHIP'S BOMBS ALMOST HIT NUCLEAR-ARMED SOVIET SUBMARINE SOVIETS CONSIDERED FIRING October 13, 2002 | St.
Studying newly declassified documents at a conference on the crisis, Cuban, American and Russian protagonists were told that the most dangerous day of all was Oct., 1962 when a United States Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost accidentally hit the hull of a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead.
The United States military ""did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archives, said Friday night.
Another document showed that United States intelligence officials had photographed only 33 of the 42 mediumrange missiles in Cuba that the Americans discovered later were there at the time.
Intelligence officials also never found any nuclear warheads, which they learned later had been kept on the island.
As events began spinning out of control in late October 1962, Cuban President Fidel Castro began expecting a United States airstrike on Soviet facilities on the island and was prepared to shoot down American combat aircraft if they invaded Cuba, according to a top-secret military directive to Gen.
A portion of the documents made available to The Associated Press demonstrates that the crisis did not end on Oct., 1962, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as was widely believed.
Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tension with the United States and perhaps provoke war.
Cuba ""wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash, and wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions,"" Khrushchev said in a l etter Nov., 1962, to diplomatic aides in Cuba.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion The Associated Press, 'CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS WAS WORSE THAN IMAGINED IN 1962, United States SHIP'S BOMBS ALMOST HIT NUCLEAR-ARMED SOVIET SUBMARINE SOVIETS CONSIDERED FIRING', St.
After the film taken by his RF-8A reconnaissance jet was developed in Jacksonville, Fla., on Oct., 1962, Ecker continued on in the same aircraft to Washington.
The black and white photograph of the bunker, which is now whitewashed and surrounded by towering palm trees, showed several men standing on the roof and several in front.
Other photographs taken by Ecker's team showed an apparent missile launching site at this military installation about 80 miles west of Havana.
The visits Sunday followed a two-day gathering of American, Cuban and Russian protagonists in the missile crisis drama.
In the afternoon, Sorensen stood next to another former aide to Kennedy, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., underneath a medium-range Soviet R-2 missile displayed at a grassy slope outside an old Spanish fortress on Havana Bay.
Three other shortto medium-range Soviet missiles of that era, and an anti-aircraft missile like the one that shot down an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba at the height of the crisis on Oct., 1962, were also on exhibit.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion The Associated Press, 'PILOT, EX-AIDES TO JFK RECALL MISSILE CRISIS', St.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion The Associated Press, 'PILOT VISITS SCENE OF MISSILE CRISIS MISSION', St.
Studying newly declassified documents at a conference on the crisis, Cuban, American and Russian protagonists were told the most dangerous day of all was Oct., 1962.
That was when a United States Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost accidentally hit a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead.
The United States military ""did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archives, told reporters.
A portion of the documents demonstrate that the crisis did not end Oct., 1962, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as was widely believed.
Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tensions with the United States--and perhaps provoke war.
During conference sessions Friday, participants also looked at American covert actions following the disastrous CIA-backed invasion of Cuba's Bay of Pigs in April 1961 and how they intensified Cuban fears of a United States military attack.
The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack that existed during those tense October days.
Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed door sessions Friday and Saturday, as did former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
The crisis began in October 1962 when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
By Chauncey G Parker III, Special To The Sentinel Section: INSIGHT 1647 Words Page: G1 OpenURL Link Thirty years ago a U-2 spy plane returned from a reconnaissance flight over Cuba laden with photographic proof that Fidel Castro was turning his country into a Soviet intermediate-range ballistic missile site.
I wondered then and still do whether the missile crisis was in fact the first nuclear confrontation or perhaps the work of those with a vested interest to counter a mounting public perception that the vaunted ''Age of Camelot'' and its glamorous torch bearer were more showbiz than substance.
JFK had come to the presidency through the thinnest of margins, barely 100,000 votes, and these were widely alleged to have been thanks to Chicago Mayor Daley's largess with creative voting machine tampering.
On Sunday, April 16, barely two months into JFK's term, a brigade of Cuban exiles landed at an inlet on the southern coast of Cuba called Bahia de Cochinos, or Bay of Pigs.
Apologists tried to claim that JFK inherited a flawed Republican plan that was executed without Kennedy's prior knowledge, and thus the fault lay elsewhere.
As a result, one of Kennedy's first acts as president had been to order CIA chief Allen Dulles to proceed briskly in planning an invasion.
This notwithstanding, the White House darted for cover now, using its formidable influence with the Northeastern establishment press to tar United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson with having insisted air support be withdrawn, thereby dooming the invasion to failure.
Barely six weeks later, JFK set off for Vienna, his first face-to-face encounter with Nikita Khrushchev.
It was a shattering experience for him, as the wily Soviet leader berated and badgered him, alternating between open contempt and base condescension.
JFK later explained the Soviet leader's brutal behavior, according to Michael Beschloss in his book Crisis Years, ''I think he did it because of the Bay of Pigs . . . that anyone who was so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be taken.
Their most virulent bone of contention had centered on the status of West Berlin.
JFK departed Vienna convinced that Khrushchev was at the end of his tether on finding an accommodation with the West on this abnormal situation, and would act on Berlin soon.
In August 1961, the East Germans constructed a wall, thereby isolating West Berlin from the rest of the city, and from West Germany itself.
This led on Aug. to 300,000 West Berliners pouring into the streets to protest what they viewed as United States impotence and a betrayal of its oft-professed commitment to their safety and well-being.
By now mutterings were emanating, even from among the faithful, that maybe the passing of the torch to the younger generation had been premature.
Small wonder, then, JFK's lament to a friend that the U.S. presidency could be the greatest job in the world were it not for Khrushchev.
Meanwhile at the U.N., from August 1961 to October 1962, Castro and his Soviet protector were to yank the lion's tail with depressing regularity, each time giving the United States and those of us at the mission to the United Nations fits.
Not a single month would pass without the United States being hauled into one or another General Assembly committee or the Security Council to answer charges of planning a second Cuban invasion.
For good measure, a special General Assembly was convened for the purpose in February 1962.
For other United Nations members, watching the United States squirm in the international court of public opinion was delicious.
While this ritual may appear pointless by today's standards, in 1962 the Cold War was in full flower and the objective was to capture the hearts and minds of emerging Third World countries.
Understandably, then, the Soviets exploited their Bay of Pigs card to the fullest.
Rather than assuming tight personal control over every decision, as the potential magnitude of danger would certainly seem to have warranted, he assembled what Hagan referred to as a ''specially contrived executive committee'' to explore options, and JFK promptly set off on a scheduled campaign swing on behalf of a number of candidates in the Midwest.
On Friday, Oct., the United States Navy boarded a Lebanese merchantman chartered by the Soviets and en route to Cuba.
No missiles were found, and it was allowed to proceed, the sole vessel to have been stopped by the quarantine.
Negotiators met thereafter but never did go beyond informing the Security Council, on Jan., 1963, that sufficient agreement existed to justify removing the so-called Cuban item from its agenda.
Castro has never permitted any on-site inspection and, despite all the United States posturing about the absolute necessity of verification, we never did force the issue.
Nor was any vessel departing Cuba ever boarded to verify the Soviets were indeed making good their promise. Lastly, JFK secretly capitulated to Khrushchev's demand to remove an old thorn in the Soviet underbelly, United States missile bases across the Black Sea in Turkey.
Withal, those with a vested interest are at it still, seeking to perpetuate the illusion that Kennedy's handling of the Cuban missile crisis should rank him among the greats of United States presidents.
PETERSBURG, Fla. You may be forgiven if you break into a cold sweat as you tour the Florida International Museum.
For students of history, seeing the display is quite a learning experience.
For those of us who lived through the crisis that brought America to the brink of nuclear war in 1962, it is enough to make your hair stand on end.
Atherholt began scrambling to put the display together six months ago when producers of the Kevin Costner film Thirteen Days called.
There's a marshmallow sofa, a kitchen with garish appliances and a Mr Magoo doll.
And you begin to feel America's obsession with nuclear holocaust you follow the timeline from one room to another.
Walking into the second gallery, you find yourself in a retro living room with a black-and-white TV playing an old documentary about the Cuban missile crisis.
Perhaps the most sobering area of the display is a 1960s-era classroom.
Playing on the rounded screen of an old RCA Victor TV is the 1951 civil defense documentary Duck and Cover, starring Bert the Turtle.
As you sit down on a couch and watch the program, all the old terrors come rushing back.
Photos taken by high-flying U-2 spy planes show the Soviet missiles set up and aimed toward the United States.
Kennedy is informed of Soviet missile bases in Cuba, and tensions mount as the United States launches a blockade of Cuba and Fidel Castro rattles his Russian-built missiles.
And you descend into a community fallout shelter, complete with CONELRAD alert and sirens going off.
Items on display include a doodle of an atomic-bomb mushroom, drawn by Kennedy and dated Feb., 1961.
There's also a Soviet-built SA-2 missile, a Russian engineering model of Sputnik, a U-2 pilot's uniform, a jump seat from a T-33 aircraft, props from Thirteen Days and items depicting the attempt to pin the Kennedy assassination on Cuba.
The missile crisis exhibition will become a permanent display, although it will be scaled down later in the year to make room for other displays.
Museum admission includes an audio-guided cassette tour of the Kennedy Galleries.
Twenty themed galleries include full-size recreations of the Oval Office and the Rose Garden along with hundreds of personal items such as JFK's rocking chair, clothing, personal notes, letters and dresses worn by Jacqueline Kennedy.
The final series of displays allow the visitor to experience the tragedy of Dallas.
Also on view is America Through the CBS Eye , with many photographs from the networks' archives.
The museum is an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution and has attracted 2 million visitors since it opened in 1995 in a renovated department store building.
Petersburg, within walking distance of downtown restaurants, the popular shops and museums at the pier and the new Baywalk entertainment/shopping complex.
Fading of memories over time argue more strongly for reviewing the story.
Dangers of fatal military miscalculation may be greater today than during the Cold War.
In the United States, our military presence in the Middle East fuels partisan political debate, but little discussion of potential confrontation with Russia.
During Oct.-28 in 1962, the Cuba crisis dominated world attention, as Washington and Moscow sparred on the edge of thermonuclear war.
Lessons include difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, and the unpredictability of events.
On Oct., 1962, United States reconnaissance photos revealed the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances.
Until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw them on Oct., Armageddon loomed.
Senior Kennedy administration officials, with the exception of CIA director John McCone, had assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba.
They erroneously calculated the Soviets also felt the move would be just too risky.
Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba were curtailed to avoid antagonizing Moscow and resumed only because McCone aggressively pressed the matter.
Analysis developed photographic evidence of the Soviet deception just before the missiles would become operational.
However, there was already circumstantial evidence, including reports from reliable Cuba agents, that something of this nature was underway.
As with the George W Bush administration regarding Iraq weapons, senior officials chose evidence they preferred.
Today, United States troops are in the Mideast along with forces from Russia, Iran, Israel, Syria, Turkey and various national and terrorist groups.
Yet partisan politics drives the debate, not clear consideration of our national interests.
In messages to an unprecedented U.S.-Soviet-Cuban conference that opened here yesterday, both Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and President Bush said that the missile crisis contained important and enduring lessons.
Yesterday marked the first time that ranking Soviet and Cuban officials have agreed to discuss their roles in the crisis with United States officials.
Soviet participants include former Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, former Ambassador to Washington Anatoly Dobrynin and Sergei Khrushchev, whose father, Nikita, ordered the stationing of nuclear missiles on Cuba and later agreed to withdraw them under intense American pressure.
American participants include former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and former White House special counsel Theodore Sorensen.
American participants said they got a much stronger sense than ever before of Cuban and Soviet fears of an imminent United States invasion of Cuba.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev insisted that his primary motivation for putting missiles in Cuba was to deter a United States invasion.
McNamara was reported by other participants to have acknowledged that if he had been in the shoes of the Soviet and Cuban officials across the room, he would have feared an American attack.
He continued to insist, however, that the Kennedy administration had no intention of invading Cuba before the missile crisis.
According to recently declassified United States papers, the United States had prepared contingency plans for the overthrow of Fidel Castro's pro-Soviet regime by October 1962.
The documents make clear that although the encouragement of internal revolt by disaffected Cubans was the preferred means of deposing Castro, some administration officials favored direct military intervention.
The opening session revealed a dramatic asymmetry in the historical record that will complicate the task of historians in getting to the truth about the crisis.
Soviet officials did, however, reveal that Washington's nuclear superiority in 1962 was even greater than the 15-to-1 ratio previously thought.
At the time of the crisis, two-thirds of the Soviets' entire missile stock of about 60 launchers was installed in Cuba.
Since the Soviets were vastly outnumbered, installing missiles in Cuba was the only way he could achieve this,"" said Scott Armstrong, director of Washington's nongovernmental National Security Archive and one of the participants in the conference.
In his message to the conference, Gorbachev said the lesson of the crisis was that ""the sharpest conflict could be extinguished thanks to the responsible approach and good sense"" exhibited by Khrushchev, Kennedy and Castro.
In his message, Bush described the conference as an example of the ""new openness of the Soviet Union"" under Gorbachev.
