It also should be read, at least portions of it, by those present-day consumers of newspapers, magazines and television news shows who think the briefly spun daily doses of what purport to be the activities at the White House capture complex presidential decision-making even slightly.
The quick answer here is ""nothing,” if what you have in mind is some stunning Walter Pincus, a reporter with The Post's national staff, covers national security issues. new fact.
The true answer, however, is that a great deal here is new if you want to understand the day-to-day evolution of a policy and the people involved in a crisis through all its ups and downs.
The Soviets clandestinely bring intermediateand short-range nuclear missiles into Cuba in 1962 and attempt to deploy them.
There are secret diplomatic exchanges against a background of public statements.
The United States puts in place a blockade and makes preparations for air strikes against the missile sites and Cuban air defenses if the missiles are not removed, with a full-scale invasion to follow.
What is not familiar, however, are the myriad steps and potential missteps over the 13 days, as disclosed in transcripts of taped meetings of the so-called Ex-Com or executive committee.
The editors have bolstered the transcripts with helpful historical and political notes.
If you do nothing else, read the transcript of the meetings of Saturday, Oct., the day that — Continued on page 10 Kennedy Tapes Continued from page 1 McNamara said he went home from the White House thinking that perhaps they had taken a step toward nuclear war.
It was a day that had President Kennedy and his aides dealing with the famous private and then public statements by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
The first, private statement said that the missiles would go if the United States made assurances that there would be no invasion of Cuba.
The second, public announcement offered to exchange the Cuban weapons for withdrawal of United States missiles in Turkey— part of NATO’s nuclear arsenal.
Next came the firing on low-flying United States reconnaissance planes prompted by an earlier White House statement that we would retaliate for such action.
Later, word came that an American U2 spy plane had been shot down and its pilot killed.
While in the room, President Kennedy clearly takes the lead, although other Ex-Com members, including his brother, share their thoughts freely.
The group goes back and forth working out responses to each event; its discussions take place against a background belief that Khrushchev will not back down and that eventually the plans under way at the Pentagon— plans not only for massive air raids on Cuba but also for an invasion of the island— will inevitably be implemented within the next few days.
A United States U2 has strayed over Siberia into Soviet air space; Kennedy with McNamara’s support decides not to disclose it publicly so as not to embarrass Khrushchev with a provocation.
The president and his aides go back and forth over whether to tell the NATO allies that Washington is prepared to agree to withdraw United States missiles from Turkey because nucleararmed Polaris submarines are to be stationed off Turkey as less vulnerable replacements.
McNamara, convinced that a United States attack on Cuba would bring retaliation against the missile bases in Turkey, suggests making them “inoperable.
Bundy at one point reminds the president that his desire to show the world he was prepared not to reject out of hand Khrushchev’s offer to trade Cuban missiles for those in Turkey would inevitably harm Washington’s relations not only with NATO countries but other allies.
