Lessons learned by American practitioners and academics contributed to the conduct of American foreign policy in the 1960s and to academic understanding of nuclear deterrence, nuclear crises and crisis management in general.
From the 1980s, study of what in Moscow was termed the Caribbean crisis was informed by access to Soviet officials and Soviet archives, and became the forefront of the ‘new historiography’ of the Cold War.
This collection reviews how various texts inform our understanding and how new interpretations and/or new sources of information have overtaken the original analysis.
This article provides an overview of this endeavour and an answer to the question of whether we should continue to study the Cuban missile crisis.
His argument was directed at those Americans who drew from the events of October 1962 a theoretical approach to managing international crises.
The aim of this collection is to revisit some of the literature on the missile crisis, how this has developed and how it informs our understanding of events.
The aim is to examine how various books inform our understanding and how new interpretations and/or new sources of information have overtaken the original analysis.
If the past is another country, then most travellers to the missile crisis are historians.
Others have different academic identities and methodological perspectives.
James Blight, for example, one of the North American scholars most active in developing critical oral history of the crisis, produced a psychological study that explores the role of fear in the crisis and its resolution.
Many other texts have multiple dimensions, and some that explore theoretical aspects provide new empirical material.
Scott Sagan’s application of organisational theory to the command and control of nuclear weapons, for example, provided significant evidence about the risks of inadvertent nuclear war.
Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein’s use of psychological approaches reflected significant empirical work in Moscow.
Moreover, shortly after Cohen’s article appeared, Western academics began to gain access to Soviet sources, first through engagement with former Soviet officials, and then through (often controlled) access to Soviet archives.
On larger questions such as why Khrushchev sent the missiles, there has been greater clarity on how decisions were made, but the debates about his objectives remain.
Different authors pose different questions, and different commentators bring different perspectives.
These questions have attracted the attention of historians and political scientists for the 50 years the crisis has been studied, just as they attracted the attention of political leaders and senior officials in October 1962.
Peter Catterall’s commentary on Harold Macmillan’s account makes clear concern in London and Washington that Khrushchev’s aim was to resolve the problem of West Berlin.
Subsequently, many analysts and historians attached primary importance to the strategic nuclear balance.
Writing in 1987, Raymond Garthoff observed that ‘there is a general consensus that the principal motivation was to redress the publicly revealed serious imbalance in the strategic nuclear balance.
No other explanation satisfactorily accounts for the action’.10 New sources of information about Khrushchev’s motives nevertheless generated discussion of various hypotheses.
Munton examines Allison and Zelikow’s revision of a seminal work of American political science Essence of Decision.
Radchenko meanwhile surveys Soviet/Russian historiography over the last two decades or more.
Radchenko scrutinises how emerging material has been used that in some cases show the fragility of evidence on which broader interpretations and knowledge claims are based.
The question of why Khrushchev withdrew the missiles has attracted the attention of those applying psychological theories, including Blight’s Shattered Crystal Ball and Lebow and Stein’s We all Lost the Cold War.
Key revelations emerged in the West and were then corroborated in the East.
In 1989, Theodore Sorensen admitted that he had deliberately falsified Robert Kennedy’s memoir when it was published posthumously.
Other former members of ExComm revealed that they had lied to preserve the myth that Kennedy stood firm and refused to trade the Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy’s willingness to remove them was made clear by his brother Robert in a meeting with the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoli Dobrynin, on 27 October.
Declassification of Soviet records, including Dobrynin’s report of this meeting back to Moscow, corroborates the oral testimony.
Whether the ‘deal’ on the Turkish Jupiters made much difference to Khrushchev’s behaviour remains open to question, as Khrushchev was already moving to retreat, though Don Munton argues persuasively that ‘Kennedy’s offer on the Jupiters and their actual withdrawal, became integral to the deal – for both sides’.15 Yet, Kennedy’s willingness to take action behind the backs of his North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies in a way that risked the cohesion of the alliance indicates his determination to avoid war.
The commentary on Brugioni’s Eyeball to Eyeball in this collection makes clear the strong opposition of the United States military to a peaceful resolution of the crisis, and, on the other hand, the belief of Robert McNamara that Kennedy would have gone the extra mile for peace.
We All Lost the Cold War and One Hell of a Gamble have demonstrated how, as the crisis continued, both leaders manoeuvred to draw back, if need be at political cost.
This may seem a flawed counterfactual as the evidence overwhelmingly shows he was determined to retreat.
If there were circumstances in which Kennedy would have accepted the missiles, Khrushchev’s original gamble might seem less hazardous and less of a gamble.
Historical revelations have provided much new evidence with which to address this question.
Both leaders followed a trajectory that began with belligerence and ended with accommodation.
Kennedy’s initial belligerent reaction to the discovery of the missiles and Khrushchev’s initial reaction to the blockade could have augured military confrontation.
However, the closer political leaders went to the brink, the more determined they were to draw back from confrontation.
Paul Nitze, for example, argued that the 1961 Berlin crisis, which at one point saw American tanks pointing their loaded cannons at Soviet tanks across Checkpoint Charlie, was more dangerous than the missile crisis.
Moreover, Nitze argues that American regional superiority in the Caribbean mixed with strategic nuclear superiority meant the risk of nuclear war over Cuba was nugatory.
At root, this is an argument that American deterrence was robust and successful.
The belief that the crisis demonstrated that nuclear threats and risks could be calibrated, managed and manipulated informed much of the discourse of strategic studies as it took shape in the 1960s.
The missile crisis thus helped frame debates about deterrence and the belief in its stability.
Yet much of what has been learned in the last few decades has reinforced the view that we were far nearer the brink than was realised.
While decision-makers were increasingly keen to avoid conflict, the risk of inadvertent nuclear war is now apparent.
Campbell Craig’s analysis of Scott Sagan’s Limits of Safety emphasises specific incidents in American nuclear command and control that require re-evaluation of the risk of inadvertent and accidental nuclear war.
Craig further explores the implications of Sagan’s work for a broader assessment of nuclear risk in the Cold War and beyond.
There was fear in Washington that the Soviets might mistake the plane for pre-strike reconnaissance and decide to launch their InterContinental Ballistic Missiles pre-emptively.
What is unclear is if the Pentagon took this risk seriously, whether consideration was given in Washington to pre-empting pre-emption.
Limits of Safety identifies more tangible risks, including how, as Soviet fighters scrambled to shoot the U-2 down, American fighters were sent in support.
Unbeknownst to political leaders in Washington, the prevailing defense condition alert state meant that the United States planes were armed with air-to-air missiles with low-yield nuclear weapons.
Sagan sketches five scenarios in which nuclear weapons could have been fired.
While Sagan’s work focuses primarily on American nuclear command and control, much new information has emerged about Soviet forces.
The suggestion that the Soviets deployed a hundred or so tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba has become an accepted part of the story, though it generated fierce debates in the 1990s, including, as Sergey Radchenko describes, over whether Soviet commanders had pre-delegated authority to fire battlefield nuclear missiles.
More recently, Michael Dobbs has shown that Soviet ground-launched cruise missiles were moved to their firing positions within range of the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay.
However, the more fundamental issue concerns an essential counterfactual.
The readiness state of nuclear weapons did not simply determine the risk of their use.
Out of 60, 59 Thor IRBMs in Britain, for example, were armed with their warheads and at less than 15 minutes readiness during the crisis.
With the range to destroy Moscow in 25 minutes or less, no one has suggested they presented a serious risk of nuclear war.
Answers are inevitably speculative, though the belief that the President’s trajectory was taking him further away from military action is convincing.
Nevertheless, if there was a risk that Kennedy would have invaded Cuba, then the risk of nuclear war was greater than understood.
Sergey Radchenko notes the complaint of Mark Kramer about predispositions to show the crisis was more dangerous than it actually was.
New revelations about the operational level have excited interest in the danger of inadvertent nuclear war.
Assessing the risk of nuclear war raises complex issues, not least because Soviet nuclear command and control procedures remain opaque.
Among the most dramatic of events was the deployment of Soviet diesel-electric submarines, each carrying a nuclear torpedo.
The 40th anniversary of the crisis witnessed testimony from Soviet submariners who suggested that on at least one boat the captain came close to launching his nuclear torpedo.
The target would likely have been one of the United States warships that were dropping hand grenades and practice depth charges to get the submarine to surface.
These were ad hoc procedures that American decision-makers believed would be understood and accepted by the Soviets.
What is striking is that dropping explosives on the submarines was discussed in ExComm on 24 October and by the President himself.
Both were greatly exercised about the need for political control over military forces, and McNamara insisted on thinking of the blockade as a means of communicating with the Soviets.
Yet they set in motion a train of events that could have led to inadvertent nuclear war.
The incident that may have generated the greatest risk of nuclear use in October 1962 may also provide the best example of the huge gap between political leaders and those who operated nuclear weapons.
In 1987, an account appeared that suggested that a coded warning from Oleg Penkovsky, the Western spy in Soviet Military Intelligence, was designed to trigger an American attack but was suppressed by Central Intelligence Agency officers.
Political authorities thus knew nothing of the incident, so it was believed.
In 1992, Jerrold Schecter and Peter Deriabin provided a detailed account based on access to CIA files, which made it clear that information about the warning was passed to CIA headquarters, and that the President was briefed on Penkovsky’s arrest.
It is now clear that Power’s message was designed to reassure his bomber crews and make clear that if in doubt they should contact headquarters.
How far this intent to reassure was comprehended by the Soviets is not yet known.
When, in the 1980s, Soviet officials began to share their recollections and reflections with their Western counterparts and Western academics, some questioned their motives.
Former Deputy Director at the CIA, Ray Cline, inveighed against ‘Mikhail Gorbachev’s team of official intellectuals engaged in a program of historical revisionism serving Moscow’s interest’.29 The interest in question was promotion of Gorbachev’s aim of global nuclear disarmament.
Historians are long familiar with the argument that debates about the past reflect debates about the present.
The lessons of the crisis for American and NATO strategies in the 1980s involved debates in which both sides drew from their reading of history.
The hawks in 1962 (such as Paul Nitze and Douglas Dillon) were hawks in the 1980s just as those who were doves in 1962 (such as Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk) were doves in the 1980s.
McGeorge Bundy (whose ornithological identity in 1962 alternated) was firmly with the doves in the early 1980s in seeking alternatives to the Reaganite agenda.
Eliot Cohen argues, We should ask whether the crisis itself can and should serve as an appropriate model either for those studying policy or for those conducting it.
We must, in short, ask ourselves whether the uniqueness of the crisis does not destroy its value as an archetype, or worse, make it a profoundly misleading subject for reflection30 Sir Michael Howard has also warned, ‘It is safer to start with the assumption that history, whatever its value in educating the judgement, teaches no “lessons” … The past is infinitely various, an inexhaustible storehouse of events from which we can prove anything or its contrary’.31 Thankfully, we have had an insufficient number of nuclear crises to satisfy the yearning of social scientists for generalisability.
The Cuban missile crisis is widely seen as the nearest the world came to nuclear war.
That includes evidence of how decision-makers themselves sought to use historical analogies and draw lessons from the past, from Munich to Pearl Harbor to August 1914.32 Analogies and lessons reflected very differing interpretations.
It is, though, worth noting that before the crisis Kennedy and several senior colleagues had Barbara Tuchman’s Guns of August, which argued that war came inadvertently in 1914 and that Robert Kennedy claimed that the book influenced his brother’s handling of the crisis.
Harold Macmillan had also read Tuchman’s book (and had fought in the Great War) and was an assiduous reader of history books.
Peter Catterall indeed shows that he managed to read a history of the 1688 ‘Glorious’ revolution during the missile crisis.
However deterrence is defined, it is axiomatic that decision-makers wish to avoid the annihilation of their country.
Yet the idea of initiating nuclear war in a conventional conflict remained at the heart of NATO strategy during the Cold War.
Similarly, Castro’s exhortations to Khrushchev on 27 October to initiate strategic nuclear attacks on the United States should Kennedy invade Cuba, might reflect a parallel logic to NATO’s strategy of Massive Retaliation, which envisaged United States nuclear bombardment of the Soviet Union in response to a Warsaw Pact conventional assault on West Germany.
Castro’s apparent willingness to provoke nuclear annihilation nevertheless challenges the idea that nuclear weapons will always deter political leaders.
How far the words of political leaders denote their intentions or how they would act in particular conditions of nuclear war remains imponderable.
Yet, it is worth noting that Kennedy’s televised speech on 22 October threatened ‘a full retaliatory response’ for the use of any Soviet missiles in Cuba against any targets in the Western hemisphere.
Discussion of Castro also points to how far the study of the crisis has broadened from its Soviet–American focus.
Certainly, a range of previously neglected issues have been the subject of valuable illumination, including Cuba,37 the United Nations38 and Europe.
Peter Catterall, in his article highlights the British role in the United Nations.
It remained essentially at the margins, though in his telephone conversation with Macmillan, Kennedy specifically asked for the Prime Minister’s views on whether with the blockade in place, and Soviet work on the missiles continuing, an invasion should take place.
Catterall illuminates what the ‘special relationship’ meant, and how America behaved towards its closest ally, as well the differences between these and Macmillan’s account of them.
On some issues there was some influence, though this seemed to owe much to the personal relationship between Kennedy and David Ormsby-Gore, the British Ambassador.
America’s allies played limited roles during the crisis though the vote of the Organisation of American States on 23 October to endorse the blockade provided a valuable legal cover for American action.
The stage at which NATO was called upon to take significant action had not been reached, and there is little doubt that America’s NATO allies were informed but not consulted over the blockade, even though this might affect their own ships in the Caribbean and, moreover, risk Soviet retaliation in Europe.
While all historiography may be revisionist in intent, the missile crisis provides much ammunition for those who question whether ‘the truth’ can be found.
Likewise, why he withdrew them still exercises historians, strategists and psychologists, though we have a much clearer understanding of how decisions were made in Moscow, and by whom.
Under what circumstances Kennedy would have used force against Cuba remains central to judgements about the risk of nuclear war.
How close we came to nuclear war is inextricably linked to counterfactual questions about what might have happened.
Some of these require better understanding of nuclear command and control – an area of deepest secrecy in the Cold War whose details remain closely guarded.
There are many ‘known unknowns’ about the missile crisis including what consideration was given by the respective military leaderships to nuclear war.
The mysteries concern the minds of those who could have faced decisions to use weapons of mass destruction.
Historical evidence of, and cognitive insights into, their moment of thermonuclear truth is inevitably limited.
Moreover, any evidence concerns how they anticipated what they would do.
Furthermore, whether Khrushchev or Kennedy would have been taking the decision on nuclear use should not be taken for granted.
One of the debates triggered by the 1992 revelations concerned delegation of nuclear release authority, and specifically whether General Pliyev had authority to use tactical nuclear missiles.
Certainly, the British Bomber Command received clear authorisation in September 1962 to initiate nuclear attacks on the Soviet Union in specified circumstances.
The obvious circumstances which applied to all three nuclear weapons states were decapitation.
So too is the question of whether the respective militaries had the ability to use strategic nuclear weapons whether or not they had authority.
The Jupiters and Thors were among many nuclear weapons in NATO Europe that were not equipped with electronic locks and which relied on procedural safeguards as well as the military discipline and judgement of the troops concerned.
Much of the literature on the crisis takes the use of nuclear weapons as synonymous with cataclysmic nuclear war and assumes escalation was automatic.
Whether there would have been similar reluctance to foreswear or limit retaliation in response to the use of nuclear weapons is certainly conceivable, especially where the use of nuclear weapons was judged to be tactical, limited or accidental.
Assessments of the risk of nuclear war require a dark empathy on the part of the historian.
They also require attention to the organisational processes and military imperatives that could have hastened escalation against the wishes of the political leaders.
Most students of the missile crisis would agree with Eliot Cohen’s antipathy to nuclear crisis management.
That would certainly include one of the more influential proponents of crisis management, Robert McNamara, who devoted much energy to re-examining the crisis, and which led him to conclude that the decisive factor in avoiding war in 1962 was luck.
The emphasis on contingency and unacknowledged risk has accelerated with more evidence.
Better understanding of the role of misperception, miscalculation and mistakes, including the actions of subordinates, suggests that the risk of nuclear war was greater than thought by decision-makers at the time and by commentators subsequently.
The study of the Cold War has rightly extended beyond Soviet–American relations.
Yet the reason why the missile crisis remains such a focus of interest is because it is a crisis with the potential for nuclear weapons use at its epicentre.
The more we learn about the risk of inadvertent nuclear war, the less we should see nuclear weapons as epiphenomenal in the Cold War.
Whatever the role of political ideology in the Cold War, we need to understand that nuclear deterrence was an independent variable and perhaps a social construct in its own right.
So long as we confront the problems created by nuclear weapons, we should strengthen our commitment to studying the Cuban missile crisis.
Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Blinking and Winking, Spy-Planes and Secrets’, International Relations, this issue.
Essence, the Puzzles and the Missile Crisis’, International Relations, this issue.
Cohen’s antipathy to the idea of crisis management is surely vindicated by the last two decades of research, revelations and reflection.
