A Decade of Revolution by Kenneth Finlayson Photo collage by D Telles 14 Veritas The decade of the 1960s witnessed profound change in the established world order.
The post-WW II global configuration was essentially bi-polar, with the United States-led West aligned against the Sovietdominated East.
This article will look briefly at each of these regions and the general United States foreign policy strategy for each.
The emphasis will be on Latin America, in particular Bolivia, and events such as Cuban-instigated insurgencies, affecting United States engagement Mao Zedong with Associated Press correspondent John in the southern hemisphere.
Mao’s Peoples Republic of sponsored revolutionary fervor was a major factor in China broke with the Soviet Union in the 1960s, resulting determining the United States strategy. in two Communist spheres of influence in the world.
It was the Soviet Union that faced off against the West in the Cold War, and instigated such provocations as the erection of the Berlin Wall.
As the Soviets achieved nuclear parity with the United States, the The Berlin Wall divided East and West Berlin for 28 years.
Construction by the German Democratic Republic began on 13 August 1961.
The Wall In the 1960s, cracks began to appear in the monolithic collapsed on 9 November 1989 to pave the Soviet bloc when Alexander Dubček presented a less way for German reunification. repressive regime in Czechoslovakia.
The “Prague Spring” was ruthlessly suppressed by the Soviet Army in 1968.
Bloc began to show signs of Nikita S Khrushchev, June 1960 1 disintegration.
Yugoslavia, Albania, and Czechoslovakia Post–World War II Wars of National Liberation are defined as those all rebelled against Russian conflicts fought by indigenous military groups against an imperial power rule.
The purpose is the violent pursuit of maintaining control over its political change; to create a new nation state grounded in some kind of Eastern European satellites, cultural community.
Overwhelmingly based on guerrilla warfare, Wars of worked diligently to foster National Liberation were the predominant form of conflict in the 1960s.
An the spread of Communism abroad as it had in the example today would be Chechnya, where the Muslim Chechens are fighting 1950s.
In the post-War era, Colombia Congo Burma Western Europe was divided Bolivia Afghanistan over the best approach to Ethiopia meet the Soviet threat and on Venezuela the question of how to deal Chile Mozambique with the divided Germany.
Guatemala Namibia The Marshall Plan poured billions of United States dollars into Peru Europe and Japan to put Endnotes the war-torn nations back 1 Walter Darnell Jacobs, “Soviet Views of Wars of National Liberation,” Military Review, October 1967, 61. on their feet.
NATO forces and reinforced by the nuclear arsenals of the West, the governments of Western Europe were popularly elected democracies or constitutional monarchies.
The fundamental issue facing the Europeans was their political and economic alignment in response to the Soviet threat.
The nations of Europe did align in 1949 under the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, , but the cohesive nature of the alliance was disrupted when France withdrew in 1966.
In spite of this, the nations of Western Europe remained stable and committed to opposing the Soviets.
There was a genuine desire to advance European economic progress and a reluctance to see the spread of nuclear weapons.
Outside of Europe, notably in Asia and Africa, things were far from stable.
In the former French colonial holdings in Indochina, Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev and United States President John F Kennedy in Vienna, Austria, on 4 June 1961.
Communist North Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh was After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Khrushchev tried to waging a war against the U.S.-backed South Vietnamese intimidate the young president by sending nuclear government.
Communist insurgencies threatened weapons and modern armaments to Cuba. neighboring Laos and Cambodia, with the latter eventually falling to Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge.
The United States was 16 Veritas Map by D Telles. engaged in a steadily escalating conflict in Vietnam.
The came to dominate American foreign policy and the United States transition to independence was often rocky, and many of military and became the focal point of domestic unrest in the new nations fell under dictators or military juntas, America throughout the 1960s.
This was in sharp was decisively engaged in Asia in the 1960s, the interest contrast to America’s role in Latin America.
Two decades in Africa was minimal. of United States preoccupation with Europe and Asia created an The decade of the 1960s brought more political imbalance in American policy towards Latin America change to the African continent than anywhere in the that the United States began to rectify in the 1960s. world.
In one year the number of new sovereign endemic to the highest levels of government, the countries jumped to 27 and continued to grow as the old tendency to generalize and simplify when formulating imperial powers withdrew from the continent in the face foreign policy.
By 1967, and then the President of the People’s Republic of Vietnam over $6 billion in economic aid from the United States until his Agency for International Development and $1.7 death in 1969.
He waged billion via the Military Assistance Program had war against the Japanese, been distributed in Latin America.
In addition to funds, then the French until 1954, Kennedy’s newly formed Peace Corps dispatched some then against the United 16,000 workers to Latin America between 1962 and 1967, States and South Vietnam to conduct civic action projects, improve agricultural until his death in 1969. practices, and help educate the local populations.
But Latin America was not a homogenous region; it contained regional cooperation.
The Organization of American widely diverse countries and cultures, with greatly States , founded in 1948 was one of the oldest of varying degrees of development.
Castro’s successful Communist instability affected many countries in the region. revolution in Cuba threw shockwaves throughout Latin In 1962, the nations of Latin America were America, and United States foreign policy became predicated predominately multi-party democracies.
By 1967, military on preventing the further spread of Cuban-sponsored juntas were in control in Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Bolivia, revolution.
The States foreign policy in the 1960s towards Latin America ideological initiative the United States enjoyed at the beginning reflected a mistaken idea that there existed a hemispheric of the decade as the promoter of democracy was lost Pan-American movement.
While the United States tried in subsequent years by its support of non-democratic to develop a coherent, ”one-size fits all” policy, each of regimes.
The presence of Fidel Castro’s Communist • A Soviet missile shoots down an American Lockheed U2 spy plane; the pilot Francis Gary Powers is captured.
United States Economic Assistance billions of 2005 $US 5 4 3 2 1 0 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 USAID USAD Other Econ.
President John F Kennedy signs the Charter of Punta del Este in August 1961.
This made Latin America countering the spread of Communist Cuban the second largest recipient of United States aid after Asia. influence in the region.
Cuba encouraged many of the revolutionaries in the Land reform in Bolivia did work to the extent that region to foment unrest.
The Indians were given title to their lands popular participation in government; land reform in the after nominal payments were made to the landowners break-up of the old feudal estates called the latifundias; by the government.
Over 19,536,850 acres, (nearly the destruction of the ruling oligarchies that maintained 31,000 square miles,) were in the hands of the Indian them; and the main objective, economic development. population by 1967.25 This redistribution had far-reaching But unlike Europe and Japan, there was no Marshall Plan consequences when Cuban revolutionary elements equivalent for Latin America.
The Alliance for Progress was structured to address “the most critical area in the world” these objectives and provide for security in the region. — President John F Kennedy Formalized in August 1961, by the Charter of Punta del Este, the 20 signatory nations mapped out the vision for the Alliance for Progress that focused on agrarian reform and raising the standard of living in Latin America.
The Alliance was founded as the response to the Cuban threat to incite revolution.
But, as the decade wore on, the Alliance for Progress began to lose its effectiveness.
The AFP gradually became more about social reform than economic progress.
It foundered on the resistance of the landed elites to cultural change and the nationalistic sentiments of the different countries.
One bright spot was Bolivia, which by 1967 had received more President John F Kennedy greets the first Peace Corps than $262 million in economic and military aid from the volunteers in Washington, DC, 28 August 1961.
The United States There the AFP-sponsored programs, notably land Peace Corps was his initiative and between 1962 and reform, were a deterrent to Cuban-sponsored revolution.67, 16,000 volunteers were sent to Latin America.
Cuba Dominican Republic Guatemala Venezuela Coup Colombia Failed Coup Assassination Failed Assassination Brazil Foco Wars Peru Urban Guerrilla Warfare Bolivia Revolution led by Ernesto “Che” Guevara attempted to foment a Communist revolution.
Che was unable to gain support from the local population and failed in his attempt to start a popular revolution in Bolivia.
By and large, however, attempts at land reform and more popular participation in government elsewhere in Latin America failed.
By the Uruguay end of the 1960s, United States economic influence had waned and Argentina military juntas were the order of the day.
The world evolved from a strictly bipolar one In the 1960s, Latin America was divided along East-West lines, to one of regional spheres subject to a series of Foco wars and other insurgencies.
The decade was one of military, ideological, map depicts the instability that and social revolution and virtually no nation went plagued the region. unscathed.
For the United States, an increasing military Map by D Telles. involvement in Vietnam and the need for constant engagement in Europe to shore up the front lines of the Cold War were the primary concerns of Washington.
After a promising beginning, United States influence in Latin America waned as the decade drew to a close.
The hemisphere proved particularly susceptible to the siren Kenneth Finlayson is the USASOC Deputy Command song of Cuban-sponsored revolution.
But, the interests include Army special operations during the failure of Che’s effort is one of the few American Korean War, special operations aviation, and World War II counterinsurgency success stories in Latin America. special operations units.
The large Indian population of Bolivia did benefit from the reforms by acquiring arable land from the large latifundias.
Endnotes 1 Herman F Achminow, “Crisis in Mao’s Realm and Moscow’s China 14 Wright, Latin America in the Era of the Cuban Revolution, 72.
A Broad-Brush Appraisal,” Foreign Affairs, 21 Frei, “The Alliance That Lost Its Way,” 438.
Cuban Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez is decay of the Alliance began under Kennedy and accelerated under Lyndon quoted as saying “Cuba has the duty of carrying out, and will always carry Johnson.
