The Jupiter Affair, 1959-1963 NUR BILGE CRISS Debates about the Cold War continue to flourish as more original data become available for research.
First, the idea of deploying United States strategic missiles in other NATO countries was abandoned.
Second, the Crisis adversely affected the relationship of both the United States and the Soviet Union with Turkey and Cuba in regard to future commitments to the security of their respective allies.
Third, historiography recently shifted from the image of President John F Kennedy, who would not bargain with the Soviets, even when confronted with nuclear war, to the image of a Kennedy, who was courageous enough to do so.
The 'bargain' was to remove the Jupiter IRBMs from Turkey in return for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Since both promises had been verbal, conducted by secret diplomacy through the United States Attorney General Robert Kennedy and the Soviet Ambassador to Washington DC, Anatolii Fyodorovich Dobrynin, plausible bargains remained the subject of speculation.
The mere suggestion of a bargain was vehemently denied by both the United States and Turkish authorities alike.
When a rumor began to circulate in Turkey during the mid-1960s of a trade off (presumably instigated by the Soviet Embassy in Ankara) the leftists believed it wholeheartedly and the rightist establishment continued to deny it but were however embarrassed.
Accordingly, another implication of the Crisis was that it effected a polarization in Turkish domestic politics, albeit as one factor among many.
The final, but not the least important implication of the Crisis is to do with the nature of alliances in regard to why and how alliance cohesion may break down.
This is also a study of how perceptions of threat become more real than life itself.
In this case, if one of the serious perceptions was the Soviet threat to Turkey, the other one was a fear of losing United States economic aid in the event of a rapprochement between the superpowers.
The Politico-Strategic Debate The Turkish government's decision to deploy IRBMs in 1959 has been subject to much political controversy yet to little academic debate within the country from the viewpoints of strategy, Turkish-US relations, and the nature of decision-making at the time.
This indicated that Turkish foreign and defense policies would adhere to the status quo despite domestic changes.
Whenever reference was made to the Jupiters in the press, the missiles were described as rockets, or guided missiles and usually the Çigli base was alluded to as the rocket base.
The word 'nuclear' was rarely mentioned, thereby removing the stigma attached to it.
Yet to possess strategic nuclear weapons also seemed prestigious, a factor which was perceived to increase a member country's intra-alliance status.
Distaste and a fear of communism on the part of the Turkish government was coupled with a fear of encirclement in the light of the leftist coup in Iraq.
The Menderes government consistently ignored friendly overtures from the Soviets and deliberately held back from establishing closer economic relations with them.
The Prime Minister was thoroughly convinced that economic ties with the northern neighbor would automatically result in a Soviet leverage to re-direct Turkish foreign policy.
But, the American dimension of economic dependence and its implications was not questioned by Menderes in the 'all white' or 'all black' atmosphere of the Cold War, which did not leave any room for shades in distinguishing between risk and security.
Turkey was trying to pursue an active foreign policy in the Middle East, as a regional actor which promoted Western policies.
Its membership in the ill-fated Baghdad Pact of 1955, had by 1959, opened the legal route for the United States and Turkey to conclude bilateral STRATEGIC NUCLEAR MISSILES IN TURKEY 99 agreements.
The United States was not an official member of the Pact, but made separate bilateral agreements of cooperation with Iran, Turkey and Pakistan.
The 'Agreement of Cooperation Between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Turkey' was signed in Ankara on 5 March 1959, and entered into force the same day.
The two governments affirmed their right to cooperate for security and defense.
One observer noted that the agreement was presented to the Turkish Grand National Assembly on 26 October 1959.
But, the minutes of meetings of the Turkish Grand National Assembly do not reveal that a parliamentary meeting was held on 26 October 1959, unless of course the cabinet was notified of the Agreement on introducing modern weapons at a closed session.
The bilateral agreement pertaining specifically to missile deployment was not to be made public and that it entered into force on 28 October 1959, after ratification in the US, attests to the secrecy surrounding the Jupiter missiles.
In fact, there were no domestic impediments politically or legally to such a decision-making process in Turkey.
The opposition was not taken into account by the government, and there were no socialist or communist parties to question the decision.
That such agreements had to be presented to and approved by the Parliament within six months, did not leave much room for the Grand National Assembly to question foreign and defense policies.
Given the aforementioned factors, this study will try to assess why Turkey had been enthusiastic about deploying Jupiters against all odds; the nature of Turkish-American relations in the process; the decision-making mechanism within Turkey's ultra conservative democracy of the time; and the diplomatic, domestic implications of strategic nuclear weapons deployment, culminating in their removal during the Pot Pie operation of 1963 in the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962.
There are at least two arguments as to why Turkey ought not to have agreed to deploy nuclear missiles.
First, weapons of mass destruction are not necessarily geared to defend a particular territory, and Turkey was not an exception.
Second, countries which share a common border such as Turkey and the Soviet Union cannot afford sustained tensions.
Therefore, both countries had to limit and contain risk factors to a minimum.
Although Turkey was on NATO's periphery and as such far from the main cluster of NATO countries, it chose to increase its risk factor.
For example the possession of nuclear weapons was perceived as an excellent deterrent to others.
In addition, Alliance strategy assumed that an attack on one NATO member was an attack on all.
Hence, in Turkey the Soviet threat was perceived to be real,' in an atmosphere when the administration was on alert against any person who might be suspected of leftist tendencies.
A third argument against the deployment of nuclear missiles was that they had deterrence value only as part of strategy of massive retaliation.
This strategy became obsolete as the Soviets began to develop IRBMs and ICBMs, and the United States policy-makers were becoming ambivalent about massive retaliation.
Although the concept of flexible response was adopted as policy during the Kennedy era, it is evident that the seeds were sown during the Eisenhower administration.
In case of use, coordination between the White House, the host country chiefexecutive , respective military personnel (whom in Turkey's case would not be operating on a double-key basis) could have resulted in loss of vital time.
One was to pursue nuclear warfare, and the second was to negotiate and withdraw.
Given the horrors of a nuclear war, the second option had to be preferable.
Hence, a third party outside the superpowers which was involved with nuclear systems, would be the subject of negotiation.
Last, between the time when the United States administration offered nuclear missiles to NATO countries in 1957, and in 1959, when Turkey signed a bilateral agreement with the United States to accept Jupiters, there existed no compelling reason for Turkey to acquire the missiles.
On the contrary, certain developments, both in the Middle East and Europe (such as increasingly strained relations between the Soviet Union and the Western Alliance over Berlin) might have deterred Turkey from taking such a bold stance, but did not.
Developments in the Middle East involved perceptions of Soviet threat, intervention, and infiltration to the regional countries.
During the 1956 Suez crisis, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had publicly threatened Britain and France with a nuclear attack if the latter did not withdraw from Suez.
The 1958 revolution in Iraq had brought a Baathist regime to power in that country, where increased Soviet influence was a risk factor.
Again, in 1958, the sectarian strife in Lebanon seemingly threatened a revolution.
Taking advantage of the Eisenhower doctrine of 1957, whereby the United States pledged assistance against communist aggression in the Middle East, the Lebanese president Camile Shamun invited United States forces into his country.
The American unit from Europe used the încirlik base as a staging point for this operation in mid-July 1958.
However, This action was to place a strain upon the sturdy US-Turkey relationship.
Due to the need for haste in preparation of the force deployment, the Turkish authorities were not able to be consulted on the action; they were notified after the fact of what had occurred.
Further, while European and American journalists had access to Incirlik, the Turkish press corps were denied entry.
He defended Turkey's position in facilitating United States troop transfers to a small nation facing communist threat.
Indeed, American soldiers had landed in Lebanon on 15 July 1958, but it would be safe to assume that they were already in Incirlik on the 14th when the US ambassador contacted the Turkish Foreign Minister.
Although the American data contradict Zorlu's statements about timing, the Foreign Minister did not seem to perceive a fait accompli in the matter.
He had been recruited to the party and made a member of the cabinet (first as Minister of State and then as Foreign Minister) from the diplomatic corps.
Zorlu was related to the Prime Minister, Adnan Menderes' family through marriage.
He was aloof by nature and did not mix with the other party members, nor even with other cabinet members.
He felt himself to be above intra party politics and domestic concerns.
His mission was primarily to integrate Turkey with the West, and strengthen his country's position through economic and military aid so that Turkey would emerge as the leading regional power.
The method he adopted was for Turkey to act as a 'bulwark' against communism and as a 'staunch' NATO ally.
The Prime Minister as Chief Executive, and his Foreign Minister agreed in principle and method alike.
And, if proof of dedication to NATO, albeit coupled with other concerns, meant accepting IRBMs in Turkey, then it was to be done.
There did not appear to be consensus among the military about the issue, however.
If there were any objections to the deployment of Jupiters from the ranks, officers kept it to themselves.
One evidence leading to this conclusion is that Admiral Sezai Orkunt, for example, was with the Turkish Defense Attache's Office in Washington DC at the time.
In a personal interview, he said that he and other colleagues had sent numerous reports to the CGS about the strategic and political liabilities of the missiles.
Whatever opposition there was to missile deployment on the part of the military was to be expressed symbolically.
On the one hand, it appears that Turkish governments went along with the idea of nuclear missile deployment, because Turkey had grown dependent on the United States military and economic aid.
This was also another way of showing its gratitude to and solidarity with the United States On the other hand, the above mentioned factors such as deterrence and the threat of communist subversion were also foremost in the decision-makers' minds when they made the choice.
Counter-arguments appear to be deliberately withheld from the two foreign policy-makers of the time, Adnan Menderes and Fatin Riistii Zorlu.
In the ultra-conservative democracy of Turkey of the 1950s, political will on foreign policy matters was neither shared nor challenged.
Preamble to Deployment At the NATO Heads of Government meeting in December 1957, IRBMs were introduced to Italy and Turkey, because, as the communiqué read, The Soviet leaders, while preventing a general disarmament agreement, have made it clear that the most modern and destructive weapons, including missiles of all kinds, are being introduced in the Soviet armed forces.
In the Soviet view, all European nations except the USSR should, without waiting for general disarmament, renounce nuclear weapons and missiles and rely on arms of the pre-atomic age.
Therefore, NATO had to stockpile nuclear warheads to be made available to the Alliance as and when needed.
The United States was prompted to take action, because the Soviets had developed a long-range missile initiated by the Sputnik experiment in October 1957.
The myth of a 'missile gap' between the United States and the Soviets soon became prevalent in the American media.
Although the United States policy-makers knew better, the myth had to be propagated perhaps in order to justify military/defense spending coupled with the more altruistic policy of controlling nuclear proliferation in Europe within the bounds of NATO, as well as strengthening the Atlantic linkage.
Subsequently, General Lauris N Norstad, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe , was the authority to have decided on Turkey and Italy for NATO IRBMs.
In a 'Top Secret' memorandum from the United States Embassy in Ankara to the US Secretary of State on 17 April 1956, it was stated that plans for massive deployment of United States air and ground forces and 'special weapons' in Turkey would be a difficult proposition for the Turks to accept if put unilaterally.
In any event, American lobbying with the Turks to accept 'special weapons' in the context of modernizing the Turkish military probably sufficed.
Modernizing its military with nuclear missiles, however, was to become Turkey's Achilles heel.
General Norstad's decision on nuclear deployment in NATO countries was made in light of President Eisenhower's concern about conducting the US military aid program overseas by extending protection under the nuclear umbrella and reducing the number of conventional forces.
By September 1958, the United States State Department approved that the Military Facilities Agreement of 23 June 1954 with Turkey be amended to include USAF's development and expansion of the Çigli Airfield near ízmir, because SACEUR had designated the USAF as the primary user of that base.
The objective was to bring the base up to USAF standards for maneuver and rotational training operations.
In April 1959, the United States Department of State was ready to conclude bilateral agreements under the Atomic Energy Act in implementation of the NATO Atomic Stockpile concept between the United States and Turkey.
While Greece remained ambivalent on the southeast flank, discussions with Turkey continued.
Yet, throughout 1959, completion of infrastructure projects were stalled, because Turkey failed to meet its financial commitments for cost sharing.
Turkey had been unable to appropriate funds in its defense budget to meet expenses.
Reportedly, Turkey's 1959 Ministry of Defense budget for infrastructure required TL 104. million , but it had appropriated only TL 23 million (US $2,5 million) out of counterpart funds.
In view of Turkey's financial and budgetary difficulties, United States officials recommended to the Secretary of State that Washington should maintain reservations until it received a satisfactory memorandum from Turkey on program deficiencies.
It also advised that it should also re-examine its aid program 'to determine what financial measures (such as release of additional counterpart funds earmarked for use in completing host country responsibilities on high priority projects) can be employed to insure operational completion of projects now under way.
Concurrent with major development projects was mismanagement of resources; bad weather and harvests eradicated benefits to be derived from massive purchases of tractors for agriculture; trade and budget deficits had increased; the opposition began to be sharply critical; and the government became more authoritarian and oppressive.
Meanwhile, the IRBM issue remained alive with the United States State Department and USAF, who were trying to determine how much of the costs would be met by the MAP and how much by the Air Force.
With respect to the location of IRBMs, the State Department favored a remote spot while the AF preferred one near Izmir which would locate the missiles close to a major port.
In due course, President Eisenhower had begun to question the presence of bases in NATO flank areas.
But the Undersecretary of State, Douglas Dillon, reminded the President that 'it would be a very serious matter to back down on our plans at the moment, apparently under threat from Khrushchev.
Despite these arguments, Eisenhower pondered whether the United States and the Western Alliance were not behaving in an unduly provocative fashion by deploying IRBMs close to the Soviet Union.
The United States military-civilian bureaucracy, keen on upholding their credibility and commitments, followed the course of deployment.
By September 1959, the United States Embassy in Ankara was authorized to begin negotiations with the Turkish government for an agreement to deploy IRBMs in Turkey.
Prior to receiving a proposal to that effect, the Turks had indicated to SACEUR their willingness to accept the offer.
The State Department, however, recommended that a public announcement about exchange of notes between Turkey and the United States to deploy IRBMs on Turkish territory be made, but only as a low key announcement after the North Atlantic Council notification.
In fact, Zorlu wished to impress upon Khrushchev that Turkey could not be bullied.
But, he failed to make the impression on Khruschev, because, Within a week the avid Turkish government accepted the United States draft agreement without alterations and proposed that the Americans conclude the deal immediately.
Secretary of State Herter and Norstad endorsed this rash Turkish approach, but it was Eisenhower himself who deferred the signing of the understanding until the end of October 1959 well after Nikita Khruschev's September visit to the United States.
If the haste and eagerness on Zorlu's part to sign the agreement seem overzealous, John Haskell from the Office of Defense Advisor (US Mission to the NATO and European Regional Organizations), was supportive of transferring nuclear delivery capability to the allies, despite the risks.
Meanwhile, already in May 1959, the Soviet Union had delivered a verbal note to Turkey asking the latter to account for press information regarding deployment of nuclear missiles in Turkey.
The note included a veiled threat that the Soviet Union would take measures to defend its southern borders and an accusation that Turkey was becoming party to NATO's offensive aims by allowing 'rocket bases' to be built on its territory.
Turkey justified its decision on the basis of its membership in a collective defense pact.
On 25 June 1959, the Soviet Union made a declaration on the establishment of an atom free zone in the Balkans.
It is quite probable that this note played a role in Greek ambivalence, albeit coupled with other concerns such as domestic opposition.
By 15 October 1959, a leading Turkish daily made the announcement that an agreement had been concluded between the United States and Turkey on building rocket sites30 although the United States had not yet ratified the agreement.
The announcement appears to have been made under orders from the government in order to accelerate United States ratification.
It was only by the end of October 1959, that the Turkish press reported an announcement of the US Department of State that Turkey had agreed to the establishment of an IRBM base, the missiles of which had the capacity to deliver nuclear warheads, classified as Jupiter IRBMs.
The Kennedy Factor It was one of history's coincidental twists that while President Eisenhower almost had a premonition in drawing parallelisms between deploying nuclear missiles so close to the Soviets in Turkey, and a theoretical deployment of Soviet missiles in Mexico, it was during the Kennedy administration that these weapons were installed in Turkey late 1961, to fulfill the 1959 agreement.
What is peculiar, however, is that even a report such as the following from the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of 11 February 1961 did not stop the deployment of Jupiters in Turkey.
Since they will not be placed in hardened bases and will not be mobile, their retaliatory value is highly questionable.
Construction, therefore, should not be permitted to begin on the five JUPITER sites in Turkey.
According to a seemingly definitive interpretation, Kennedy did not wish to look weak after his encounter with Khruschev in Vienna.
The 3-4 June 1961 meeting in Vienna had left JFK convinced that Khrushchev would not shrink from pulling the nuclear trigger if his back was to the wall.
The entire United States strategy in the Cuban missile crisis a year later was based on this analysis, which proved to be correct.
Because Khruschev was given leeway to maneuver, he did not reply in kind to our show of force against Soviet ships and his Communist ally, Castro.
Further yet, the 'leeway to maneuver' after agreeing to United States inspection of Russian ships during the 1962 quarantine of Cuba, and the subsequent promise that the United States would not invade Cuba might have had something to do with the seeming compromise that, in Khruschev's own words was explained as, President Kennedy told us through his brother that in exchange [of removing Soviet Missiles from Cuba] he would remove missiles from Turkey.
I give my word I will do this, but this promise should not be made public.
The broad technical strategic argument alone rendered the Jupiters obsolete.
Far from it, there was resistance to all American approaches for their removal until the Cuban missile crisis occurred, and Turkish policy-makers came to the realization of how close the country might have come to becoming a Soviet target.
Before the Cuban crisis, the belief in government circles was that Turkey was a target without the Jupiters, anyway.
During the Cold War, it was difficult at best, if not impossible, to differentiate between fact and fiction.
Moreover, the ban on teaching Marxism/Leninism, Communist Systems, Russian History and Thought deprived the first two generations of the Turkish Republic of any sense of a realistic assessment of this neighbor.
But, subjects such as the Soviet Union, Russia, Communism, Turkic People's of the Soviet Union became the monopoly of radicals, not well-versed 'communists' and not well-versed 'Pan-Turkists' alike.
These groups remained marginal in the 1940s and 1950s, only to reclaim their conceptual territory, even though they lacked factual information, to the detriment of the country.
The polarization of the 'right' and the 'left' in the 1970s and their resort to terrorism resulted in the third coup d'état in Turkey by 1980.
The previous ruling parties, both Republican and Democratic , have been responsible for ideological polarization by equating dissension and liberalism with treason.
Under those circumstances, a sacrosant issue such as foreign relations entrusted to any incumbent government was naturally considered above scrutiny, in the hope of keeping foreign relations above domestic party politics.
This literally meant integrating Turkish foreign policy with NATO, alias the US, for the United States was equal to NATO on Turkish territory until the crisis over the Jupiter missiles, the Cyprus issue, limitation of opium cultivation, problems with SOFA and sovereignty issues, and other issues brought Turkey to make a conceptual distinction between its commitments to the United States bilaterally and to NATO multilaterally, in accordance with its basic foreign policy tenets.
The Road to Deployment Caught between the desire to attain NATO force goals, modernizing its military and strengthening the economy, Turkey by 1958, had grown increasingly dependent on United States aid.
This was reflected by Zorlu's behavior in the use of incirlik-for-Lebanon case.
Prior to Zorlu's ministry, however, there was real concern about the image of equal partnership.
Although this would not change the substance of plans either way, an appearance of correctness in relations prevailed.
By 1958, Turkey was in deep economic crisis and United States economic aid was limited to the amount believed necessary by the Americans to prevent a collapse.
Turkey's annual deficit in the balance of payments was approximately United States $350 million (Turkey agreed to an economic stabilization program only in 1959).38 Hence, the excitement expressed in the press about US aid.
On 14 January 1958, an editorial in the daily Vatan said that Turkey should carry out radical internal reforms to make it possible for the United States to assist the country economically and warned that United States interest in Turkish welfare may disappear should Washington reach a rapprochement with the Soviets.
The following day Cumhuriyet called for a sharp increase in aid programs.
In the same article, Turkey was credited with being the only possible NATO site for IRBMs directed against Russia and stated that Turkey refused to profit from its strategic position by not bargaining with Russia.
The latter statement was obviously made for American consumption, but one probably dictated by a government caught between its commitment to sovereignty and excessive dependence.
Requests for increased military aid were justified on the basis of increased Turkish share in the collective defense burden.
The foreign aid that Turkey received in 1958 amounted to United States $359 million of which $234 million was granted by the United States.
The rest came from OEEC, IMF, the Federal Republic of Germany and Britain.
Yet, given the budget and trade deficits, domestic credits were frozen, price increases as well as shortage of goods occurred with ensuing inflation, black market and queues.
Zorlu tried to account for the economic problems by stating that Turkey had incurred medium term loans for investments and repayment dates for these loans came before the government managed to make investments operational and profitable.
In this way, the United States would also become dependent on Turkey through its custody of nuclear warheads on Turkish soil.
In addition, after the United States spent US$100 million on each Jupiter squadron and developed support systems, Turkey, in all likelihood would be guaranteed continued American economic and military assistance.
In addition, NATO had expended United States $200 million on all infrastructure works in Turkey (approximately.
US$90 million on airfields and United States $60 million on POL-Petroleum, Oil and Lubricantsfacilities), but by the close of May 1959, there was still not an operational POL system or a fully operational airfield.
However, Turks would not welcome any suggestion to reallocate national funds to meet host country responsibilities.
The matter was left to negotiation along with Turkey's defense budget of FY I960.42 In spite of its economic problems and limited military capabilities, Turkey was perceived as an aggressive nation in some circles of the State Department.
On 4 February 1959, Secretary John Foster Dulles, told General Norstad that some people in the Department were opposed to IRBMs for Greece and Turkey.
Opposition regarding Turkey might have stemmed from the aggressive stance that the Menderes government displayed in the aftermath of the coup d'état in Iraq in 1958.
Specifically, Menderes wanted Turkey to take military action and eliminate the leftist coup-makers in Iraq, only to be convinced by the Americans to refrain from such an act.
General Norstad had already announced that Turkey was going to get IRBMs the previous December, in addition to Secretary of Defense, Neil McElroy, who announced on 23 January 1959, that negotiations were underway with France, Greece and Turkey for IRBM deployment.
But, Norstad said, if people were worried about the Turks misusing IRBMs, we could drag out indefinitely arrangements under which we would have to keep United States personnel present and eliminate thereby such theoretical risk.
The Turks were obviously not ready to move into any situation of full control over the IRBMs immediately.
The Soviet Union, however, delivered a note to Turkey threatening that if the decision was implemented, it would take the necessary precautions to defend its southern border.
On 13 July 1959, the Turkish Foreign Ministry responded to the June proposal of the Soviet Union regarding an atom free zone in the Balkans by stating that Turkey was not forced by the United States to accept atomic 'weapons'; that since it was under threat it had the right to legitimate self-defense through most advanced weaponry; and that this proposal of the Soviet Union which intended to deprive Turkey of sophisticated weaponry, but leave intact its own, was proof that Turkey had made the right decision.
Hence, the official announcement of IRBM deployment in Turkey was to read, In accordance with the decision of the NATO Heads of Government meeting in December 1957 and the recommendation of SACEUR, an exchange of notes took place in Ankara on , between the United States and Turkey providing for the deployment of IRBMs in Turkey.
The 'Agreement of Cooperation Between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Turkey' signed on 5 March 1959, was presented to the Committee on Foreign Affairs at the Turkish Grand National Assembly only by 6 February 1960, although international agreements were to be presented to the GNA within six months of their signing for mandatory ratification.
The clause which stated that the United States and Turkey 'affirmed their determination to maintain their collective security and to resist aggression direct or indirect' (emphasis added) caused consternation among the opposition.
He reminded the Assembly that when the Lebanese President Chamun sensed that he was losing to the opposition, he declared the matter as an infiltration attempt by international communism, and invited the United States military to intervene.
It is not within the scope of this study to assess whether Chamun was being an opportunistic politician or whether the communist threat was real in Lebanon.
But, given the growing authoritarianism of the Menderes government, Ecevit's questioning of the Agreement was valid.
However, the government had no time to spare on details, namely, democraticallyinclined bickerings of opposition parliamentarians.
Throughout 1960, there were tangible developments in Soviet-Turkish relations which were hardly a reflection of easing of East-West tensions.
In October 1959, Menderes complained at the Dallas Council on World Affairs meeting that the inflated defense budget of Turkey in view of the Soviet threat was causing financial problems in development projects.
Its intended rapprochement with the Soviets was based on its frustration with the United States aid levels for development projects.
The Menderes government plausibly wanted to play the trump card of rapprochement against the Americans for increased levels of aid.
By April 1960, declarations were made that the Soviet and Turkish premiers would be visiting each others' country.
The visits did not take place, because on 27 May 1960, there was a military coup in Turkey.
Colonel Alparslan Tiirkeç of the National Unity Committee, who served as an Under Secretary of the Prime Minister's Officedisclosed recently in his memoirs that the Soviet Ambassador, Nikolai Rijov delivered a message from Khruschev soon after the coup.
The Soviet Premier offered Turkey United States $500 million annually in foreign aid in return for Turkey's abrogating its NATO membership.
Moreover, the Soviets were ready to modernize the Turkish Armed Forces.
Rijov expressed Soviet concern over United States bases in Turkey as well as tactical nuclear weapons and missiles capable of nuclear delivery.
The latter had not yet been delivered, but the issue must have disturbed the Soviets to the point where they came up with very advantageous offers to the new ruling elite, which did not concur.
In 1960, HQ USAFE programmed one SM-78 Strategic Missile Squadron for Çigli Air Base, with five launch positions to be completely operational by February 1962.
A second position came on alert the following month, and the fifth and final position became operational on March 5, 1962.52 In 1961, President Kennedy asked the former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, to conduct a study assessing NATO policies.
There were suggestions in the study group that Acheson formed, to the effect that IRBMs in Italy and Turkey should be removed.
Actually, it was the critical report from the Joint Atomic Energy Committee of the Congress which had stirred the President to search for ways to remove the Jupiters.
President Kennedy asked Rusk to take up the matter with the Turkish government which he did during a CENTO meeting in Ankara on 1 May 1961.
According to Rusk, after dinner, I had a walk in the garden with Mr Selim Sarper, the Foreign Minister of Turkey, and took up with him the matter of withdrawing the Jupiters from Turkey.
First, he said that the Turkish government had just gotten approval in its Parliament for the Turkish costs of the Jupiter missiles and that it would be very embarrassing for them to go right back and tell the Parliament that the Jupiters were being withdrawn.
Moreover, such an action would be demoralizing before the Polaris submarines became available in the Mediterranean, and that was not scheduled before Spring 1963.
When Rusk briefed the President on these points, Kennedy agreed to delay any action.
Kennedy's concern about looking 'weak' in Soviet eyes was clearly enhanced by the Turkish attitude.
This conclusion is based primarily on the view that, in the aftermath of Khruschev's hard posture at Vienna, cancellation of the IRBM deployment might seem sign of weakness.
When the Secretary of State raised this matter with the Turkish Foreign Minister at CENTO, the Turkish reaction was strongly adverse, When the Turkish Foreign Minister discussed the problem with SACEUR, General Norstad underlined the military importance of sending IRBMs to Turkey.
This made it unlikely that any attempt to persuade the Turkish military that they should abandon this project would succeed.
The Secretary of State has discussed this conclusion with General Norstad, who concurs.
By July 1961, W-49 warheads for Jupiter missiles in Turkey were released.
In essence, a parallelism would be drawn between the Soviet missiles in Cuba, and the Jupiters in Turkey was a foregone conclusion, even though the Turkish press argued to the contrary, stating that Turkey was part of a collective security system while Cuba was not.
When the crisis unfolded, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, met President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk in Washington DC on 18 October 1962.
Thus, the USA may have bases in those countries and conclude military treaties with them, yet you do not believe the USSR has the right to help Cuba to develop its economy and strengthen its defensive capability.
In fact, it was not only the Soviets who drew a parallel between the two situations.
A Turkish journalist reacted to this by saying how grateful he was that the conservatives were in power in Britain and not liberals, 'who live on the Moon.'60 ismet inönü, once again Prime Minister in 1962, handled the repercussions of the crisis in as low a profile as possible.
The domestic implications of the crisis, however, later, were nowhere nearly as smooth.
In contrast with Italy, where the removal of the Jupiter missiles facilitated a consensus between the Christian Democrats and Socialists,61 in Turkey it served to widen the gap between the Right and the Left.
The leftists argued that the Americans had been bargaining with the Soviets behind Turkey's back, and that a tradeoff between the Soviet missiles in Cuba and the Jupiters in Turkey pointed only to what an unreliable ally the United States was.
Consequently, Turkey's membership in NATO only endangered its security, because if there was ever a nuclear attack on Turkey, the NATO allies would not retaliate in kind, but would probably turn the issue into a bargaining chip with the Soviets.
But the President immediately abandoned the idea on further thought because 'the Turks' he said 'were now in no position to make a statement to the effect that they would ask that the Jupiters be withdrawn'.62 Kennedy was right.
Just as these problems were being debated in the White House, the Turkish government had issued a press statement rejecting outright Khruschev's public offer of a tradeoff between the Jupiters and S-4s.
This is perplexing, given the fact that the Turkish Chief Executive was Ismet Inönü, who had conducted brilliant diplomacy during World War II so that Turkey would not get involved in the war, in spite of its military alliance with Britain and France.
The missile crisis was made public on 22 October, and Khruschev made his proposal on 26 October.
There were already indications from the Western press drawing a symmetry between Cuba and Turkey, inönü was briefed immediately after the 22nd about the liabilities of the missiles at least in regard to the decision-making process of their use.
Was faith in NATO so strong, or national pride in refusing to be compared with a small island so great, that inönü did not grasp the initiative, are questions which cannot be answered definitively at this point in time.
The answers to these questions may well be yes, but the lack of a message from the United States one way or another must have given the Turks a false sense of security.
Left to his own devices, inönü chose to stand firm against the Soviet demand.
It had worked in the past when Turkey was not even a member of any alliance.
Having stated that, however, one has to note that inönü's and Turkey's traditional foreign policy was to remain cordial with the Soviets.
Turks took an uncompromising stance against the Soviets only when challenged by them.
Meanwhile, in Washington DC, Kennedy realized that world opinion would never comprehend why Soviet missiles in Cuba were different from American missiles in Turkey.
He knew that he had to make a trade rather than risk war over the obsolete Jupiters, but he apparently decided early on that he would keep this move as his trump card, to be used only at the end rather than the beginning of the negotiations.
It seems clear now that he would have given up the Jupiters through some form of UN mediation, but by bluffing so well that he even fooled most of his advisers, he was able to force Khruschev to accept his terms without disclosing the secret concession regarding the missiles in Turkey.
The idea of 'talking to the Turks' occurred to Kennedy only after Khruschev's offer.
I have argued elsewhere that the Turks may be proud and courageous no more or less than others but were definitely not suicidal.
While one cannot rule out Kennedy's personal ambition to gain a political victory against the Soviets all by himself without involving a remote third party such as inönüit nonetheless had a spillover effect in Turkish-US relations.
On 27 October, even Kennedy was in a dilemma, acknowledging that he might need the Turks.
By then, both the Turks and the United States President had publicly launched an irreversible course, except that Kennedy had already conducted secret diplomacy with the Soviets, but not with an ally.
President Kennedy had not taken inönü into his confidence and this factor, more than a 'bargain' or a 'trade-off, was significant for the future of the collective alliance as well as for bilateral relations.
And, it may well be questioned whether that very moral authority would have held, had he been convinced to offer in 1962 to remove the Jupiters for the sake of world peace.
The chances were that it would have worked despite the apparent military insistence on holding on to the missiles.
Good sense alone would dictate that the military would welcome the opportunity to clear the Turkish Armed Forces' name of the stain of having executed elected politicians, by engaging in the grandiose scheme of contributing to world peace.
The Turkish Armed Forces already had a keen sense of public relations trying to distinguish itself from the coup makers of Iraq of a couple of years ago, as well as from the National Unity Committee faction which had signed the death warrants.
Yet four days, from 22 until 26 October (in essence, from 13 October when the Cuban missiles were identified) might have been enough time to test these hypotheses had misperceptions about Turkish behavior been absent and alliance cohesion been intact.
Conclusion Justifying the existence of Jupiters as a NATO issue, thus distinguishing it from the bilateral relations between Turkey and the US, therefore claiming that no symmetry existed between the former and that of bilateral relations between the USSR and Cuba was a face saving device.
The two decision-makers who decided to deploy nuclear missiles in Turkey, Menderes and Zorlu were not alive by the time of the Cuban crisis.
They were sentenced to death following a legally flawed trial and were executed in 1961.
Therefore, domestic concerns took priority over foreign policy as well as defense until the 1964 Cyprus crisis, and the subsequent tension between the United States and Turkey over the Johnson letter.
President Johnson, by cautioning inönü that if Turkish action on the island would invite a Soviet attack, then NATO was not obligated to defend Turkey, brought home the fact that the security interests of Turkey and the Western Alliance were not necessarily the same.
The 1961 Constitution had brought Turkey freedom of the press, expression, and of association.
In this liberal milieu, foreign policy was also being discussed publicly for the first time.
The Johnson letter made it obvious that Turkey's national security interests were not always going to be convergent with those of its allies.
Concomitant with the Johnson letter, news leaked, presumably from the Soviet Embassy in Ankara, that President Kennedy had agreed to a trade off of the Jupiters without informing the Turks during the Cuban crisis.
Although scholars can only recently verify such a verbal assurance from Kennedy to the Soviets, the Turkish left believed it wholeheartedly at the time.
Coupled with the Johnson letter, anti-Americanism and neutralist sentiments grew on the part of liberals and socialists alike.
They argued that all bases in Turkey were United States bases, with the exception of the Izmir NATO Headquarters, which was a showcase, and that Turkey had lost its sovereignty to the United States an unreliable ally at that.
Disassociating United States domination from the entirety of Turkish security interests, came in increments.
The Jupiter case, although assessed without any precision, should have been the first step in that direction, but it was lost in 1970s rhetoric.
Criticism was directed at the Turkish governments' accommodation of United States listening posts, bases, and radar sites on Turkish territory.
The Turkish soldiers only patrolled the fences of such installations, which subjected uncontrolled American military presence in Turkey to polemics alone, and not to serious debate.
Therefore, proand non120 THE JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES Americanism became polarized.
Only by 3 July 1969, a Defense Cooperation Agreement was signed by the United States and Turkey 'in order to consolidate the various bilateral accords that had accumulated over the years'.67 Some of those accords were verbal, some written, but remained top secret.
Upon proddings by leftists and liberals alike, followed by several incidents caused by uncontrolled US flights compromising Turkish sovereignty (e.g. the U-2 incident of 1960, RB-47 reconnaissance aircraft accident in the Black Sea, and the downing of a United States military aircraft by the Soviets in 1967), the Turkish government, by 1970, announced that the Military Facilities Agreement of 1954 with the US was abrogated.
From then on, with alacrity, the Turkish State has made the use of NATO bases conditional upon its own political will.
Barring NATO or bilateral relations with the US, the short tenure of IRBMs in Turkey remains an anomaly, but historically, no more or less of an anomaly than the Cold War itself.
Latest systematic research was carried out under the auspices of the Nuclear History Project and the Cold War International History Project with major contributions from American, German, French, Dutch, Italian and Russian scholars.
A List of Treaties and Other International Agreements of the United States in Force On January 1, 1992 244.
David J Potter and Gregory J Stachelczyk, 'The Military Relationship Between the United States and Turkey Since 1947', (unpub.
Dept of State Memo to United States Embassy Ankara/Paris/Athens', 17 Sept.59.
Frederich E Nolting Jr, Acting Chief of Mission, USRO from John Haskell, 'European Production of Medium Range Ballistic Missiles ' 3 Nov.59.
Hearings on Military Posture, Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives, 88th Congress 1st Session Jan.
Khrushchev Remembers-The Glasnost Tapes Jerrold I Schecter and Vyacheslav V Luchkov 179.
Illegible; 'Amerika'nm Bize Vereceği Füzeler' , Cumhuriyet, 24 Jan.59,3.
USNSA, Cuban Misile Crisis Box, Dean Rusk to James G Blight, 25 Feb.87.
