But for the past year and a half, week in and week out, they have reassured us that they would never do anything as risky as put nuclear weapons in Cuba.
I have issued public statements saying that the Russians will not put nukes in Cuba, but if they did, we would take them out militarily.
He is telling us that if we don’t remove the missiles from Cuba, he will order an attack on Cuba.
Instead of removing the weapons, let’s speed up work at the missile sites on the island and make them operational for a launch.
This is your moment of truth, your chance to destroy the United States if Kennedy is stupid enough to attack us, now that we are equipped with nuclear weapons.
A week ago, on the morning of October 16th, his national security adviser McGeorge Bundy came to see him while Jack was eating breakfast, and still in his pajamas.
Bundy broke the news that the CIA had confirmed the presence of Soviet nuclear missile sites under construction in Cuba.
Some medium and intermediate range missiles had also been positively identified.
In his mind’s eye, Jack could already see a “we told you so” look on the faces of his military chiefs, Republicans in Congress, many Democratic hawks, and even members of his own administration.
Collision 71 warnings from the United States of the dire consequences that would follow such a deployment.
Now all the hawks will come home to roost and demand that an immediate air strike on the Soviet sites, with an invasion to follow, to make sure all the weapons and their delivery systems have been destroyed.
If they do, the United States is bound by its agreement with NATO to respond militarily.
Jack knows only too well that in Europe, the Soviets field an army in the millions, while NATO has only a token force of about 12,000 in West Berlin.
Thus, the only NATO response that might plausibly stop the Russians in their tracks is a nuclear response.
The resulting nuclear war will begin with the use of NATO’s relatively small, tactical nuclear weapons.
But it will almost surely escalate to the use of larger nuclear weapons.
Jack’s brother Bobby, the attorney general, had told Jack on the 16th that it seemed as if the world was on the brink of nuclear destruction, possibly foreshadowing the end of mankind.
Unable to find words with which to respond adequately, Jack had simply nodded his agreement at Bobby’s proposition, formerly so abstract, now suddenly so horrifyingly close and real.
Moreover, if the Soviets fail to agree to dismantle their nuclear missile sites and send their equipment back to the Soviet Union, the blockade can be tightened to include other material.
The Pentagon anticipates 25,000 American casualties in the initial phases of the invasion and occupation of Cuba.
Jack is editing a letter to Khrushchev urging the Soviet leader to take this upcoming speech very seriously.
He wants Khrushchev to pay especially close attention to those aspects of the speech which emphasize that the United States is absolutely determined to remove the Soviet weapons from Cuba if Khrushchev is unwilling to do so.
In the speech, 72 The Armageddon Letters Jack will stress that any Soviet attack on any target in the United States or Latin America will be met with a nuclear response against the Soviet Union.
He knows that a direct nuclear challenge, made in a public forum, is unprecedented in American history.
As he releases the letter to be sent to Khrushchev, Jack briefs the Congressional leadership on what is in his speech.
They know nothing of what has been going on behind closed doors for the past week.
Jack heads upstairs to make the final adjustments to the scariest speech ever delivered by a United States president.
Jack will be a little ambiguous at this point, but in just a few minutes Jack will seem to many Americans to be saying that, in that case, we will attack the Soviet Union with nuclear weapons.
Armageddon lurks in between the lines of his speech, and between the lines of the letter he now sends to Khrushchev.
At our meeting in Vienna and subsequently, I expressed our desire and readiness to find, through peaceful negotiation, a solution to any and all problems that divide us.
Collision 73 force abandonment of our responsibilities and commitments in Berlin would constitute such an action and that the United States would resist with all the power at its command.
At the same time, I wish to point out that the action we are taking is the minimum necessary to remove this threat to the security of the nations of this hemisphere.
Nikita Sergei’ich and his closest advisers in the Soviet Presidium are sitting in a conference room at the Kremlin, waiting for John F Kennedy’s TV and radio address, set to begin at 3:00m.
Nikita Sergei’ich has dreaded such a moment ever since the deployment to Cuba began over the summer—the moment when it becomes obvious that the Americans have discovered the missiles in Cuba before they become operational, before they might provide a deterrent to a United States attack on the island.
Outwardly confident about his scheme to arm Cuba with nuclear weapons as a means of saving the Cuban Revolution, Nikita Sergei’ich has nevertheless had his doubts about whether the plan would succeed.
Cuba is so far from the Soviet Union and so close to the United States But around the middle of October when the 74 The Armageddon Letters deployment neared completion and the United States had apparently—he couldn’t know for sure—not yet discovered the nuclear component of the deployment—he allowed himself to become optimistic, almost jubilant.
He is still acutely aware, however, that even if the Soviets get away with it, Kennedy will find the deployment difficult to accept, and of course the United States hawks will squawk and scream bloody murder that the president should use the opportunity to get rid of both Soviet weapons and Cuban communists.
Nikita Sergei’ich has, in fact, been composing and revising in his mind the letter he wants to send to Kennedy on the eve of giving his speech in Cuba, planned for the end of November.
In that speech he would announce the details of the deployment to the whole world.
Kennedy, he feels, will need some time to deal with his own emotions and also to plan a politically viable strategy to resist the urge to war that his hawks will doubtless try to force on him.
Of course, he thinks, we don’t like being surrounded by American military might in Turkey, Italy, Germany and elsewhere in Europe.
No one in his right mind can believe even for a moment that the objective is to actually use these nuclear weapons.
Nikita Sergei’ich is mulling his options over in his mind—depending on what Kennedy says in his speech—when a knock is heard on the door to the conference room in which the entire Soviet leadership sits in silence.
They might be mistaken for a group of Buddhist monks except, of course, that these Russians are meditating not on the concept of emptiness, but on the possibility that a nuclear war in which they are centrally implicated may be about to begin in and around Cuba.
He is handed a phone, which he puts to his ear while, for what seems to the others in the room like an eternity, he makes notes with a pencil and paper.
The aide, Oleg Alexandrovich Troyanovsky, at last informs the group that he has been on the phone with the Soviet ambassador in Washington.
The ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, has been reading the text of Kennedy’s speech to him in English.
Troyanovsky has been translating the speech and writing it down in Russian.
When Troyanovsky is finished scribbling, Nikita Sergei’ich motions for him to tell the group the gist of the speech.
As the minister begins to rise and elaborate on his point, Nikita Sergei’ich tells him to shut up and sit down.
At last, the official copy of the speech comes through, via the United States embassy in Moscow, to the Soviet Foreign Ministry, thence to the Kremlin.
So we have to be careful, but we have to be clear that, as the other superpower, the USSR is not going to be pushed around.
After a moment’s hesitation, Nikita Sergei’ich dictates the letter to Kennedy.
Then he announces that the entire leadership will sleep what little is left of the night in the Kremlin.
The press, especially the foreign press, is bound to be curious, he thinks, if ZIL limousines begin to zoom out of the Kremlin in the middle of the night.
Nikita Sergei’ich says he will edit the text of the letter to Kennedy at the beginning of a meeting he calls for 10:00m. later on the morning of October 23rd.
I have just received your letter, and have also acquainted myself with the text of your speech of October 22 regarding Cuba.
I must say frankly that the measures indicated in your statement constitute a serious threat to peace and to the security of nations.
The United States has openly taken the path of grossly violating the United Nations charter, the path of violating international norms of freedom of navigation on the high seas, the path to aggressive actions both against Cuba and against the Soviet Union.
The statement by the government of the United States of America can only be regarded as undisguised interference in the internal affairs of the Republic of Cuba, the Soviet Union and other states.
The United Nations charter and international norms give no right to any state to institute in international waters the inspection of vessels bound for the shores of the Republic of Cuba.
And naturally, neither can we recognize the right of the United States to establish control over armaments which are necessary for the Republic of Cuba to strengthen its defense capability.
We reaffirm that the armaments which are in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they may belong, are intended solely for defensive purposes in order to secure the Republic of Cuba against the attack of an aggressor.
Fidel arrives at the television studio in downtown Havana at around 8:30m. on October 23rd.
He will give Cuba’s official response to the crisis that began a little more than twenty-four hours earlier, when Kennedy gave his speech announcing the “quarantine” of Cuba.
He must sit, though his inclination is to get up on his feet, to gesticulate wildly with his long arms, neither of which is possible in the small, cramped space.
Even more importantly, he thrives on the feedback of an appreciative audience.
He tries to keep this uppermost in his mind as he gets set up in the studio.
His only live audience is the collection of rather dour-looking government ministers and other officials.
At first, he squirms and seems uncomfortable with the position of the microphone.
He is also exhausted; he hasn’t slept more than a few hours in the past days, as the crisis approached and finally erupted.
But after a few minutes, Fidel warms to his task and launches into wave after wave of apocalyptic rhetoric, urging Cubans to remain calm, even serene, as the countdown proceeds toward Cuba’s possible date with nuclear Armageddon.
He is emboldened not only by his own self-reinforcing crescendo of verbal virtuosity, but also because he has by this time seen reports of Khrushchev’s reply to Kennedy’s speech of the day before.
Khrushchev has been tough and uncompromising, ready for a showdown with the United States of America over nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Cuba, Fidel says in many different ways, now at top volume with hands and arms punching holes in the air over the microphone, will never surrender any of its inalienable rights, will never allow the Yankees nor anyone else to inspect its territory—regarding Soviet missiles or anything else, for that matter.
His voice cracks, as it always does when he is going full tilt, in a way that surprises those new to his speeches.
Collision 77 it is for him to say all he has to say in the time allotted for the speech—no matter that he sometimes speaks continuously for several uninterrupted hours at a time.
Both the fatherland and death have never been this close, this intense, and this significant, he thinks, on this warm October evening in central Havana.
But Fidel has already told his listeners that death, if that is what comes to the entire Cuban nation, will not be in vain.
The Russians, it is understood, will redeem Cuba’s martyrdom by destroying the United States.
Fidel’s small audience of officials reacts to this apocalyptic statement by breaking into uproarious laughter.
Hasten to battle, men of Bayamo, For the homeland looks proudly to you.
You do not fear a glorious death, Because to die for the country is to live.
We decidedly reject any attempt at supervision, any attempt at inspection of our country.
Our country will never be inspected by anyone, because we will never give authorization for that to anyone, and we will never abdicate our sovereign prerogative.
Within our frontiers, we are the ones who rule, and we are the ones who do the inspecting.
Anyone who tries to come and inspect Cuba must know that he will have to come equipped for war.
That is our final answer to illusions and proposals for carrying out inspections on our territory.
We maintain there should be no troops or military personnel in the territory of any other country.
That is 78 The Armageddon Letters our position, the principle we stand on.
Let us all support a policy for the dismantling of bases, troops, all of those things scattered throughout the world.
However, we are not in agreement with a policy which calls for disarming us in the face of the aggressors.
That is so stupid, so ridiculous, and so absurd, that it is not worth time wasting a thought about such idiocy … They believe they are going to scare us with that.
But we are calmed by something, and that is knowing that the aggressors will not go unpunished.
And we, who are part of mankind—and a very worthy part of mankind—know how to run those risks calmly.
And we have the consolation of knowing that the aggressors in a thermonuclear war, those who unleash a thermonuclear war, will be exterminated.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher.
