The developments that emerged as a result of this shift, including legislation and technology, are the legacy of the sixties.
The decade was full of competition with the United Soviet Socialist Republics, changing government responsibilities, and increased civil rights.
As a result of the decade, America has been changed drastically in ways that can never be reversed.
During the 60's a series of welfare programs were initiated, both by Kennedy and by Lyndon B Johnson.
The programs were started mainly as part of a way to reform America and have an equalizing effect on Americans, and provide a safety net for its citizens.
These programs were a new role that the government was fulfilling for America, and has lasting impacts, as the programs exist today.
Another lasting effect of the decade were the accomplishments of the Civil Rights movement.
Through the efforts of people like Martin Luther King Jr., many changes were made in American society.
The establishment of laws such as the many Civil Rights Acts, and government enforcement of desegregation helped eliminate institutional prejudice.
In addition to the direct effects of the civil rights movement, it led to the widespread use of peaceful protest as a way to get legal changes.
Through actions such as the March on Washington, the sit-ins, and other measures the Civil Rights Movement helped change America for the better through peaceful demonstration.
One of the most key parts of the 60's however was not domestic but foreign.
The Cold War, while not unique to the 60's, dominated much of the foreign policy of the time.
One of the most exemplary is the Space Race; the two world super powers used all of their resources to try and beat the other to the domination of space and the Moon.
While this happened, less peaceful contests occurred, such as the Vietnam War, a conflict started to try and contain the spread of Communism in south-east Asia.
Whether it was through domestic developments, like civil rights and welfare, or foreign involvements, the 60's would end up as a decade which forever changed the course of American history.
The events of the decade have long lasting impacts both for America and the world.
But by 1964, the collapse of South Vietnam at the hands of communist North Vietnam and the Viet Cong was imminent.
The Johnson administration believed that the escalation of the American role in Vietnam was the only solution.
While the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was the official response to the Gulf of Tonkin Incident, it was also an unofficial declaration of war.
The resolution allowed military escalation to begin in Vietnam, resulting in over 500,000 American soldiers on the ground by 1968.
This document is important because it demonstrates the attitude of the United States at this time.
As was the typical course of America at the time, whenever it saw an increase in Communism's field of influence it would interfere and attempt to limit or destroy it, disregarding the document's claim of lacking any political ambitions, it was meant as strengthening the sphere of influence of the United States while limiting that of the USSR and other communists.
This document is part of the United States' plan for containment of communism.
Containment was in this case enforced through the Vietnam War despite the document's calls for peace.
This exemplifies the attitude of the United States at the time, as one of trying to stop communism's spread at any cost, while justifying it through euphemisms describing it as peace. (we could also talk about the war powers act which repealed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, after Congress reevaluated how much power they had given to the president) I thought it was implemented too late, it was passed in 1973 7 Lyndon B Johnson's 1964 State of the Union Address During the Kennedy Administration a number of reform initiatives were set in place.
Johnson took office in 1964, only weeks after the assassination of Kennedy and wanted to continue Kennedy's efforts to expand the welfare state.
His vision for America was motivated by the widespread poverty and racial injustice that were present in the country at the time.
In his 1964 State of the Union Address, Johnson outlined his goals for America before Congress and the American people.
His main aspirations were an ""unconditional war on poverty"" and an end to racial discrimination.
Johnson's plans for these reforms involved a series of legislation supported on national, state, and local levels.
Johnson's plan was extremely ambitious, and he conceded that it would require a large level of cooperation.
This document is important because it framed the overarching goals of the Johnson administration, many of which came to fruition through legislative measures.
The reform program that he discussed, later referred to as the ""Great Society,"" became fundamental to Johnson's administration and a guideline for his presidency.
The Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, which provided training and education to disadvantaged youth, was passed as part of the antipoverty program he had discussed in his speech.
Similarly, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which sought to end racial discrimination, were envisioned in his speech.
As promised by his campaign slogan, ""getting America moving again,"" Kennedy sought to strengthen the economy.
His plan to end the recession involved working the business community while controlling price inflation.
To this end, JFK negotiated a deal in which the United States Steel Union agreed to restrain their wage demands in return for promises that the United States Steel Company would not raise their prices.
However, crisis struck in April 1962 when steel companies decided to increase prices instead.
In a news conference, Kennedy discussed how he was upset at the sudden and apparently unanimous decision of various steel companies to increase their prices by six dollars per ton of steel.
He told the nation how he believed the steel executives were abusing their power by increasing the prices arbitrarily, and how it has been the duty of Americans to serve their nation and that the steel companies had failed.
This decision by the steel companies was described by Kennedy to have powerful negative effects against the public, such as an increase in costs of living, automobiles, and other things becoming standard for Americans.
Although the steel businesses eventually rescinded their price increases, they became distrustful of Kennedy's forceful approach and viewed his actions as an attack on the free market system.
Although Kennedy rejected excessive government regulation and control of the economy, he was not shy of pressuring people and businesses in non-legal ways such as this speech.
The steel crisis and the animosity it provoked set the economic trajectory for the remainder of Kennedy's presidency.
It began when United States surveillance planes were sent over Cuba and returned with images revealing ballistic missiles which could reach major United States population centers in a matter of minutes.
With the lingering memory of failure during the Bay of Pigs Invasion still fresh, Kennedy was determined to emerge out of this confrontation successfully.
On October 22, he held a meeting with members of the Executive Committee of National Security Council.
Kennedy later described the situation and informed the nation of his plans in a televised address.
He declared that the Soviet's ""rapid offensive buildup"" in Cuba was a ""definite threat to peace"" and could not be tolerated.
Kennedy was determined to meet the confrontation with strength and discussed a comprehensive plan for dealing with the Soviet threat.
A major aspect of this plan was the decision to enact a naval quarantine around Cuba to prevent the Soviets from importing more ""offensive military equipment"" to Cuba.
However, early on Kennedy's advisors had urge a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
Kennedy, realized the potential for Soviet retaliation in Europe and decided against this.
In addition, he knew that it would be unwise to carry out a full-scale blockade since it would not only be considered an act of war, but it would also be inhumane to the Cuban people.
After the disaster at the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy could not afford to be submissive to the Soviets.
The idea of mutually assured destruction had promoted an arms buildup, resulting in a crescendo in tension between the United States and the Soviet Union.
A Soviet-American hotline was installed as a result of the crisis to prevent similar confrontations in the future.
In addition, the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 was negotiated between the rivals, prohibiting atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons.
Naturalist, Rachel Carson was a principal figure in the movement and was famous for her book Silent Spring which warned the public of the dangers of pesticides and environmental pollution.
Her book was well received by many, but also received a fair amount of criticism, especially by the chemical industry.
Congress responded by holding a hearing on the issue of environmental pollution in June 1963.
Carson appeared before Congress to deliver a testimony during this review.
Her statement addressed the environmental hazards control of pesticides and other poisons.
She explained how the shortsightedness of businesses who are concerned with making a profit causes irreversible damage to the environment.
Her main purpose was to show how disturbing the environmental situation was in order to convince Congress to take action.
This speech is important because it was delivered by a leading figure of the environmental movement and helped to make the issue of environmental pollution public.
Carson's research led the President's Science Advisory to issue a report on pesticide poisoning.
In addition, her work helped convince Congress to pass the Wilderness Preservation Act in 1964 and promoted several other legislative measures to protect the environment.
Carson's work was crucial to setting the environmental movement on course.
Several labor unions were formed to organize strike in order to gain improvements in working conditions and pay.
In September 1965, César Chávez and Dolores Huerta led the National Farm Workers Alliance in a strike against the grape growers in the Delano area of California.
In 1969, Dolores Huerta issued a proclamation to explain why the striking laborers wished for consumers to boycott grapes.
In the statement, she described how the farmers who first started working the fields of California hundreds of years ago endured suffering and hunger similar to the conditions for farmers at her time.
She asserted that grapes must remain an ""unenjoyed luxury,"" until the workers who picked them were fairly treated.
Huerta hoped that a successful boycott by the NFWA would encourage other American farmers to follow suit.
This document is important because the Delano Grape Strike was one of the most innovative and influential strikes of the time.
Besides boycotts, the strike involved other tactics, such as marches, and performing art to protest the farming conditions.
These strategies allowed the strike to last over five years, ending with a collective bargaining agreement that promised more representation to farm workers.
As Huerta had hoped, the success of the Delano Grape Strike inspired a series of strikes by the United Farm Workers Union, resulting in the 1975 Agricultural Labor Relations Act which established collective bargaining for California farmworkers.
This speech lays the groundwork for many of the goals both sought after and accomplished in the 60's.
The speech starts with a prioritization of liberty over all other subjects linking to the foundation of America.
This s not too far from the connection made in the welfare policies made by both President Kennedy and Johnson in the Great Society.
This can be seen by the focus on poverty which had been made as a new form of oppression.
The increase in welfare under President Kennedy was meant to combat this, and lay the groundwork for Lyndon B Johnson's Great Society.
Kennedy's idea of increased government involvement did not stop at spending but also a hands-on approach to the economy, as can be seen through his dealings with United States Steel.
This speech also sets a focus on science and its potential for international cooperation, ""Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors"" being a key idea throughout the speech.
Kennedy ad a presidency that tried to have international efforts focus on science and liberty.
However, his focus on liberty would sometimes contradict itself as was done in this speech, ""one form of colonial control shall not have passed away merely to be replaced by a far more iron tranny"" setting an idea of stopping the spread of communism.
Which would lead to foreign policies like the Bay of Pigs Invasion attempt.
These statements made in President Kennedy's inaugural address would establish policy not only for his presidency, and the 60's but forever changing American history and thinking politically.
Making the inaugural address of President Kennedy an important and representative document for the 60's in the United States.
One of the most important of these was the Space Race, which was started by the USSR's Sputnik 1 being the first artificial satellite.
However, the United States responded in kind with its own space program as detailed in this document.
The United States founded the National Aeronautical and Space Administration , to make develop the advancement in the race for the moon.
This document has information describing the intent and results of the space program, particularly after the successful Apollo 11 landing.
This document describes how it is hoped that this is ""a beginning – and not an end to the exploration and use of space"" placing an emphasis on the continuation of the space program.
Another emphasis in this is the military advantage of having space dominance.
The document lists things like, ""Department of Defense space activities"" as a potential future of the space program.
One of the clear objectives was to advance national defense through military space programs.
That is because even though in the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 said the purpose was for all mankind, the post-Apollo project was meant to demonstrate American leadership in science.
In an international frame, the Apollo programs were meant to ""win extensive admiration and respect for American achievements"", as no other project could.
This program was another example of how the competing forces of the United States and United Soviet Socialist Republics were competing for spheres of influence.
This document also demonstrates how the United States repeatedly won these competitions with the USSR not only in the 60's but for the rest of the Cold War.
This speech has a lot of what was happening socially during the 1960's socially.
A new wave of progressive change was going through America, wanting social change especially towards the rights of racial minorities.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s speech is known for setting the standard of conduct for protest and social change.
In addition, his famous quote, ""a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character"" showed the new movement in America towards a future against racism.
The speech was given after a march on Washington DC, and served as a call both for the rights of people of color and a peaceful means of achieving it.
The speech made multiple references to the founding of America, with its Bill of Rights, and how the dream would be that since ""all men are created equal"" they would all have equal rights under the law.
The march was made during this civil rights movement chiefly in protest against segregation in many southern states, but also against the police brutality of the time.
The Jim Crow laws were put in place in many southern states, and led to the dehumanization of blacks in those states, as well as unequal opportunity for them.
The speech also made clear that the elimination of things like Jim Crow laws was going to be fought against until they were destroyed.
They went to the nation's capital to ""remind America of the urgency of the Now"" that no blacks were going to fight for their rights.
The fight for equality was going to continue until it was resolved, earning things like the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965.
However, the speech also made it clear that the struggle for liberty was not going to devolve into violence.
Martin Luther King Jr. was clear in saying that ""in the process of gaining our rightful place, we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds"" demanding that the movement remain peaceful.
This was to stop teachings like that of the Nation of Islam form spreading.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s ""I Have a Dream"" speech showed what the civil rights movement was focused on, that being equality achieved through peaceful demonstrations.
The movement achieved many great things and is critical to both the 1960's and American history.
