The Sixteen Known Nuclear Crises of the Cold War, 1946-1985"" presents in detail the reality which many of us have either known or suspected during our nuclear age.
Nations with nuclear weapons will, as we know, threaten to use them, and as we also know, in some circumstances, actually use them.
Morgan establishes, in fact, that we have approached that crisis, not once, but 16 times since the blasts that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Those were, as we now know, minor bombs, and Morgan documents the times the use of the bigger ones were threatened.In the introduction to the research paper Morgan writes:This paper is an attempt to inform the public simply and clearly about the very dangerous nuclear crises of the Cold War.
Until these are widely understood, the great dangers of present policies will not be questioned and discussed.
The U.S., with its Freedom of Information Act, is the least secretive of all the world's great powers.
Much of the information in this paper has been made available by the benefit of this Act.
Members of the public have thus been able to inform themselves of the way that nuclear weapons have threatened world security over the years.There are 36,000 nuclear weapons in the world in 1996 and the threat of the destruction of civilization by these weapons remains very great.
The more that nuclear weapons increase military power, the more they decrease national security.
The only escape from this paradox is by the balanced reduction and eventual total abolition of these weapons on a rigid schedule.
Strong pressure on Truman and later Eisenhower to use A-Bomb.53 United States tests the first H-Bomb.54Vietnam War, Crisis #4.
RELENTLESS ARMS RACE, 1969-19831969Vietnam again, Crisis #12.1970Jordan, Crisis #13.
United States develops MIRVs, multiple warhead ICBMs.71 United States develops submarine-launched MIRVs.73Israel Yom Kippur war, Crisis #13.
Soviets develop first MIRV for their ICBMs.74India explodes A-bomb.75fall of Saigon.76SDI secret funding begins.79USSR invades Afghanistan.
Shah flees Iran, United States embassy seized.80Iran again, Crisis # 15.
POST COLD-WAR RE-GROUPINGS, 1991-1996This is a time similar to Period 3.
Effective nuclear arms control is needed to avoid repetition of Period 4 with dire results.Morgan documents in considerable detail each of the 16 nuclear crises, with background material and commentary on the outcome.
This is just a taste of the total frightening menu.We have been fortunate in getting through all 16 of these crises without actually launching or stumbling into a nuclear war.
At issue in the crisis was the right of the U.S.S.R. to match the U.S.'s medium-range nuclear-missile threat.BackgroundOn April 17, 1961, 1,400 Cuban exiles invaded Cuba at Playa Girón with United States support.
Cubans defeated the invaders in two days.Kennedy then approved Operation Mongoose.
Several attempts to kill Castro, sabotage, arson, crop poisoning, and murder of Cuban civilians.
The target date for Cuban ""revolt"" with United States military support was October 1962.
To defend Cuba, Khrushchev offered Castro nuclear-armed missiles to be installed secretly.Crisis EventsSunday, Oct.Kennedy gets U-2 photos of Soviet missile bases in Cuba.Wednesday, Oct.16 missiles installed and would be ready to fire a week later.
Le May, USAAF Chief of Staff tells Kennedy an attack is essential and that Soviets would not respond.
This could have avoided the more dangerous public challenge and demand for a humiliating withdrawal that Kennedy made two days later.
The B-52 bomber force was ordered into the air fully loaded with nuclear weapons.
Organization of American States gives United States full support.Wednesday, Oct.Quarantine goes into effect.
Kennedy orders State Department to prepare a post-invasion government for Cuba.
Joint Chiefs of Staff propose air strike on Monday followed by invasion.
Missiles will be withdrawn.OutcomeCuba was secured from United States covert attacks and invasion.
At issue in the crisis was United States preparation for first strike capability.BackgroundIn the nuclear arms race the United States had always held a five to 10 year lead over the Soviet Union.
In the 1980s a system for a first strike surprise attack on the USSR was nearly ready.
The flat trajectory Pershing II missiles were extremely accurate and designed to ""decapitate"" the Soviet leadership.
It would be possible by the late 80's to knock out all known Soviet missiles on land and at sea with MX and Trident 2 missiles using the new very precise ""Navstar"" guidance system.
These very threatening plans meant that a world nuclear holocaust might result from a faulty Soviet radar warning.
Six minutes gave the Soviets little time for analysis of United States intentions.The Soviets understood all of these threats very clearly.
These were then transported to the United States Army 56th Field Artillery Brigade base at Mutlangen, Geneva.
Soviet negotiator Yuli Kvitsinsky walks out of the meeting with United States negotiator Paul Nitze, ending nuclear arms negotiations and offering no resumption date.Dec., 1983Four United States and four Soviet scientists meeting in Washington issued a statement predicting a nuclear winter that would kill all nuclear war survivors, even if only half the United States and Soviet nuclear weapons were used.March 11, 1985Gorbachev elected General Secretary of the Central Committee by a margin of one vote over Grishin, a hardliner who would probably have escalated the arms race.
Gorbachev and Reagan meet; Cold War tensions ease progressively for the next two years, and the First Strike crisis also ends progressively during this period.
Dec., 1987, Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty signed in Washington by Presidents Gorbachev and Reagan.
