Furthermore, in 1960 Castro ask the Soviet Union for military and economic help, meaning that Cuba was becoming a Communist country.These actions angered the United States which resulted in an U.S embargo against Cuba.
It prohibited the U.S companies from doing any business with the Cuban Nation.
At the same time, the United States decided to train the exiles Cuban to overthrow Castro from power but keeping its role in secret.
This was known as the Bay of Pigs, it was a failure that made the United States seen as a weak and dishonest nation in the eyes of the world.
This lead to one of the events that almost lead the United States and the Soviet Union to a nuclear war.
So, he called for more financial and military aid from the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union were gladly to help Castro because for them it was seen as a way to end the disadvantage that they had with the United States Now the United States would have Soviet missiles near to their home -just 90 miles away,as the Soviet Union had as well with American missiles located in Turkey.The United States learn about the Soviet actions 0n October 14, 1962 when photos of missile bases were taken by an U-2 spy plane.
President Kennedy did not want to be responsible for having started a Nuclear War.
He decided to inform the Americans about and demanded for the removal of those Soviets missiles from Cuba, moreover he ordered a military quarantine -blockadearound Cuba in order to stop the Soviets from sending arsenal.
Also ask the military to prepared possible invasion of Cuba, as well the military prepared itself in the Soviet shores with U.S submarines supplied with missiles.On October 26 1962, Khrushchev sent a letter to President Kennedy agreeing in the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba, if the United States promised not to invade the island of Cuba.
However, a second letter was sent to president Kennedy even before he replied the first one.
In the second letter, Khrushchev ask the United States to remove the American Missiles from Turkey.
Therefore, Kennedy announce publicly that the U.S accept the first offer and wrote to Khrushchev saying the following “I would like to say again that the United States is very much interested in reducing and halting the arms race…” However, the second agreement is made confidential from the American public.
Monday, May 10, 2010 VOCABULARY Radara system that uses radio waves to detect objects at long rangeNuclear Missilerockets that has an atomic warheadNATOIts defensive alliance formed between democratic countries of Europe and North America in order to curb soviet aggression in EuropeSoviet Uniona group of communist countries headed by Russia.
Fidel Castro rises in Cuba.60.December 19: Cuba allies with the Soviet Union.61.-January 3: The United States stop trading with Cuba.April 12: Kennedy promises not to use force to overthrow Castro.April 17: A group of Cuban exiles, backed by the U.S invades Cuba at the Bay of pigs.
Castro announces that he has invited the Soviet Union to help defend Cuba.August 29.U.S planes look that there is military activity in Cuba.October 15.-U. spy planes confirm that there are missiles in Cuba.October 17.Kennedy announces air strike to Cuba.October 22.-Kennedy announces quarantine in cuba.October 22.Khrushchev said that this is a serious threat to peace and security of people.October 24.The U.S takes effect.October 26.Spy planes shows how the missiles were being build.
Khrushchev says he promises to remove the missiles only if the U.S promise not to invade Cuba.October 27.A U. is shoot down by the Soviets.
The Soviet Union said they will remove the missiles only if the U.S removes their to from Turkey.October 28.Kenedy agrees to Khrushchev first proposal.November.All the missiles from cuba had been remove.
