Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, read U.S. weakness in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, and blustered publicly that he might retaliate by driving the United States out of West Berlin.
United States President John Kennedy, in return, openly boasted that the United States possessed many more (and more accurate and deliverable) nuclear missiles and warheads than the U.S.S.R., and would consider striking first with them if it ever found itself at a military disadvantage.
Once in office, Kennedy dropped the old story about the ""missile gap"" and brandished the United States's nuclear superiority openly against Khrushchev.
Khruschev's response was to secretly build missile bases on Cuban soil to compensate for Soviet inferiority in ICBMs.
Castro gave permission to the Soviets to build Cuban missile bases in trade for a promise of protection against United States invasion and for cancellation of Cuban monetary debts.
Construction of the Cuban bases proceeded throughout the summer of 1962.
Kennedy issued warnings to Khrushchev that the United States would not tolerate a major military buildup in Cuba, but would do ""whatever must be done"" to guarantee United States security; Kennedy and his advisors believed that Khrushchev would take these grave warnings seriously, and were A low-level photograph taken November 1, 1962, of a medium range ballistic missile site at Sagua La Grande, Cuba, showing launch erectors removed and the launchpads bulldozed over.
AP/WIDE WORLD PHOTOS . also aware that the U.S.S.R. had never yet placed nuclear weapons outside Russian territory; these factors made it seem unlikely that nuclear weapons were part of the Cuban buildup.
U-2 spy planes (aircraft designed to take reconnaissance photographs from very high altitudes) were making regular flights over Cuba, observing the military buildup.
Immediate attack on the Soviet missiles sites in Cuba, followed by a full invasion of the island using 180,000 U.S. troops.
If the blockade did not work—and it was a risky plan, as such a blockade is, by international law, an act of war—the invasion plan would be carried out.
On October 22, 1962, Kennedy addressed the American people by television.
Over the next four days, ships carrying Russian goods were searched at sea, and several Soviet vessels carrying missiles were turned back by U.S. naval vessels.
If nuclear war had occurred, it could have caused hundreds of millions of deaths, and significantly destroyed the U.S., the U.S.S.R., and many other nations as functioning societies.
On October 26, Khrushchev sent a private message to Kennedy indicating that he would be willing to remove the missiles if the United States would promise not to invade Cuba.
Many historians have viewed Kennedy's handling of the Cuban missile crisis as a masterpiece of statesmanship.
Robert Kennedy said later that his brother had put events in motion that he could not control.
What is certain is that Khrushchev and Kennedy were both willing to risk global nuclear war for dubious gains.
By the same token, no long-term U.S. interests were at stake in the deployment of Soviet intermediate-range missiles to Cuba, as within a few years every city in the continental U.S. would be vulnerable to Soviet ICBMs and submarinelaunched ballistic missiles anyway.
Its policymakers had verified, as they believed, that ""showing resolve"" (threatening to use military force) was more effective than diplomacy, the United Nations, or international law—with the proviso that the United States should be more willing to commit conventional military forces in a crisis, in order to keep back from the nuclear abyss.
