SSC Player Dies — Story on Pa|;e 6 Savannah Slate (lolloge Honiecoining Is Nov.
Emma Sue McCrory will lead the gigantic parade of student and alumni for the annual SSC liomecomlng festivities.
In addition to being ""Miss Savannah State College,"" Miss McCrory is a member of Delta Sigma Theta sorority, the Tiger's Roar Staff, Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges, Camilla Hubert Hall Council, Boar's Head Club, and Student Council.
The attendants to ""Miss Savannah State"" are Juanita Quinn and Dorothy Brown, Miss Quinn Is a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority.
Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges, and the College Playhouse.
Mis.s Brown Is a member of Delta Sigma Theta sorority, Who's Who Among Students In American Universities and Colleges, and the College Marshall Board.
Emma Sue McCrory, ""Miss Savannah SUt« College"" and attendants, left, Dorothy Brown, right.
First concept is the trend to a biochemical approach to life, indicating increased emphasis on chemistry's relationships to the science of life.
Second has to do with the cell as a ""human computer,"" while the third involves changes in attitudes toward scientific inquiry.
Times for local broadcast of ""The New Biology"" on TV will be announced by local newspapers.
The study guide, written for the course by Dr Koppelman, is available at bookstores, or direct from the publisher, postpaid $2.50, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts.
Georgia Committee on Cooperation In Teaolier Edncation Meets The fall 1961 conference of the Georgia Committee on Cooperation in Teacher Education convened at Fort Valley State College.
Wilson, head, department of secondary education; Dr, Claude Hall, head, division of technical sciences, and Dr, Walter A Mercer, director of student teaching, Dr.
Mercer presented a research paper pertaining to the organization and administration of off campus student teaching in relation to professional laboratory experiences in selected institutions of Georgia.
Alvln Jones, Shelton Daniels and Benjamin Colbert; advisor — E, J Jackson.
Jerome Smith, Margaret Hayes, Emanuel Austin, Betty Upshur, Betty Coleman.
Mattle Lattimore and Richard Cogen; advisors — Eddie BlvIns and Miss Luella Hawkins.
Committee on Publicity; students — Loretta Miller, Thermoa Thomas and Verdelle Lambert; advisor— Wilton C Scott.
Student Teaching Assignment Made student teachers have been assigned for the fall quarter, according to information released by Dr.
Pera Adkins, elementary education, East Broad Street School, Mrs, Pauline Hagins; Vernetie Moultrie Sims, elementary education, Hodge Elementary School, Miss Louise Milton; Dora S Myles, elementary education, Spencer Elementary School, Mrs.
Mildred Young; Ernest Robinson, social studies, Sol C Johnson, Mrs Mamie Hart; Rosemary McBrlde, elementary education, Sol.
Millie C Creagh; Junice C, Wright, mathematics, Center High School, Waycross, Mrs.
Meyers, each person whose name Is listed has attained an average of 2.50 or higher on a full program during the summer quarter 1961.
Each Is therefore accorded a place on the Dean's List for the fall quarter 1961.
Savannah, graduated from Beach High School; Mamie E Greene, 2.66, senior, English major.
Savannah, graduated from Beach High School; Juanita Moon, 3,00, senior, music major, graduated from Beach High School; and Henrietta Meeks, 2.65, senior, biology major.
Peace Corps are available to citizens of the United States. years and over, including married couples without children.
Tests and interviews are required by applicants before selections are made for overseas projects.
Glennora E Martin, Engish major, and graduate of William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia; Gloria J Johnson, biology major, and graduate of Alfred E Beach High School.
Savannah; and Sallie F Screen, business major, and graduate of Hutto High School, Bainbridge, Georgia.
Other students are Veronica Owens, sophomore, an English major who graduated from Alfred E, Beach High School, Savannah; Louise Lamar, senior, English major, and graduated from Ruth Carter High School, Talbotton, Georgia; and Zelma Stevenson, senior, business education major, graduated from Wilson Senior High School, Florence, South Carolina.
Importance of the College Newspaper The college newspaper plays an important role in college life.
You may not know It, but colleges are represented to the outside world by student publications.
The College newspaper does not only represent the college In the outside world, but It also serves as an outlet for Informing students of the activities that have taken place on and off campus which concern them.
The college newspaper Is an Instrument of mass communication on campus.
It is a publication by which the students may speak or voice their conceptions through editorials, feature stories, poems, etc.
This also raises the question of freedom of the student publication versus control.
The college newspaper represents the students and gives them a chance to debate and test experimental thoughts, emotions, and beliefs.
A free college newspaper gives self-expression of the outstanding moments on campus.
It has many motives of expression and is as multiform as human emotion.
The college newspaper does not only have a local campus value. but a professional value also.
So from these conceptions, it can be concluded that a college newspaper holds the major spotlight of student expression in college life.
Presidenfs Message Every generation of college students faces new and changing conditions.
Many students appear to be worried about the lack of ability to finance their college education.
It is no exaggeration to state that today the number and variety of sources of financial assistance have never been as numerous.
It appears that a number of factors may be responsible for the apparent shortage.
In many instances, college students and high school seniors have failed to do specific planning for a college career.
Applications for aid have been filed at times when the student would be least likely to receive help.
Many of the applications, when filed, have been executed in a manner that tended to discourage the accept-nce of the student.
When applications are filed a month or two before the college opens, most of the funds for that year have been exhausted.
If applications are not properly filled, contain omissions, erasures, mistakes in spelling and punctuation, some doubt is raised concerning the validity of the risk.
Agencies and individuals wish to make certain that students are able and willing to do acceptable and superior grades of college work.
Another factor which makes it appear that financial aid is scarce is the lack of acquaintance with available resources.
Almost every student of college caliber could qualify for aid under several agencies.
The ability of a student to wade through information and discover which one meets his condition best is one index of his ability to succeed, A third factor which contributes to the apparent scarcity Is the lack of initiative and drive.
Students who are willing to work can find many opportunities to supplement their major source of income.
This willingness must be accompanied by the desire to perform first class service wherever one Is employed.
This trait and characteristic should be exemplified in every type of job opportunity as well as in the academic program.
Students must have enough drive and initiative to make their needs and desires known to the people who are in position to assist them.
Every year hundreds of college students fall out of college because no one knows that extent of their financial need.
Most lending agencies are not interested in mediocre or sub-standard college work.
The best assurance that can be provided for one who needs help Is a good record as an individual and as a college student.
Few. if any, funds are available for the mentally soft or the social outlaw.
There are millions available for students who have plans for their development, who show that they can profit by a college education, and who exercise initiative to move forward to their chosen objectives and goals.
By SAMUEL M TRUELL 87lh Coiifiressi Ailjoums Congress adjourned with moderate success after a long hectic battle between liberals, radicals, conservatives and congressional neutralists in an endeavor to legislate for their respective constituents.
Liberals and radicals alike tried endlessly to push President Kennedy's progressive measures — measures which his chief lobbyist, Larry O'Brien, claimed to congressional leaders were designed to compete with the prevailing chaos presently at hand.
As for his success with Congress, this youth chief executive who was elected more so on his father's financial influence, together with his brother's vast popularity in Washington, than by his own capabilities, had little or nothing to say when questioned about the recent session of Congress.
But it can plainly be stated that he is everything but complacent regarding the matter.
Nevertheless, Democrats are cheering their success and Republicans are cheering the failures.
In such fields as minimum wage, housing and aid for depressed areas, Kennedy's measures were passed with much facilitation.
But some of the more liberalized bills passed with much more difficultyMr Kennedy failed to get exactly what he wanted in his arbitrable and remote foreign aid bill.
He also failed to procure medical care for the aged, and his highly controversial education bill was put off until Congress convenes next year.
To the satisfaction of southern conservatives his civil rights promises were also sidetracked, In consequence, the past session was moderate, liberals were dissatisfied for lack of action and Senator Barry Goldwater and his cults are crying that things are still moving with too much haste.
Washinfjtoii Should Take Drastic Action Against Kremlin Last month President Kennedy sent Vice President Lyndon B Johnson and German hero General Lucius B Clay to West Berlin.
These two were sent to Berlin by the incumbent president to assure the Berliners that the United States government intends to stand firm on its vital interest in the isolated city.
This symbolic move was also intended to boost the morale of the Berlin people, a people somber and melancholy and so full with fear of all-out war that they tend to become unconcerned about their own fate and destiny.
These oppressed people need more than a morale boost, they need evidence — evidence that the western world will give them more than lip service, but strong support in time of war.
A small boy may not dare defend himself against a fellow larger than himself, but if big brother appears on the scene, the smaller boy will not procrastinate for long.
This writer is by no means in favor of war, but he does believe that the United States should take effective action against the conspirators.
Negotiations with the Russians has proven time and time again to be futile due to each country's failure to concede to the other.
Washington should initiate an economic blockade against the Russians and cease all commercial ties with the Red world.
Commercial wise, the Communists need us more than we need them and furthermore, our president has bluntly asserted that Americans have borne burdens before and will not abandon them now, I agree with Mr Kennedy on this particular point. kdmm Freedom For .411 follege Students From the Desk of the Editor WILLIAM D HAGINS Academic freedom has become one of the central issues of the times.
If we forget the importance of academic freedom in an institution of higher learning, then our learning is in vain.
It is not for him to preach a cause or to expect the student to take his mere say-so on any matter concerning which men dispute.
But it is for him to state his reasoned conclusions on matters within the area of his instruction.
The latter should do so with respect for the teacher's greater experience but nonetheless with the readiness to follow his own reason wherever It leads.
The more thoughtful among them, the better students in other words, become uneasily aware that a teacher is not a free man and lose their respect for him and their trust in the honesty of his teaching.
They become more skeptical, even cynical, and are often inclined to believe that the suppressed doctrine must have virtue in it.
Leadership The need for good leadership among men has become increasingly obvious in recent years.
The world is in need of qualified people to take their places as leaders, as guides or conductors to steer their people to a safe and profitable destiny.
In considering preparation for leadership, we are to be mindful of the qualities sought in a leader.
The ability to think clearly and logically, the ability to accept criticism, the feeling of security, and a sense of responsibility.
A good leader must also have foresight, thoughtfulness. respectfulness, and above all, freedom from bigotry.
We must note that an educated person is one who is capable of doing the right thing at the right time.
The qualities just mentioned are not usually inherited, but are developed over a period of time by special efforts.
As the leaders of tomorrow, we should be mindful of our responsibilities.
The weight of the world is thrust upon our shoulders because we are college men and women and the masses look to us to assume the mantle of leadership.
These men had the courage and the will power to take the helm in the midst of perilous situations and lead their people to a new destiny.
DEMOCRACY By CHARLES A PHILLIPS Democracy is a government by the people either directly or by elected representatives.
It's a hot dog at a baseball game, it's your radio, your neighbor's, and his neighbor's all tuned to a different station, yes, democracy is you, living from day to day under a system that recognized the worth and dignity of each human being.
Democracy is you inasmuch as it stands guard over you, your family, and your home, your schools, and your right to worship when and where you please, as well as to speak your own mindPut yourself in this picture.
There's a knock on your door in the night, your family is awakened by the noise, you go to the door trembling in your shoes.
When you finally open the door you see two policemen standing there staring you in the eyes, they quickly push you aside and begin to search through every closet and bureau searching for something of which you haven't any knowledge.
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, paper, and effects, shall not be violated.
October, 1961 THE TIGER'S ROAR Page 3 TIGER ROAR'S NEWS IN PICTURE Savannab State's matching banil in ailion, Coluiiilnis Classics paiatle.
J fliss Savannah Stale and Attendants Ininp eharni and heanty to President Payne addresses student body.
Support Your Hompcominfi Miss Perry, Miss Fort Valley Slate, and Miss Savannah Stale, Miss Ennna Sue McCrory.
Kiirnielta Clark chats iiitb ^liss Savannah State anil Mr Clay al fresbmell reception.
Page 4 THE TIGErr.S ROAR October, 1961 Miss CliallahooilKiCla»si. s uiiil Anciiilaiils.
It is a lavishing new color between red and maroon, and is worn very well with black, white, and certain shades of gold.
For that double-breasted or four-button suit that will be so popular for the ""Homecoming Game"" or any other special occasion magenta is a very favorable color.
For that leather Jacket or long coat that is the talk of the campus, and that coat sweater magenta Is a beautiful color and comes in a number of plaids.
For the rabbit fur sweater, mink collar, and that special racoon fur for suits and coats which can be bought dyed to match any color, for a change try magenta.
Girls' shoes, bags, hats, gloves and jewelry come in magenta also to match that special white dress for concerts and banquets.
A magenta velvet costume with matching hat and shoes would be very stunning on any young lady.
Yes, girls, if you are considering colors, then think of magenta and some matching contrasting colors.
The Continental Look By CHARLES ANDRE PHILLIPS It's in and it's going strong.
Accentuated with a detachable belt, cuffs on the sleeves, solid colors as well as muted plaids and side vents.
By the description above I know that you have readily figured what I am speaking of.
That is if you consider yourself to be Ivy or just up-todate with the latest fashions on campus and elsewhere.
You're right, it is the double-breasted continental suit and sportcoat in either the four or six-buttoned model.
If you have noticed, the majority of the fellows on campus are jumping clean in either one of these two models So I can only gather that Savannah State College believes in being up-to-date in styling as well as many other things.
The latest addition to the very popular and colorful sweater line is the Big City Model sweater This sweater is altogether different and completely new.
It is accentuated with a knitted belt with a leather buckle which is completely removable if desired.
This sweater is a cardigan which buttons all the way up to the neck, and completes the button with a roll collar.
Along with this, you must also have the most popular selection of ties, and of course, the majority must reps.
As far as shoes are concerned, please have some dirty sneaks and cordovans in either plain toe or wing-tip.
Tiger's Roar Staff Announced At Savannah State Savannah State College Tiger's Roar staff for the 1961-62 school year is operating under the guidance of William D Hagins. editor in chief, senior, social science major, Savannah; and Norman Elmore, co-editor, junior, English major, SavannahOther top members are associate editors, James DeVoe, senior, business administration major, Savannah, and Verdeli Lambert, senior.
Savannah; campus editors, Dorothy Carter, junior, English major, Madison, and Carolyn Vinson, senior, social science major, Savannah; feature editor, Samuel Truell, senior, social science major, Savannah; sports editor.
Redell Walton, senior, health and physical education major, Chicago; Greek editor, Bobby BurCollege gess. senior, chemistry major, Metter; fashion editors, Rosemary McBride, senior, elementary education major.
Savannah, and Charlie Phillips, junior, social science major, Savannah.
Savannah; society editors, Annette Kennedy. senior, social science major, Savannah, and Emma Sue McCror^, senior, English major.
Typists are Edith Albright, Otis Mitchell and Merlon Dixon, Columnists are Samuel Truell, Annette Kennedy, William Day and Otis Cox.
Percy Harden is serving as business manager and Wilton C, Scott, director of Public Relations and Alumni Affairs, and director of student publications; Miss Albertha Boston, assistant professor, Business Administration, and Robert Holt, assistant professor, English, are serving as advisers.
A Tribute to Dag Hammarskjold By JAMES T DEVOE Dag Hammarskjold was a remarkable man.
As the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, he was a bridge between East and West, He remained the link between East and West, in spite of Russia's desire to remove him from his position.
His years as secretary-general will be labeled as turbulent years by future historians, when they begin to chronicle the history of this great organization During his tenure, he dealt with the Palestine question, the United States flyers held as prisoners in China, the Suez crisis, the revolt In Hungary, the problem of Lebanon, the crisis In Laos, the Cuban crisis, and the fiasco in the Congo.
In the space alloted to me. it would be difficult to comment on all of the problems encountered by Dag Hammarskjold as outlined above, so let us look at one of his problems, the Congo.
Dag Hammarskjold's difficulties stemmed from the fact that the United Nations was called upon to undertake a task for which the machinery did not exist.
This task was to help mold a new nation, and at the same time, prevent the former colonial power, Belgium, from establishing a puppet state within the province of the new nation.
This was to no avail, because East and West attempted to create spheres of influence which led to civil strife and the death of one of Africa's brilliant young leaders, Patrice Lumumba.
Someone has called Hammarskjold the Custodian of the Brushfire Peace, It Is true that . mi ^ Induction of Camilla Hubert Hall officers.
The Camilla Hubert Hall Council is an organization made up of all the residents of Camilla Hubert Hall, The old residents have extended a hearty welcomeand a helping hand to all the new students.
Ira Snelson was elected to the office of president with Delores Bowen to assist her as vice president.
Nora Williams, secretary; Annie Banks, assistant secretary; Louise Lamar, treasurer, and Mary Moss, chaplain.
The installation of the newly elected officers was held in an impressive, ceremony on Sunday.
October 1, 1961. in the lobby of Camilla Hubert Hall, with Mrs, Margret C Robinson administering the oaths of office.
The theme for the occasion was ""The Great Pillows of a Temple"" Miss Margie Lecount presided.
The council hopes that with cooperation of each resident, this year will be a most enjoyable and prosperous one. the problem of the Congo was crisis diplomacy, and In spite of the secretary-general's administrative ability and diplomatic foresight, he was unable to bring harmony and peace to this young nation.
This Inability was not Hammarskjold's fault, but stemmed from the many years of colonialism, oppression and bigotry practiced by the Belgians, We believed that the United Nations has been right In this action In the Congo, We are sorry that Mr Hammarskjold had to die in this venture.
Freshman Class News By Alvin Watklns The Freshman Class of Savannah State College has elected its officers for the year of 1961-62.
The officers are as follows; Darnell Dawson, president; Alfonso Brown, vice president; Cassandra Sexton, secretary; Florence Rhaney, assistant secretary; Battle Moore, treasurer; and Alvin Watklns, acting reporter.
The class has also elected its queen and her attendants, who are Miss Artuetta Doanes, Miss Freshman; Miss Delores Williams, first attendant and Miss Mattle Lattlmore, second attendant.
CREATIVE POETRY I Woirt Tell It By Dan Wilson Come on. tell me your secret.
Forgive me for crltclzing, I sometimes talk too much; But that skeleton of yours is awfully lean.
Your secret is too darn good to tell; That's why I'm going out and yell it.
To catch your love, you've got to be strong For at times the case lasts for days, So never give chase on a empty stomach And my friend, you'll find that it pays.
To catch your love, you've got to be sly And let her have her way at any cost.
Having no dark phantoms to obscure them; They sparkle and shine with the Illuminance of Keats' ""Bright Star;"" And smile as propitiously as ""Helios"" On earth's Inhabitants from afar.
On these coveted days, nothing less than Life's advantageous components are Imbued; Enticing the indulgent and ambitious to pursue them.
That ""Helios"" sends every day your way; For beware, the somberness of Bembrandt's ""Night Watch"" Is encompassed in many a day; And some days have the melancholy mood of ""The Deserted Village"" to supplement your dismay.
The days that ""Pegasos"" chooses to send will be Forever exempt of suns.
Clouds of gloom, remorse, discontent, and woe; When ""Pegasos"" takes pride in making Every friend a foe.
Page 6 THE TIGER'S ROAR October.61 Savannah State College Player Savannah State Tops Fort Dies As a Result of An Injury Valley; Columbus Classics How i Remember Wendell Mcintosh By REDELL WALTON This edition of Tiger's Roar is being dedicated to Wendell Mcintosh in memory of one of the most loved members of our college family.
Wendell was a tackle on our football team and was injured during practice October 5 and because of this injury he passed away Friday October 13. 1981 at 5:30m.
Wendell was a graduate of Ballard-Hudson High School of Macon Georgia and while attending high school he never participated in football because his parents objected.
Mack, as called by most of his friends joined our family in September of '59 where he immediately began participating in football, and the following spring quarter he played baseball also.
He was a junior majoring in physical education and was an active member of the Physical Education Club.
He also was the president of the Lampados Club of Omega Psi Phi fraternity and one of his main goals was to become a member of this fraternity.
It is really touching to the college family, because he never got the chance to participate in a single game this year.
Mack was a fellow who was good humored, I can't remember one time that I saw him angry with anyone.
Personally, I think Mack was 'one of the finest fellows in all respects that I have ever met.
To me a dear friend has been lost and to ""Savannah State College"" a great football player and an equally great member of our family has passed on to the great beyond.
When a fellow risks his hfe for the college he loved and loses It, the only thing that can be said is that the entire community is at a great loss, for there is no greater love than the love of a man who laid down his life for his friends.
Tigers Edged By Waters, 3-0 By THERMAN THOMAS The Savannah State Tigers lost its first game of the season by being edged by a score of 3-0 as the result of an 18-yard field goal.
SSC Tigers' predominately freshman squad played a scoreless first half.
The Tiger starting team sporting six freshmen on their starting team held the Waters team at will as expected by many.
The Tigers' defensive might proved too much for any sort of running attack, the Waters team, unlike the Tigers, was dependent upon its well experienced senior laden club, who last year gained recognition by tieing powerful conference cliamp Albany State.
Moses Herring, freshman quarterback, provided the only offensive thrill of the afternoon by breaking momentarily into the open only to be stopped by a lone Waters defender.
The lone score of the day came on a field goal by Waters halfback Walter Jackson, who kicked tiie decisive three-pointer.
Standouts for the Tigers were guards George Johnson, Willie Simmons, center Calvin Roberts, tackle Bernard Lewis, end Fred Carter, halfback Robert Saxby, who displayed his defensive ability by stopping five of the Edward Waters aerials.
The Tigers next game will be next week when they play Fort Valley State College, ^^ew Recreational Facility For Savannah City Gets New Recreational Spot Hi-Hat Lanes, located on Atlantic and Park Avenues.
Is a welcomed addition to the Negro recreation facilities for the Savannah area, Hi-Hat Lanes consists of thirty-two (32 1 AMF ten pin lanes which are equipped with American Machine and Foundry's famous automatic pinspotter.
The cost of the construction of the bowling lanes is slightly over one-half million dollars, and the establishment is geared to operate on a twenty-four hour a day basis.
In addition to the thirtytwo ten pine lanes, Hi-Hat Lanes provides for its customers a free supervised play room for the children, league meeting room, a customized pro-shop for all bowling accessories, a luxurious snack bar, plus ample concourse area for spectator seating and dining.
The Hi-Hat Lanes opened on October 13, 1961, under the management of Kharn Collier and Alphonso McLean, manager and assistant manager respectively.
Savannah State Ties Morris, 0-0 The Savannah State College Tigers put on a strong defensive show and battled the Morris College Hornets to 0-0 deadlock in a conference game played in Sumter, The Tigers' much relied on passing attack was stalled all evening by the high gusts of wind and a hard charging Morris College line.
The Tigers blocked two punts deep in Morris territory to halt Morris drives but the Tigers could never get started.
On three different occasions, the Tigers penetrated deep into Morris territory but penalties, fumbles and a stout defense drove them back, McArthur Pratt led the Tiger offensive machine with 88 yards rushing.
Blocked punts by Benjamin Spann and Fred Carter gave the Tigers two chances to score, but a total of 80 yards in penalties kept them bottled up.
Wins Classic, 14-7 By REDELL WALTON The Savannah State College football team won the second annual Chattahoochee Classic by defeating Fort Valley State College by a score of 14-7, The game was held in Memorial Stadium in Columbus, Georgia and was witnessed by some 5.000 spectators in somewhat chilly weather.
Two minutes after the second half got under way Fort Valley marched from their 30 yard line to the 40 yard line of Savannah State, The next play William Hogan went straight up the middle and scored for the first score of the game, Clifford Brown booted the extra point.
Savannah State took the ball after receiving the kickoff and moved into the Fort Valley end zone.
Quarterback Moses Herring got the Savannah State attack rolling in this drive by flipping a 25-yard pass to Thomas ""Sugar"" Williams.
Herring rolled around end and went to pay dirt from the nine yard line.
The third quarter ended with Fort Valley leading 7 to 6, After the fourth quarter got under way Fort Valley had to give up the ball on downs and punted to Savannah State College, After taking the ensuing punt the Tigers rolled into action again.
This time McArthur Pratt connected on a 35-yard pass play to Henry Haunders who was stopped on the 25-yard line, Fullback Freddie Myers bulled his way across for the winning touchdown.
By REDELL WALTON The basketball team will begin its 1961-62 basketball drill on November 1, The squad will be drilling under the watchful eye of coach Ted Wright, who has had much success in guiding the team for the past three years.
Over the last three-year period the team has won 80 games while losing only 12, The same squad will be put into action this year by Coach Wright that is responsible for this glorious record.
The fifth prepped in the vicinity of the Big O One of the main purposes for the success of the team has been a 21-year-oId lad from Chicago by the name of Redell Walton.
As a freshman he averaged 17 points per game, as a sophomore 22 points per game, and last year he was voted an AllAmerican berth while averaging 25 points per game.
He is the first basketball All-American In the history of the school, Walton has not by any chance been responsible for the entire success of the team.
His four running buddies have each shared in the spotlight, Ira Jackson has been very valuable.
He has led the team in rebounding three straight years, and has been the number two scorer.
Captain of the team James Dixon, known as the take charge guy, is a very fine player.
He is only 5' 4"" but he makes up for it with his speed and ability to handle the ball.
Willie Tate, a player who always seems to get better in the clutch, is very dependable.
He can play the front court or the back court and Is just as effective playing either.
A lot will be expected from Johnny Mathis (no relation to the famous singer A sophomore who is now an experienced player and should be ready to step into the collegiate ranks.
Leon Wright, Paul Thompson, William Day, Raymond Harper, and Harvey Bailey.
There was ample seating for the anticipated audience which looked forward to this traditional musical event.
The center of attraction for this concert was the famous oratorio by George Frederic Handel — The Messiah, the Christmas portion of which was performed throughout the world during the Christmas season perhaps more often than any other musical composition in existence.
The sections heard featured several soloists as well as the Choral Society.
The soprano solists were Margaret Tilson, a freshman music major from Savannah, and Juanita Moon, a senior music major also from this city.
Eudora Moore Allen, a junior music minor from SavannahJohn Calvin Reed, a sophomore from Sylvania was heard for the first time as one of the tenor soloists.
Another sophomore from Sylvania, James Weldon Johnson, likewise did a tenor solo.
Joshua Walker, a sophomore from Savannah, and Launey F Roberts Jr., a graduate and now a local public school teacher, were heard in leading bass solos.
Rose Marie Overstreet, a junior music major from Sylvania, provided a piano accompaniment while James Thompson, Jr., a member of the Fine Arts faculty, was at the organ.
Braithwaite conducted an augmented group that included members of the college Choral Society, Men's Glee Club, faculty, alumni and community singers.
Staging for the performances were under the direction of Felix J Alexis, Superiniendent of Buildings and Grounds, the ushers were members of the Marshal Board under the supervision of Miss Althea Williams.
The Overture, played by Miss Overstreet and Mr Thompson; The Recitative, Comfort Ye, sung by Mr Reed; the tenor Air, Every Valley Shall Be Exalted, by Mr Johnson; the chorus.
And The Glory of The Lord; the bass Recitative, Thus Saith The Lord of Hosts, and the Air.
But Who May Abide The Day of His Coming, both sung by Mr Roberts; the chorus.
And He Shall Purify; the alto Recitative, Behold, A Virgin Shall Conceive Sung by Mrs.
Allen; the Alto Air and Chorus, O Thou That Tellest Good Tidings; the bass Recitative, For, Behold, Darkness Shall Cover The Earth, and the bass Air, The People That Walked In Darkness, both sung by Mr Walker; the chorus, For Unto Us A Child Is Born; the chorus.
WELCOMED NEWS K Payne aiinouiicey tliat Savannah iiccepled as a member of llie Southern President William State College has been Association of Colleges, Universities and Secondary Schools, the highest accrediting agency.
The freshman students are to be highly commended for their over-all participation in aiding with keeping the wheels oiled for all phases of the operating units; the sophomores for serving dinners, the juniors for handling baked good sales and take out orders and seniors for waiting.
Vernita Wright took the leadership for building decoration and music and Anna Cooper as general manager for engineering the success for the entire annual.
Inc.. became an official representative for the Christmas Stocking Fund on Savannah State College campus Friday.
The objective of this drive is to provide a channel by which the generous, warm-hearted people on tlie campus may give cheer at Christmas time to our less fortunate citizens who would otherwise face a destitute and unhappy yuletlde.
The Christmas Stocking Fund has the seal of approval of the Savannah Area Solicitation Review Board with R Nondell Coger as student general chairman and Dr.
Wilson, Director of Secondary Education at Savannah State College, as faculty advisor on the campus.
Most of us, probably celebrated it in the usualy gay manner without giving much thought to its true meaning.
We have now returned to our classes to complete the last few weeks of required study for the quarter, in jolly anticipation of the approaching Christmas holidays.
Let us not make the same mistake that we made in our celebration of Thanksgiving, too much festivity and not enough reverence.
It is a day that we should hold in high esteem above all others in the year.
We should be thankful, especially at Christmas time, for the birth of our Savior and seize the opportunity to thank Him for all the blessings, too numerous to name, that He has bestowed upon us.
The wise men gave gifts to our Savior because it was a tradition in the ancient days never to approach a king without a gift.
The wise men knew that Christ was truly a king and the gifts that they gave Christ were given from the depths of their hearts.
Today, we have a different conception of gift giving than that of the wise men.
Merchants use gift giving at Christmas time as an opportunity to augment their trade.
Employers use gift giving as a means showing appreciation to their employees, but aside from this, they also give gifts as an inducement for more work from their employees.
Many of us simply give gifts because others do it, without the true spirit of giving.
When we exchange gifts, let us try to feel as the wise men must have felt as they gave their gifts to Christ.
We must remember also that the greatest gift that we may exchange at Christmas time, or any time, is sincere reverence, thankfulness, forgiveness, brotherhood, and a mutual desire for peace and happiness among humanity, The writer of this article is gently trying to remind the read&r of the coming Christmas season and asking that we do not neglect to observe it's true meaning.
In making our resolutions, let us not forget to include more study for the next quarter and more cooperation and togetherness with our fellow students so that we may aid in making the student body of Savannah State College truly one to be admired.
Jllcrrp Cfjristmasi anti a students leaving Assembly and heading for lunch.
The Verdict Is Yours Savannah State College is one of the few institutions of higher learning in the southern region with such an abundance of natural beauty.
And since the college is home to us. it seems only natural that we should constantly endeavor to maintain that beauty for which our college is noted.
But recently it has been observed that a large number of students leaving chapel traverse the lawn in a mad dash to the dining hall instead of using the walkways provided.
Even more Important, however, than the possible damage to the lawn is the indictment upon ourselves as college men and women.
And while it seems that we have learned that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line, and that one can reach his destination even faster if he runs, we ought not to forget the amendities of life.
Maturity, socially acceptable conduct, and appreciation for the finer things in life are intrinsic, that is, embodied in the concept of college men and women.
Page 2 The Tiger's Roar Staff WILLIAM D, HAGINS Edltor-ln-Chlef JAME L, DEVOE Chief Associate Editor VERDELLE LAMBERT MAMIE E GREENE Associate Editor Associate Editor Managing Editor Veronica Owens News Editor Norman Elmore Assistant News Editor Roscoe Edwards Feature Editor Samuel M Truell Fashion Editors Dorothy Carter.
Bobby Burgess Exchange Editor Mary L Brown Business Manager Bobby Hill Society Editor Louise Lamar Photographer Robert Mobely Assistant Photographer Kermetta C Clark Secretary Mary L Brown Typist Jacquelyne Butler Advisers Wilton C Scott, Robert Holt.
Miss Albertha Boston News and Literary Editor Norman Elmore Copy Editor Bernice Pinkney CONTRIBUTING EDITORS Carolyn D QulIUon Daisy Anderson Irene E Elmore June Alexander Redell Walton Elaine Smith Pauline Heard Charlene Bright Ben Colbert THE TIGER'S ROAR December.61 World News and Politics Good Leadership Based Upon Faith By Roscoe Edwards, Jr.
The first, ""Faith in God"" upon which rest all worthy accomplishments of our civilization.
Leaders who base their beliefs and purposes upon faith in God have survived the efforts of tyrants and dictators.
They have become successful guiders, have inspired great projects and have strengthened the principals of democracy.
The well known adage ■■As a man thinketh in his heart. so is he."" brings to light the great quality of ambition.
If one thinks that he has the ability and potentiality to lead, to organize and to control situations, he will prove his worth with all energies and talents.
He will develop abilities that will take care of life and which will prove essential to the preservation of human rights and personal liberties.
Our forefathers possessed ""Faith In their Fellowmen."" when they designed the Constitution.
We must trust one another to do the things that will promote a good life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
Good leadership must be founded upon :i belief that there Is a freedom u> maintain.
Leaders must comfort their followers in order to fortify the cause of freedom.
The one big quality of leadership is that of accepting responsibilities.
Savanunh^s Tennis Courts Are Opened City-owned tennis courts have been added to a mounting list of desegregated facilities here, it was disclosed Friday.
Several Negroes already have played without incident on the courts at city-owned Daffin Park, When Negroes ask to play on the courts, they will not be turned aside, said Herbert Griffin, Sr,, chairman of the City Recreation Board.
A C, Smith, attendant at the courts, said officials notified him several days ago to start permitting Negroes to play on the previously all-white courts.
Savannah also has desegregated lunch counters, city buses, the public library and the municipal golf courses.
This is a question that is pondering in the minds of practical-thinking people everywhere, where freedom of speech, religion, thought, association, and any other type of freedom that is so dear to the inhabitants of the non-Communist countries.
Many people wonder why an individual dares to ask such a question, when seemingly democracy is on a rapid upward movement.
These -complacent people are apt to be contented with our so-called democracy and disillusioned by the many advances made in our society in recent years.
In America, which is the undisputed leader of the non-Communist world, we have our first Catholic president, , a Negro cabinet member, and a Jewish cabinet member.
These radical moves are unprecedented in American history, and one New Frontiersman even went as far as to predict a Negro to the presidency by the twenty-first century, I must say that I am not as optimistic.
Radical moves like the former and statements as the latter tend to bring about complacency in the best of us.
There are too few Americans who realize that we do not have a democracy, we have a model, and that model is not good enough.
It is especially not good enough for us to propagandarize our ideologies to the new and underdeveloped countries.
In a perfect democracy an individual could and would not be fired, rehired, and then severely reprimanded for taking an active part against the evils of his community and nation.
We live in a society where a president reigns, who received less popular votes than his opponent — yet in our so-called democracy the majority Is supposed to prevail.
While Mr Kennedy is in office the majority of the people will suffer while he jams his extremely radical measures down our throats.
In a true democracy a woman black or white, would be able to seek a local civic position without unfair tactics by her opponents to beat her.
In a true democratic society, a general would not be ostracized by his country's legislature for informing his subordinates of the evils of communism.
Men's Fashions By Charlie Phillips OUTLETS SEEN FOR STYLE SCENE This year even more than last, tiie vernal style scene promises to be a harmonious blend of tradition and innovation that should provide more ample outlets for both conservative and liberal tastesriiing!to Come The shape of things to come will change a bit. but only the perceptive eye will notice.
Happily, the natural shoulder hasn't been touched, but the new jackets will be longer by a fraction than heretofore, and their lapels will be slightly wider.
Waist suppression, gentle but noticeable, will be back, and you can expect to find more patch flap pockets on solid-color coats.
Slacks win retain their slim and clean-lined silhouette, but with a decline in elasticized waistbands.
Belt loops will be reappearing and with them, a sumptuous variety of new belts in both leathers and fabrics.
But the biggest news is the triumphant revival of stripes; candy -f lipes, boater stripes, awning .tnpes. ice cream parlor stripes.
On blazers, sweaters, swim trunks, walking shorts, belts, dress and sport shirts, they promise to infuse the style season with an atmosphere of carnival gaiety that has not been enjoyed since the stripe-candy Nineties.
JAZZ CRITIQUE By Samuel M Truell In contemporary society, college students are becoming aware more than ever of syncopated jazz music, which Is a consequence of the ingenuity, versatility and improvisation of present day jazzmen.
Admirers of modern jazz, and '' its fanatics are deeply indebted to the pioneers of modern jazz, Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie and the volatile Thelonius Monk.
These men mere noncomplacent during the be-bop era and consequently they rebelled in wrath against the jazz music of the early forties.
By way of their instruments this triumvirate created a revoi lutlon in music.
Many jazz critics believe that Morxk alone initiated the revolt because of his tendency to deviate from the favorite music of the pre-war years.
Dixieland, and many people feel that he is still deviating, due to his absolute and complex style.
I believe that Monk, with the exception of Miles Davis, is the most disliked and least understood man in jazz today.
I have no special predilection from Monk^s music, because I feel that he is more of a composer than a musician, but when one contemplates the idea, one can't help but admire the man for his endeavors.
For to be a deviate or to conform against the prevailing elements of music and still be accepted is something many musicians may never accomplish.
In 1956 death claimed the ""Bird"" Charlie Parker and it was felt throughout the jazz world that no one would ever fill the shoes left vacant by this immortal genius.
But a few years later a young man by the name of John Coltrane was given the chance by Miles and Monk respectively to play in their combos.
Subsequently Coltrane played with so much reverence and vitality that he is now by far the most acclaimed jazzman today, and the recipient of the accolade once bestowed only to Parker, Coltrane may never fill Bird's shoes to capacity but he will undoubtedly wear the larger portion for a long time to come.
Indeed John Coltrane has perpetuated his way in a field that is as difficult as Japanese trigonometry, and his is definitely here to stay.
The Coed in Literature Chtss So petite and debonaire, So lovely and warm; All dressed in pink and white.
A visiting prof was on campus yesterady; Boy, was he handsome, but fair.
His voice was shrill, his smile was warm, And his gait was very smooth.
Wonder what is going on in her pretty head, For it is obvious that she is preoccupied Despite the beautiful poem the class is discussing.
December.61 THE TIGER'S ROAR Page 3 SSC FACULTY COMMENDS PRESIDENT PAYNE PRESIDENT WILLIAM K TAYINE At the recent December faculty meeting, the faculty of Savannah State College voted unanimously to extend commendation to President William K Payne for his leadership in obtaining accreditation of the college by the Southern Association of Secondary Schools and Colleges.
For the first time in the history of the College, it has been accepted into the circle of academic institutions on the basis of criteria applicable to all institutions in this region.
James Thompson, Margaret Tynes, nationally known soprano, in concert at Savannah State College.
Dr Lionel Newson, of the Department of Sociology, at Morehouse College, speaking at Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity"" Founder's Day program.
Roland Nash, from Claxton, Ga., a member of Savannah State Tigers' fabulous team.
Alvin Toney, from Columbus, Ga., who is expected to see a lot of action with the Tigers.
December, 1961 THE TIGER'S ROAR Savannah State College 1961-62 By James Brown, Jr.
The squad is under the management of Coach Ted Wright, who has had much success in guiding the same starting five for the past three years.
Over the last three-year period, the team has won 80 games while losing only 12; this includes winning nine championships.
Redell iMoose) Walton, one of the starting five, is the first basketball player In the history of the school to berth All-American, Redell is a 21-year-old lad from Chicago.
Captain James Dixon, only 5' 4"" is the little general of the squad and he makes up for his lieight with his fine performances.
Willie Tate is the player who always seems to be the man to shoot the big points when they are neededTate possesses one of the finest jump shots of any college player.
Steve Kelly, the ball handier of the team is undoubtedly i^me of the finest ball handlers in any college.
A lot will be expected from Johnny Mathis, Leon Wright, Paul Thompson, Raymond Harper and Harvey Bailey this season.
E SCHOEFFLER, ESQUIRE'S Fashion Director With the holiday season approaching, you'll be dresshig formally with increasing frequency, Let's review what's new and correct in campus formal wear so you'll be at ease and in fashion at fraternity and sorority dances and at the many gala parties ahead.
The correct and smart silhouette for campus formal wear is the natural .shoidder, single breasted dinner jacket with black satin shaicl collar.
The high fashion peak lapel model is also being worn by some tmderpraduates.
FABRICS ARE LIGHT.., Lightweight formal \vear makes sense in any season.
The heavy weight, old fashioned ""tux"" made formal evenings a chore rather than a pleasure.
A few hours spent dancing in stuffy, overcrowded, overheated ballrooms was enough to take the starch out of the hardiest college man.
This season's favored formal fabrics will be dull finish tropical worsteds and dacron/ rayon blends, GO VEST, YOUNG MAN . . . just as vests h ive made a comeback in suits, and with sport jackets and shicks, you'll see more ■vests with formal attire.
An elegant vest in matching or fancy fabric is just the added touch to boost your rating along sorority row.
FORMAL FOOTWEAR . . . whether your forte is the Pachanga, Charanga, Cha Cha Cha or trusty Fox Trot, you should keep in .step with black patent leather in either plain tip or slip on model.
Plain black or midnight blue are the correct colors in formal wear hose.
The white ivash and wear dinner jacket in blends of rayon and acetate or dacron and rayon is smart and practical.
You can also make a colorful vacation splash in plaid cotton or batik dinner jackets.
Charles ^att. head of the Department of Chemistry at SSC, is ptTl'orming one of his many experiments.
SSC Places Three On AU-Conferenee Football Team Three of the Tigers ""mighty eleven"" were named All-Conference football players for the 1961 football season.
Henry Saunders is a big 6' 2"" end who came to us from Tompkins High School, in Savannah, Ga.
Saunders played a large part in the Tigers attempt to receive respectability In its conference.
He was one of the Tigers' top ground gainers, Benjamin Spann, made the second team, but is regarded as one of the roughest lineman in the conference.
Spann is probably considered the most versatile lineman on the Tiger squad.
The poll, conducted by a volunteer student group, was intended to find out if claims of theater owners that their business would fail off if they were to integrate were valid.
The paper also cites, as indication that theater seats are '■growing cold under the present segregated arrangement"" the recent practice of offering free showings to fraternity and sorority groups during prime evening hours at the Carolina Theater.
Willie Tate, Ira Jackson, Steve Kelly, James Dixon and Redell Walton led the seasiders' attack.
Last season Benedict was one of the few teams that was able to stop the Savannah Stale College's thundering offensive attack.
The high scorer for Benedict and the game was Artie Burke, who poured In 27 points.
Savannah State's high men were Willie Tate with 24 points. and Ira Jackson with 20 points.
Two busy juniors preparing ""take out"" orders at the Bazaar— Norma Hendrix, left, of Savannah, Georgia and Annie Pearl Davis, right, of Waycross, Georgia.
The secret of the flavor is the famous Marlboro recipe from Richmond, Virginia. . . and the pure white Selectrate filter that goes with it.
Honorary Chairman, Southern Regional School Press Institute, and President of Savannah State College, announced that Savannah State is sponsoring the Southern Regional School Press Institute.
The Institute will feature two High School Printed Divisions, one catchall Metropolitan Newspaper, a Yearbook Division, and an Elementary Division.
Jack Leflore, Chief Consultant of the Scliool Press Institute, Sales Manager for the American Yearbook Company and Jonston Jewelry, will serve as Keynote Speaker on Thursday, February 8, and Paul Swensson.
Adviser to President John F Kennedy, Vice Chairman of the Democratic National Committee, and Vice President of the Chicago Defender, will appear as the Luncheon Speaker on Friday, February 9, A registration fee of $1.50 will be charged for each participant, and meals for out-of-town participants will be $2,25 per day for three meals.
Paul Swensson. executive director of the Wall Street Journal Newspaper Fund, will deliver the main address at the public meeting.
The importance of journalism education and career planning have long been watch words for Paul S Swensson, executive director of The Wall Street Journal's Newspaper Fund, Inc.
Gustavus Adolphus awarded Mr, Swensson a doctor of human letters degree.
His journalism career began at 15, when he was a correspondent for a Minnesota weekly.
Since that time he has been active in both professional and scholastic journalism.
Prior to joining the fund in September of 1961, Mr Swensson was managing editor of the Mmneapolis Tribune from 1950 through 1955.
He is a past president of the Minnesota Associated Press and the Minnesota professional chapter of Sigma Delta Chi. a former director of the Associated Press Managing Editors Association and a member of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
Jack LeFlore, sales manager of the American Yearbook Company is the keynote speaker at the opening session at 10:00 A.M., In Meldrim Auditorium, and Frank Reeves, former special assistant to President J, F Kennedy, will be the Luncheon Speaker on Friday at 1:00 P.M., In Adams Hall.
William K Payne, president of Savannah State College is the honorary chairman; Wilton C Scott, Public Relations Director, is the Director; Mrs.
Luetta C Upshur, Assistant Professor in English, is the program director; Miss Rosemary Singleton, Clerk in Public Relations, is General Secretary; Norman Elmore, Editor of the Student Newspaper, is student chairman; and James Devoe, President of the Student Council, is co-chairman.
It is fitting that institutions such as this one, for the proper training of young journalists, be held in this sovereign state where the freedom of the press is held so dear.
The challenge is now yours to protect and preserve this right, as it is essential for a democracy of free people and ultimately for a free world.
Chancellor Pays Tribute to SSC ""The Office of the Board of Regents wishes to join with the Savannah State College in welcoming the members of the Southern Regional School Press Institute to Savannah and Georgia.
Those in attendance at the Institute will have the privilege of hearing addresses by. some of the nation's leaders in the publishing and newspaper field, (Conlinued on Page 5, Column 3J DK HILLIARl) A BOWEN Alpha Kappa Mu ludnrts Five The Alpha Nu Chapter of Alpha Kappa Mu National Society held its January induction ceremonies on Thursday, January 25, The inductees were presented to the college family during the weekly assembly hour, at which time was delivered a challenging and impressive address by Dr.
Hilliard A, Bowen, Superintendent of Area 1, Atlanta Public School System.
Some of the members on the staff have given interesting reports and discussions.
They were Norman Elmore, Mamie Greene, James Devoe, Dorothye Carter, Louise Lamer, and Verdelle Lambert.
The reports were centered around journalistic reports, student publications, and newspaper magazines, The advisors, Mr Wilton C Scott, Mr Robert Holt, and Miss Albertha E Boston, have also given interesting comments that will be of great value at the Institute.
It Is hoped that the events this year will over-shadow those presented In former years, Student Council Sells Candy By Dorothye Carter It Is gratifying to know that the several Greek-letter organl.zatlons on campus are co-oper-' atlng whole-heartedly with the members of the Student Council In promoting the ""Dollars for Scholars"" program, a candyselling project.
Proceeds from this campaign will be used to give additional aid to the National Defense Loan Fund and other worthy causes on campus.
In ascending order Dorothy L Brown, Bernita Koniegay, James J Devoe, Berniece Pinckney, and Mamie E Greene take time out for a picture prior to their induction into Alpha Kappa Slu Honor Society.
Former SSC Student Assigned For Special Training Two Savannah men are being assigned to new bases for training in United States Air Force job specialities following their completion of basic military training here.
The participants and distinguished consultants always find the experiences new and challenging.
Much of our education today and in the future wiU be influenced by those who read and write and use the various media of communication.
Savannah State College is glad to welcome all who will participate In the programs.
They will be as diverse and varied as the personalities who participate, but they can contribute to our growth and understanding.
It is through enlightenment of the many that we can move towards our cherished goals.
Expressing the hope that Us action would be ""forerunner of similar action by all organizations and Individuals interested in financial support of Southern universities and colleges,"" the endowment annuonced that its trustees had voted to Duke the special gift of SI million — which is to be matched by another $1 million to be raised by the university itselfThe entire S2 million is to be devoted exclusively to raising faculty salaries over a two-year period.
Dean Jesse Caskey of Northland College suggested that this potential might be within the student — that the educator's greatest unexplored resource might be the student's ability to learn by himself.
The freshman's ability to pursue his education under a loose rein varies — generally, from fair to poor.
Unless the student has learned to pursue his education independently by the time of his graduation, college has been for him a miserable failure.
The student will develop fully his inherent capacity for self-education only if it is expected of him.
Types and Techniques"" Members of the Journalism Class General Assembly Willcox Gymnasium Paul Swensson.
FEBRUARY 9 Workshop Sessions Workshop Picture Press Conference"" Institute Luncheon, Adams Hall Louis Martin, Presidential Adviser — Speaker •"" Each delegation is eligible to select one Star Reporter to serve as one of the participants in the Press Conference.
A citation will be presented to the writer of the best story based on this interview.
Lance Kerr, a 12-year-old physics major, began a regular schedule of classes this fall, says the Daily Bruin.
Miss Loveman was widely known and beloved in the publishing world and throughout her long and distinguished career in literary journalism, was particularly interested in broadening the horizons of young people by introducing them to the universe of books and ideas.
The sponsors believe that the award offers a realization of this important objective of Miss Loveman.
Nominations of senior students for the award will be made by Chairmen of Campus Library Award Committees who will select a local winner.
Collections are to be judged on basis of intelligent interest. scope and imagination shown in creating the collection and knowledge of the books as revealed in the annotations.
Collections of any type are eligible; whether centered in a subject or avocation, a single author or group of authors, a general collection.
And even if your answers are in the affirmative, you. too. can resolve to strive toward greater heights.
Let us use all the facilities it has to offer, but let us not forget the purpose of, and the comfort found in. our libraryIt is true that there are many past achievements of which we should be quite proud, but let us not consume so much time reminiscing.
May one of our greatest ambitions be that of doing something commendable— something that will be remembered long after we have completed our stay at this institution.
Let it be something of which we can boast with a gleam in our eyes and joy in our hearts.
May we always be mindful that a college is no better than its students and personnelLet us endeavor to change our C's to B's and A's, We must find time to better all of our college organizations and activities, for they, too, make the College.
With each hand in the hand of a brother's, we can form a family circle so strong that the mightiest army would have to admit defeat if ever the attempt to destroy our mighty fortress is tried.
Remember, without your help and determination, Savannah State is ""nowhere-"" A Stiideut^s Vieiv of Life By Freida M Brewton Life is a ball game.
Some of the spectators are friendly, others are hostile; such is the case in any game We are not to be disturbed by the scores the spectators are keeping, because we must realize that the official score is recorded by our heavenly Umpire.
Only He can truthfully say how many errors we have made, innings we have had. or how many home runs we have hit.
In this ball game of life, victory is our ultimate goalEach time we stand at bat we must be careful to play the game fairly because the Umpire is watching at all times, and when we play the game unfairly.
If we work diligently at winning this ball game of life and are mindful not to cheat in any way, we can rest assured that some day, in the final analysis, victory will be our reward.
This solutions keeps his face from getting sore — if he hasn't already cut it.
The main purpose for using this solution, however, is the pleasing odor it has.
They stop at the theater where the fellow stops the car, gets out, runs around to the girl's side to open the door, helps the girl out of the car, finds a spot for her to wait while he runs back to the car. drives it to a parking place and then runs back to the theater.
It is customary that he ask her if she would care for something to eat and if she says yes. the same courtesies at the restaurant as the theater.
When they get to the door of her home, he takes her key and struggles to open the door for her.
February, 1962 THE TIGER'S ROAR Page 3 Omega Psi Phi 25 Strong Nov By Ralph Lowe As a result of Novemtier's line of probates, eleven Brothers have entered into the realm of Omegadom by way of Alpha Gamma chapter of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.
The initiation of these brothers has made the chapter twenty-five strong.
These neophyte brothers are Willie Adkins of Ludowici, Harvey Bryant of Woodbine, James Coar of Columbus, Alex Habersham of Macon, Christopher James of Woodbine.
Dolphus Lewis of Columbus, Horace Magwood o( Savannah, Leander Merritt of Ocilla, Jerry Mims of Hinesviile, John C Reed of Sylvania, and Louis Frank Tompkins of Columbus.
We would also like to note that Brothers Ernest Brunson and Norman Elmore were recently named to ""Who's Who Among Students in American Colleges and Universities,"" and that Brothers Norman Elmore, Leander Merritt, and Lester Wilson were honored at the college's annual Honors Convocation on November 16. 1961, for having maintained averages of ""B"" or better for three or more quarters last year.
Atlanta, Georgia, was the guest speaker on our National Achievement Week program held last quarter.
Robert Smith of Griffin, Georgia, did not return to school this quarter.
Brother Smith's contribution to the chapter will be missed by all of the brothers.
It is our sincere hope that he will return in the near future, if not in our presence, then in the presence of those brothers left behind to keep the fiame of Omega burning here at Savannah State College.
The brothers of Alpha Gamma are looking forward to the events to be sponsored by the chapter with much enthusiasm.
In the very near future we hope to sponsor the following activities; an All-College Assembly, our annual Talent Hunt Program which is to be presented jointly with Mu Phi chapter in the city and last but not least, our annual Mardi Gras.
We are doing our utmost in the line of preparation in order that these events will be vast improvements over those presented in the past.
Alpha Gamma chapter is proud to announce that we have been represented well by Helen Woods, a soror of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, who is ""Miss SIX— TIGER ROAR Omega,"" and by her very lovely attendants, Dorothye Carter and Carolyn Vinson, also Delta soror The brothers of Alpha Gamma chapter also extend a hearty welcome to all beginning freshmen and transfer students who decided to matriculate at Savannah State College this quarter.
Five young men of the Lampados Club are now looking forward with great anticipation of someday crossing the burning sands into Omegadom.
Alpha Kappa Alpha Sororitv Observes National FoiiihUm''s Day The National Founder's Day of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.
Inc.. was observed by Gamma Sigma Omega and Gamma Upsilon Chapters on Sunday.
S u j e 1 1 e Fountain Crank, South Atlantic Regional Director of the sorority.
Mrs, Crank is the executive director of the Phyllis Wheatley Branch of the Young Women's Christian Association.
She is a graduate of Morris Delias Observe Founders Day The surors of Delta Nu Chapter, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc., paid homage to the founders of their organization during the weekly chapel hour on January 18 in Wilcox Gymnasium, The theme.
Included, was the memorable ""This Is Your Life"" which was an imitation of the television program.
The sorors are looking forward to a successful year under the dynamic leadership of Almarie Glover, and they extend best wishes for a prosperous and academically successful New Year to the entire student body.
Crank centered her address on the theme ""Women's Role in Bettering World Relations"" In her speech she adinto professional areas with the best possible training In order that they might make the world monished all able women to go a better place to live in.
Mrs, Crank closed her address by challenging the women of today to accept the standards of the day and to make the role of the woman felt in the attempt to better world relations.
Other highlights of the program included greetings by Mrs, Leila Braithwaite. the occasion by Mrs, Louise L, Owens, selections by the Alpha Kappa Alpha Ensemble, remarks by Dr.
A reception was held in the Student Union Building immediately after the program.
Phi Beta Sigma Makes Plans The Gamma Zeta chapter of the Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity.
Inc. is drafting plans for the chapter's annual ""Education Day"" which will be observed on the Savannah State College campus on March 29.
The chapter extends words of sincere appreciation to everyone who helped in making the Christmas Stocking Fund Drive a success.
Alpha Kappa Aljtlia Sororilv l*re^«'nl> Chapel Program By Veronica Owens On January 11, Gamma Upsilon chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority presented its AllCollege Assembly Program, The theme of the program was ""A Salute to Greekdom in Words and Music,"" It was appropriately conveyed when sorors Veronica Owens and Bessie Samuel saluted each Greek letter organization on the campus.
After the comments on the life of a famous member of the other organizations, the Greek medley was played.
In addition to this, a member from each Greek letter organization on the campus was an honored platform guest.
The program was brought to a close when the sorors of Alpha Kappa Alpha formed a semicircle and sang their National Hymn, Alpha Kappa Mu Inducts 5 <UmUH„cd from /V--' "" honors convocation.
Savannah; Liberty County High, Mcintosh; Lee Street High, Blackshear; Ralph J Bunche High, Woodbine; George Washington Carver High, Richmond Hill; and Springfield Central High, Springfield.
Clemmons was the setting for the induction ceremonies which were held that evening.
But ""they"" are the painters of the night Who touch up the sordid and' sundry places.
In the bright light of day, We see Man in a different perspective — He lies beside the Pierian spring like some fallen god Stripped of the glory that once was.
Breakfast Is served from 7:30 to 8:00; If you are one minute after you'll be late.
Dressed In white, Nice and clean Look healthy, clever, Bright and keen.
Sftvaiinah Staters Wonder Boy By Therman Thomas For the past four basketball seasons, Redell iMoose) Walton has led his team in scoring and has ranked second In rebounding.
During the 1960-61 season the mild-mannered and somewhat shy Walton averaged 25 points per game.
In 1960 he established a one-game record by shooting a total of 39 points against the Benedict College team.
The four-year letterman is deadly from all points on the court, ""Moose"" plays both front court and back court exceptionally well.
For the past three years, he has been selected ^or the Southeastern Athletic Conference's All-Conference team.
Through outstanding feats in tournament play, he was also selected the most valuable player In the 1960-61 NAIA District 6 Tourney.
Last year ""Moose"" captured the Most Valuable Player title in the Pelican State Tourney over NAIA All-American elect, Charles Harnett of Grambling College.
Redell has no definite future plans as yet; however, he will probably settle for professional basketball or coaching.
In his spare time, Walton does a lot of reading, writing and listening to jazz albums.
Most of his time is spent with co-ed Gwendolyn Smith, an ardent basketball fan.
A pleading letter was carried by the Daily Trojan of Southern California asking coeds to throw a few written lifelines to one depressed serviceman.
It Is up to us to prepare ourselves to meet such a demand, In considering preparation for leadership, we are to be mindful of the qualities sought In a leader.
These men had the courage and the will power to take the helm in the midst of perilous situations and lead their people to a new destlny.
Page 4 THE TIGER'S ROAR Febn MEMORY LANE 1961 By William Haglns The swift arrival of the New Year has caused many of us to pause for a moment to take an Inventory of 1961.
The activities at Savannah State College last year proved that there were many momentous events filled with challenges, opportunities, and success. in our midst.
Let's take an imaginary stroll down Inventory Lane and recall the glorious past.
Atlanta, Georgia, was the main .speaker at the Tenth Annual Pre.ss Institute held at Savannah State College on February 16.
Devoe, MrCrory \ ictorions in Stndenl Klertions James J Devoe, popular student and ""Man of the Year,"" was elected president of the Student Council by the college electorate.
Emma Sue McCrory, popular and talented student, won the coveted title of ""Miss Savannah State 1961-62"" over three other contestants.
Miss McCrory's radiant personality captuied the students' hearts and their votes too.
MAY Fanions Modtl Hcadiint-s Annnal Charm Week World famous model, Dorothea Towles, headlined the Annual Charm Week Activities sponsored by the young women of our campus.
Miss Towles spoke at the All-College Assembly and was the center of attraction at the fabulous fashion extravaganza that culminated the week's activities.
Verdelle Landiert Receives Mantle of Honor Verdelle Lambert, highest ranking junior woman, received the ""Mantle of Pallas Athene"" at the Annual Charm Week Assembly from Yvonne McGloikton, highest ranking senior woman.
Alpha Kappa Mti Inducts Tuo Annette C, Kennu-dy and Norman Elmore were inducted into Alpha Nu chapter of Alpha Kappa Mu National Honor Society on May 17.
Over Fifty Students Receive Awards on Awards Day Over fifty students received coveted awards at the Annual Awards Day Assembly on May 17.
Degree On June 5, ninty-one students left the hallowed walls of Savannah State College by way of graduation and ventured on to broader horizons, JULY Ne>* Facidty Appointments Made Four distinguished persons were added to the staff of Savannah State College, namely.
AUGUST August Commencement Held Forty-seven proud seniors marched down the aisles of Meldrim Auditorium to have the B.S, degree conferred on them by Dr.
This program was sponsored by the Student Personnel staffOCTOBER Chattahuuchee Clas>ic Sucee»sfnl The Savannah State College football team, the ""Fighting Tigers,"" won the second annual Chatahoochee Classic by defeating Fort Valley State College by a score of H-7 at Columbus.
Hundreds of alumni flocked to Savannah and to Bacon Park Memorial Stadium to cheer the Tigers on to victory.
Deborah Thirty-four Intern Teachers Assigned To Student Teaehing Posts According to information released by Dr.
Savannah State College, thirtyfour student teachers have been assigned to student teaching posts.
The name of the student Also Donnie D Cooper, Eleteacher, major, school assigned mentary Education.
Moses Jackand supervising teacher respectively are Lee Westley Walker, Industrial Arts.
Verdelle Lambert, English, Sol C Johnson, Mrs, Dorothy U Adams; Doris Riggs, Mathematics, Sol C Johnson.
Eldora Greene; Geraldine Spaulding, Elementary Education, Montieth School.
Mattie Leaks; Retha Butler, Elementary Education, West Broad Street School, Mrs, Erma Williams.
Ella Mae Cunningham, Health and Physical Education, Liberty County High School.
It has been estimated that Chubby Checker will make well over one million dollars from the sale of articles with his name and picture on them.
Shirts, shoes, trousers, and suits called the ""Twisters"" are already on the market.
Pictured above with Ira Jackson, popular basketball player and ideal gentleman, are Sherbie Best, Laordice Winfrey, Dawn Hollinshead. and Lois Carson.
These young ladies are known as the ""Magnificent Four"" and are members of the Ira Jackson Fan Club.
Patridge Wolfe, Grand Basileus of the Sorority, was the featured speaker at a public program.
Mrs, Ella W, Fisher, member of the Savannah State College faculty, is Regional Director of the Southeastern Conference.
DECEMRER Alpha Kappa iVIn Rc<:ional Ct>n\enlioii tield at SSC Alpha Nu chapter.
Norman Elmore of Alpha Nu chapter was elected vice-president of the region.
Verdelle Lambert, president of Alpha Nu chapter was awarded a certificate of honor at the convention (or her original poem presented at the meeting.
Savannah Stale College Is Accredited hy tlie Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Scliools On Thursday.
President W K, Payne announced to the faculty and student body that we had been accepted for full accreditation by the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools This accreditation by that accrediting agency is a milestone in the histoiy of Savannah State College.
But we as students and faculty of this great institution can do much to make 1962 a banner year.
Art Chd) Being Keorj;anized By Benjamin Colbert The Art Club is being formally organized again.
The reorganization is largely due to popular requests, the expanding art program and an increasing community interest.
The first meeting of the Art Club was held Friday, January 20, in the Fine Arts Building.
The main purpose of the club will be to sponsor programs and projects of art, including painting techniques and drawing; participation in art exhibits, both locally and nationally.
There will be special exhibits on the campus such as the Fine Arts FestivalAll persons of the campus community are invited to join the Art Club.
Bobby Hill announced that the organization will present a Special All-College Assembly program during the month of February, Bobby Burgess, president, expressed great appreciation for the cooperation of the entire organization in making the year of 1961 a successful one.
Debating Society Presents Debate The Savannah State College Debating Society presented its first debate on Friday, January 12, in Meldrim Auditorium.
That Labor Organizations should be under the jurisdiction of Anti-Trust Legislation.
James Brown and Samuel Williams represented the affirmative side, while Bobby Hill and Elmer Thomas argued the negative point of view.
Tlie Committee on Intercollegiate Discussion and Debating of the speech Association of America chose the current topic, because all Americans, directly or indirectly, are affected by the relationship of labor and management.
The primary emphasis of the debate is labor-management relations, particularly union activities and goals, as these affect the public, Samuel Williams Is president of the Debating Society of Savannah State College, Abraham Jones, secretary, Professor Blanton E, Black, Dr.
E SCHOEFFLER, esquires Fashion Director This Fall's fashion note in campus sportswear is one of bright, fresh approaches to traditional stylings.
You'll find smart looking sportswear in a wide range of colors, fabrics and styles suitable for classrooms, campus and for casual dates.
A MODERN SLANT ALONG TRADITIONAL Linto . . . this natural shoulder brown Donegal t\\eed jacket is the epitome of casual elegance.
It's an infallibly correct sport coat specked with flecks of green, olive and yellow and buttoned in leather.
A BLAZING TWOSOME... this .tnki„g duo really lights up the campus fashion scene.
A blazer striped hopsacking wool jacket in three favorite campus colors — blue, tiger, and olive, is worn with a grey long sleeve turtle neck pullover.
ALWAYS POPULAR AND INCREASINGLY VERSATILE . . . large glen plaid checked sport coats in heavier weaves will have an elegant but casual ""country gentlemen"" look; also check lighter weight Harris tweeds in jaunty olive plaids, and olive and black checks, THE CAMELS ARE COMING. ..o, rather returning to the campus scene.
New camel's hair jackets are tailored with natural shoulders, straight-hanging lines, patch chest, lower flap pockets and center vent.
A striking camel's hair cardigan sweater merits your special attention, it's smart and luxurious looking, in the natural camel shade with leather buttons and side vents.
A dashing V neck pullover in strong blazer stripes of blue, chianti and olive should be noted.
Models will be seen with cross and vertical stripes and subtle tiger and grape tone accents.
SLACKS, SLACKS AND MORE SLACKS . . . daikg,eys.-inddaik olive.'^ predominate, fabrics ;ire flannels, worsted flannels, smooth finished worsteds, blends of miracle fibres and wool . . . and all are hard /rearing.
BUTTON DOWN SHIRTS are brightened up by ;a((fvs(i(ic;;ecA,s, in red, black, and yellow; bold checks in fresh combinations of olive and blue tone.s.
Note batik print button downs; you'll find these in pullover styles in the increasingly popular color combination of olive and blue.
They'll be styled with a deep nap, narrow brim and will feature wool cord band and pinched telescoped crown.
WOMEN'S FASHIONS By Dorothye Carter Beautiful You and Black Black has just been hailed as the color of the year on the Savannah State College campus and is being worn by everyone.
Black is a very conservative color and can be worn by everyone for any occasion — class, church, banquets, formals, and for sportswear.
For you figure-conscious girls who can't wear certain colors, and who feel ill-at-ease in certain colors, forget your problems because I have the color of the year for you— Black.
For church, let's try a black two-piece dress or suit with burnt orange or beige accessories.
And the black sheath dress with spaghetti strings across the shoulder is just the attire for the ""Sweetheart's Bail"" or for that all important banquet.
No one, but no one, would be without some type of black coat in her wardrobe, such as a black leather jacket, the all popular double-breasted long coat with large collar and pockets.
Don't forget the black suede leather long coat and jacket, For evening wear let's consider a black velveteen lined in white fur.
Let's wear more black and less flash, and you will be very beautiful In black.
SSC Southern Regional iC.onimued jrom /V <> ""The Board of Regents and its staff join with the officials and faculty of the Savannah State College in hoping that those who are at the Institute meeting will find their visit to Savannah a delightful and rewarding experience,"" comments Harmon Caldwell.
Under the leadership and guidance of President William K Payne, Savannah State College has obtained noble heights in the area of a school press program to help all schools and community groups.
Jt was designed as a program for the college newspaper and yearbook staffs, now it serves all schools in the southeastern United States.
Among the consultants, workshop leaders, and discussants are Paul Swensson, Executive Director, The Newspaper Fund.
Public Relations Director, Fort Valley State College, Fort Valley, Georgia, Willie B Chlsholm.
Atlanta; Clarence Lofton, Co-ordinator, Cooperative Training, Tompkins High School, Savannah; Lawrence Bryant, Sales Representative, Josten's Jewelry.
Savannah; Alphonso S, McLean, Assistant Manager, Hl-Hat Bowling Lanes, Savannah; Mrs.
Estella S Pate, Associate Editor, Herald Publishing Company, Savannah; Mrs.
Emily S Chisholm, Associate Editor, Around Our Town Magazine, Savannah; Ric Mandes, Public Relations Director, Georgia Southern College.
Statesboro; William Pace, Public Relations Director, Morris Brown College, Atlanta; Marlon Jackson, Sports Editor, Atlanta Daily World.
Savannah; Mrs, Lillie Allen Powell, Secretary, Office of Public Relations, Savannah State College, Savannah; Miss Helen Lanier, Promotion Manager, Savannah NewsPress, Savannah; and J Randolph Fisher, Associate Professor, English, Savannah State College, Savannah.
Julie Cheely, Earnestine Jones, Mamie Greene, Bernice PInkney, Charlie Phillips, Kermetta Clark, James Devoe, Irene Elmore, Eudora Allon, Norman Elmore, Otis Mitchell, Eunice Veal, Veronica Owens, Louise Lamar, Therman Thomas, Pauline Heard, Bobby Burgess, and Bobby Hill.
The College newspaper docs not only represent the college in the outside world, but it also serves ;ks an outlet for informing students of the activities that have taken place on and off campus which concern them.
The college newspaper -is an instrument of mass cominunicatio non campus.
It is a publication by wlilch the students may speak or voice their conceptions through editorials, feature stores, poems, etc.
The college newspaper represents the students and gives thcni a chance to debate and test experimental thoughts. emotions, and beliefs.
So from these conceptions, it can be concluded that a__collcge newspaper holds the major spotlight of student expression in college life.
WELCOME DELEGATES Redell Walton of SSC shines in the game against Morehouse College of Atlanta.
CaOmdar GirCs -1962 JANUARY ON GUARD t Fionklo Sliickland. chnrming tranilm tludcnl lioi Daiion, piovoi IhnI womnn cnii loncu loo, Fionkic hoi hopoi ol lohlon dotlgnci.
She inllv ""Mill TochnicQl APRIL showers; Louoly Mniga.ul Jeiikini, n juiiioi i-lemmiBiy educolion niajoi liom Savar.itoh b tluiining ai ihc posei lot Ihe phologiBphci.
FEBRUARY MAKE TWO I Loii Cniion, ehairoing fioihman Engliih major om Winlei Po.k, FloiidH, domonilintoi lome limoly baikcthall poinlpit lo loni in Wiloy GyranHiiuro, Loii wiilei poems ir hei FORMAL FANFARE' Malilds Bi\an, peil sophomoie liom Savannah, potes beioie altending a Gieek loimat.
MaLlda ii a locial fcicnce major and holds mcmbeiship in Ihe Ivy Leal ClubMARCH SOOTHING THE WIND' Vivian Roge.s ij linking ai the i* capluied by the phologiaphei allci a brush with the Match Wind.
Vivian is a sophomore buiinuss majoi Itom Milledgevilto She ii a member ol the Pyramid Club and the Matching Band.
She is a senior English ma|oi and holds mcmbeiship in Delta Sigma Thela Soioiity, Ihe Boat's Head Club, the College Playhouse, Who'e Who, and Ihc Doimiloty Council.
Our stall photographer caught lovely Cwondolyn Buchanan in this striking pose on Ihe tennis court.
Mallie Lattimoio, popular fieshman last Itom Milledgeville, poses lot our pholographer on a hoi Septembei day.
OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER STACKING HAY( Taking a break allei a hay-ilacking atcapade, Freddie Liggini ""Miii Junior IVAIti, "" poi«s lot out ilsll phologiaphei.
Freddie 1. an Engliih majoi Itom Savannah and holdj membeiihip In Ihc Boai'i Head Club.
Bessie Samuel ii chaimlng at ihe leb out lo help SanlB on Chtiilmai Eve.
She holdi mumbeithip in Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Ihe S.N.E.A., and Ihe Womnn'g Eniemblo.
These are just a few of the gay, Norman Elmore and Berhcnors claimed by the Alpha Nu niece Pinkney.
Highest distinction status goes to those ..■hapters which have promptly I'omplied with the requirements set up by the national officeAlpha Nu Chapter has received this distinction for the past five years.
This is the first time that this feat has been accomplished by a regional director.
Wilhams serves as co-ordinator for the ten colleges that comprise region V, The Executive Council, to which Elmore was elected, is responsible for carrying forward the activities of the society in the interim between conventions.
The council outlines the program for the coming year's meeting, makes recommenda'ions for convention speakers :ind subsequently selects them.
It was expounded ipon by the four speakers who -iddressed the delegates and later was used as the topic for \ student symposium.
The topic was carefully analyzed by the nanel and many provocative luestions were posed.
There were delegates from 39 colleges and universities throughout the United States.
All of the student delegates enjoyed a rich program of activifies that included inspiring addresses, a reception given by FAMU's President.
Gore, a thrilling performance by the famed FAMU Choral So'-■iety and Symphonic Band, a ""Bait-a-Date"" Social and a sumptuous banquet The banquet was followed by a ""Night Club Affair"" sponsored by the Pan-Hellenic Council At the last session, Dr.
This project, which is spearheaded by the student council, began after a letter was received from Mrs.
Grant wrote that there were thousands of Nigerian youth who were hungry for education, but that there was a great shortage of books in the school's libraryPledgees of the four fraternities on campus have undertaken this book collecting project.
They are now in the process of knocking on doors in the community, their way of trying to further the cause of education in the underdeveloped countries of the world.
Coach Ted Wright's senior five, shooting for the NAIA title for the fourth straight year, hit the bucket for a 97-point average, finishing with a 26-3 seasonal record.
They moved to the second round of the national tournament before being eliminated.
Not only did Savannah State out-score all other NAIA bail clubs, but it placed eighth on the margin-of-victory list.
Redell Walton, 6-2 forward with a deadly jumper from anywhere on the floor, was the ringleader in the powerful Tiger attack, Walton was ninth in the NAIA scoring parade with a brilliant 29 points per game average.
Men's Festival Concludes Today An evaluation-luncheon meeting, scheduled for 12 o'clock today in Adams Hall, will bring to a close the fourteenth annual Men's Festival at Savannah State College.
During the luncheon, this year's program of activities will be evaluated from all phases by the members of the committees.
The suggestions and criticisms voiced here will be considered in the planning of next year's activities.
Savannah State Colleg^e Wins Medalist Award Scott Represents SSC Four Facility Members Selected To ""Who's Who"" Walter A, Mercer, Director of Student Teaching, Wilton C Scott.
Persons listed in ""Who's Who"" receive this honor through recommendation.
College and university presidents are asked to recommend new and worthy members of their faculties.
Superintendents of schools in cities of 5,000 population are asked to recommend worthy administrative officers and outstanding teachers.
And a number of people not directly connected with the field of education, such as librarians, are recommended also.
Savannah State College News received the Medalist rating because of the well-rounded interpretation of college news and pictures.
Savannah State won first place in the college alumni bulletin printed publication and for a homecoming bulletin in offset publications.
The Tiger's Roar was tied for second place in printed college publications with Indiana State College of Pennsylvania, Western Kentucky State College of Bowling Green, Fort Valley State College.
The Savannah State Alumni quarterly received a third place rating in the general college and university publication session.
No other college had a higher rating than Savannah State in this section.
Savannah State was represented by Wilton C Scott, director of Public Relations and Publicity.
Mr Scott conducted two workshops and served as chairman of several group discussions.
It featured Leslie Midgley. executive producer of CBS News' Eyewitness television program, as speaker. m To (lelrhi Library Wei;k CARL T KOWAN The Honorable Carl T Rowan.
United States Department of State, will be the featured speaker for the third annual National Library Week Convocation, to be held at Savannah State College on Thursday, April 12, at 12 o'clock noon.
Before becoming a member of President Kennedy's New Frontier administration, he had distinguished himself as a world renown journalist.
For five consecutive years, beginning in 1952, Carl T Rowan, young Negro journalist, won national honors as a newsman and author for reports which ranged from race relations in the South and the plight of the American Indian to the political and social turmoil in Asia.
In 1956, he became the only newspaperman ever to win three successive annual awards from the Sigma Delta Chi journalistic fraternity.
THE PITYFUL AND THE PROUD, GO SOUTH TO SORROW AND WAIT 'TIL NEXT YEAR, Mr Rowan is a frequent contributor to the nation's leading periodicals.
NEWS BRIEFS Coming soon — ""Phaedra"", presented by the College Playhouse.
Charles McMillian, president of Gamma Chi Chapter, will attend the Southeastern Regional Convention of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity in Cheraw.
MacMillian has been chosen as the speaker for the undergraduate luncheon.
Rosemary McBride, senior elementary education major is now teaching in Statesboro.
Annette Kennedy, senior Social Science major, and Helen Woods, senior Elementary Education major, are teaching in Warrenton, Georgia.
Richard Cooger. president of Gamma Zeta Chapter of Phi Beta Sigma, attended the recent state convention of that fraternity held at Albany.
Don't read this because more than likely it is about you. and It is Incriminating, More than a third of the dormitory students, after leaving chapel, trample the lawn in a mad dash for the dining hall instead of using the walkways provided.
Now this is a serious indictment upon ourselves as college men and women and it demands our attention.
We can not tell what you would like to see added to. deleted from or changed In the Tiger's Roar.
Without the benefit of supernatural powers, we can not produce a paper which will reflect your interests and talents and also serve as a functional campus communication medium.
If you do not care about the fate of your college paper, then continue on your merry way and don't give this editorial a second tliought.
But if you do care, if you want a paper which reflects you. then you have a job to do.
Mercer, the local chapter advisor, served as consultant at the meeting.
The discussions and speeches at the convention were centered around the qualifications of teachers and the need for better teachers.
At the business session, a report on local chapter activities was given.
Honor Roll and Deans List Announced Each person listed below win has attained an average of 2 5n or higher during the winttr quarter.62. is accorded a placr on the Dean's List.
Other persons who have attained an average of 2.00-2 49 are accorded a place on the Honor Roll, TluHonor Roll Winter Quarter 1962 Library Pnrrliases Copying Machine E J Josey, college librarian and associate professor announced recently that the library had purchased a photocopying machine.
The machme is primarily used to make copies of magazine articles and excerpts from books.
Since the machine has been obtained for the use of the students, Mr Josey feels that the student body should make use of this worth-while addition to the college library's facilities.
This machine is another step in the library's program of providing the latest library equipment available.
It is hoped that this machine will be instrumental in stopping students from destroying valuable library materials.
Tfinn 2-26 Jones, Shirley D 2.00 Kornegay, Bernlta 3.00 Lamar, Louise 2.68 Lamar, Lucile 2.23 Lambert, Verdelle 3 00 Lewis.
Glennera E 2.37 Matliis, Margurlte 2,38 McCrory, Emma Sue 2.33 McMillian, Charles 2.31 Meeks, Henrietta 3.00 Merritt, Leander 2.00 Miller.
Ruby A, 2.00 Moon, Juanita 2.33 Moran, Eliza M 2.00 Moss, Mary 2.68 Moxley.
E SCHOEFFLER, esquire's Fashion Director With Easter vacation already flashing the ""•Walk"" sign, why not decide before you go home on your number one suit and the rest of your wardrobe.
Aside from the traditional dress-up holiday, there may be decisive interviews for either a summer job or a permanent one if you're a graduating senior — and the clothes you wear — plus the way that you wear them — make the pivotal first impression.
You want it to be right at first sight, so, let's take a run-down on what you might well select this Spring in fashion.
YOUR NUMBER ONE SUIT for warmer weather is next to weightless in the new lighterthan-ever flannels and polyester/wool blends.
Color-wise, consider the more definite blues, the neiv lighter greys ; see the classic Glen Urquhart or 'glen' plaids.
Its fine diagonal twill weave and surface sheen make it an excellent choice for your Number One Suit.
Today's gabardines also come in lighter weight wools and new polyester/wool blends.
STILL THE FAVORED SILHOUETTE the Natural shoulder threebiittuii, .■^trait'ht-hjiiigint' jacket with center vent and flap pockets.
The First Executive Look, epitomized by President Kennedy, may be Two-Eutton ...but the Campus Look, coast to coast, remains devotedly Three-Button with slim, pleatless trousers ivitli cuffs.
REGIMENTAL STRIPES ... the resurgence noted by ESQUIRE ast fall is gaining momentum for Regimental Stripes— the traditional colors of the historic British regiments.
With scores of these famed regiments — like the Grenadier Guards, the Royal Fusiliers, the Inskilling Dragoons — there's quite a roll-call of striking color combinations in pure silk repps for your selection.
DRESS SHIRTS— SHOES— BELT . . . white Button Down Oxfords are ^till very much de rigeur. and there are handsome variations in narrow tape stripes of blue, grey, olive.
Also, although you 'can't go wrong' with a white broadcloth tab collar dress shirt, why not dress up with the newest pale tones of blue, olive or cream.
With suits in Blue or Grey, wear BLACK SHOES or the VERY DARKEST BROWNS . . . and RIB SOCKS are always smart and correct.
Your DRESS BELT is LEATHER with an important harness-type buckle in polished metal.
AT THE SUMMIT-YOUR HAT . «here the decisions are made, it'.s the narrow snap-brim felt in brown or olive— weit edge. r;iw edge or grosgrain-bound.
BIG SWEATER ON CAMPUS— THE CARDIGAN the buttonfront coat-sweater is tops in campus popularity, Tops in favor are the lofty Shetland and the open-knit Alpaca wool or wool blends in solid colors or stripes.
Lauderdale or Bermuda, say, then sportswear moves into number one spot.
Here you'll see a lot of TIGER— the bold, tawny color that's getting the roar of approval from campus men everywhere.
Find it in sharp, solid tones or mixed — for example, a houndstooth sportcoat checked in Black and Tirer . . . and let them see you ""burning briglit"" in fashion.
Cartoon Quips Nothing irks the hard-pressed college student more than shaking out an envelope from home and finding nothing in it but news and love.
The professor who comes in 15 minutes late is rare — in fact, he's in a class by himself.
The college basketball coaches are all interested in higher education, and the closer they come to seven feet the better they like it.
April, 1%2 THE TIGER'S ROAR SSC Student Covers Campus For Savannah Morning News A 1960 graduate of Tompkins High School, now enrolled at Savannah State College, has been assigned by the Savannah Morning News to cover campus events.
Elmer Thomas writes ""College By the Sea"" which appears in the Sunday edition of the paper.
Prior to March 4 of this year, the column was handled by the Office of Public Relations.
He recently qualified for a position of Student-Trainee in a US Civil Service Examination, which gives college students summer work in governmental agencies in the same field in which they are majoring in college.
Thomas is a sophomore math major, and he qualified for a job in statistics.
When asked if she had a philosophy of life, Emma answered, ""Yes, but I don't think it works so well all the time,'* She added, however, that in spite of this, she still believes in it.
Emma simply suggests ""better human relationships,"" As far as her own life is concerned, she expressed the desire to become a speech therapist, ""I would like especially to work with children,"" commented Emma.
I guess what I'm trying to say is that she should have a pleasing personality.
Actually, rushing is a type of politiking which has become standard practice on most campi, and in certain cases, the organizations vie with each other for particular students.
More important, however, pledgees help to keep the organizations ""alive,"" They fill the vacancies made by withdrawals and transfers, inactivity and graduation.
This year the rush parties or programs, as the case may be. were most impressive.
Delta Sigma Theta geared its program to travel ""Around the World, With a cry of ""ship Ahoy,"" the sail was set for London, Paris, and points East.
The college, without a doubt. always profits from high-quality programs such as these.
Page 3 IN CASE OF FIRE At home — Quickly get everybody out of the house.
Dinner is served from 12 to 1:00 If it's 12:55 you'd better run Prom 5:00 to 5:30 supper Is served This is the meal we all deserve.
Under the new system, a student wishing to drop a course must initiate the drop himself by first contacting his dean and then filling out a form in the registrar's office.
Dropping students for nonattendance IS inconsistant with the adoption in 1959 of the voluntary roll taking.
Since the student has paid his tuition he should be permitted to exercise his right to attend or not attend classes.
If the student feels that he can pass a course without attending classes, he should be permitted to do so.
Grades in a particular course should not be based upon the physical presence of a student.
This new rule is intended to cover only excessive absences from class, A student may still be dropped from a course by the instructor as a disciplinary action, according to Richard R Perry, director of admissions and records.
The Coed iu Literature Class By ""Gem"" So petite and debonaire, So lovely and warm; All dressed in pink and white.
For it Is obvious that she is preoccupied Despite the beautiful poem the class is discussing.
Vivian Rogers is striking :is she is captured by the photographer after a brush with the March Wind.
Vivian is a sophomore business major from Milledgeville, THE TIGERS ROAR March.
In Research on Cotton Seed By Frcida M, Brewton The Department of Chemistry, headed by Dr.
Gossypol, one pigment found in cotton seed, Is responsible, at least in part, for the color of the oil.
The first Chemistry Seminar, which Is an outgrowth of this project, was held Thursday night, March 29, In the Technical Science Building.
The purposes of these seminars are to acquaint other majors in the Department with what each student <who is employed as a researcher) Is trying to do, and to increase their knowledge of chemistry by means other than classroom instruction.
Hi that each senior pass an oral comprehensive on each phase of chemistry that he has taken, and that each senior must do a research investigation which will add to the present stockpile of knowledge and be of a quality publishable in a scientific journal.
Some individual senior projects underway now involve a study of sugars extracted from natural sources such as pine needles and Spanish moss.
Several useful Instruments have been added to the department which have been helpful in the study of the cotton seed.
The college newspaper is an ln.strument of mass communication on campus.
A free college newspaper gives selfexpressions of the outstanding moments on campus.
The college newspaper does not only have a local campus value, but a professional value also For many colleges are judged by their student publications.
Always Finish If a task is once begun never leave it till it's done, Be the labor great or small.
This declaration, stated in both the affirmative and the negative, has become a virtual political basketball since the United States Supreme Court handed down its recent decisionRepercussions are being felt over a wide area and particularly in the South.
Because of its significance to us as voters affected by the county unit system, and its controversial nature, the Savannah State College Debating Team has chosen this as the topic for its next debate.
Being fought on home grounds and before fellow students, both sides are determind to make it a fight to the bitter end.
CAMPUS and NATIONAL SPORTS By Redell Walton Basketliall Team The passing of the 1961-62 basketball season will mark the end of college basketball careers for eight seniors who have won the hearts and respect of all basketball fans in and out of our college communliy.
The Tigers, a well rounded group of athletes and gentlemen have built up a record on the hardwood that will stand for some years i;o come.
They won their conference visitations and tournament crowns four consecutive times, ruling the District 6A NAIA playoff Dodsers Favored since its beginnmg.
We need not stop here in remembering the outstanding feacs of the team; they won the Pelican State Tournament last year in New Orleans, and they have advanced to the NAIA national tournament for three consecutive years.
Coach Ted Wright's Tigers hold wins over some of the nation's finest basketball teams.
In the NAIA tournament competition, tliey have stopped Willamette, and more Patterson vs.
To Win Pennant Listou for Crown Next Edition of tinTIGERS KOAR Coming Soon Walton Drafted By Pipers By Charlene Bright Redell Walton was drafted by the Cleveland Pipers of the American Basketball League in their annual winter draft of top collegiate basketball talent.
Bill Sharman. to discuss matters concerning his being drafted by the Pipers.
Coach Sharman sent a congratulatory letter to Walton here at the college on April 2, The Tiger's Roar and the entire student body wish for Redell much success in his future professional basketball career.
The Los Angeles Dodgers are favored to win the National League pennant in this forthcoming season.
Manager Walt Alston should finally come up with the right combination to get the best results out of the much talented Dodger organization.
It seemed that the juggling of the line-up the past season did not give the players time to get adjusted to their new positionsThe Dodgers, like the Yanks, have power and speed along with a stroHgpitching staff.
If Manager Walt Alston sticks with the starling line-up. the Dodgers should win the pennant, The San Francisco Giants should give the Dodgers a good fight for the pennant with Cincinatti and Milwaukee fighting it out for third and fourth place.
Louis Cardinals and Chicago Cubs should place fifth and sixth respectively while the rest of the league fights It out for the second division.
Redell Walton AlhTourney Pick In Kansas City By Therman Thomas Redell Walton, all American basketball player at Savannah State College, was selected to the all-tournament team in Kansas City, Missouri in the recent NAIA tournament.
He received a gold watch as a naward for being selected to the all -tournament 2nd team.
Floyd Patterson, *he heavyweight champion of tne world, has signed to meet Sonny Liston. the number one challenger for the crown.
This fight is expected to be one of the all-time great fistic contests ever presented, Beth fighters have similar backgrounds.
Liston was the less fortunate, running into difficulty with the law time and time again.
He just recently convinced the Pennsylvania Boxing Commission that he was worthy to fight for the crown.
Liston is tlie heavier of the two fighters and can throw the knock-out punch easily with either hand.
Patterson's punches are fast and dangerous too. commg from either direction, This is a bout that Liston has been trying to get for a long time.
Patterson is the champ and the favorite but one slip-up can cost him his title to the hardhitting Liston.
Willie Tate, Ira Jackson, Redell Walton, Stephen Kelly and little James Dixon.
The hub of the Tigers"" attack for the past four years has been Redell Walton, a muscular 6 ft. 1 in. forward who has averaged around the 28 point mark during his entire four years as a regular player.
He has won a berth on almost every tournament team in which the Tigers have participated.
Teaming up with Walton to give the Tigers a deadly one-two puncr was center.
Ira Jackson, a shy fellow who usually commards the backboard for the Tigers.
He has averaged 20 points or more as a regular player, Willie Tate, James Dixon, and Stephen Kelly have also contributed immensely to the Tigers' success story.
Raymond Harper and Paul Thompson were two outstanding hustlers all season long.
They formed the nucleus of the Tigers' bench strength Roland Nash, a player who did not get in the picture as often as the others, can also stand up and be counted.
Alfredo Morange, Anthony Sheffield, Billy Day and Harvey Bailey plus a few freshmen who are slated to come in next year by way of Chicago, South Carolina.
The above mentioned players are all over the 6 ft. mark, Mathis and Bailey will probably be the two key men in the Tigers' attack next year.
With the additional players slated to come, the Tigers should be as strong as before.
Write a Letter to the~ifr<litor Anyway Honor Roil and Dean""'* (Contimoul from Page 2.
Geraldine Stepherson, Jimmy Stewart, Louise Strange, Doris M Terry, Shirley J Thomas, Elmer Truell.
Marian Werner, Edward C West, Inez Whipple, Gracie Mae White, Lucy Wilkes, Thomas A, Williams, James W Wilhams.
MelSludents Select Council Officers By Beineice Pinkney In a race to determine who will head the Student Council for the school year 1962-63.
Savannah State College, seventy-seven persons are listed as candidates for graduation on June 5, 1962, Verdelle LaVerne Lainber Is the highest tanking candidate and Juanita Moon is the next highest.
Miss Lambert Is associate editor of tilt' Tiger's Roar; president of Alpha Kappa Mu; secretary of Delta Sigma Theta sorority; member of the College Playliouse; AKM English tutor; and is on the Cotnmlttee on General Education.
She Is also listed In Who's Who Among Students In American Universities and Colleges, Candidates from the DIVISION OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION — GENERAL BUSINESS ADMINISTHATION are; Evelyn Bell, Sylvania; David Bodison, Savannah; James J DeVoe, Savannah; Abraham Johnson, Savannah; Dorothy N Lanier, Savannah; Erma Jean Mack, Savannah; William Edward Slbert, Mt.
Dorothy Brown, Metter HEALTH, PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND RECREATION: Mary Cantrell, Gainesville INDUSTRIAL ARTS EDUCATION: Richard Mondell Coger.
Perhaps the most decisive factor ' distnigui&hlng great educational ' ceiileri. hum not considered so great is Us siudciit body.
Col leges that select ""better"" students enjoy a pl&ce of promlnnence In the eyea of tlic public as well as eduoati^is 1( anyone at SSO can discuss the InatUution lioin the standtjuint of change and progress In so far as stiidejita are concerned, Uien Mr W E (irlffln can.
During the thirty years he has been employed at the cuUege. this elderly gentleman who teaches cnuises in social studies has probably been In contact with mure students than anyoiiu un the present staff.
When Mr, Griffin came to Georgia State he luund students far less able to undertake college work than lecent years But on the other hand, they were mme serious Because of pievailing ecunonilc conditions, to attend cullege was a supreme saciiilce on part of the student and his ianuiy A large percentage helped tmance tlieir educalinn through part tirne campus woik 'i'he aveiage student was older and itiaybe a little more mature In parallelism with the post War trend aciusi the nation, the student population has more than doubled.
Buitaings and facilities have also been improved and expanded to belter suit the needs of the institution.
A room In Meldrim Hall that now serves as an office was formally a library housing wliat few books and periodicals they had Tlie hbiaiy now m use is well equipped and has a reasoiiably large collection of volumes, perlodicala, encyclopedia, and so forthWhat was then primarily an agiiculturat wjllege now offeri degrees In many areas of specialization.
Several other buildings have been added In addition to this, vast new improvements in the curriculum have been made.
The administration realizes that in order to provide better educational opIjortunitles for its students, a more qualified faculty must be secured and maintained.
Conseciuently, almost all heads of departments hold the doctorate degree, and many on the staff liave done graduate work beyond the Master's degree at major institutions of higher learning.
In order to keep pace witli future needs, to continue at the present rate would not be enough, These efforts must be hilenslfied and accelerated.
Grants iCuntmiu-d Irom P„ge I) with problems which may be suitable for graduate work, and help students develop a method of organizing acquired knowledge so that the transition from undei graduate to graduate study can be made with a minimum of difiiculty.
To become eligible for both grants the student must be a chemistry major with an average of ""B"" or higher, must have recommendation from the Chemistry Staff, and must be a junior or senior.
By Samuel Truell Since taking the oath of office last January the volatile potentate of these United States has proven himself to be a man of vigor, vitality, tenderness, temperance and most recently — extremely powerful, Mr Kennedy's power was exemplied a few weeks earlier when he hastily stepped in and forced the strong steel bosses to yield to his demands after they joined forces and thus raised the price of steel.
This use of force almost forgotten since the days of Roosevelt's ""big stick"" policy was hailed by some as dictatorship, but to others it was a much needed panacea for arbitrous price-fixing.
In defense of his actions, the President so emphatically told the United States Chamber of Commerce.
Now that the chief executive has voiced such a blunt opinion many people are wondering why doesn't the President use this force on the Congress of the United States to stamp out the evils prevalent in our society.
It's widely known that Kennedy is planning to push hard for his controversial medical aid to the aged, foreign aid, and educational bills, and if necessary he will journey to Capitol Hill to meet this end.
It is equally known that the promises he made to Negroes with regards to their civil rights failed to materialize.
This reporter is cognizant of the precedents set by this neophyte in naming Negroes to heretofore untold positions, but I must say that these posts are infinitesimal when one views the promises made by this novice President during his vigorous campaign.
My question is, will the President carry the new civil rights bill and his ""Big Stick"" to Capitol Hill when Congress convenes its next session, or will he procrastinate until 1963 when a new term in office is in proximity.
Mr Kennedy may invoke serious damage to himself if he continues to abscond from Martin Luther King's second Emancipation Proclamation which asks for the abolition of segregation and discrimination in all areas of our society.
Impact of Changing Racial Climate on Policies and Practices of Y.M.C.A/s By Robert W Patrick In a discussion of Racil Climate one must be aware of the primary factors which are unavoidable.
One is not reporting on events of the past nor the present, but rather on the factors by which the major problems of racial relationships exist.
Freedom is one of the main reasons that we ithe Negroes i are striving to make integration successful.
Freedom has no definite meaning; it is rather an individual concept that we are striving to obtain.
Patrick Henry once said, ""give me liberty or give me death,"" and the action that the Negro has facilitated toward integration indicates the same Progress implies change and growth and the need to submit to processes of adjustment which occasionally are painful, and this indeed has been emplified in our action toward integration.
Director of Public Relations, Elmer Thomas, who writes the ""College by the Sea"" column for the Savannah Morning News, has been appointed Editor-inChief of the Tiger's Roar for 1&62-63.
Patricia Quarterman, Jimmle Stephenson, The remaining positions will be filled in September Security in this sense refers to assurance of acceptance in American society.
It is also related to one of the basic human needs, the need for economic security.
Peace in this sense refers to the interrelationship and negotiation between races.
Before integration can be fully realized the American society must be matured, morally, intellectually, emotionally, and most of all, socially, for when one is socially mature he is able to live easily, comfortably, and harmoniously with other people.
The socially mature are free from the neurotic necessity t"" dominate and control others and will accept one as he is, with respect.
The racial climate has changed in the Y.M,C-A's and is favorable to change in other aspects of our society.
Johnson (Conlinued Irom fage l> Gospel,"" a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
He is a member of Kappa Alphi Psi Fraternity, and International Society of Theta Phi, a scholastic honor society in Religion for Theological students in the field of Religion, and outstanding Religious leaders.
Edna Marie Harden, Macon; and Yvonne Harris, MclntoshMATHEMATICS; Margaret Hayes, Savannah.
Albert King, Waynesboro LANGUAGES AND LITERATURE: Louise Lamar, Talbotton; and Verdelle LaVerne Lambert.
Olivet Wyche, Dublin, DIVISION OF NATURAL SCIENCES — BIOLOGY: Jeff Dunbar, Savannah, Almarie Glover, Savannah; and Raff Simmons.
Quietly charmingChosen as her attendants were Dorothy Carter and Bessie Samuels.
Board's Head Club and was recently elected to Who's Who in American Colleges and Universities.
On campus, she is active in the women's ensemble, Y.W.CA,, and the S,N,E,A, In quiet moments, Bessie likes to read or crochet.
Mavjunc.62 THE TIGER'S ROAR Page 1 Fine Arts Festival The Fine Arts Department had on display during the fine arts festival, a selection of paintings and sculptures done by art students of Savannah State College and members of the community.
The purpose of the fine arts festival Is to stimulate a greater interest and appreciation of the arts through the rendering of programs, recitals, and exhibitions.
According to Mr Phillip Hampton, SSCs art expert, these efforts have been very successful in arousing student and community interest The display was housed in the seminar room of the college library The subjects of the paintings ranged from Carl Moore's graphic description of the hustle and bustle of Times Square after a thunderstorm to Mrs.
Bertrand explained that her painting represents an experimental effort In oil searcihing for form and textural relationships rather than being of any particular meaning Itself.
The Oconee High School Chorus of Dublin, Georgia was featured in concert on Thursday's assembly program.
The group is directed by an outstanding graduate of Savannah State, Timothy Ryais.
This is an article written to the students, faculty, and the entire college family.
A student who wants to succeed does not need competition, it is the student who just wants to pass that needs it, 7.
Over-exertion (causes headaches ) 4 The Dean's List and Honor Roil may be harmful In that some students strive to obtain an ""A"" or ""B"" without actually learning the subject matter, but merely giving an impression.
We have given you a general outlook of what the students are thinking about in our class.
Jaekson l)rail<'<l By Hawaiian (Mnh By Thennan Thomas Defensive whiz Ira Jackson recently became the second member of Savannah State's fabulous ""Chicago Five"" to be drafted by a professional basketball team.
A former All-City player from Chicago, Jackson was considered to be the engine for the highpowered and high-scoring Tiger quintet.
Playing with the shadow of NAIA All-America Redell Walton, he was the most underrated player on the squad.
In the twenty six games played by the Tigers this season, the modest and somewhat shy Jackson grabbed an average of 17 rebounds per game and tossed in over 19 points per contest.
The big center teamed up with scoring ace Redell Walton to lead the Tigers to four consecutive and division crowns and three District 6-A NAIA titles.
Because they winked their eyes; While the fellows thought they had a good friend The ladles had just been telling lies.
Charm is a beauty A beauty that is true It makes her do the things That she should do.
Her personality Sweet as spring air; When you're in her midst You will be aware.
She is as pretty As a queen's smile Warm, pure, lovable She is worthwhile.
The participants convened for two days and attended a variety of sessions in journalism.
Listed in Who's Who in Public Relations and Who's Who in American Education, he has received the highest acclaims from Dr.
The Michigan Interscholastic Press Association, now in its thirty-fifth year, featured some of the top journalists in the United States.
Savannah State's tine showing at the meet was due to the great throwing of Raymond Harper, Fred Carter, and Anthony Sheffield.
Hershel Robinson, Jr., won second and third place respectively picking up eight points for Savannah State's Tigers.
Robert P Daniel, president of Virginia State College, was the speaker for the college vesper service on April 29, presented by Beta Phi Lambda and Delta Eta chapters of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc., during their observance of education week.
Highlights of his address were centered around the importance of education in gaining true citizenship in the space age and the Negro as a part of the new frontier— a society without racial barriers and discrimination.
The first award for outstanding work in the fraternity and community during the year 1961, and the second award went to Mr Prince Jackson.
Aberdeen A Allen, Luther Mack Brown, Thomas Alexander Wilkes, Otis Mitchell and Samuel MTruell.
Percy Harden; corresponding secretary, Otis Mitchell; financial secretary, Reginald Rhodrlquez; treasurer, Alvin Jones; sargeant at arms, Samuel M Truell; chaplin, Willie Shinhoster; editor to the Sphinx, Clyde Jenkins, and liaison between graduate and undergraduate chapter, Lawrence Hutchins.
Debators Plan For Next Season By Sam Truell The Savannah State College Debating Society is busy formulating plans for the 1962-63 season.
The success enjoyed by the team recently has prompted Its members to commence study and research for future competition.
The televising of national intercollegiate debates locally has created a growing interest in debating.
On Wednesday evening, May 8, the organization elected officers for the forthcoming season.
Bobby Hill was elected president, Verlyn Bell, vicepresident, James Brown, secretary, Mannie Roberts, treasurer and Samuel M, Truel. reporter.
The outgoing president, Samuel Williams, was commended for his participation during the time he was affiliated with the group.
Jr, The little road to happiness It Is not hard to find; It might not lead to wealth and fame But to a contentment and peace of mind.
N'uw th.it ihr lifat is on. the male students at Savannah State are falling out in trousers, suits and sports coats made of the ever popular dacron and cotton poplin materials.
The trousers come in various shades of olive, brown, tan, and stone mist, the most popular colors for men this spring.
He Is wearing a black poplin coat with tan poplin trousers, a blue and white striped snaptab shirt, a red muted tie and of course, the ever popular dirty sneakers.
Chess Club r<;anized If you hear students at Savannah State talking about ""bishops,"" ""rooks,"" or knockouts, the chances are pretty good that they aren't referring to members of the clergy, first year athletes or fistic encounters In which one competitor spent ten seconds on the canvas.
The above mentioned words are terms used in the faclnatlng game of chess.
Several months ago, several persons affiliated with Savannah State College met with the Intention of organizing a systematic approach to mastering the fundamentals of the game.
According to George Grlmsley, sophomore business major and acting president of the club, meetings are held twice weekly to discuss the members' playing efficiency.
Beginning with the elementary principles, history and special points about the game they move on to the more complicated movements and techniques.
Chess is regarded as one of the most demanding games In so far as thinking power is concerned.
It Is very popular In Russia, especially among scholars and Intellectuals.
In the curricula of our three military academies are found courses in chess.
It is felt that this game is one of the most practical applications of military strategy.
George Grlmsley and several graduates of Savannah State comprise the chess club.
Have a Happy Vacation THE TIGER'S ROAR May-Jane.62 NINE HONORED FOR SERVICE W Verfiil Winters err>y W Brown Dr.
This is the first time such an extensive tour has been taken by the group.
The twenty-six member glee club sang In concert at churches and high schools in seven states and twelve cities""The Omnipotence"" by Franz Schnbert.
According to Mr Thompson, another tour will be scheduled for next year.
It will be more extensive, covering Massachusetts and ConnecticutMr Thompson also expressed the desire to increase the size of the glee club from twenty-six to approximately thirty or thirtyfive members by next year.
Many letters and telegrams, praising the recent tour, have been received by Dr.
William Hagins, Lawrence Hutchins, Rowland Jackson, Frank James, Linwood Jones, Marvin Kirkland, Albert Lewis.
James T Williams, Joseph Williams, Thomas Williams, Lawrence Wilson, Roosevelt Winfrey and Northern Moore, Miss Rose Overstreet, pianist, and Miss Althea Morton, chaperon, accompanied the group.
I >rni7 If inters Is Chairman SavmiiKih Stalf Local St'lutlarsliip Membership Appeal SSC Graduate Promolt'd Dr.
George S Kent, associate professor in English, has been promoted to a full professorship in the English Department.
He instructed English at and became dean of Delaware State College, taught at Samford before joining Quinniplac College faculty.
Kent is advisor to the monthly and yearly student publications at Quinnipiac, is a member of the National Council of English Teachers and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Dr.
Kent lives with his wife and two children, Edward., and Sherald, 6, at 14 Ives Street, Handen.
The 1962 Savannah Negro College Fund Drive will get underway May 17, with Mr, W, Vergil Winters, Professor of Math-Pyhsics at Savannah State College and Chairman of the Drive, spearheading the movement.
Other key figures in the drive are Mrs, Frankie Ellis, Vice Chairman; Miss Lola Dison, Secretary; Mr, E, A Bertrand, Treasurer; Mr, W C, Ervin, Director; Augusta-Savannah area; and Dr, E, K, Williams, Assistant Director.
In fact, its identity as a 'Negro College.' while never a cause for shame, was an Identity that was imposed, deriving from the most easily observable aspect of the college — its Negro student body — rather than growing out of the essential meaning and purpose of the institution,"" states the UNCP Board of Directors.
Today, the 71 private institutions of higher learning for Negroes have an enrollment of 28,380, or approximately 33 percent of the Negro students attending predominantly Negro institutions.
With the help of thoughtful Savannahians, the UNCF will be able to help hundreds of Georgia students further their education and help our Georgia private institutions acquire new structures to build finer men and women.
The appeal of the Savannah State College Annual Alumni Scholarship and the Savannah Alumni Chapter of the Savannah State College National Alumni Association began Sunday and will end the second Sunday in June.
The Alumni contest will qualify Savannah State College for more national defense loans.
William B Nelson Faculty Honorees At Presidents Anniversary To share in the Silver Anniversary of President William K, Payne are nine faculty members who have given twenty-five or more years of service to Savannah State College.
But William B Nelson, Professor of Industrial Education, will reflect upon past years from a different point of view.
Having spent seventeen years at Savannah State College, he retires this June.
W, Vergil Winters, Professor of Physical Sciences, came to Savannah State College in 1927.
A year later Leroy WBrown Joined the staffHe is now assistant Professor of Auto TechnologyDr, Joan L, Gordon was a librarian when she joined the staff in 1929.
Mrs, Varnetta K, Frazier, college dietician, and William E, Griffin, Assistant Professor of Social Sciences, came in 1930.
Mr, Griffin helped to organize the first basketball tournament held at Savannah State College.
Hubert is presently employed as secretary and Assistant to the Co-ordinator of General Education, and Mr, Clay is Associate Professor of Chemistry.
Happy Vacation All institutions of higher education must seek new financial resources to buttress their work.
Chapter president says, ""An Alumnus will always be identified by the reputation his or her Alma Mater has attained.
May-June.62 THE TIGER'S ROAR Pase 5 Pilot Project to Begin Here By Patricia Quarterman It was recently announced ticipating high schools will be educational experiment.
Beginning on June 25th and running through July 20th. twenty students selected from Tompkins, Beach.
Swainsboro High and Industrial and Ballard Hudson will begin their rigorous academic training.
Contents The specific contents of instruction will finally be determined in accordance with the results of achievements test and the objectives of the project.
Evidence from high school and freshman tests points conclusively to a program that primarily emphasizes reading and communication in words and number.
Announcements of the John Lewis and Clara Moffatt Brumm Scholarship for 1962 and Awards for Reporting were made.
In addition to this, participants will have an opportunity to remove any educational deficiencies that might otherwise retard their academic progress.
This will certainly provide for greater achievement on the collegiate level.
Dorothy B, Wilson, senior, business law; and Miss Geneva Seigler, junior, shorthand, Miss Merion Dixon, a senior in the division of business administration, will serve as student judge.
W, A, Mercer, Miss Marcelle E Rhodriquez, an instructor in the division of business administration, will serve as coordinator of judges. riuirin Week Held Al Savaiuiali Stale The annual Charm Week Celebration at Savannah State College began Sunday, May 13.
Associate Professor of Health and Physical Education at Savannah State College, opened the Charm Week activities as Vesper speaker, Sunday evening at 6 o'clock in Meldrim Auditorium.
She hold the B.S. and M.S. degrees in Health, Physical Education and Recreation.
During May I4th-I7th seminars, conducted by various female organizations on campus, were held in the Audio-Visual Aids Center.
Savannah -Chatham County Board of Education and staff announcer at WSOK Radio, was the speaker for the allcollege assembly held on Thursday.
Following the address, in an impressive ceremony, Verdelle Lambert, senior, passed the mantle of Athena to Bernita Kornegay. highest ranking junior woman, in the annual passing of the mantle ceremony.
A talent and Fashion Show on Thursday night concluded the 17th annual Charm Week Celebration.
AK Mil Sponsors Many Activities Alpha Nu Chapter of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society rounded out its year's program with a number of interesting activities.
At this affair, which has become an annual event, recognition was given to those persons who had achieved scholastic honors during the year.
Purdue Prince Jackson C Vernon Clay Facnlty Members To Atlencl School White many of us will be busily enjoying ourselves this summer, some of our faculty members will be in school.
It has been announced that four of our faculty members have been awarded grants for summer study.
Luetta C Upshur, Assistant Professor of English, will study at Peabody College.
Nashville, Tennessee, under a program of assistance from the Southern Education Foundation.
Mr Purdue was among twentyfive other business educators from a fifteen state area.
Mr Purdue, an accounting and General Business Instructor is a graduate of Morehouse College, Atlanta.
The credits earned during the year's work will be counted toward his Ph.D. degree.
Upshur described the artist as a philosopher, a creator, and a clairvoyant.
After the address, graduate members of Alpha Kappa Mu, tutors and aspirants were presented.
On May 21. a colloquy was held in the reading room of the college library.
This event, the third in a series to have been presented by Alpha Kappa Mu, began at 4 o'clockm.
EDT, projects onto a 10' X 10' movie screen color transparencies. drawings, written material, overlays, and non-objective designs that, not only command the attention of the students, but vividly portray proper sentence construction and writing techniques.
Professor Peterson analyzes great works of literature and his own students' compositions a paragraph at a time by flashing them on the screen from his ""magic lantern,"" in reality a small projection machine that requires no dimming of classroom lights; in this way, the class benefits as a whole from the visual lecture.
Peterson also attains rapSSC Alumni Play Important Role in Life of Savannah By Wilton C Scott The Savannah State College Alumni Scholarship and Solicitation is now in progress and the community can look with pride on the work of the graduates and former students of Savannah State College.
In talking with graduate John McGlockton, former president of the Hub and member of numerous other organizations as well as a member of the board of directors of the Carver Savings Bank, he states.
It has been recognized that the majority of public school teachers In Georgia as welt as other states are former students of Savannah State College.
In looking at Savannah in particular, it appears that some 90% of the teachers are products of State, That is true of principals also.
Seventy per cent of the Negro policemen in Savannah either graduated or attended Savannah State College.
The same is true of civil service workers, agricultural extension workers, proprietors, and government employees, It is obvious that these very prosperous graduates will respond readily to their Alma Maters giving freely ranging from $10 up.
Dr, William K Payne, President of Savannah State, comments, ""Savannah State College places much of Us hope and faith for continued growth and development in the Alumni.
Their achievements and influence in their respective locations continue to creat a large circle of Interested and dedicated friends.
Their annual contributions are playing a significant role in the growth and improvement of the College."" port with individual students or small student groups In his office in the Early American Room which achieves the personal, down-to-earth touch with Its open hearth fireplace, low beamed ceiling, and planked table and benches.
Pape 6 THE Tir.F.R'S ROAH May-June, 1962 SOME WHO SERVED United States WELL nOKOIHV HKOWN ■AlUntiaiit.
Miss SSC EMMA SUE MiCRORY Miss SSC JlfANITA QUINN Attendant, Miss SSC ANNEl^E KENNEDY MAMIE CREEN Associate Eriitor VERDEELE LAMBERT President.
The freshmen come and bring a little learning with them and the seniors leave without talcing any away.
We would like to think of this as being just a play on words and not a true definition, at least not on our campus.
On June 5. between 70 and 80 seniors will leave SSC and will take away some ""learning"" and a lot more besides.
Some of the campus' most outstanding students will graduate this year A kaleidoscopic view of the graduating class will bear out this statement.
The campus will certainly miss the radiant beauty of Miss SSC, Emma Sue McCrory and her attendants.
Juanita Quinn and Dorothy Brown, who represented SSC on so many occasions.
Leadershipwise, Student Council President James DeVoe and Vice President Berneice Pinkney are among those leaving the campus after serving as heads of the student government.
Senior representatives Joy Heywood and Louise Stewart Wllkerson will also graduate.
SSC collegians will long remember Annette Kennedy and Carolyn Vinson for their roles in Cameo Sketches and ""Medea "" To prove that more than just a little learning will accompany the seniors, take a look at the membership of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society.
The Tiger's Roar will lose Editors Berneice Pinkney, Verdell Lambert, Associate Editors Mamie Green and James DeVoe.
In a surprise move, the student body was asked to name their choices of the five most outstanding seniors in the June graduating class.
There were no criteria given as a basis for selection other than being known for performing some function for the college, nor was there a list of candidates.
Looking over the list of the five selected, we find James DeVoe in first place, Charles Frazier in second and Verdell Lambert third.
Emma Sue McCrory was selected for fourth place and Bobby Burgesses fifth.
Yes, seniors, we are taking quite a bit away with us. including one of the senior class advisors.
Lest our heads be swelled so that they exceed previous measurements, a small reminder.
June, 1962 THE TICF.RS ROAR Page 7 Deltas Celebrate National May Week at SSC Delta Nu and Savannah Alumnae Chapters of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority celebrated National May Week at Savannah State College Sunday, May 20, at Vespers Service beginning at 6:00 m.
National President of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority was the guest speaker.
She was formerly Guidance Counselor and Director of Freshman Orientation at the City College.
Oklahoma and Research Assistant in the Program of Guidance and School Counseling, Board of Higher Education.
The Negro Woman's College EducaSpri By Lois Carson Spring is the time That thrills most of us.
Everything is pretty; Everything is gay This is the time When most lovers say, ""I love you darling"" In their own special way.
Noble has contributed several articles in professional journals in her academic field.
Margaret Fisher entitled College Educatio nas Personnel Development was published in 1960.
Inc., an organization of 30,000 college women in 38 states, the Republic of Haiti, and Liberia, Africa; she has just completed a three year term on the Commission on the College Student of the American Council on Education; she IS a member of The National Board of the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. and serves as Chairman of the Study-Grant Committee for this organization.
Noble serves a three year term to the Defense Advisory Committee on Women in the Services (better known by its short title— DACOWITS) by the Secretary of Defense, serving as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Education.
National Teacher Exainiiiatioii to Be Adniiiiistered The National Teacher Examinations will be administered at Savannah State College, July 28.
Bowling Finals Held NEW YORK, May 9— The finals of the 550,000 Tournament of Champions, which will be bowled at the AMF-equipped Play Bowi Lanes in Indianapolis, Indiana, will be seen coast-to-coast over the ABC-TV network on Sunday, May 20 from 5:00m until 6:30m.
Eastern Daylight Time, The tournament, the first of ~ ^ ~ ~— its kind, will be made up of a field of 25 bowlers.
Every one of them is a champion in his own right, having won either a Professional Bowlers Association tourney or one of the top national titles.
Such stars as Dick Weber, current ""Bowler of the V'Mi"" who is the All-Star champinii and has won more P.B.A. tt.uirneys than any other bowler; Don Carter, World's winner; Fred Lening; Harry Smith; Glen Allison; Carmen Salvmo; Vern Downing; George Howard; and many other great names of bowling will compete for the top prize of $15,000.
Each bowler will bowl the man who immediately precedes him in the scoring, thus second-place man bowls the first-place man, fourth against third, sixth against fifth and so on through the entire list.
In this round, as in the 24 preceding games, the bowler is credited with one point for each game he wins and one point for every 30 pins he knocks down.
The three top scorers meet on TV and the winner is determined by total plnfall for two games.
As with many bowling spectaculars of the past, AMF will coproduce the ""500"" Festival Tournament of Champions.
Open your heart and let me inside I would rather have De Ann's love than pride.
I've tried so many, many ways, so many days Please make my life begin and not end.
What is the place in which we dwell Whether it be a heaven, a paradise, or hellIt's ours, so lets hope for only the best.
The breeze may rupture the waves in the sea, But deep in your heart I hope it will always be me.
Wherever I go. and whatever I do I'll always worry, wait, love, and dream of you.
Our summit, our goals, are forever to be reached, Although the road may sometime get steep And the little river of our life too deep.
Players Presentt'd ""A Dislaiil Holl"" By Charles A Phillips "" Distant Bell,"" was the pathetic narrative of a mother who has been misunderstood and has thus been treated as one who was insane.
It all began when her husband, James, had her committed to a rest home early in her married life.
Although, at times her actions were a bit irregular, she was not lacking In wisdom and understanding, The mother.
Burton Greer, which was played by Charles A Phillips, a Junior, majoring In Social Science, a prominent character in ""Dark Victory"" and a third year member of the Y piayers, who felt that she should be committed.
However he did succeed in having committed her iavorite daughter Waverly, which was played by Mrs.
Sally M, Marlon, a graduate of Morgan State College where she participated in drama, a third year member of the Y Players.
The story became complicated when as a young man John Greighton, a leading part, played by Daniel Washington, a teacher of English, and a four year member of the Y Players, who has appeared In several productions of the College Playhouse, came to work in their town and found himself interested in two of the daughters, one the serious type, the other the gay type.
Flagg. played by Rose Baker, a senior at Savannah State College, a college Playhouse member, majoring in Social Science and is active in many campus organizations.
The third daughter, Barrett, played by Flora Braxton, a senior majoring in Business Administration, a member of the College Playhouse, and many campus organizations, the quiet type, built up her bitterness for her mother and finally blows up.
Technical Science News Notes In the industrial and technical science area of Savannah State College, the technical science club has just finished its most recent activity which was a fund raising boatride to Dafuski Island The funds will be used to defray the operational expenses of the club.
One of the purposes of the club is to acquaint the students with the many areas encompassed in the technical sciences.
Membership in the technical science club is both a challenge and an honor.
The challenge is to keep pace with the ever changing industrial and scientific growth of the space age.
The honor is granted to those who successfully meet the challenge, Ernest Brunson, president of the technical science club, was recently elected vice-president of the Student Council.
NAIA Track Leaders KANSAS CITY, Mo. — Two iNortheast Louisiana State College athlets are the only double leaders In the latest National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics iNAIA) track statistics.
Fred Norrls, the 40-year-old sophomore at McNeese State. has the best two-mile time.
Robert Hayes, the sensational sophomore from Florida A & M, has equalled the accepted 100yard dash world record of :09.2.
However, NAIA records are only set at the final meet, this year at Sioux Falls, S D,, on June 1-2.
Pacific Lutheran's star basketball center — Hans Albertsson — has the best high jump, 6-lOVj.
Track Meet at Savannah State Edward Waiters College of Jacksonville piled up a total of 40 points to win the annual Southeastern Athletic Conference track meet held on the athletic field at Savannah State.
The Waters team captured several first and second places in the competition.
The Ploridlans showed superior strength over the other teams in the runs and relays.
Savannah State, the usual conference track rulers, mustered a total of 31. points to place third.
Robert Patrick and Herschel Robinson won 2nd and 3rd place in the two-mile run.
Versatile Fred Carter staged a terrific duel with Albany's Art Gamble in the pole vault.
Although he was a favorite to win tht low hurdles, pole vault and t^ ; discus throw.
Carter lost uf narrowly In ail these events. rage 8 THE TIGER'S ROAR May-June, 1962 TO REMEMBER 1 — Ira Siii>lsoii, siuorfMwfiil oaiidiHote for Minn SSC lille, signs for lior ttullul. — Tlie Ocoiioe Hif;h Srhool Chorus in conccrl. — Mrs.
H — Alhiiny Slale Biiiul nl llie opening of ihe Fine Arls Festival. — The SneUons view the Bu<^ineF,s Dept/s exhihil. — Sc4.'iie from ihe rreative <lanee recital. — Verdell Lamhcrt passes the inuntle of Aiheiiia lo Bernila Koriicfiay during Charm Week. — A scene from AK Kill's annual lea nl the home of rreoideni and Mrs.
Savannah State Stndents Hold Interesting Jol>s Bernard Kent, Jr.. junior.
Camp Henry for boys is only one of these services established to meet the need of our society.
Abraham L Jones, a graduating senior, worked in this same position for two summers.
Health, Physical Education and Recreation major, has been appointed to the position of Director of the Sophronia Tompkins Recreation Center, He assumed the responsibilities of the position in June of this year.
The City Recreation Commission, through the Savannah Civil Service System, hired the student on basis of recommendations from teachers, persons with whom he had previously been employed, and courses in his major that he has completed at Savannah State College.
He has general supervision of the building and its facilities, the personnel employed at the gym. and its entire operation.
One of his duties is to develop programs of group and individual participation.
These may or may not be athletic, in fact there are several activities open to adults and children such as arts and crafts and folk dancing.
Thomas graduated from Tompkins High School in 1960 and entered Savannah State the following fall.
He has had five years experience as a football player, four as a regular starter at Tompkins and one as a player on the Savannah State team during his freshman year.
No cause for alarm, though, the students I'm referring to are the group of outstanding high school graduates who participated in the Pilot Study Project at Savannah State.
The Pilot Training Program sponsored by the Southern Education Foundation and Savannah State College, began on June 20 and ended on July 20.
The students were tested during the early stages of the program to determine their mental abilities and scholastic achievement.
At the end of the program they will be tested again to examine the effectivenes.s of the four weeks of intensified training in reading, mathematics and science.
Ruby Dean Clarke, Dorothy Brown and Sarah Nell Sinmions, William James High School; Jean Stewart, Barbara Jean Pray and Nathaniel Fuller.
Liberty County High; Essie Grant and Elizabeth Miller from Tompkins High School; Romona Marks, Jeffrey James, Ethel Mae Robinson and Betty Jean Simmons.
Robert Williams and Eugene Whitehead fro m Waynesboro High and Industrial Training School.
Williams, Co-ordinator of General Education, is director of the project.
Tucker Addod J\> CIk iiiislry Stall The Chemistry Department announced the appointment of Mr Willie G Tucker to the chemistry staff.
Tucker studied at Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama where he received his B.S. and M.S. degrees.
As a graduate student at Oklahoma, Tucker worked on the preparation of Two-Chloropyrudin compound.
He holds membership in the Society of Xi, a national scientific honor society. and the American Chemical Society.
Tucker to the Staff, the department will be able to offer better training to the majors as well as to majors in other areas, such as biology, who must have strong backgrounds in chemistry.
This will be accomplished, at least in part, by providing well trained staff members.
A further attempt will be made to increase speciliazation — that is to have on the faculty a Ph.D. in each of the five major areas of chemistry—physical, analytical, inorganic, bio-and organic.
Tucker's area of specialization was organic chemistry and instrumental analysis.
With improved staffing, equipment and facilities, Pratt envissioned the possibility of Savannah State offering graduate courses and/or advanced degrees in chemistry.
Bertrand is returning to the Virgin Islands to accept a position of Deputy Commissioner of Health in the Virgin Islands.
Mr Bertrand has returned to his native land after spending 25 years In the United States.
He was later appointed to chief accountant, assistant comptroller and comptroller.
Savannah State's loss is the Virgin Island's gain, Mr Bertrand, during his stay here, won the admiration of countless numbers of people in which he has come in contact.
Bertrand, wife of Savannah State Comptroller Emanuel Bertrand, has left a collection of original paintings to the college in hopes that the gifts will touch-off action that will result in the erection of a permanent art gallery on campus.
Hampton. she is an accomplished studentartist of five years training in painting.
Constitution, the Supreme Court outlawed the formalation and the enforcing of OFFICIAL prayers in public schools.
To those who remained it was a religious exercise, ""An official religious exercise is unconstitutional,"" the court said.
Today, more and more people are joining the ranks of the Goldwaters and/or Talmadges in saying that the Supreme Court is too powerful.
These ""rightists,"" as they call themselves. declare that some of the power of the Supreme Court should be curtailed.
These ""right-wingers"" claim that all of the Court's rulings since 1954 have been unconstitutional.
They say nothing about the Dred Scott decision or the upholding of the ""separate-butequal doctrine"" a few decades back.
We should accept the rulings of the court whether we go along with them or not.
If we reject the court, we reject the constitution; if we reject the constitution, we refute the foundation upon which this nation was laid.
Federal District Court to recognize the present county unit system In Georgia is the best thing that happened here since Dr.
Under the old system the city voters' strength was unequal to the power held by the rural voters. therefore, with the idea of staying In office in mind, the lawmakers in Atlanta did not hesitate to jump when the country folk cracked the whip.
The people in the larger metropolitan areas paid the bulk of the taxes while the people in the rural areas benefitted from their political advantage.
The party decreed that the 1962 gubernatorial race and other state offices will be decided by the popular vote.
The candidate or candidates carrying a particular county received that particular county's unit votes.
Tlie Tiger''s Roar Staff ELMER THOMAS Editor-in-Chief Co-Editor* Paulyne M White News Editor Samuel M, Truel Feature Editor Veronica Owens Exchange Editor Patricia Quarterman Reporter Kermetta C Clark BUSINESS STAFF Business Manager Typist •Student Adv. for Summer Session.
Supreme Court's decision making it unconstitutional for the use of official state prayers In public schools.
The affirmative consensus was centered mainly around the belief that the court's function is to interpret the constitution and all religious education and training should emanate from church schools and homes.
Those students rejecting the decision contend igenerally) that this decision is abetting the cause of communism.
Kti', orjan ul fi Job of Making Your Newspaper NEW YORK— Canada's newsprint producers who provide more than 70 percent of the American supply, have just finished a key phase of the job of making paper for next year's newspapers.
This is the annual spring drive, in which millions of pulpwood logs cut In the backwoods last fall and winter are floated downriver to the mills.
Most of the paper made from these logs will reach United States newspapers during 1963.
Details of the drive are explained by the Newsprint Information Committee, composed of a representative group of the Canadian mills.
Tossing one log in the river to float downstream is simple and costs nothing.
The latter eventuality would present certain problems for the pluming and these problems have their counterparts in the comiJlex river drive.
Os the thaw builds up the head of water in the lakes and rivers, the logs are enclosed in booms which are towed into position behind the dams.
For this job and kindred work, the inventory includes 20 power boats, 10 outboard motors, two derricks mounted on scows, ten other scows, and four houseboats.
By Llmer Thomas As we look about us in the library, the classrooms, the laboratories, we see many individuals who normally perform the duties of the classroom teacher during the academic year returning to college to participate in workshops and other activities of interest to in-service teachers.
Whether it is their will or not. these persons have returned to improve their skills as conveyors of knowledge, Instigators of intellectual curiosity and moldei's of citizens of this state and nation.
At no time in history has such a high premium been placed on formal education.
Scientists and engineers have perfected machines that perform certain tasks many times faster and with much more accuracy than the human brain, aircraft that transport their multi-ton cargo at unbelievable speeds over thousands of miles.
Medical science, through improvements in facilities and techniques, has increased the span of life for the average person born in 1960 to 69-7 years as compared to 60 in 1950.
Out of every thousand babies born in 1951, '29,1 died before they reached their first birthday.
Vast improvements in the standard of living and intellectual status of people all over the world have been made.
Along with these changes for a more ""livable"" world, there are many other changes taking place.
If not dealt with properly, they threaten the security and well-being of all mankind.
Enslaved men all over the world are quickly throwing off the bonds of colonialism and oppression, A powerful economicalpolitical system already has under its control millions of people and is growing more powerful and gigantic every day.
The population boom in several countries of the world means the amount of food available per individual is decreasing rapidly.
Men of one color are sending men of another color, often illiterate, unskilled, misfortunate, to other parts of their country in soothe of an urge that makes them hate, in satisfaction of prejudiced beliefs and opinions seasoned by agents of bigotry, ignorance and unwarranted convention.
The story of the fourth grade youngsters reply to his teacher's geography question is quite famous.
The storms of war, poverty and ignorance have taken their toll on the world.
The flood waters have risen to a critical state — but we still have time to pump out some of these waters that threaten the erosion of man's culture and civilization.
There must be the creation of a greater degree of understanding between nation and nation, black and white.
As members of the minority group we must refute the false contention held by the white supremlsts that Negroes belond on the back seat.
We must, however, be able to ""measure-up,"" Our people must be competent, Our teachers must be of the highest quality, lest we find ourselves within an endless circle of low-quality education.
We can not take yesterday's tools, do a good job today, and expect to be in business tomorrow.
So teachers and potential teachers, we must take our business more seriously.
Jesus Christ, Socrates and Aristotle, three of the greatest beings who ever lived, were teachers.
Teachers of facts, mendors of ideals, molders of men — just as you are.
We should, therefore, work more diligently so that we may become better teachers of facts, menders of ideals, molders of men.
This is the charge of 20th century education — this is the charge of Savannah State College.
The Tiger's Roar is in need of individuals who are willing to devote a little of their spare time to the production of this newspaper.
The Campus paper presents an excellent opportunity for students to develop desirable skills in expression and communication.
If you can't find time to work on the staff, then perhaps you will see to it that all organizations with which you may be associated will submit all news releases to the editor welt in advance to the deadline tor each issue, It is our intention to produce for you the best publication possible, but we must have your cooperation.
Meetings are held periodically at the Tiger's Roar Office, Room 208, Hill Hall, Watch the bulletin boards for time and dates.
May I see you at the next meeting? — The Editor THE NATIONAL TEACHER EXAMINATION WILL BE HELD ON JULY 28, 1962 June -July, 1962 THE TIGER'S ROAR I'aignni^^ FASHION MEWS ""A LA MODES"" By Mile.
For if you look around, you will behold summer's accompanist, this season'smost ultrachic fashions.
At the park, you see captivating styles by Miss Pat, Macshore Classics, Petti, and Mr Mort.
During an evening on the town, you glimpse the sleek, sophisticated stylings of the fashion artist.
Yes. any young lady would be set for a summer of fun and excitement with such combinations.
Speaking of fun and excitement, you're sure to have just that when you head for the beach in a striking Rose Marie Reid swlmsuit.
In the event, you haven't noticed, each year the beachwear becomes just a little bit snazzier.
This year the versatile Rose Marie Reid styles are accentuated by daring, low-cut backs.
The alluring styles come i nlatex. knit, and the latest material lycra fibers.
And here's another bonus, the famous RMR swim suits may be gotten in every color of the rainbow.
They are adorable three-quarter length cotton knit shirts that create oceans of interest on the beach.
Comparatively new. these shirts may be worn as a cover-up garmet over bathing suits or shorts.
Some of these unique shirts may even be bought with hoods if you crave a worldly air.
Vision Care Helps You Drive Safely The difference between life and death lies in your eyes when you're driving a car, the Vision Conservation Institute of Penna., Inc., warns.
For the sake of yourself and your car— not to mention the other fellow on the road— it behooves you to keep your vision functioning at the highest level of efficiencyOptometrists can help you do this.
In most cases they are able to correct any visual errors that exist very satisfactorily.
And. even if you have faults which may not be corrected, you'll find it helps to know what they are.
A frequent eye examination is a definite step in the right direction of safety.
The normal person can see almost 90 degrees to each side while fixing his vision on a point straight ahead.
If your field is less than 75 degress to each side, there is danger you may fail to see a car or a pedestrian approaching from Now, to leave the outside scene for a while.
The lovely dress styles shown this season have bodices that are shoestring, single strap, and strapless.
In addition to those assets, this summer's dreamy, after-five fashions come in durable materials like petit point pique, batiste, organdy and the delectable nylon tulle.
And to add a bit of good news to the ""slim Miss,"" the sku-ts to the season's newest dresses are billowy, floaty, and bouffant.
A driver should also have efficient depth perception, in order to judge how far away the neighboring cars are and to estimate their speedy.
Color vision rarely presents a serious problem to a motorist, for less than 1% of all those with faulty color vision are unable to distinguish red traffic lights from green.
Missed opportunity is the price of total reliance on comfortable security.— Dr.
Edmund C, Neuhas Soap and education are not as sudden as a massacre, but they are more deadly in the long run. — Mark Twain Success is not so much a matter of talent as of concentration and perseverance. — Anonymous Houses Materials.
Methods Workshop Summer is Jiere and many teachers throughout America are busying themselves in further pursuits of learning in the various colleges and universities.
To keep these teachers abreast of current trends, the Savannah State College has set up its 1962 Workshop in Materials and Methods for Elementary and Secondary Schools at the Sol Johnson High School in Savannah, Georgia.
Mr R, J Martin, Principal of Ballard-Hudson High School, Macon, Georgia; and Mrs, Blalock, teacher at the Sol C Johnson High School, who is giving her talents to instructing a group of voluntary children as part of the over-all Workshop programs.
Josepii Brown, Columbus; Minnie Gordon Brown, Savannah; Minnie S Hagan Bryant; Vernon S Butler.
Savannah, Georgia; Otta Flagg, Macon; Willie C, Hamilton, Savannah; Mary J Lester, Harmon, Byronville; A Eugene Hagans.
Jr., Savannah; Daisy Hatney, Rufus C Harmon, Oglethorpe; George R Hunter, Guyton; Delores Jefferson, Atlanta; Warren CAMILLA HUBERT HALL NEWS NOTES By Kermettu Clark Two exciting parties and the opportunity to meet many interesting people has made residing in Camilla Hubert Hall both informative and enjoyable so far this summer.
Among the varied personalities living in the dorm are Pilot Study students, in-service teachers and Dr.
Ighodaro was on tour in the United States and Puerto Rico to study the living conditions In America, In order to get acquolnted socially, everyone In the dormitory along with the young men of Wright Hall were invited to a party in the College Center on June 29.
There are a number of activities on the agenda for the summer in Camilla Hubert Hall, and I shall keep you posted as to the happenings.
Dplectiie"" Successful In Solving of ik ""Mi\\{ Razor"" By Elmer Thomas I examined briefly the gadget on Barbara's desk in the Processing Room of the College Library, but immediately I could not determine what it was or what it did.
Because of its size and shape I could ""readily see"" that it was an electric razor.
She moved the twirling pivot of the machine across the word she had written.
WORDS OF WISDOM It is our civic duty to guard and rise in defense of our own and our neighbor's rights.
We must answer with outspoken criticism every attempt by a local or federal government to infringe upon our rights. —Page 56 of the Quiet Betrayal the COMPTON QUIZ By Keith Roberts, Director, Information Service Test your knowledge, with these questions and answers from the pages of Compton's Pictured Encyclopedia.
Hiiiiiaii Virus in Cancer Three Texas scientists report the induction of highly malignant lung cancers in laboratory animals with the use of a virus knows to cause a variety of common human respiratory disorders.
Education Television Services—State Department of Education, was special consultant for the Elementary Secondary Workshop at the Sol C, Johnson High School, June 28, 1962, During the workshop sessions, Mr Crudup brought out many interesting points which aroused the interest and thinking of all participants.
Mr, Crudup was also the main speaker at the general assembly on the campus Thursday, June 28.
Foreign Nationals Every major geographical and political area of the world showed an increase in the number of its students and scholars here, but African again had the greatest proportionate increase.
As last year, the largest number of foreign nationals in the U, S for the academic year 1961-62 were from the Far East; 26.522 or 37To of the total.
For the first 15 days of the month of June it has rained every single day, Actually, th epreclpltatlon began on May 30, and continued to annoy Chatham Countians until late June, The records show that for 22 days of of 30 In the month of June, rain fell.
The record rainfall for June, according to statistics available from Travis Field, is 18.
Coger was among the first 3 to take examinations for the Peace Corps in the Savannah area.
The examinations were administered for the first time In Savannah last year.
A June '62 graduate, Coger received the B.S, degree in Industrial Arts, While in attendance here, he was active in the political, social, and cultural activities of the campus community being a member of the YMCA, Phi Beta Sigma fraternity.
College Playhouse, and Debating Team, He was also a candidate for ""Man of the Year,"" and a candidate for Student Council President.
PI^IBIi®Il Some Days Are Loiifxer Than Others Many Savannah Staters liave said ""This sure has been a long day."" and according to the U, S Coast and Geodetic Survey, some days are longer than others.
Of course the difference is .so minute that it could not be realized by the human mind.
The rotation of the earth on its axis has been said to be slightly variable and hence the sideral day, and also that of the mean solar day derived from It. are not strictly uniform.
The present length of the day is closely equal to the period of free oscillation of the atmosphere, whose amplitude Is therefore increased by a reasonable effect.
The phase of the atmospheric tide Is such that it tends to accelerate the rotation of the earth, energy being drawn from the sun by a heat engine effect.
It is probable that tidal friction has slowed the earth down until the length of the day has gradually approximated to the period of the atmospheric oscillation and that the atmospheric accelerating maintains tlie rate of rotation statistically uniform.
There is some evidence that changes within the earth's magnetic field may effect the rate of rotation.
This seasonal variation is a result of a change in the angular momentmii of the seasonal winds, which must be compensated by o corresponding variation in tlie opposite sense of the angular momentum of the earth. iMpiilal Allilinlc .\ff«rls TciuIciHcy lo Ovcreal Emotional depression disturbs the normal balance of sugar metabolism in the body, and this in turn, causes some obse women to overeat.
The overeating is not caused by an increase in hunger drive. but by a failure of the brain's signal mechanism to indicate when hunger has been satisfied. said Dr, Albert Stunkind.
Studies Indicate that mental attitudes and reactions play an important role in accelerating or retarding a person's inclination to become excessively overweight.
Individual bones of the hand and wrist differ enough from one person to another that if no other marks are available — such as fingerprints or dental work — the person can be identified.
A study of hand X-rays of the same individual from early chiidiiood over many years shows that tlie skeletal features useful for identification usually are fixed during late adolescece and remain relatively unclianged until at least well into the thirties.
There is enough slmitarity between one person's right and left hand to permit successful pairing.
Griffith, examine instrument used for deir onstralions during Science Workshop session.
Wilson, Head of the Department of Secondary Education, Dr, B, T, Griffieth.
Chairman or Division of Natural Sciences and head of the Department of Biology.
Wilhemina Fraizer, and Ervin Gardner, all of Savannah, Georgia, and Rosa Davis, Sandersville, Georgia.
Agnes P Herring, Sylvania, Georgia; Annie M Huggins, Vidalia, Georgia ; Delia Johnson, Martha F Johnson.
Harriett Thornton, Dorothy B, Vaughn, Delores J, Washington, Emma H, Wortham, and Edna Young.
WASHINGTON— U, S, smokers paid enough in cagarette taxes last year to pay for the U S, space agency's fiscal 1963 program, with funds left to buy 40 Atlas missiles.
Tobacco News, published by The Tobacco Institute, Inc., said cigarett*^ taxes last year brought in about $31 billion to all levels of government in the U, S.— federal, state and local.
The 1963 budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is S2,% billion.
State, the Federal Aviation Agency and the General Services Administration, says Tobacco News.
Adherence to Important Rules Should Make Summer Vacations Safer, More Enjoyable FLINT, Mich.— Your vacation trip this summer will be a lot safer and more enjoyable if you will get plenty of rest each night and limit your driving to 10 hours per day.
These are two of the most important rules followed by Buick test drivers in compiling a record of 3,000,000 miles without an accident at the General Motors Proving Grounds, Milford, Michigan.
Good living habits— plenty of sleep and rest, and a good frame of mind with no worries while driving.
Break up monotony — stop for coffee or gas. at regular intervals, get out and walk around.
Car maintenance — it's a must to keep your car in top mechanical condition.
Keep the inside of your car neat and tidy, everything packed in convenient places where loose items can't slide around.
Packages piled on the rear window ledge becomes missiles in case of a collision, and they also block the view of the driver behind you.
The signs are placed along the roadway ior your help, and they have a good reason for being there.
Strict adherence to them is the best insurance we know against accidents."" siles to be built this fiscal year. —Over half of the U S. military aircartf scheduled for 1963. —155,000 $20,000 homes, On the average, taxes account for half the price of every pack of cigarettes sold, says the publication.
The last U S, boost, to 8 cents a package, was the Korean War, but it has been in effect ever since.
Lilirai'j' Science Sliideiils Present Syiii|iosiiiiii On All College issenibly students enrolled in the School Libraiy Administration and Organization summer class at Savannah State College presented a Symposium on ""Achieving Excellence In Teaching Through the School Library,"" at the regular all-college assembly on Thursday, July 12th.
This topic was selected for discussion in order to dramatize the library as a teaching materials center.
Far too long have teachers in the public schools ignored the library in their teaching.
Educators, lor the purposp of strengthening the public schools, are now calling for the abandonment of the one-text-book approach and are now insisting on the use of a wide assortment of books and materials which will enrich and reinforce the learning process.
An illustration of the lack of concern for the school library is The Secondary School Teachers and Library Services, a report of a significant and revealing study of teacher use of the library by the NEA in November 1958, This study found that among secondary school teachers, the major users are teachers of English, Social Studies and Science, Teachers of Business Education, Industrial Arts, and Mathematics are minor users.
Teachers of art, foreign language, household arts, music, health and physical education are potential users; however, many of them find the school hbraries' collections inBy Juanita T Williams The most active and enthused group of students on Savannah State College's campus this summer are the students in the Library Science courses.
Dixon, our most abled teachers, have done their utmost to make this one of the most deUghtful study periods ever enjoyed.
Surely, we work very hard but the rewards are truly greater than the effort.
The objectives of this course will enlighten you as to what our activities consist of; adequate for their subject fields.
Members of the Symposium depicted ways and means of improving instruction in six fields of study by utilizing the school library.
Vivian Singleton Howard of Savannah officiated as Chairman of the Steering Committee.
WASHINGTON, D C— Can a college professor objectively discuss the pains and pleasures of college teaching; how does he react to its frustrations and rewards—these leading questions signaled a lively discussion by a panel of college professors on the final show of the 1962 season on ""Meet The Professor,"" Sunday.
Radio adaptions of ""Meet The Professor"" with Milton Cross as host commentator are heard every Tuesday evening at 9:30m., EDT, nthe ABC radio network.
Each one of these objectives is being explored fuUy and each student in this course will strive to go back to her community and make her library more than a house for books but a ""BeeHive of Activities"" that engulf every phase of education and pleasure.
The fact that there are so many enrolled substantiates that ""developing a strongly functioning library as an integral part of the total school program is essential,"" Mrs.
The purpose of this meeting, designed especially for the classroom teacher, was the development of techniques of evaluation and evaluation devices appropriate for use in clothing and textile college classes, A native of Nebraska.
She is a member of the National Society for the Study of Education, Omlcron Nu, Phi Kappa Phi, Pi Lambda Theta, American Homo Economics Association and the American Educational Research Association among others.
Conference staff Included Dr, Hildegrade Johnson, coordinator; Dr, Pauline Keeny, Miss Louise Lowe and Mrs.
Helen Staley. all of the Woman's College School of Home Economics faculty.
Among the fifteen registering for this course which offers two semester hours graduate credit includes Mrs.
Stevens, Savannah; Annie M Stewart, Richmond Hill; Irene Derry Thomas, Macon; Udell Thomas, Sandersvllle; William A Washington, Savannah; Lillian Sheron Williams, Savannah; and Ida B Wright, Savannah, Georgia.
This represents a 10% increase over last year, continuing the steady climb of each successive year since 1952.
Of these students, 21,568 came from the Far East.,915 from Latin America, 8,277 from the Near and Middle East, 6,833 from Europe, and 6.639 from North America.
I'fllLEfiH LIBRiRV WHS FIIIST fiM MM FOR Um I'lllLICITY miillMI The only college or university library to receive an award for a top-rated public relations program in this year's John Cotton Dana Publicity Award Contest was the Savannah State College Library.
One hundred scrapbooks from many kinds of libraries all over the country were submitted to officials in contention for the honors.
Josey, librarian at Savannah State College attended the conference of the American Library Association in Miami where he received the award on behalf of the College Library.
The contest, honoring a great pioneer and promoter of llbrarianship, is sponsored jointly by the Wilson Library Bulletin and ALA'S Public Relations Section.
Josey, Savannah State College Librarian, accepting the John Cotton Dana Award.
Cleveland O Christophe, Piofessoi and Head of Ihe Department oi Economics at Savannah Slate has made ""American Men of Science"" lor 1962-63.
At the Oil Chemist Society meeting held in Toronto, Canada from October 1-4, Dr.
Charles Piatt presented a paper on research being carried on at Savannah Slate.
Pratt commended Miss Idella Glover lot working diligently on the project and stated that her efforts in laboratory research entitled her to alt the credit for the paper being presented.
SSC Graduate Rereives Proniiueiit Position Robert A Robbins, an alumnus of Savannah State College, has been appointed to the position of Cartographer with the USAF-Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St.
Art Iiistnu-lor Makes ""Who's Who"" Phillip J Hampton, Assistant Professor of Fine Arts at Savannah State, has made ""Who's Who In Art"" lor 1962-63.
The 1962 homecoming theme of ""World of Wonders"" and the nature and enthusiasm of the activities being made in preparation for the celebration suggest that this year's homecoming will be one to be long remembered.
The crowning of ""Miss Savannah State"" will take place at the Coronation Ball which wil be held in Wilcox Gymnasium on Thursday evening, November 8 at 9 o'clock.
Following a parade in Savannah, the football team will clash with the Clark College Panthers of Atlanta.
During the half time period, addresses will be heard from the newly-crowned ""Miss Savannah State,"" PresiSSC Host to Georgia Teachers The fall conference of the Georgia Committee on Cooperation in Teacher Education met at SSC on Thursday and Friday, October 11 and 12.
Savannah State College Student National Education Association members were in charge of registration and served as hosts and hostesses to the meeting.
From 2 to 4:30m. this group held a general session during which time the keynote address was delivered by Dr.
Don Davles, Executive Secretary of the National Commission on Teacher Education and Professional Standards, Washington.
This body was divided into four small study groups and met on Thursday evening from 7 to 9.
Center, In this meeting, group reports were made, institutional research projects were summarized and representatives from the State Department and the Georgia Teachers and Education Association were presented.
Mr Shearouse commended the group on its accomplishments during the meeting and gave challenging directions for future action.
The visiting Clark College band and the Savannah State College Marching Band will render a half-time show wellworth watching.
In addition to these two bands, high school bands from Savannah and other areas will be on hand for the parade.
The homecoming committee is headed by Mr Tharpe, chairman, and Mr Bivens. vicechairman.
Mr, Bivens is directing the activities due to the illness of Mr Tharpe, the chairman.
There are several subcommittees working on particular phases of the homecoming celebration.
Enlcriiio aiiil Ciin To llpiiclil From Savaiiiiali Nlato r By Elmer Thomas A total of 1160 students are enrolled at Savannah State during the 1962 Fall quarter according to figures released from the Office of the Registrar.
One of the most noteworthy of changes and additions made this academic year is the addition of more late afternoon and evening classes to provide persons not able to attend regular sessions with the opportunity to receive an education.
The total length of the college day has been increased with the addition of what was formerly the lunch hour as a regular class period.
In June of 1963, the college will have ended its first full year as a fully accredited member of the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools.
The ""4 point system"" will replace the ""3 point system"" used here in past years. (iiiuiiio NliiiliMils liiipiovniiNils W ollcgp The college has embarked upon a progiam of building and campus improvement.
On the third floor are three music practice rooms, music study lounge, four offices, large rooms for music rehearsals and a music-art classroom.
There is also an art study room, a classroom tor ceramics and sculpture, rooms for kiln and art supplies in addition to a large room for paintings and designs.
Payne spoke to the college family on new challenges to be met by college students today and in the years to come.
Georgia Committee on Co-operation in Teacher Education meets at Savannah State, Left lo right.
Department of Education at Morris Brown College and graduate of Savannah State; and Dr.
Student Ctmitril Prex V A tldressing Freshnum Class NORMAN B ELMORE ij» h3» ^^m Professor Dies By Ann Henderson Mrs.
Florence F Harrington. who up until the time of her death was a music instructor at Savannah State, passed unexpectedly at her home in Thunderbolt on October 9, 1962.
Harrington had served in the capacity of Director of the Female Ensemble at the college in addition to teaching courses in music.
She began working in the church at an early age where she served as a teacher and organist of the Sunday School and president of the Young Peoples' Club.
When candidates for public office will no longer abusively in.sult a segment of the population and at the same time advocate complete disregard for the welfare of these same people. . . When our people would come to realize that In order for us to elevate our status from the lowest rung on the economic ladder— in order to share more of the fruits of an abundant society — that we ourselves must become more enterprising and productive.
Small confectlonerys. barber shops and gas stations siiouldn't be the limits of our business activities.
We would like to see the day when the vision of the United States of America as a truly democratic nation would be more of a reality than a dream; and when all American citizens can sing ""America The Beautiful"" with meaning and true sincerity.
Whistling Against A Strong Wind By Samuel M Truell Undoubtedly, the Impending crisis In the •'sovereign"" state of Mississippi is one of the gravest chapters in the lives of our citizens since the War Between the States.
Perhaps Harnett should be charged with the murder of the two victims Had the governor not been so loud and abusive with advocations of defiance, the situation would never have become such an ugly mess.
When his constituents looked to him for direction, the governor responded by sending them up a dark alley.
On three different occasions Barnett journeyed from Jackson to Oxford, arbitrariy set himself up as registrar of Ole Miss and rejected Meredith's application for admission to the lily-white institution.
Mr Barnett repeatedly quoted the tenth amendment to the constitution of the United States.
But Barnett refused to take notice of the fourteenth amendment to the same constitution.
This out-of-date governor has exemplified a personal disregard for federal authority.
If he does he will learn or be reminded that federal supremacy won out over state's rights on a bleak day in 1865 when General Lee sang to General Grant.
Because of the actions of a stubborn few, this great nation must hang its head in shame.
Newspapers around the world tchoed the Mississippi crisis with all its ugly details.
This distorted picture of this country will remain in the minds of many for a long time to come.
The President MUST, whenever the need presents itself, use haste In sending federal troops to protect the property and lives of the citizens of Mississippi or any other state in the Union.
The prompt and determined action of the federal government to enforce federal laws should be a warning to South Carolina and Alabama, the two states remaining who have complete segregation.
History has shown us that the doctrine of Interposition is a direct repudiation of the constitution.
Southern leadei's and citizens must realize that some degree of integration is inevitable all over the South In the foreseeable future.
The moral of the Mississippi Saga— YOU JUST CAN'T BUCK UNCLE SAM, Cuba — Dyn€itnit€ At Our Doorsteps The immediate response of the United States to the military build-up in Cuba by the Soviet Union has won the support of a large majority of the free world leaders.
The big question now is whether the Soviets will try to force their way through the blockade.
It is very possible that Cuban puppet Fidel Castro could start World War III, or perhaps it need not be numbered since it may be the last one.
Kennedy and most observers agree that the President had no alternative in the situation.
To back down from our commitments to defend this hemisphere from Communistic aggression would result in a tremendous loss of prestige by the U S, throughout the world.
Russian bases on the island would put this country and the West at a great military disadvantage.
The Russians have repeatedly declared that they will spread their system of government throughout the world and would stop short of nothing to accomplish this.
Without a single missile in Cuba. the Russians could hit almost any target on the U S, mainland from launching pads in the Soviet Union.
GIVE and GIVE GENEROUSLY support the UNITED COMMUNITY APPEAL ScCcia%ial By Elmer Thomas The story is told that a fourfooted animal, probably an ape or gorilla, was roaming through the woods thousands of years before the appearance of Neanderthal man.
The sight of a glossy apple dangling from overhead motivated the creature's impulse to secure the fruit for himself.
Clutching the apple In his paw he was very happy with the fruit of his effort — he mastered a skill practiced by none of his jungle colleagues— the ability to stand erect, This fable would have different meanings to different people. but the point here is that incentive or motivation was the necessary stimulant preceding the achievement.
In this case it was the fact that the fruit could be reached if the animal would put forth the necessary effort.
Of course there are numerous types of ""fruits"" to serve as incentives or motivators in the process, but the basic operational principles are the same.
Our people have long been characterized as being lazy and non-enterprising.
One military officer said that Negroes under his command were poor soldiers in combat.
This is the secret of inner health and happiness which millions have found in the most rapidly spreading Faith in religious history.
The Baha'l World Faith is a new, independent universal religion, whose goal is to revitalize mankind splriutaily. it is a practical spiritual religion with the mission of uniting the world in one common faith and order.
The word ""BahaT' comes from the Founder of the Faith— Baha'u'llah iln Arabic, the Light or Glory of God ) , who announced his mission to the world in 1863, Baha'ls believe there Is one God and therefore only one religion.
The unfoldment of religion from age to age is called ""progressive revelation"" — Baha'u'llah being the Messenger of God in our time.
An international police force as an arm of world governmentElimination of all forms of prejudice.
Universal obligatory education The essential harmony of science and religion.
The common foundation of all religions, and the progressive character of religious revelation.
These unique communities encompass all racial, religious, and cultural backgrounds.
They invite you to investigate this Faith and share in this spiritual adventure. of white employees.
High school and college students of color, in general, seem less enthusiastic about their work than white students.
Negro soldiers were subjugated to harsh treatment overseas and here in the United States.
Very often they were deprived of those rights and privileges which they so bravely fought to safeguard.
In this poem entitled ""Defeat,"" Witter Brynner describes such a situation.
On a train in Texas German prisoners eat With white American soldiers. seat by seat While black American soldiers sit apart— The white men eating meat, the back men heart.
Mark well the token of the separate seat — It is again ourselves that we defeatHistorical records show that Negro soldiers were continuously humiliated.
Ira, Miss SSC 1962-63. is currently a senior majoring in Business Education.
Ira says that she enjoys the company of an open-minded person with a sense of humor.
Ira spends her liesure time reading and listening to music and she hke to draw and paint Lovely Bessie Samuels hails from Philadelphia.
Pennsylvania, She is a graduate of Alfred E, Beach High School of Savannah.
She is president of the Women's Glee Club, State Department Official Visits By Earlene Freeman Miss Ann Clarke, a recruiting official of the U S, Department of Civil Service, gave professional advice to the students of Savannah State College interested in some of the great opportunities in Civil Service jobs, on Thursday.
Miss Clarke indicated that any student who has been an American Citizen for nine years, and who is at least 21 years of age, can qualify for the Civil Service written and oval examination.
The field is now open for secretaries, typists, clerks, communication specialists, administrative and technical personnel.
Miss Clarke, a former woricer in Washington, D, C, is now a member of the recruit in Atlanta, Georgia.
Neat and cliarming Dorothy Carter is a native of Manchester, Georgia, and a graduate of Manchester County Training School.
After graduation, she plans to join tlie Peace Corps, The three young ladies featured in this issue of the Tiger's Roar can best be described by the four C's.
Every time the doctor had a chance he lectured his receptionist on health matters.
RESEARCH HAZARD lACP)— Instructor Bill Emerson of the San Dlcgo City College.
The college's FORTNIGHTLY says the instructor okayed a term paper on ""Birth Control"" for one of his evening students only to approve a drop-out slip the following week for the same married student because of her announced pregnancy.
In the interim between the book's appearaiice in France and its publication in America the author, Henry Miller, was elected to membership in the American Institute of Arts and Letters and gained a sizeable underground fan-club that emerged to the surface with an enormous increase in number when ""Cancer"" was made available to the public in hard cover and paperback editions by Grove Press.
Despite a considerable delay of 27 years, during which the book had been labeled ""obscenrr,"" filthy, ""lewd,"" by the appointed censors of this country it is now recognized as a modern American classic and Henry Miller is compared in stature by our critics with Melville and Whitman, a recognition which must certainly please him.
It's doubtful whether or not the 63yearold Mr Miller is overwhelmed, having been celebrated as a great author for years by the French and most of the other fine writers around.
We are told that the book contains an unusual amount of obscene language—and after reading ""Cancer"" we must admit candidly, that it does.
Yet despite the repetitious gutter-slang employed throughout the book, the author does not give us the impression of excessive preoccupation with sex that so many other current writers repell us with in their books.
Anyone who buys ""Tropic of Cancer"" to be titillated by the ""sexy"" scenes is wasting his money.
This book is exactly what many critics have claimed it to be a modern classic.
It's also a hilarious comedy, Wliat many people call obscene in the book is actually funny.
Mr, Miller can use four-letter words in such a way that they lose their ""nasty"" or ""smutty"" connotations.
No, this is a prolonged insult, a gob of spit in the face of Arts, a kick in the pants to God.
Destiny, Time, Love, Beauty . , . what you will,"" Tropic of Cancer is about Miller's life in Paris, a life he pursued after being unable to find himself in America.
He found himself so completely in Prance that everything that had been hold back erupted wildly in this his real book.
Its this quality of uninhibited wildness that gives his book an alien sound to the uninitiated reader, and that kept it from publication so long in the country he escaped from in order to write it.
The wildness is also what makes it great and exciting once Miller's contagious exuberance of words begin to intoxicate the reader.
Ths books are recommended in many colleges as classics to students, many who have chosen the ""Tropics"" as the subject of their theses.
Hi Hat Lanes on Radio Broadcast A new promotional feature has been added to the activity calendar of Hi Hat Lanes Bowling, announces Alphonso S McLean, Manager.
McLean directs the show, assisted by Herbert Williams who Is In charge of advertising.
We play the latest hit tunes and records, highlight the football activities of the local high schools and Savannah State College, announce bowling league standings, give bowling tips and interview outstanding bowlers of the week,"" The program Is being sponsored by local business firms in 10, 15. 30 and 60 minute segments.
Bowling Instructional classes will also be conducted between the hours of broadcast (4 to fl p,m, I by Gordon Hall and Adrene Sparks, Certified Instructors at Hi Hat Lanes.
Son of Zeus, who art the Pilot preeminent of moon's illuminent companion, One most exalted in the Delphians' paeans.
Those sunlit days o'er which you rule That give perpetual glee, all powerful One, Inculcate them into my life that I may know Earth's vicissitudes never more.
But, rather, know nothing but days Lilting, lovely, lulling, leisurely, lively, lanquid.
WZiwtT^^^^^SS Miss Savannah State Cullege and her attendants in Columbus, Ga,. (luring Chattahoochee Classic.
E SCHOEFFLER, ESQUIRE'S Fashion Director Wi-itine a column on campus spnrtswcfir is always a pleasure for me. because of the natural affinity of young men and new ideas.
College men are mo.st ready to experiment with their wardrobes, and often produce fashion trends that the whole country eventually follows.
The correct ""when and where"" of any leisurewear depends on the degree of formality on your campus, so no hard-and-fast general rules apply.
But there's big fashion news for every campus this season, and here arc some of the newest ideas in the Fall lineup of leisurewear, BRIGHT BOLD JACKETS. ..in Wb plaid paUerns vie with soft plaid muted tones in the season's newest sport jackets.
No hedging bets hereIhcy're either big and brassy or quiet and' subdued-but they're all woven with multi-colored markings in the plaids.
Brown lends the way as the fashion first color for Fall, turning the traditional olive to bronze and the basic gray to tan-gray.
They'll be seen in the natural shoulder, 3-button models, with either center or side vents.
Shetland tweeds in heather tones, and Harristype tweeds are on the scene this year, particularly in brown and other solid colors.
Both the soft-napped Shetlands and the wiry Harris roughsurfaced tweeds will naturally be seen in natural shoulder models.
Some men prefer these ruggedlooking jackets with protective and decorative leather patches at the elbows.
And don't discount the blazer, the perennial campus favorite, still most popular and most correct indark blue flannel.
Another ""odd jacket"" with a great following is the corduroy coat, styled this Fall with a heavy set wale (the ridging of the cord fabric) in natural tan and brown shades.
TAKING UP THE SLACK ... in slacks silhouettes this year, the slim line of tapered, pleatless and beltless styles is definitely in.
Flannels in dark shades of gray, olive and brown will coordinate with the new jackets, as will the increasingly popular corduroys.
Tan twills remain a big favorite, in both lightweight cotton twill and the dressier diagonal weave wool of Cavalry twill.
Solid color bright flannel vests will enrich any wardrobe, and new vests in plaids, figures and madder prints brighten any jacket and slacks combination.
A smart bet is the reversible vest, with a big plaid on one side to match your jacket, a solid color flannel that matches your slacks on the other.
SPOTLIGHT ON SPORT SHIRTS -Look for luxurious batiks and cotton prints that are soft, dark, and muted in tone ... as well as Fall versions of the rieb-looking India madras plaids.
Solid color flannels in wool or blends of wool and polyesters are a definite contribution to colorful campus wear.
Also in flannel, and cotton as well, the season's bright new prints are bold Tartan plaids that can be worn with solid color slacks and blazers.
IF YOU'RE A PULLOVER PUSHOVER . . . take a look at the new pullovers of soft, medium weight Shetland wool.
Pullovers in heavier, bulkier ski styling, in solids and the traditional ski patterns, will also be on the snowbound scene.
Authentic Regimental colors, in bright, wide knitwear stripes, are the pattern news in sweaters this Fall, You'll see these Regimental sweaters in both pullover and the popular rib-knit wool or wool-blend Cardigans.
THE HOBO HAT . , . is the happiest headgear to come along in a long time.
This go-anj-where leisure hat is simpiv a flat cone of ultra-soft felt.
You can shape or dent this epitome of casualness to suit your mood, whim, or manic urge, then shove it right around into something else, perhaps holding vour new crease with a ski club or fraternity pin.
IHt Hlbn-KIStR RISES ... in popularitv every vear. particularly this Fall, in the campus boot-type in brushed'leatber, with 2-eyeIet lacing.
But choose a grained leather, plain toe Blucher or wing-tip to coordinate with your brown wardrobe for less relaxed leisurewear, OUT IN THE COLD?Next month we'll take up the question of outerwear for Fall and Winter of 'G2-'G3. and the big issue of keeping warm, and well-dressed, during those long Saturday afternoons m the stadium.
So long, until then. ^ ^ ^ nm SHI OF nil By Veronica Lynne Owens Autumn, with all of its obscure somberness, has brought with its entrance some of the seasons mo.st provocative and colorful syltcs.
Contrary to the tenor of the season, this Fall's fashions are making their debut in an array of hues.
Simply this, plaid woolen cloth that originated in the Scottish Highlands.
This season, however, it migrated to the Western shores and has become quite a hit.
Blouses, skirts, coats and hats are vailable at all of the fine stores in the tartan plaid.
This ultrachic material blends harmoniously with solids for those persons that like a contrast.
Any coed would really be a smart ""Lassie"" to Include the tartan, one of Fall's recent imports, in her wardrobe.
Oddly enough, the tartan is not the only imported style to visit our shores this season.
America's fashion experts have proven to be most susceptable to the foreign flair for styles this year.
All of the madras plaid Fall cottons are durable, and versatile little dresses that are jus t the garments for autumn's brisk, invigorating days.
Even the most feminine of ""femme fatales"" have fallen head over heels in love with the boys , . . look, that is.
Because of the popular ""little boy look."" this season's co-eds can get away with wearing boyish bermudas, knickerbockers, hipster pants.
COMMENTS In all phases of civilian and military life, Negroes have always been discriminated against; they are being mistreated now, and it appears that this will continue in the future. though probably to a lesser degree.
A Negro competing for a position must be far superior to his white opponent, or opponents, if he is to occupy such a position.
American fashion experts landed in England and sent the jaunty, British male look to the fashion game American co-eds.
Esquire checks and herringbone tweed materials lose their look of total masculinity when houses like Mademoiselle Modes include the merest hint of feminity in their Fall stylings.
So, if you want to be novel, new, and ""boyish,"" include some of the boyish styles in your Fall wardrobe.
CoUarless Coats Dominate Men^s Fashions By C, A Phillips It's definitely in, it's way out, it's crazy but it's swinging.
It comes in many shades, such as navy, olive, black, and beige which is the newer color for fall.
Along with these colors we find the many desert tone shades, such as green-leather, blueleather, sand or black and grayloden.
This coat has natural shoulders and it's accentuated with white pearl buttons and the ever popular lap seam in the back.
This coat is very reasonable as far as price is concerned Trousers are tapered more so than ever this year.
The shirt is still that button down ivy collar, in solids as well as stripes, India madras, you know, the shirt that bleeds, is spreading like wildfire over the fashion lights, and you can get one for your girl too, just like yours.
You know, make like twins, I know your wardrobe's got a pair of tennis cordivans.
That's it for now, next issue we are coming out COLD, in other words, BIG HEAVY COATS. careers and seeking self-improvement through education, are ""drawn"" by a vision of the rewards of their efforts.
If such a vision is non-existent or nearly so. then it is not surprising that they may be lacking in zeal and industriousness which is so necessary in achievement.
Though this is true, this is not sufficient reason for one of us to fail to do his best to reach his potential.
Jockie Robinson, Ralph Bunche and George Washington Carver had one thing in common — they went to bat with the odds against them— poverty and a racially intolerant society.
I will not let prejudice or any of its attendent humilities and injustices bear me down to spiritual defeat.
Most of us who come to study here at Savannah State received inferior high school training, which, for the most part, can be attributed to existing social and economic conditions.
In spite of these disadvantages, we must have an awareness of our responsibilities.
We must be prepared to contribute significantly in all areas of endeavor.
So that we may be more qualified to fulfill the roles assigned to us, we must first realize that we are behind in the race and that the only way that we will gain for ourselves those materials, rights. and privileges taken for granted by most Americans is for us to run night and day and move on irrespressibly toward those goals which we have set.
We must be mindful of the fact that our group must develop a greater amount of economic vitality if we are to progress In the future.
October, 1%2 THE TIGER'S ROAR Page 5 By Therman Thomas Sports Editor All of the home games of the Savannah State football and basketball teams will be played on the campus this year.
Last year the team played in the city's ultra-modern Bacon Park Memorial Stadium^quite a contrast to the SSC athletic field.
Of course It would be kind of ridiculous to play the games out at Bacon Park and only a handful of students and supporters sliow up to root for the Tigers.
Most of the spectators aren't students, either, If Savannaii State would field a team of the Southern U., Grambiing.
FAMU or A&T College calibre, then football could become a money-making proposition for the school.
Some people say that they'd rather watch a game on TV than one of the Tiger's grid contests.
You can bet your bottom dollar that the bothersome sand gnats won't complain about the games being played on campus.
If any game should be played at Bacon Park then the homecoming game should.
The halftime activities, the fact that we will have many distinguished guests and alumni present and the large contingent of Clark fans wiio will follow their team, warrant the use of the city's facilities rather than the SSC athletic field — at least for that one game.
If we use ""Tiger's Field"" then the large homecoming crowd might not be as large next year at homecoming time.
Bobby Mitchell Spearheads Redskins Bobby Mitchell, the Cleveland Brown cast-away half back, has put new life into the Washington Redskins football team.
Chiefly through Mitchell's superb ball-carrying, the 'Skins' are sitting on top of the NFL's Eastern Division with a respectable 4-1-2 record.
One of these wins came at the expense of his former team, the Cleveland Browns.
For the past several years Savannah State has been missing out on local football talent.
The three local high schools have produced two state champs in years past and also some top football players.
Players like Solomon Brannen, James German, James Palmer and Eddie Fennell played at Tompkins and are now playing at Morris Brown in Atlanta, Henry Kelley who graduated from Beach and played at Johnson C Smith Univ.
All of the above players expressed a desire to attend Savannah State at one time or another, but for some unknown reason they all got away.
SSC Cagers Begin Pre-Seasou Drills The 1962-63 Tigers basketball team has already started preseason drills.
Although the Tigers lost five lettermen from last year's team, the locals are expected to hold their position atop their conference and other basketball circles in this area.
Gone are the nationally known five ""sizzling seniors,"" The quintet, composed of Redell Walton.
Missing also will be Theodore Wright who has decided he will watch from the stands after 27 years of coaching.
In what was described as a ""spectacular play,"" he lunged at a bail carrier and tagged him.
After the play he told friends he heard his stomach ""pop."" the Dally Kansan reported. action for the past couple of years To round out the list of experienced players we have William Day.
New comers who could fit well into the basketball picture are Tommy Davis and Aaron Johnson.
Frazier, a graduate of Tuskegee Institute, is highly respected for his coaching abilities.
Mr, Frazier has served as baseball coach, and currently, he is backfield coach for the football team. — y<^t James Carthon , and Calvin Roberts arc key men in the Savannali State offensive and defensive attack.
One would have to look twice or possibly three times to see whether or not these were the same Tigers who represented Savannah State in prior grid action.
Benedict took the lead in the second quarter when Charles Benson went over from seven yards out to give the Carolinians a 6 point advantage.
Robert Saxby tackled Henry Chandler behind the Benedict goal line for a safety.
The Tigers came back In the third quarter and saw pay dirt as QB McArthur Pratt completed an aerial to Robert Saxby.
In the last quarter Pratt connected with Herschel Robinson for State's second TD, and a few minutes later Fred Meyers caught one of Pratt's passes to give the locals a 20-6 lead in the contest.
Listou Takes Crown I rank in game ag Ih^ , freshman quarterbaik from >mI ( .lolui^un High in Savannah, handling pigskin linst Morris College on October 13, Savannah Slate lost the game 9-6.
Listen's smashing punching demoted Floyd from the rank of a lightlytaken heavyweight champ to that of a former heavyweight titleholder even more lightlytaken.
When Floyd was knocked out by Ingemar Johannsen in his first bout with the Swede, there was the question of Floyd underrating his opponent.
Although sportswriters predicted the champ would probably retain his crown, the odds-makers picked Liston as the best bet.
Patterson did not take this bout as just another prize-fight — he trained for it.
If you listen closely enough you may hear someone say that Floyd was too tense and that he will be the first man to win it back twice.
The two fighters somewhat resembled David and Goliath, only the giant throwing the sock that felled Floyd like a rock.
THE TIGERS ROAR Oclober.62 CAMILLA HUBERT HALL NEWS NOTES Lucy C White.
Reporter The Inslallation of Officers The 1962-63 officers of Camilla Hubert Hall Dormitory were Installed Sunday evening, September 30.
Miss Carolyn Roseberry, Vice President, Is a junior majoring in business education from Covington.
Miss Rosemary Fatten, Secretary, Is a sophomore majoring in physical education from Cartesvllle, GeorgiaMiss Preda Hunter.
Assistant Secretary, is a sophomore majoring In elementary education from Fitzgerald.
Miss Mary Smith, Treasurer, is a sophomore majoring in biology from Cartesvllle, Georgia.
Joan Mainor, Chaplain, is a sophomore majoring In English from Woodbine, Georgia, and Miss Lucy White.
Reporter, is a junior majoring In business education from MllledgevlUe.
Misses Sherard Allgood, a sophomore majoring in dressmaking and tailoring from Trlum, Georgia; Alma Favors, a freshman majoring in physical education from Greenville, Georgia: Hazel Phillips, a sopromore majoring;; in English from Hogansvllle.
Georgia; Beauty Poole, a senior majoring in Mathematics from Sandersvillc, Georgia; Annette Randolph, a senior majoring in elementary education from Fitzgerald.
Georgia; and AJbertha Roberts, a sophomore majoring in business education from Rlceboro, Georgia.
Florida was voted ""Miss Camilla Hubert Hail,"" and her attendants are Misses Martha Smith, a freshman from Waynesboro.
P Ed, and Recreation to present to the college a Certificate of Recognition for the role played so far in the project.
This group, the AAHP & R, is a division of the National Education Association.
The twenty students have begun the test and upon completion they will serve as instructors and assist in administering the test to other college students.
The testing program has been officially adopted and recommended by President Kennedy's Council on Youth Fitness and is especially usable for the screening of individual weaknesses, evaluation of program quality, and periodic testing of Individuals for progress.
The performance is graded and scored according to the national norms for college men and women.
These tests are designed to measure arm strength, abdominal strength, speed and agility, leg power, arm power and endurance.
The data secured may be used to counsel students concerning health, nutrition, and exercise programs They also may be used as a guide to the selection of physical education coursesOn Thursday morning during the regular all-college assembly program.
To help each person evaluate his fitness quotient, she elaborated on four facets of fitness — physical, mental, social and moral.
She admonished the audience that each facet must be considered in order to assess accurately his total fitness.
The Savannah State College Debating Society moves into the 1962-63 school year with high hopes and plans of an even higher nature.
Plans are also being instigated to bring the entire Savannah State student body to critical thinking on this year's topic.
That The Non-Communist Nations of the World Should Establish an Economic Community."" has far reaching implications and the final decision may very FELLOWSHIPS Competition for the 1.000 firstyear graduate study awards offered by the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation for 1963-64 is under way now.
Faculty members have until October 31 to nominate candidates for the awards.
Wiggins in 219, Hill Hall. well be influenced by the careful analysis offered by debating societies throughout the country.
Such issues of local, national and international importance are more often than not decided after careful process of argumentation.
Members of the Savannah State College Debating Society, namely Verlyn Bell.
By Lawrence Hutchins The Savannah State College ""Marching Tigers"" under the direction of Mr Samuel Gill are making tremendous strides toward becoming the greatest musical aggregation in the history of the school.
At football games, out of town engagements, and parade, there is no doubt that the band will be at its best.
Included in the sixty-six member band are twenty-five freshmen who not only are enthusiastic, but are very talented as well.
The wearers of the blue and orange uniforms are proud of their organization and have created much interest in the band throughout the community and state.
State Scholarships Aivarded Stndents Nelson R Freeman, Director of Student Personnel, and Dean of Men at Savannah State College, announces that several students have received notification that they have been approved by the Board of Regents to receive Regents' State Scholarships for the 1962-63 school year.
Screven ; Shirley A Conner, freshman, Savannah; Glennera E Martin, sophomore.
The demands on the limited funds for student financial aid in an institution as large as Savannah State College are necessarily heavy.
Therefore, financial aid can be granted only to those students of sound moral character who are doing highly creditable work in high school or in tlie college and who cannot continue their education without some type of financial aid.
A recipient may re-apply in succeeding years provided he remains academically qualified, has continuing need, and the program continues to be adequately financed.
LAST RITES FOR COLLEGE MINISTER W ITAESSED BY I\Ien are born every dav.
But when a man passes who has contributed significantly and unselfishlv toward the (hing^s in which he is most interested, men will pause and take notice.
Savannah Slate College Minister and Assistant Protessor of Social Sciences at Savannah State College who died on No%ember 8.
Last rites were held on Tuesday, November 13. in Meldrim Auditorium, Savannah State College, with Reverend Blanton E Black delivering the Eulogy.
The funeral was attended bv huridreds of students and teachers along with many other individuals from Savannah and other communities.
Reverend Peacock was college minister at Savannah State from 1940 until 1952, and again from 1959 to the time of his death.
Savannah State College developed a well balanced educational program of spiritual and moral values.
Ihis. he devoted his leisure time to fraternal, civic, and general community welfare.
He was also vice president of the Omar Temple of (he Mystic Shrine, with jurisdiction over 20,000 persons.
Giblmiis, Dislri.t {ir:in(l Master nl I'rm. r II. ill Al.is.ms. said lll;llMiiM U \i.is Ihc most pupiihir lr;ilcrnal leader in southeast Georgia and was a loyal and dedicated servant of all humanity.
Reverend Peacock visited the sick daily in hospitals and was always willing to give a helping hand.
For several years, he directed the college Campus Chest Program which annually gives several thousand dollars to charity.
Numbei ""^ Twelve Savannah State College Students Nominated To Who's Who Dr.
Payne, President, Savannah State College, announces the nomination of twelve students to Who's Who in American Universities and Colleges.
Freida M Brewton, Chemistry major, Claxton; Ernest B Brunson, Building Construction Technology major, Savannah: Annie Helen Cruse, Social Science major.
Business Administration major, Milledgevllle; and Mary Moss, Mathematics major, Fitzgerald.
The criteria to be met by students to be eligible for nomination are 1.
Must have been in College at Savannah State a year prior to being nominated, 4.
Cases of unusual contributions and outstanding contributions will be considered and studied by the Administrative Council.
Students are first nominated by all student organizations in good standing and by the departments of the College.
They are then cleared through the Business Office, Registrar's Office, Personnel Office and the Dean of Faculty's Office, Thirdly, those names which are cleared through all four offices, go to the Administrative Council and the President of the College for final clearance or substitution.
Completes Trainina Edward C Werner Receives Air Force Coniniission Edward C Werner, an August 1962 graduate of Savannah State College, was recently commissioned Second Lieutenant in the United States Air Force.
He was selected by the Air Force after successfully competing in a screening program which included aptitude examinations and personal interviews, Lt, Werner attended the Officer Training School at Lackland Air Force Base, San Antonio.
Texas, and finished the iCorilinUi-il on Piigc 41 Honor Society Represented By Glennera Martin Two Savannah State College Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society students attended the Fourth Annual Regional meeting of the organization on November 16, 1962, at Benedict College, Columbia.
South Carolina, Colleges from both Georgia and South Carolina were represented at the meeting.
The students attending were Miss Bernita Kornegay and Mr Norman B, Elmore.
Georgia, Her major is Business Education, and she is president of the Savannah State College Chapter of the Alpha Kappa Mu Honor SocietyMr Elmore is a senior English major from Savannah.
The purpose of the meeting was to provide for creative endeavors and to improve the quality of activities of local chapters.
Wilhams. co-ordinator of General Education, and Mr John B Clemmons, Associate Professor and Chairman of the Department of Mathematics, Newtonian Society Of Savannah State Holds Meeting By Ralph Lowe The Newtonian Society of Savannah State College held Its weekly meeting Friday, November I6th. with Mr W H, Sullivan as Principal Speaker.
This was the 7th meeting of the group which alternates between lectures and general business.
One of the aims of the Newtonian Society is to have outstanding persons in the fields of Science to lecture and discuss new methods and concepts of our modern scientific world.
Browne II, Head of the Department of Industrial Technology at Savannah State College, initiated a series of lectures to be given to the group.
Clemmons, chairman of the Mathematics Department, as the advisor, has planned many Informative activities for the school year.
One activity is the all College Assembly Program to be held January 31.
VMCA, Mid Physical tdutaficn major from Atlanta, Georgia, presents :VIary Greyer.
Public Relations and Spencer's guest speaker; ""Miss Spencer High School""; Willie Anderson, and Margie Cannon, Spencer High School student.
The exhibition is on loan to the Savannah State College Library from the Student Artist Division ol the National Conference of Artists.
Mrs, Virginia J Kiah, a local artist, is a consultant to this organization.
The public is invited to view the exhibition during regular library hours.
ChristniaBall Drf-enihtr 7th The annua] Christmas Ball at Savannah Stale College will be held on Friday evening, December 7, 1962.
In past years, most city students have not attended the Christmas Ball, Music will be provided by an orchestra, and decorations will be in keeping with the Christmas spirit.
The semi-formal affair promises to be enjoyable and students should make preparations to attend.
Gordon applied for the position during his senior year at Savannah State and began work in August of this year.
Performances of our basketball team this season may not be as brilliant as in past years.
It seems also that the attitude and interest of students in other phases of student life is far from being desirable.
To cite particular instances where this is noticeable, we would not have to go beyond the confines of this publication's newsroom.
Students and student organizations are usually concerned with getting news releases published, but not to the extent that they will submit information before each deadline.
Although an organization may be last to release news items to this newspaper, that same organization is usually first to criticize this paper for not Including its articles in the publication.
More regards should be given to OUR COLLEGE LIBRARY and OUR library materials.
Under no circumstances should a student destroy or steal library material.
We should remember that a copying service is available in the library at a low cost.
Every dollar spent to replace books is a dollar that could have been spent to purchase new books.
In some cases administrators and faculty members themselves are guilty of possessing an indifferent attitude toward students and what they may be attempting to do.
Perhaps the attitudes of students and teachers are resultant or partially resultant of each other, but even so, we should take the necessary steps to remedy this situation within and among ourselves.
If this happens, the work of both student and professor would certainly become more profitable and enjoyable.
WliislliiiQ Against \ Strong Wind Attorney Leroy R Johnson, of Atlanta, will be the first Negro to sit in the Georgia Senate since reconstruction days.
Johnson won the Democratic nomination of the 38th District when he defeated four white candidates who opposed him.
In the General Election of November 6. another Negro, T M, Alexander, also from Atlanta, opposed Johnson unsuccessfully, and Johnson was assured a seat in the 54-member Senate.
Johnson as a member of the Georgia Senate will not change the course of politics in this state significantly insofar as legislation is concerned, but at least his election might be the starting point of an era of greater representation by Negroes on school boards, city council and other bodies.
Without the bloc-vote, scandalized and criticized by those who fear the potential political might of Negroes, neither Johnson nor the Republican Alexander would have been in the race.
An example of bloc-voting in reverse is the flocking of white voters to the polls in August of 1961 to defeat a Negro candidate for the position of Clerk of Superior Court of Chatham County, Georgia, Any student at Savannah State College who is not registered to vote in his or her home county, and who does not vote in each and every election siiould remove himself from this institution or remedy the situation because he has failed in one of the primary objective of his educational preparation, which is specifically, to become an enlightened citizen.
Athens has what could be a very powerful publication ordinance which prohibits anyone from having or selling any literature which Is obscene.
The ordinance went Into effect in March.61, but the only time it has been enforced was to keep ""Tropic of Cancer"" off the newsstands a year ago.
A review of author Henry Miller's ""Tropic of Cancer"" appeared in the October edition of the Tiger's Roar.
Our argument is that there are many obscene paperbacks being sold on at least two newsstands in Athens, and yet no attempt has been make by the police to ban these books.
This, in effect, means that the police are acting as censors whenever they feel something is obscene.
Police Captain Joseph McBride is now in the position to judge whether a book is literature or obscenity.
This also means that, as one letter writer said, the police could keep ""For Whom the Bell Tolls,"" ""To Kill A Mockingboard"" or any other piece of literature off the newsstands by simply calling them obscene.
Thus, Ordinance 1532 could easily become a tool for the Athens police to use at will.
Either Athens should enforce the law all the time or remove it as an ordinance.
Also many persons have questioned the POST'S right to call any literature obscene.
Apparently tliese persons have never read the contents of the paperbacks we listed.
I do not recall his name, was crossing a street on the campus, when I noticed, because of the cane that he carried, that he could not see.
From time to time I saw him crossing the campus on his way to classes or in the dining room of the dormitory.
He was enrolled at the university to improve himself and so that he might become a more resourceful and better citizen.
The man was up against tremendous odds, because to succeed as a student at the university was and is no trifling matter for persons without handicaps. to say nothing of a sightless person who had to study the same information and materials as other students.
Maybe he was enrolled in a special program, but even so. he must be admired for making this attempt to improve himself Somehow the student had acquired a great deal of courageHe could be found, more often than not. in a gay and cheerful mood For some reason he did not indulge in progress-thwarting self pity.
He saw something that he wanted, but more than Character is much easier kept than recovered— Thomas Paine WORLD OF BOOKS Reviewed by Joyce Moxley '..jnn.l.
CtorilJi. ua Pi-ecocious writers are rare; precocity in the arts is usually found in musicians, mainly because to write intelligently one must have had some experience with life.
The feeling for music is a more direct and primitive perception than the feeling for words which usually comes only after some maturity, when one is sophisticated enough to relate living experience to one's particuar language.
Yet in the last decade or so, it seems the young writer who is both published and talented is becoming more prevalent.
Reasons for this can perhaps be found in the great emphasis our culture places on youth and the early initiation of young people into the ways of adult life.
The vogue of the young writer first came to my attention several years ago when I read in a national magazine about a French girl, barely eighteen, who had written a book, Bonjour Triestesse, iGood Morning.
Sagan to write a slightly bigger and better book to consolidate her position as an important literary figure.
A Certain Smile was not a bigger or better book, but still it wasn't a disappointment.
Cecile, became Dominique, heroine of A Certain Smile, with little change in character or charm except for a slight increase of cynicism, and once again Mile.
Sagan succeeded in giving what might have seemed puerile adventures depth and humour.
It seemed her forte lay just in the limitations that she had imposed upon herself — the novelette literary form and the first person narrative.
Readers of Sagan looked forward to the gradual expansion of her adolescent heroines into mature characters; it seemed possible that her precocious, perceptive power would enable her to develop into a major literary influence.
Her third novel appeared, Those Without Shadows, in which the author did away with the first-person narrative, substituting a collection of vaguely dicpicated characters in a brief that, he decided to try and get it for himself.
As we set our eyes on the uphill road ahead, we can see that it Is quite different from the almost level, happy go lucky path over which we have already trod, Competition for employment is, and will be moreso in the future, increasingly keener in all fields.
Althougli it appears that government and industry are able to absorb more engineers and scientists than are available, and giving due consideration to the fact that '■there's always room for a good man in any field,"" the supply ol average, below average, and absolutely incompetent person.is so large that any person who insists on joining these rank.s can only be guaranteed a very small slice of the economic pie, if any at all.
The teaching profession, in which so many of our graduates are employed, won't be as easy to enter in the future as in years past.
A certain score on the National Teachers Examination is a requirement for employment in Florida Schools.
Most colleges stipulate that their candidates for graduation make a certain mark on similar examinations if tliey are to receive a degree.
Teaching and administrative jobs on the high school and college level will carry bigger salaries and more advantages In the future because education tomorrow will have to do more to compete with government and industry for the well-trained and competent.
If one can live in Georgia cheaper than In Indiana and if Indiana ranks as one of our leading states educationally, then an average teacher from that state might be in contention for the same teaching assignment for which you may apply.
The only thing we can do is spend more time in serious study rather than cheating ourselves of the educational advantages provided for us here.
We are at a disadvantage in more ways than one and this is no time for complacency.
Delores Bowens, the first of these personalities, is a graduate of Monitor High School in her home town, Fitzgerald.
She is currently a Junior at Savannah State College, majoring i n Mathematics.
Her associates think of her as an ideal co-ed. an intelligent young lady that has a promising future.
Some persons tend to take life as it comes or think of life as a routine.
Delores has a different opinion of life, ""I think that life is just what a person makes it.
It was obvious that she had attempted to overstep her limitations and broaden her scope as a writer.
I came out. opinion was mixed as to the literary merit of the fourth novel, A beautiful woman, Paula, aging and plagued by the problems of love — an unfaithful mature lover, and an unhappily smitten young man, too young for her^ — make up the main elements of the plot.
Although Brahms seems much too contrived and artificial as a whole, it still succeeds in being entertaining and at times one is surprised by a wholly originial and poignant paragraph that reminds the reader of the earlier work of Mile.
One can see in Brahms a definite indication of maturity, not a really good book, but one can't help thinking the hext one will beRecently, the latest Sagan novel was translated and published in this country and fans of the French author have another book with which to judge her literary excellence.
The Wonderful Clouds was serialized in ""Playboy"" magazine before appearing in book form here and after reading the serialization, that magazine seems eminently suite to feature the ""Clouds."" chronicle of infidelity and adultery.
Being well past the age of precocity (born in 1935) she seems to have done an about face and is now retrogressing as a writer.
She likes to create dances and is always willing to teach her new steps to friends when they come around.
Pius High School in SavannahHe is active in the following activities a t Savannah State College.
He is president of the Student Council, Secretary-Treasurer of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society.
National Officer of Alpha Kappa Mu, Student Advisory Committee, Boar's Head Club, Newman Club and has been listed twice in Who's Who in American Colleges and Universities HJs fellow students think of him as being a good example of a typical young man.
He is a sports fan and spends his leisure time reading novels and dancing.
When asked what changes at Savannah State College he would make if he were President, he replied.
I would strive to build multiple purpose classroom buildings and make provisions for different organizations to have clubrooms.
Home Economics Club lustalls Neiv Officers By Mary Jones The installation of the elected officers and the initiation of new members were held in an impressive ceremony on Friday.
The Home Economics Club is an organization made up of the students majoring in Home Economics.
Home Economics Club purposes are to help ID Develop professional spirit and co-operation among members, '2) Inform students of opportunities offered by the home economics profession, Keep in touch with current topics in the home economics world and its general scientific trend, and Develop personality, leadership, initiative, and social poise.
Anna Cooper was reelected to the office of president with Lottie S Shellman to assist her as vice president.
The other officers are Mary Nell Hollls, secretary; Evelyn Cruise, assistant secretary; Areatha Ware, treasurer; Norma Hendrix, chaplain; and Mary Jones. reporter.
The members hope that with the cooperation of each student, this year will be a most progressive and prosperous one.
The members hope that with cooperation of each student, this year will be a most progressive and prosperous one.
The most popular fur pieces being worn are mink, chinchilla, ermine, fox, beaver, and raccoonThis season fur pieces adorn dressy coats, sport coats, suits and jacketsAnd to top It off hats are even being shown in fur material with matching hand muffs.
Regardless of what you call them, they're smart, collegiate, and saucy.
These smart little vests should be a ""must"" on every coed's fashion list this winter.
Because they're guaranteed by designers to add zest, zing, and zip to any wardrobe.
Other fashion apparel that rate high this winter are the coordinate sets.
Lovely as always, these coordinates come In various dyed-to-match colors.
Those of you with a flair for blending will like the matched coordinates.
And those that have a yen for contrast may mix either part of the original set with other wearing apparel.
The latest coordinates are rather snazzy with their unique ""intarsia"" designs.
Whatever your choice may be, you're in for a fabulous wardrobe if your fashion choice happens to be coordinates sets.
Many outfits for the busy college coed have been shown in suede material this winter.
The most popular in the group are full-length coats, blazers, handbags, jumper dresses and belts.
Those of you inclined to be a wee bit individualistic and different will simply adore the suede earbobs and bracelets to match your outfits.
Yes, this winter's ""fashionlogue"" seems to be just what the coed ordered.
But the next colunm promises to present some even more desirable and appealing styles.
Ill Defense of the (iiaiil Handhag By Gwendolyn Buchanan A young lady walked into a variety store to purchase a very necessary article.
She knew that it was in there, but she just couldn't put her hands on It.
Out came lipstick, shades, hankerchief, pointless pencil, nail polish, lotion, powder sponge, bobby pins, and at last — the cliange purse.
There's a young lady seated in class waiting very nervously to take an examination.
She had begun to relax before the instructor, while passing out exam papers, stumbled over the long, black bag In the aisle.
They'll twist an ankle running to open a door for a lady with one hand full of books.
Often they are almost knocked off their feet by the swaying bag— That's the thanks they get.
The smaller bags occupy less space; they are easier to carry, and as In the case of the stumbling professor, they are less hazardous.
A lady could hardly go armed against any eventuality (almost any eventuality) with a ""loadllmlted"" two-by-four handbag.
There are times when a girl may need a personal item such as a tube of hand cream, lipstick, bobby pins or lotion.
Such ""extensive equipment"" calls for a bag with a reasonably large capacity.
The average bag usually weighs less than three pounds — even when Its loaded, So the next time you feel prone to issue one of your wisecracks about using women in the weightlifting competition In the 1964 Olympic Games — think twice — because they (handbags) might not be so heavy after all.
Savannah State College student, Jeanette Greene, explains the College program lo Florida Governor as military leaders look on. prior to President Kennedy's arrival at Hunter Air Force Base at Savannah Georgia.
Hunter Air Force Base. ful Clouds is a portrait of an unhappy marriage written much as a morbid, slightly depraved 18year-old would have imagined it, while ""Bonjour Tristesse"" (actually written at 18) depicts the vivid sad summer of a young girl as it might have been remembered by the mature woman years later.
Base Information Officer, is receiving Savannah State College Annuals from Miss Jeanette Greene, Junior, Business major.
The 1962 Annual was received on behalf of the President of the United States.
Photo by Mobley Creative Poetry C'est La Vie By Veronica Lynne Owens Behold the Sun, fluorescent ball, The glow it cast on Thee; But, then the rain begins to fall Like snowflakes, C'est La Vie.
And whilst you set it free; A thorn erases all your mirth And merriment, C'est La Vie.
Sailing would be heavenly; But. then rip tides begin to heave And roar, C'est La Vie.
SCHOEFFLER, ESQUIRE'S Fashion Director When thatwintry wind whistles across the campus or through the stadium, there's no iicecl for you to get that left-out-in-the-cold feeling.
Your new outerwear, your ""fashion front"" in Fall and Winter, can be both warm and fashionable.
Fashions in outerwear, particularly those styled for campus, are more functional and individually styled than many other areas of a man's wardrobe-and this year's new coats are no exception to that glittering generality.
PILING UP POINTS ... in popularity, new pile linings, usually of fur-like acrylic fibers, provide excellent light insulation with a lofty, comfortable feel.
They're covered by single-breasted shells of processed Dacron and cotton.
A removable hood for blustery days completes the picture of fashion and warmth.
SALT SEA SPRAY . . . was the test for the rugged, dark-blue denim coat.
Adapted from a classic boating jacket, this climate-controller is of water-repellent, processed denim, with a brilliant scarlet lining for warmth.
Masculine metal hooks and rings across the front shut out the icy blasts, yet set-in sleeve and front-yoke styling keeps this weatherproof roomy even when hooked right up to the military collar and center-zippered hood.
ROOM TO SPARE ... is the lieynote of the Duffel Coat, this season's comeback favorite.
Toggle rope closures are the distinctive trademark of this large and bulky coat, and you'll see it in tan and camel's hair tones of brown-this Fall's fashion first color.
This above-the-knee coat is warm, practical, and ideal for campus and stadium wear.
And new this year are zippered jackets in just-below-the-waist ski styles.
They're quilted for warmth, and faced with water-repellent nylon and processed cotton.
Solids in olive, black, tan and navy will be the most popular colors, and some models will feature detachable hoods.
BLACK AND WHITE ...con trast is the word for rainwear colors this Fall.
Raincoats will be seen either in natural tan or off-white, or in very dark olive or black, Raglan styling and 40"" lengths are most popular, particularly among yoimger men. and zip-in linings make these campus favorites a good het well into Winter.
A bright new idea worth a second look from the daring young man is the patterned raincoat, seen for the first time this year in muted plaids.
HUNG BY THE NECK. . . of many college men this year will be the popular long, flowing muffler.
It will most usually be seen in broad, 3"" stripes of college colors, or in bright, bold solids.
THE MAILED FIST, .is not as husky and masculine looking as this Fall's new gloves.
The sportscar set has given us the knitted wool glove, usually in tan or light olive. with a sure-gripping tan pigskin palm.
Tan and black pigskin shells will also be seen with liners of knitted wool in matching colors.
And the Shearling-type glove remains a standard in every man's wardrobe.
These thick, husky grippers are simply made of skin-suede leather, with the fur turned to the inside of the glove.
CHROME STRIPPING AND FOX TAILS . . . are not what we mean by acjc-^surius.
You can find out what we do meanand what little touches the well-dressed man can add to his wardrobe-next month.
He stated that the Greeks had their special day of thanksgiving, even thougti it may have been quite different from ours.
The speaker commented on the death of the originator of the prc-Thanksgiving Service at Savannah State, the late Rev.
WERNER fConliniietl Irom Page 1) training with a ""B-plus"" average in his course work.
While at Lackland he took such courses as astronautics, world affairs, effective communication, and military law.
Tuskegee, Alabama, until he entered the Air Force and served for a period of five year.
In the fall of 1961. he entered Savannah State College and was graduated in August of 1962.
Werner is now attending a 16-week missile training course at Sheppard Air Force Base.
He will be trained to handle the Air Force's Titan II. a long-range Intercontinental Ballistic Missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead.
If he completes successfully the schooling at Sheppard, he will be stationed at a missile site near Little Rock.
CoUesire Magazine OFF CAMPUS, a new look at ""extracurricular entertainment,"" bows this month.
OFF CAMPUS stands unique, A national search for promising talent to be featured within the pages of OFF CAMPUS is now underway.
OFF CAMPUS invites contributions from all talented fiction and feature writers, cartoonists and illustrators.
Basing its appeal to the more sophisticated tastes of today's college audience, approximately one-fourth of each issue will be student contributed.
The balance of each issue will contain an unusual blend of professional wit and purpose.
Fashion, entertainment, sport^s and featured campuses provide a well-rounded monthly look at the colleges of the nation, OFF CAMPUS, then, has been created to appeal to tlie man who wants to be where the ■""action"" is happening.
Self-addressed stamped envelopes should be included if return of material is requested, OFF CAMPUS is now on sale at nearby bookstores and drugstores at fifty cents a copy.
SAVANNAH STATE COLLEGE 1962-63 Basketball Schedule Home Gaines Dec. — SC Area Trade •Jan.— Fla.
N & I College Jan. — Benedict College •Jan.— Edward Waters Jan.— Allen Jan, 19 — Paine College •Feb.— Albany State College •Feb, 6 — Morris College •Feb.— Claflin College Feb.— Fort Valley State Feb. — Bethune Cookman Games Away ■Dec, 6— Edward Waters College.
Georgia Jan.— Fort Valley State College •Jan.— Claflin College, Orangeburg.
Columbia, S C, 'Feb 16— Paine College, Augusta, Georgia Feb.— Feb.— Feb.— SEAC Tourney.
Albany, Georgia All Home Games are to bcplayed at 8:00 P.M. in Wiley Gymnasium.
Jg-U The Reverend Amjocollo ElHjah Peacock was born in Bathurat Gambia.
A LOOK AT THE GREEKS News of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority Rho Beta Chapter of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority is happy to have increased its chapter with the addition of six neophytes.
Freida Brewton, Barbara Dupree, Nokaleta Mattox, Deloris Mitchell, and Elizabeth Ann Morris, We welcome these young women into our sisterhood.
Soror Ella W Fisher, Regional Director, will preside at this conference.
Theresa Lewis, Reporter New Members Indiictefl Into Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity During the fall probation period.
The fraternity also inducted five new members into the Sphinx Club They are Sam Ward.
Carolyn Elaine Boyles, '64, Savannah, majoring in Biology; Louise Bolden, 64, Royston.
Devereux, Elementary Education Basileus Dorothy J Dorsey ha.-announced plans for the fund raising Post-Thanksgiving Dance to behld in the College Center December 1, 1962.
She also noted that a tentative program being drawn up for the celebration of Sigma Week in March calls for the appearance of one of the Regional or National officials.
They that are serious in richculous things will be ridiculous in serious affairs. — Cato The Elder Mr B (\ Inril, Vice President of Guaranty Life Insurance Company, ami tir.i(l> Copeland, Senior Business Intern confere.
Si5^S«^S^^S^S^<^^ mms ROAR SAVANNAH STATE COLLEGE SAVANNAH, GEORGIA Jb nrcmber 14.
Evanel R Terrell brought a close it's most successful mual food bazaar.
This activity was conceived w ith the purpose of offering the t:ame Economics Club a pref lofessional training organization, an opportunity to promote b-nter public relations in the College Community, to promote s;Lles abUity. to develop culinary skills in the baking of pastries a lid cakes and an appreciation for the aesthetic and gourmet qjality in deliciously prepared fiiods.
This project underwrites tiie educational good of sending a promising home economist to attend the Annual meeting of the College Clubs section of the American Home Economics Association.
Students are made up into preparation work groups for advanced production, last minute details involving art education includes decoration of the dining room.
Christmas tree decorations, display tables for re-sale foods, and exterior building decoration.
The business Community assists the group each year by providing apples and oranges, a beautiful 12 lb. turkey, a large premium quality ham, a cake and a roasting chicken for the culminating raffle.
Besides offering every one gustatory pleasure, fine fellowship and new friends are added each year.
Mrs, M N, Curtright assisted by Mrs, F H, Lumpkin, Student direction from the Home Economics Club was under the leadership of Anna Cooper.
February On February 2. the SSC Debating team defeated an opposing team from Fort Valley State CollegeThe topic of the debate was.
That Labor Organizations Should Be Under the Jurisdiction of AntiTrust Legislation,"" The basketball team captured their seventh straight Southeastern Athletic Conference tournament by defeating Edward Waters College in the afternoon semi-finals, and Albany State in the final round.
Georgia, The Eleventh Annual Press Institute was held at Savannah State College.
Jack LeFlore, sales manager of the American Yearbook Company, spoke at the opening session, Paul Swensson.
The ""college received the Medalist Award for news released through metropolitan newspapers.
Cited also were the Tiger's Roar, Alumni Bulletin, and the Savannah State College Bulletin.
IVIarch The Savannah State College Basketball team played^ in the NAIA Basketball tournament in Kansas City.
Moore, has received an appointment as a Therapuetic Dietitian at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, in Baltimore 4, Maryland.
Miss Moore, a graduate of Savannah State College in the class of '61 completed the internship in dietetics at Freedmen's Hospital, Washington, D C. in September 1962.
Miss Moore is a member of The American Dietetic Association and the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority.
SSC Choral Society Presented ""The MessiiUr The fourth annual presentation of George F Handel's famous oratorio.
THE MESSIAH. by the Savannah State College Choral Society under the direction of Dr.
Chairman of the Department of Fine Arts, was held SUhday evening, December 2, at 6;00m. in Meldrim Auditorium on the college campus.
The singers, assisted by members of the Men's Glee Club, Women's Glee Club, faculty, alumni, and leading singers in the community. resulted in a singing force of more than one hundred voices.
Of the nine soloists heard. three sopranos were Margaret Tilson, a sophomore music major from Savannah.
Aurora Griffin, a freshman music major from Miami, Florida, and Naeline Buchanan, also a freshman music major who comes from Douglas.
Eudora Moore Allen, a senior music minor from Savannah, Two juniors from Sylvani^r; 'John Calvin Reed and James W Johnson, tenor solos, and leading bass solos performed by 'Joshua Walker of Savannah, Launey F Roberts.
Braithwaite conducting the Savannah State College Choral Society during the presentation of the MESSIAH December 2.
Slory of Christmas Giving Chrisliuas Eiitertaiiiiiig Aroiliul ihe World Presidcnl's Message THE TIGER'S ROAR December 14, Editorial Comments The holiday season will be niJed with celebration and joymaking, Ouihomes will be decorated appropiiately.
But several hundred miles to the south of us. men are not so fortunate.
Several thousands of miles to the east and west of us. men still hunger for what is supposed to be an inherent right of all hujuanity— freedom and libertyPerhaps right down the street from you. maybe next door, there live those who are materially depraved.
There is a family of ""havenots."" the head of which earns a good salary at the plant, or post office, or as a truck driver, but somewhere between his place of employment on payday he makes a check-sapping stop There are the slums.
Macon or Brunswick, there is the Ignorant tenant farmer applying 18th century farming techniques in an era of 20th century agriculture.
Perhaps they are shown more pity than the rest since the odds were against them from the start.
We send thousands of youths, along with more mature persons, to the south of us. to the east and west of us. hoping that their presence will gain the friendship of foreign peoples— to prevent or halt Communistic exploit^but more important, to save our own necks.
Satisfactory, or nearly so. programs for care of the aged, blind, crippled, and feeble-minded are in operation.
Jr.. deputy head of the Department of Social Sciences and member of the Army's elite Corps of Professors.
The ABC-TV network telecasts -MEET THE PROFESSOR"" Sunday, December 16th, at 1:30m.
Colonel Jordan believes it is vital that future Army officers have a broad understanding of the political and economic problems of foreign countries.
He designed the course in ""Problems of the Developing Nations."" which the Academy added to its curriculum last year.
In addition to reading and discussing the material, the students hear lectures by visiting authorities and have frequent contact with foreign students.
This gives the cadets insight into the political systems of the developing nations in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Colonel Jordan will be seen conducting a class of cadets in the developing nations course on the program.
Colonel Jordan is also charged with the administration of a unique project called SCUSA (Student Conference on United States Affairs) which brings about two hundred students from other colleges and universities to West Point each year for three-and-a-half days.
The program gives the students the opportunity to participate in stimulating round-table discussions and to hear talks by outstanding statesmen.
Prior to his appoiniment as Professor at the Academy in 1955, he served in the field as Artillery Battery Commander.
He is the author of Foreign Aid and the Defense of Southeast Asia, published by Praeger this year, and other works.
Some of the people who received a small percentage of your resources could turn out to be good citizens One or two of them might turn out to be quite outstanding.
Students from Savannah State along with those from high schools could form a domestic task toi-ce here, and go through the streets of Savannah instructing the ignorant and counseling the doubtful.
They could arrange a program of out-of-class help tor junior high and high school students.
Such action might induce more high school graduates to come to college.
Such a program could graw in magnitude and proportion throughout this state and nation.
Let us resolve to do something of this nature during 1963 and if we meet any degree of success, next year this time we can feel proud of having made a noteworthy and significant contribution to our fellowman — and ourselves. )eceniber 14.
Failing to collect all gift wrap materials in one spot — a smooth solid surface with plenty of working space— will result in frazzled nerves as well as frayed ribbons.
Don't wait till wrapping day to find out that your gift paper won't i-over big packages.
Wary of skimpy-looking packages, people often use more paper than they need— not realizing that they are creating an equally ungainly effect, especially at the corners.
Allow enough so that the width of the gift wrap will overlap the package by no more than an inch.
The gift paper you use is a big factor in the all-important ""first impression"" your gift makes.
Don't skimp on quality, but don't feel that you have to spend a fortune; some of the bestgrade gift wraps are sold in variety stores.
Something like Trophy or Excello Brand print, definite without being gaudy, would look well on most packages.
Stick-on bows in numerous beautiful versions are avilable in variety stores; Satin Glo makes some in geometric flower-like designs.
If you're in a do-it-yourself mood, here's a pretty way to tie a fancy bow.
First make a loop between the thumb and first finger, keeping the ribbon flat.
Additional loops can be made the same way and tied in the middle to form a multiple bow.
You'll be making no mistake if you follow Miss Rapp's suggestions for some imaginative ""extras"" that will really wrap up your reputation as a smooth Santa.
Page 3 PRESIDENT'S CHRISTMAS MESSAGE The celebration of Christinas is well established in the life oE all AmeiicansIt is unique in many ways.
No other occasion furnishes the potential for good during the entire year.
It is at this time that the thought of others over-rides many of the selfish interests which dominate other parts of the year.
No other occasion contributes so much to family life and the rejuvenation of values developed within the home.
Students will be making their way home with memories and anticipations that gladden each heart according to the respective homes from which they come.
Christmas to the college student provides opportunity for thinlting, planning, and evaluation.
During this recess from college, students often secure work to help pay expenses for the remainder of the school year.
In other Instances, there is spare time which may be utilized to Improve one's knowledge and understanding of subject matter areas which have been or are to be covered during the school year.
Many of them read books, write papers, continue experiments, and travel.
The reunions with families and friends will be assigned only a part of this extra time.
The purposes and plans which students have developed for themselves will receive additional implementation.
The continuous inquires of friends and loved ones concerning one's progress and his plans for the future keep the student ever aware that much is expected of him.
Parents, relatives, and friends express in many ways their faith in each student to succeed in the studies and program of education which he has elected to pursue.
The celebration of Christmas for 1962 provides the basis for heartfelt thanks as one thinks of national and world conditions.
Only through the realization of the meaning of Christ does our civilization continue to exist.
There is further hope that through Him civilization can continue to exist and make progress.
The men and women enrolled In our colleges and universities are faced with the challenge to initiate to Inspire, and to develop the mind and will of the modern world to overcome the barriers which threaten the civilizations of our world and time.
Chairmen of Campus Library Award Committees, after selecting a local winner, are asked to submit nominations of senior students for the national awardThe deadline for nomination is April 30th, The award will be made at the winner's commencement.
Collections will be judged on the basis of Intelligent interest, scope and imagination shown in creating the collection, and knowledge of the books as revealed in the annotations.
Collections of any type (excluding textbooks) are eligible whether centered in a subject or avocation, a single author or group of authors, or a general collection.
Miss Loveman was especially concerned with broadening the book horizons of young people.
Recipient of the 1962 award was Walter S, Rosenstein. a senior at Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, for his collection of English and AmeriThe tradition of giving gifts at Christmas dates back to the Three Wise Men, who suddenly appeared out of the desert bearing sold, frankincense and myrrh for the new-born Infant at Jerusalem.
Smce then, the act of givmg has been shrouded in an air of mvsterv that surrounds both giver and gift, and Christmas gift-givers' have appeared and disappeared mysteriously throughout history.
But it was from the Vnited States that he re-crossed the Atlantic, as Father Christmas in England and Pere Noel in France.
The splendor and enchantment of the holiday season can be yours in a nutshell if you dared to write 'ole ""Saint Nick"" regarding your fashion whims earlier.
Well, anyway, those of you that did, will wake with ecstatic glee on Christmas morn to find bewitching ""after-five"" dresses wrapped daintily under your Christmas tree.
These figure-beguiling creations come in this season's newest and most exciting holiday color.
Chiffon leads the list of fabrics. but of course, these dresses are also shown in the ever-popular wool.
The styles are available in sleeveless, halter-type, backless. dirndl skirt, sheered pleats, or bell-shaped skirt.
Although some decolletages remain sophisticated, others are more demure and simple.
Why. nothing other than bright, paisley print material used for a new purpose.
This new addition to the holiday styles rivals the traditional ""after-five"" dress like real close.
The new lowered waistline is featured in some of the new cocktail dresses, and others come complete with self sash to be worn or discarded.
These dresses are styled in adorable printed silk surah, chiffon, and the sheerest of wool.
So, you see, you too can be the ""belle of the ball,"" or a (Continued on I'agc 7} December 14.
Men appeared suddenly out of the desert bearing gold, frankincense, and myrrh for the new-born Infant at Jerusalem, Christmas gift-bearers have appeared and disappeared mysteriously every year.
In Spain, the three Wise Men still bring the presents and distribute them on January 6th, the Epiphany, Spanish children put their shoes out on the window sill and fill them with straw for the camels — then awake to find that the straw .s gone and presents have been leit in its stead.
In Italy, the gift-giver is La Befana — who is reputed to eat bad children as well as reward good ones.
Legend has it that Befana was a woman who had been too busy with her housework to offer hospitality to the three Wise Men — and asked them to return when she was not so busy.
They did not come back and Befana watches for them every Epiphany, French children know that Le Pere Noel will come down from heaven and bring good things if they are well behaved— but if they are not.
In Mexico, gifts come tumbling from a pinata— a gay clay bird or animal filled with fruit, candy, nuts and small gifts.
The pinata is hung from a doorway or tree and the child, blindfolded, breaks the pmata with a stick.
In the mad scramble that follows, each child strikes to pick up as many gifts as possible.
In Denmark, presents are brought by the little gnome said to dwell in the family attic or barn— and in some parts of Scandinavia, gifts are brought by two gnomes— an old woman carrying a basket of gifts and an old man with a white beard wearing a red hood.
In Russia, Grandfather Frost often is assisted in his gift-bearing by the Snow Maiden.
In ancient times, the gift-giver was a local bishop accompanied in a procession by demons who scattered at his approach.
ESQUIRE'S Fashion Director 'GOD REST YOU MERRY, GENTLEMEN . . ."" for the festive holiday season is upon us.
The days are drawing in, the nights are filled with music and laughter, and it's time to take a good, solid look at your formal wear so you'll be a ready — as well as a willing — party-goer.
So your formal clothes are the blue chips in your wardrobe — and an extra investment not only of money but of time and thought about tailoring, fit and fabric, will pay you steady dividends for many seasons to come.
WILT YOU WON'T — not in the new lightweight fabrics now available in formal wear.
These lustreless, lightweight worsteds, or blends of acrylic or polyester fibres and worsted, are proof against the most sardine-packed ballroom, stuffy and steamheated though it is.
You'll be coolly, comfortably turned out in these fabrics for all . seasons.
THE SHAPE'S THE THING, and a smart, correct jacket is the natural shoulder, single-breasted dinner jacket with black satin or silk faille shawl collar.
Gaining steadily in popularity is the notched lapel, often seen on the dinner jacket with flaps on the pockets that may be worn in or out.
Some undergraduates are wearing the high-fashion peak lapel, which is a feature of dinner jackets with a little more shape at the waist.
One of these will add a real touch of elegance to the formality of your image, whether in matching fabric trimmed with silk, or pure silk in a brocade or textured weave.
Here is the single-breasted shawl collar vest with satin lapels and three . buttons.
ON MIDDLE GROUND, the pleated satin cummerbund with matching tie is the smart variation on a theme.
Your dress shirt, with black pearl studs and cufflinks to match, has a pleated bosom and leaves a dazzling V2"" of white cuff showing.
Home tconomics students prepare Christmas Bazaar under direction of Mrs.
A prize package designed to be opened both before and after Christmas is this jolly Santa Claus cookie canister.
All you need are a paper bucket, a bit of cotton and colored paper, and some pomsettia leaves.
Besides, you'll be much more in step in your black patent leather plain-toe eyelet-ties, or your slipon pumps with a grosgrain bow.
A smart alternative is a pair of highly-polished, black calfskin shoes— with plain toes, of course.
Your hose are thin black silk, nylon or rayon — plain, with no ribbing, please, and gartered for the extra sleekness that formal dress demands.
COVER THE SITUATION with a classic Chesterfield coat, velvet-collared, worn with a black, dressy snap-brim.
More adventurous alternatives, if you've the face for it. are the black homburg or derby, both equally correct.
A white silk scarf and light grey suede or natural chamois gloves will complete the picture of a deb's delight.
Savannah State's attack was paced by Johnny Mathls, 6' 5"" center, who collected 23 points.
He received assistance from guard Aaron Johnson who tallied 14 points, and substitute Charles Day. who collected 10.
High man of the game was Area Trade's James Grant, who tallied 29 points, his teammate.
Intranuiral Program of Savannah State To Inclnde Basketball and Volleyball 33conds left.
Savannah State led the tournament in point-averages per game with a rating of 97 pts. game.
April Gwendolyn Brooks, Pulitzer Prize poet, appeared on the Savannah State campus to inaugurate National Library Week which began on April 8.
The singers visited Wilmington, N C; ; Roanoke, Virginia; Washington, D, C; Laurel.
Payne was honored by faculty, alumni and student body for twenty-five years of service to Savannah State College.
Joseph A Johnson of ihcInterdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta gave Lhe bacculaurate sermon.
The Savannah State College Library received the John Cotton Dana Award for an excellent library publicity program.
Anthony Sheffield one of the Tigers gun fire from the outside being defense by two of South Carolina Area Trade players.
By Jimmy Bennett Well, it's that time of year again at Savannah State for intramural basketball arid volleyball.
The i n t r a m u r :i I basketball loop will be compos^^d of eleven teams competing for hardwood honors.
Each other team in the league still has players from last season and will probably be vastly improved over last year, and competition for the title will be keen.
Richard M Coger became the first Savannah State student or graduate to be accepted as a Peace Corps volunteer.
Massie of the National Science Foundation was the commencement speaker.
H MTurner, pastor of the First Congregational Church in Savannah, delivered the baccaulaureate sermon.
The class presented a $50D check to the college's National Defense Student Loan Fund.
September The College began program of building and campus improvement.
Roads were re-surfaced; the Fine Arts Department moved to a renovated section of Hill Hall.
November College suffered loss of second professor in less than one month.
Homecoming was observed; parade, coronation, and other activities were rated as successful.
But one of the strangest gift5:i7ers of all flings open a door ir Sweden — throws in a gift — Ihen vanishes.
The gift, called the Julkapp, is done up in so ii'iany wrappings that it is hard to find.
Penney Company, ave more than 50,000 different kinds of gifts to choose from in department stores.
Penney's cliief toy buyer alone selects upwirds of 1,000 different toy and me items from which Penney stores select Christmas toy S'.ocks.
The red-clad figures who ring their clapper at shoppers have a real life model in the Turkish Bishop St, Nicholas, who devoted his life to charity and good works more than 1,600 years ago.
Nicholas unintentionally originated the custom of hanging stockings by the fireplace at Christmas time, St.
Nicholas knew of a poor and proud nobleman who had no dowry for his three daughters.
Nicholas peered in the nobleman's window, saw him fast asleep, and stealthily climbed the roof to Ihe chimney.
Here he pitched down three gold pieces, expecting they would land at the hearth at the nobleman's feet.
But one of the daughters had hung up a pair of stockings to dry and the gold pieces landed in the toe of one of tliem.
For a time — from 1642 to 1652 — the Puritans in England issued a series of ordinances forbidding church services and festivities on Christmas Day — as well as making plum puddings and mince pies.
And in America, because such celebrations had a heathen origin, the General Court of Massachusetts passed a law in 1659 making the observance of Christmas a penal offense.
In England, Christmas merriment returned with the restoration of the monarchy, in 1660.
Ben Grauer, Harry Hart, Eleanor Smith, and John Winterich — selected Mr Rosenstein from a group of 52 finalists nominated by college and university committees throughout the United States, The sponsors of the award anticipate even greater participation this following year because of new and expanded collections stimulated by the first award.
But in America, the zeal against ""heatlien customs"" persisted until the middle of the 19th century.
As late as 1856, Christmas was an ordinary working day in Boston, and often those who refused to come to work were dismissed.
In 1870. classes were held as usual on Christmas in public schools, and children who did not attend were severely punished.
But things began to brighten as more and more immigrants arrived, bringing with them their own special gift-givers.
A German colony had moved into Pennsylvania along with ""Cliristkindlein"" who was to be transformed into Kris Kringle, Swedish settlers brought a giftgiver descended from the old god Thor.
Clement C Moore bumped into a tiny, fat Dutchman with red cheeks and white hair.
Moore that the old Dutchman was the very image of St, Nicholas himself.
The modern flesh and blood Santa today, says Penney's. is usually equipped with an artificial beard made of yak's hair from Tibet.
But it was from the United States that he re-crossed the Atlantic, as Father Christmas in England and Pere Noel in France.
Xiiias Entertaining ent fountains on Christmas Eve wliile the midniglit church bells are ringing, and then runs to church, the future mate will be found standing on the church steps.
Though Christmas comes but cnce a year, in the Scandinavian countries it lingers for a long time; Jul, as it is known, lasts thirteen days.
The French prefer cakes shaped like a Yule log, frosted with chocolate to resemble the bark.
After Midnight Mass. families and friends gather to make merry all night and to partake of an enormous meal called ""reveillon,"" which features oysters, sausages and pancakes.
In some villages, a big party is given on Twelfth Night, and the king or queen of the evening is the lucky person who has found in his pastry a tiny doll, a bean, or a little wooden shoe.
Traditionally, the big Christmas visiting day in France Is January 6. when friends call on each other with gifts.
French children had already put out their shoes for Bonhomme Noel on Christmas Eve.
But if you think you have a lot of people dropping in during the Christmas season, consider the plight of some Mexican hostesses.
For each of the nine nights before Christmas, a man and woman dressed as Mary and Joseph lead a donkey from door to door, knocking for admittance, Each night they are refused at all but one home, which invites them in for supper and hospitality.
Remember that next time you invite the ""crowd"" over for a glass of Spanish sherry and some Christmas cheer.
The very ultimate In femininity and vogue is seen in the new French cuffs.
Christmas pins (holiday bells and flowers), As you've probably guessed by now, Santa's pack will be overflowing this Christmas with a million and one items for you, the fashion minded college coed.
SSC Choral Society IConliniteil jrom Piini' I) Sylvania, Mary Armstrong, a sophomore music major from Dublin, Beryl Cook.
Romona Marks, all freshman music majors from Savannah, and Mrs, Myra Thomas, a member of the Fine Arts faculty.
Staging for the performance was under the direction of Felix J Alexis, Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds; scenery.
In token of this fact, both farmers and their cattle fast the day before Christmas in parts of Germany — and then both enjoy a hearty meal.
As you sit down to Christmas dinner this year, give a thought to the ways in which foreign families spread good cheer.
Norwegians sit down to a gigantic Christmas breakfast with as many as 40 different kinds of hot and cold dishes.
In some districts of Portugal, even the ghosts look forward to Christmas.
For the Portuguese leave food on the table so that the spirits of the dead, if hungry, can share in the Christmas cheer.
But the Danes go to special pains to avoid one unwanted Christmas guest, the Shoemaker of Jerusalem.
According to the old Danish legend, Jesus rested at a shoemaker's door while on the road to Calvary.
Danish farmers make the sign of the cross over all their farm implements, lest, finding an unblessed corner, the Shoemaker sit down and rest, bringing bad luck to the farmer and his household.
Though so many of the world's Christmas customs sound exotic and strange to our ears, the fact Is that much of our own Christmas cheer has been imported from abroad.
This is true not only of the Christmas tree (from Germany} and the Christmas card lan English idea), but the ingredients of our holiday dinners and parties.
Turkey is a native American dish, but plum pudding and mince pie are English; so is the wassail bowl.
You might take a tip from Sir Walter Raleigh who developed Sack Posset as a Christmas drink.
Take 2 quarts of milk. ■\ cups of sugar, warm to scalding, add 4 beaten eggs yolks, and add one bottle of Oloroso type Spanish Sherry.
Another Spanish custom which might divert your holiday guests, but has yet to reach our shores, is the Urn of Fate.
The names of friends are placed in a large bowl and on Christmas Day each person draws the name of the one who shall be his best friend till next Christmas.
A large jar of earthenware, called a pinata, is filled with gifts and then hung from the celling of the house, or from a nearby tree.
Blindfolded children try to break the jar with a stick, and when someone succeeds, they all scramble for the candy, fruit and gifts inside.
Another ""swinging"" Christmas ritual, observed -in Switzerland, has to do with the selection of a future mate.
If any young boy or girl drinks from nine differOtis Cox, the President of Delta Eta Chapter Alpha Phi Alp Fraternity, congratulates Otis Mitchell for message delivered by hi on DcLcmber 6. 1962, for Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity.
WELCOME PRESS DELEGATES ^TIGERS ROAR SAVANNAH STATE COLLEGE SAVANNAH, GEORGIA Jt January, 1963 THE TIGER'S ROAR Volume 1>< Number -^ Andrew T Hatcher, Thompson, McClarrin To Visit During Press Institute According to Wilton C, Scott, Director of the Savannah State College Southern Regional School Press Institute, February 7-8, 1963 has been set aside for the annual affair.
Dow Jones & Company, Inc., will deliver the keynote address on Thursday, February 7 at 10:20, in WillcoxGymnasium.
CLYDE HALL ISPEAKS AT TOMPKINS Featuring a discussion on Industrial Arts in the Junior High School curriculum, Tompkins Junior High School teachers presented Dr.
Director of Technical Sciences, Savannah State College at the legular in-service workshop.
Before one can consider meeting the scientific and technical needs of Junior High School students, he must first be thoroughly aware of the student's real needs.
There is a need for teachers to be aware of the fact that there is a definite relationship between the Income of parents and the achievement of their cliildren in school as recorded by standardized tests, but this relationship does not necessarily hold true when it comes to Naiive ability.
Students should be made aware early in their educational program of the many scientific and technical jobs available to their group, so they can start pursuing the necessary courses to qualify for such jobs.
Industrial arts is designed to introduce to and provide an opportunity for students to understand our present day industrial complex which is run by electronics and automation, and financed heavily by the Defense Budget of the U, S Government.
Electricity, electronics, metals and drafting should be the key areas of an up-to-date Industrial arts program.
Civil Rights Commission will be the luncheon speaker on Friday, February 8. at 1:00 m.
Publishers THE WALL STREET JOURNAL and BARRON'S NATIONAL BUSINESS, AND FINANCIAL WEEKLY, who will serve as the keynote speaker on Thursday.
He will deliver the principal address at the public meeting in Meldrim Auditorium on Thursday, February 7 at 7:30 m.
Mr Hatcher is the first Negro to serve as Associate Press Secretary for the President of the United States.
Joseph Bradford, Information, United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, D C; S Joseph Ward.
Managing Director, Radio-TV Division, Esquire, Inc., Don Ferguson, General Manager.
Thelma Roundtree, Adviser to the Student Newspaper, Saint Augustine's College.
Lillie Allen Powell, Secretary, Public Relations, who will serve as assistant to the Director; Mrs.
Luetta C Milledge, Director of Dramatics, who is serving as Associate Director and co-ordinator.
Milledge are Mrs, Louise L Owens, assistant professor of English; Miss Mary Ella Clark, assistant professor of English; and Miss Albertha Boston, assistant professor of Business.
Assisting the Savannah State participants will be the staff of the SaAccording to members of the Freshman Class, the biggest event of the coming month will be the freshman talent show.
M.C'ing the talent-student affair will be James Sapp and Warren Williams.
Much talent has been discovered among the freshmen, and a great deal of it will be exhibited on the show.
Savannah State College, will be the consultant and main speaker at the Fourth Annual Workshop for Teachers of Social Studies in the state of South Carolina on February 7 at South Carolina State College.
The workshop is sponsored by the Division of Social Sciences, South Carolina State.
Andrew T, Hatcher, Associate Press Secretary to Hie President, win speak at the public mectiiig Thursday, February 7, at 7:30 m. vannah Morning News and Evening Press.
Collegiate Press Workshops, 4-H Club News Seminars, Community News Service Workshops, Radio and TV Workshops.
High School Publlcalton Workshop, one catch all — Metropolitan Newspaper Workshop, a Yearbook Division, Elementary Division, and a special seminar for Educational TV will be offered.
All publications must be mailed with a fee of $2,00 postmarked January 18 to be eligible for rating.
All participants are required to pay a registration fee of $1,50 which will entitle each participant to attend the Annual Luncheon on Friday, February 8.
So far, every team has been defeated at least once, which supports our prediction that competition would be unusually keen.
Directing the loop this year is Coach Richard ""Smiley"" Washington and Dr.
Raymond Hopson, head of the Physical Education and Recreation Department.
January 24. the Savannah Sta'e Colleije Chaiitcr of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society held its annual induction ceremonies.
StandniR m rear but not visible are the three students who were inducted.
In order to have enough class hours in this quarter. college officials had to add an extra day— the day that most students sleep late — Saturday.
THE TIGER'S ROAR January.63 ]i©a^®iiiii^iL Honor System Needed Here An article appeared recently in the Savannah Evening Press on the orRanizine of a honor system at one of the local high schools.
The honor system, as outlined, would curb or eliminate cheating on examinations by having. students to pledge complete honesty in the taking of tests, <2) students to consider it their duty to report to authorities whenever other students attempt to copy on tests or give out copies of stolen examinations for profit or favor.
Such a system should be organized here and at other educational institutions, because it is a known fact that American high school and college students have resorted to various dishonest practices in order to ""pass"" examinations.
Being such an institution, it is not surprising that a representable number of our students do ""got"" examinations.
This should be of vital concern to both faculty and student body because, If not checked, this malignancy could spread to such proportions that our rating system here would be invalidated.
It would tlien be possible for a dishonest ""honor"" graduate's record on a Job could be harmful to the reputation of the school.
While reaction to this editorial may be disfavorable on part of those guilty of these malpractices, it is the role of the school press to bring forth for all to see those things which are considered to be undesirable or harmful.
The Tiger's Roar is definitely and uncompromisingly against all such dishonesty and will campaign vigorously against this evil.
It Is almost unbelievable that instructors here are not aware of the situation.
We would like to see more precautionary measures taken by professors to safeguard the security of their tests, and some type of action by the sincere and honest students at this college to halt this assault on the integrity of our institution is long overdue.
This rationalized promise by which much of the injustices of today are explained away should be unequivocally dispelled.
The Emancipation Proclamation was indeed a step in the direction of ""Justice writ large"" but a far cry from unqualified justice.
Since Abe Lincoln set pen to that famous document of ""freedom"" the black man having stepped, ualks on, but he has walked on rugged grounds.
Blockades have been placed in his way, The roads have been revamped by the contractors and architects of bigotry and hate.
The Negro has trodded peacefully into towns where the stones, stakes, boiling oil and jeering wiiites awaited his arrival.
He has stopped at the back window of restaurants and for equal price, received scraps reserved for the dogs and the Negro.
The black man has had to rest in the scums of iast-class housing, along his way.
He has to take what was left after the feast, on that which his black hands planted, worked, picked, cooked and served.
The story of the Negro, since the Emancipation Proclamation, has certainly not been one of free flowing melody.
Too often, the story has been of desolation and long suffering; too often, it has been a story of detached and autonomous people in a nation claiming dedication to unity.
The laws and treaties espousing freedom and equality since 1863 have been numerous, and an equal number of them have been only ink filled scraps of paper; yet, the black man walks Converse to the scriptures, the black man is forced to make two steps to God's one.
Marvelous though, is and has been his ability to walk on when the road was all uphill.
Even more marvelous has been his ability to achieve recognition and merit when twice the effort, time and ingenuity of any other individual had to be put forth.
In the period since the Emancipation Proclamation, we have seen the black man, in spite of gross unfavorable odds, produce great men in every existing field — from syrup-making to surgery.
One would reasonably surmise that time alone (1863-19631 would have eradicated the American injustices and made for the realization of racial peace under the Emancipation Proclamation.
One would reason that in a one hundred-year lapse of time, slavery would be a memory, segregation dead and prejudice passed away.
To tliink this would certainly be a careless thought. as well as a thought in error.
Today there is a new Negro, There is a new hope and a new dignity, all encompassed with a new approach.
The barriers that stand before the new Negro must come down, never to rise again.
It is for certain that in this new day, the laws proclaiming justice must be either realized or scrapped.
Not for one minute more can political, economic and social injustices exist under the roof of democracy.
The new Negro demands that democracy be defined and practiced or scrapped and forgotten.
Simpson Says Research Centers Develop Around LJ ni versities By Veronica Owens The Editorial and Research Service published an editorial by Dr.
George L Simpson, Jr., the Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Simpson stipulated the plausibility of establishing research centers in the South He is quoted as stating, ""Before we can consider such research centers seriously, we must take a look at the factor most vital to their success , . . the men who staff those centers,"" He further contended that the research scientists that will automatically have to work at these centers are attracted to the metropolitan areas more than they are to small towns and communities.
Simpson attributed to the fact that in the metropolitan areas entertainment and speaking engagements are at a high level.
Also, in these areas a great deal of informal actviity where research shop talk and general intellectual discussions are held.
Preparing to Unlock Tomorrow's Doors Savannah State Faculty Puhlishes Research Bulletin By Elmer Thomas The annual Faculty Research Edition of the Savannah State College Bulletin was recently released by the college.
The bulletin contains articles on research as well as creative writings.
Inasmuch as this edition contains a wide variety of contributions, it is considered to be one of the best ever published.
Write a Letter to the Editor By James Robert Smith /Te look with joy for ihc dawn ol tomorrow Because we have done our best K'e have no regret, no remorse, or sorrow Accepting what fate has brought our way.
The uncharted juture we stand to treasure II we run with patience the race.
The dawn of tomorrow will be exciting if we dedicate ourselves to the task that lies ahead.
The student.s at Savannah State College represent an exciting hope for the futureHere are the future teachers, doctors, and lawyers.
Here are the scientists needed to light the way for future generations.
Here are the engineers who can translate the scientist's findings into productive machines and processes.
Here, in short, are the men and women whose minds, skills, and energies will adapt the treasures of the earth to the services of mankind tomorrow.
But, we do not have to be reminded that we live in a world of great tension and compression.
Certainly, if the past ten years area prologue to the future, we face difficult problems, revolutionary changes, and dynamic challenges as well as unsurpassed opportunities.
Culturally, the masses of the world are stirring with a rampant nationalism that is sweeping across entire continents.
Educationally, there is a passion for knowledge in the world today that never before in the history of civilization has been equaled, for free people know that it takes an educated population to remain free.
Politcilaly, we live in a divided world which is chiefly dominated by the split and fused atoms.
Economically, we are experiencing aggressive competition in our domestic and foreign markets.
In a time such as ours, we need outstanding men and women if we are going to meet the economic, political, and social challenges of our times.
Our critical shortage is for persons with the intellectual capacity and the qualities of character necessary to cope with such problems.
Two poems, ""Personality"" and ""The Portrait of a Word"" were written by Dr.
President Payne revealed that a letter of commendation on the liigh quality of the Bulletin was received from Dr, Harmon W, Caldwell.
Darnel H Dawson Exchange Editor Patricia Quarterman Typist Charlene Bright JANUARY CONTRIBUTING EDITORS Bobby L Hill James R Smith Veronica Owens Therman Thomas Samuel Truel ADVISORS Wilton C, Scott Robert Holt Miss Albertha E Boston PHOTOGRAPHER Robert Mobley 1MF.RC0I.LE&IATE PRESS COLUMBIA SCHOLASTIC PRESS ASSOCIATION ASSOCIATED COLLEGE PRESS ASSOCIATION Januan.63 THE TIGER'S ROAR Page 3 Savannah State Students Do Practice Teaching According to Mrs.
Dorothy C Hamilton, Assistant Professor of Education at Savannah State College and Co-ordinator of Student Teaching, the persons listed below have completed the professional education sequence and have been admitted to student teaching.
James Luten; Gussie Lee Copeland, Mrs, Eldora Greene, Moses Jackson, CLUB & CAMPUS ^ FASHIONS BY 0.
E SCHOEFFLER, esquire's Fashion Director Winter isn't really going to go on forever ... it just seems that way.
And by now. you've probably noticed some gaps in your coldweatJier wardrobe.
So, what better time to fill in those gaps . . . and to help you here is a review of this Winter's newest fashion ideas.
SUITS ON THE SCENE. ..this wintevoffer enough variety to suit any discernnig young man with ideas about fashion.
Dark blue unfinished worsted is your best bet for the basic, go-anywhere suit.
It's equal to all but the most formal after-dark occasions, as is dark gray sharkskin bird'seye worsted.
Pin stripes, especially in dark blues and bromis, are playing a successful revival this year, and are due for a long run.
The much more casual, soft muted glen plaids are most often seen on the fashion scene in light and dai'k tones of gray.
WINTER WEIGHTSAll wool material. or blends of wool and polyester fibers make for light^veight warmth in today's suits.
No matter what your great-aunt says, horse-blanket Winter weights just ai-en't necessary anymore, even for horse-blankets.
The silhouette of your new lightweight Winter suit is natural shoulder, with straighthanging, center-vented jackets remaining the rule.-button models are most popular with men on campus, and trim, tapered trousers, either belted or in the newei', self-belt variety, are all pleatless for a slimmer look.
SHORT SNAP STYLING — short snap-tab collars on dress shirts are the front-runners in fashion today, followed closely by buttondowns, both featuring barrel cuffs and button-back neckbands.
And both provide the right background for foulard and wool challis ties printed in soft, muted patterns.
DAY OUT. ..nothing cuts winter chin likeaflannel shirt, both for warmth and for warmly colorful good looks.
They're either all-wool or blends of either wool-and-cotton or wool-andpolyester fibers.
Oversized tartans and solid colors, classically styled with medium spread , collars, are standouts for comfort and good looks.
Shetland pullovers in heather tone mixtures or in vibrant colors are the hardy perennials of the pullover breed, and are always m fasliion.
But if you're looking for something new, try one of the new Tyrolean-influenced heavy-knits.
These lively patterned pullovers have V-necks that button up snugly against the Wintry winds.
Cardigans, now available in lighter-than-ever-weight yarns, are fast becoming year-round favorites.
Button one up against the icy blasts now, and get the bonus of casual good looks over your cotton sport shirts this Summer.
STRAYING FROM THE FOLD le liable to wind up in shearling jacket:or knee-length outercoats.
Handsome bulky stadium coats with shearling lining are this year's fashion pace-setters.
Cotton pile lining under smooth fabric shell is another fashionable way to fight frost.
Lightweight and warm, it features a zippered front and parka hood for extra protection and trim good looks.
RAIN MAY NOT HURT THE RHUBARB ...but it can dampen more than your spirits if you're not ready for it.
Florance Street School, Norman Elmore; Doris Marie Strange, Mrs, Leo Harris.
Elizabeth Smith; Eudora Moore Allen, Mrs, Thelma Lee, Sophronia Tompkins, James Luten; Dorothye Virginia Carter, Mrs, Dorothy U, Adams, Sol C Johnson, A Dwight; Delores Ann Clark, Mrs.
Christine Robinson, Sol C Johnson, A Dwight; Norman Benedict Elmore, Miss Geneva Young, Alfred E, Beach, O L, Douglass; Lawrence Hutchins, Gary Douglass, Alfred E, Beach High, O L, Douglass; Beauty Cornelia Poole, Mrs.
Sol C, Johnson, A, Dwight; Ethel Lacine Ross, Roger Jones, Sophronia Tompkins, J Luten; Eunice Veal, Mrs.
She spends part of her spare time as a charm instructor at the I'WCA in Savannah.
Sporls Coach Frazier\s Tlfiers Showing Improveweiit By Therman Thomas "" After a relatively slow start, Coach Al Frazier's youthful Tigers have picked up steam to bolster their season record to four wins against five setbacks.
The current edition of the Tigers is one of the tallest teams ever to don the Blue and Orange, Average player height is about 6' 2"", Although blessed with height, the squad is a bit lacking in the speed category.
In order to counteract this weakness, mentor Al Frazier changed his attack from the old run-and-shoot type of offense to a ball-control type of game.
The squad's attack is centered around Johnny Mathis, a towering 6' 4"" center.
Having not yet reached their mid-season form, the Tigers have the makings of a wellbalanced ball club.
Only three lettermen from the long-to-beremembered squad which achieved national recognition, are now playing varsity basketball at Savannah State. '-^***f Delores tlarke, senior mathematics major from Savannah, checks progress of Lillie Mae Simmons, a ninth grade student at Sol C Johnson High School in Savannah.
Delores is one of many student teachers doing intern work in various schools, mostly in the Savannah area.
As a member of the Delaware State Department of Public Instruction, School Librarian Certification Revision Committee.
He is a member of the Editorial Committee of the Savannah State College Research Bulletin.
The author of many articles in professional and national publications, he is the author of an article which appears m the current issue of COLLEGE AND RESEARCH LIBRARIES, This publication is the official journal of the Association of College and Research Libraries.
In addition an effort was made to access the role of the library staff in the process.
Page 4 THE TIGER'S ROAR January.63 Vieivs & Opinions Students Here Vote ""Pro"" On Birth Control Question By Darnel H, Dawson During the past few years the subject of birth control has caused much controversy.
A great deal has been said for and against birth control measures, with the sharpest reactions being posted by those who view the problem In a religious or moral light.
One eminent Catholic gynecologist who helped in the development of the pill said that "". . . the use of birth control pills for legitimate purposes Is completely moral,"" while on the contrary Catholic Church officiais say the pills may not be used for the prevention of conception.
They do. however, approve of the pill being used to prevent miscarriage and to promote fertility.
Today with the population of the world at the three billion mar\i and rising, birth control has become an International issue.
Statisticians say that by the year 2000, the earth's present population will double.
Josey was one of two Negro citizens appointed to the Board of Managers of the Savannah PulDlIc Library.
Eugene Gadsden, a local attorney and an alumnus of Savannah State, shares this historic honor with Mr Josey.
Mayor Malcolm Maclean recommended the appointment and City Council approved on Wednesday, December 19.
Josey was born in Norio\k, Virginia, and educated in the public schools of Portsmouth.
Something must be done to curb the present birth rate if the over-populated countries of the world are going to stabilize their economies, Already extensive birth control promotion is being carried out in countries with populations exceeding one blliion.
Our territory of Puerto Rico and the country of India are two of the areas where such measures are being used on a large scale.
Extension Service Facilities Outlined Among the many offices on the Savannah State College Campus is the one located on the second floor of Hill Hall.
Actually, though, it is not an office, but an agency composed of several offices, which form the Georgia Agricultural Extension Service for this area.
Augustus Hill, state agent in charge of the extension service, says that the agency offered various types of services of interest and benefit to both urban and rural citizens.
Farmers may receive free professional aid from the agents, who are trained In their specialty and are familiar with the latest techniques and developments in the field of agriculture.
Area farmers may have their soils tested and analyzed so that they can fertilize their land properly.
Help in such areas as insect and pest control, marketing, farm improvement and the prevention of soil erosion is al.so available.
The agents also can help solve social and economic problems like family budgeting, rural recreation, and personal problems whenever this type of assistance is sought.
Students in the junior high ; schools and the lower grades are I taught many skills and practices • which will be of benefit to them.
Many a successful housewife can give credit to a 4-H Club and a club worker for the acquisition of basic household skills.
The man I'm talking to is Mr Raymond Johnson, a retired mail carrier who lives in this small but neat cabin witli his wife.
As a matter of fact, this is the main reason he moved here from the city after he retired from the Post Office.
It was almost impossible to tell what thoughts Mr Johnson was entertaining, but I tell you I doubt that there is a more broadniinded' individual in tliis region.
However, one could be very easily fooled by his rather rural appearance and speech, but if you knew him like I know him, you'd agree that he is quite a person.
Evidently the old man hadn't lit the tobacco well the last time because it went out again.
He went through the same procedure as before, lighting the paper and then transferring the fire to his pipe.
Drop a word of cheer and kindness; in a minute you forget; But there's gladness still a swelling, and there's joy a-circling yet And you've rolled a wave of comfort whose sweet music can be heard Over miles and miles of water just by dropping one kind word,"" The horn honking outside was that of my brother who had stopped by to pick me up on his way home from his job at the forestry lookout station.
The seminar is being sponsored ijy the Division of Business Administration, Dr.
These discussions are held from time to time, and are attended by college seniors, business and professional people.
Persons who speak during the seminars are usually authorities on the topics being discussedjfeTIGERS ROAR SAVANNAH STATE COLLEGE SAVANNAH, GEORGIA February ■ March, 1963 THE TIGER'S ROAR IW^ Volume Tl, Number -yf MEV/S BRIEFS ~ Infill euza The flu epidemic, which has risen to serious proportions throughout the United States. has struck a number of students and faculty members here.
In less than a week after the general outbreak, the college infirmary had been filled to capacity with stricken dormitory students.
Owing largely to the quick action taken by the college doctor and nurse, the number of flu cases here have been kept at a minimum.
The Fraternity wishes to make it clear that this is not an Alpha project exclusively.
In fact, all able-bodied members of the college community are asked to donate blood.
Death Debaters and advisors examine plan of affirmative team after debate held here February 27.
The case for the establishment of such an economic community was presented by Clarence Holmes, first affirmative, and Prince Mcintosh, second affirmative.
The team supported its stand on the issue mostly on the grounds that such an economic community alledgedly Facts Revealed Concerning Credit Unions In an address on Thursday, February 14, at Savannah State.
James R Coats, Regional Representative of the Bm-eau of Federal Credit Unions.
He said that it took only five persons to start such an organization, provided that they all would have a common bondof association.
This association could be in the way of fraternal ties, membership in a labor union, a farm organization, a religious or church group, etcNot only is the membership requirement surprisingly small, but the fee charged members is only 25 cents.
The other basic requirement is that the members must all live in a well defined neighborhood, comunity, or rural district. would halt Communist expansion and would result in increased productivity and higher standards of living for all member nations.
Bobby Hill and James Brown convincingly submitted arguments branding the proposal, in Hill's words, as "". . , unworkable, unrealistic, and would create a host of new problems, Both teams exliibited a clearcut mastery of the topic under discussion, but most observers had to agree that the Savannah State team was both thorough in its knowledge of the case and brilliant with orations.
At 7:30m. on the same date, Mannie Roberts and Verlyn Bell debated South Carolina State College on the same topic.
The Savannah State Debating Society defeated South Carolina State in Columbia earlier during the season.
Blood Campaign Delta Eta Chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc. has announced plans to initiate a blood-donating campaign here at Savannah State College.
It has been revealed that the supply of blood in the city of Savannah is not up to a desirable level.
At a recent meeting, the brothers of Delta Eta Chapter voted unanimously to undertake this humanitarian project.
Johnnie Mae Hill, Budget Assistant, Savannah State College, died February 28 at her home.
Hill was a graduate of Savannah State College and had been employed at the college since January.48.
In June. 1962, upon the resignation of E A, Bertrand. she became Acting Comptroller until sickness made it impossible for her to serve.
She was a member of the First Bryan Baptist Church and the Keyboarders Secretarial Club, Savannah State College.
Etta Lee Smith, all of Savannah; father, Wesley Smith and grandfather, John A Smith of Washington.
D C. and an aunt, Mrs, Rosa Scott, Philadelpiiia, Pa, Religious Emphasis Week Observed On Campus Zetas Celebrate Finer Woiiiauhood Week Rho Beta Chapter of Zeta Plii Beta Sorority at Savannah State College observed Finer Womanhood Week February 28 to March 3.
Soror Georgia White, basileus of the chapter, presented the Anne W Jordan Memorial Prize to Louise Tarber, freshman girl with the highest average.
A special display of articles from Africa was exhibited through the courtesy of the many friends of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority.
Serving as general chairman of the activities was Miss Geraldlne Caesar, Savannah State College began its annual observance of Religious Emphasis Week on February 17 at 6 p,m, in Meldrim Auditorium during vesper services.
The speaker was Reverend E, P, Quarterman, pastor of the Second Baptist Church in Savannah.
Reverend Quarterman also served as Religious Consultant during the five-day celebration.
Rabbi Speaks Rabbi Solomon Starrels of Temple Mickve Israel in Savannah represented the Jewish Chautauqua Society as a lecturer on Thursday, February 21.
The Rabbi lectured at 10:20m. in Wilk'ox Gymnasium as a participant in the Religious Emphasis Week Program.
The Rabbi lectures on college campuses under the auspices of the Jewish Chautauqua Society, an organization which creates better understanding of Jews and Judaism through education.
Other Activities During Week Other activities throughout the week included a special AllCollege Assembly on Tuesday, February 19, in Meldrim Auditorium; Musical Interludes in Adams Hall, group singing and Prayer Meeting.
Savannah State Men^s Glee Clnb Presents Annual Spring Concert Leaves For Germany Mrs.
Lillie A, Powell, secretary in the Office of Public Relations for more than four years, recently resigned her position here to join her husband, Sgt.
Powell received the B.S. degree in Business Education in 1958 and was immediately employed as a clerk in the Office of Public Relations.
The Savannah State College Men's Glee Club under the direction of James Thompson, Jr., presented its annual spring concert, Sunday afternoon, March 3. in Meldrim Auditorium.
Accompanying the group was Roland Allison, famed choir leader and professor of music at St.
Choirs and voice students whom he has trained have appeared on niunerous coast-tocoast telecasts and broadcasts, and he has enjoyed a great degree of success as a choir director.
Also accompanying the Glee Club was Walter L Green, head record librarian at North Carolina State Sanatorium.
Mr Green is now, and has been for a number of years, a celebrated piano teacher and church organist in western North Carolina.
Green graduated from North Carolina College where he was an accompanist and assistant director of the North Carolina College Choir during his entire college career.
Though he is now head record librarian for the largest hospital of the North Carolina Sanatorium system, he devotes countless hours to his music and gains wide recognition for his work.
A specially arranged exchange program between the well-known Morehouse College Men's Glee Club and the Savannah State College Men's Glee Club have just been completed.
The Men's Glee Club has represented its Alma Mater for three years under Mr Thompson's directionIts selection of compositions involves those pieces which exort the full muscular quality of the male voice.
Iota Phi Lambda Celebrates 25tli Anniversary The Southern Regional Conference of Iota Phi Lambda Sorority will be held at Savannah State College.
This occasion will be highlighted with the celebration of Nu Chapter's 25th Anniversary.
According to Mrs, Thelma T Lee, President of Nu Chapter, the public program will be held Friday.
March 15. 8:00m., in Meldrim Auditorium, Savannah State College, Mrs, Ossie Ware Mitchell, the National President, from Birmingham, Alabama will be the speaker.
Alabama, Florida, Tennessee, and Georgia, Iota Phi Lambda Sorority was organized August 19.
Nu Chapter recognizes the responsibility of it^ organization to all worthwhile community efforts and makes contributions of time, needed articles and money to many programs.
Georgia Association for Retarded Children and Savannah Council of Church Women.
Learning among us has come to be regarded too much as a means of hnprovlng one's material comforts.
People do want money and are willing to work and to speculate In order to acquire wealth.
They crave entertainment and throng moving picture shows and Jazz palaces In the feverish pursuit of such ideal pleasure.
But beneath these hectic tendencies of the age there are more determined movements in the direction of the things that make for a sound mind In a sound body.
Poise — The ability to enter a room and to remain in it without feeling that your arms and legs are insecurely fastened and that your clothes are wrong, This is a valuable asset in any walk of life.
Voice Training — Everyone realizes the value of pleasant, welJ-modulated voice.
Spirit of Cooperation — The production of a play does not depend upon any one person, but upon everyone concerned, 4.
A Knowledge of Human Nature — There is no job where a knowledge of people is not of vital Importance.
The relation between employer and employee, between teacher and student, between parents and children depends on it, and one of the best ways to acquire it is by the study of character, motives, emotions, which is the foundation of all acting.
To put yourself into Juliet's place, to think her thoughts, and understand Juliet on the stage is to understand many Julletish qualities off stage.
Likewise, various other students at this college might give a detailed account of the value and necessity of teaching the correlated arts of music, dancing, language, and painting; but as each supplants the other, we will generalize by saying that an appreciation, a love and an understanding of the arts develops the individual's taste for better things in life.
To strive to go adventuring along unlcnown paths; to seek to make real a dream; to find the moaning of that wondrously patterened thing called life, these are desires which even live in the heart of man.
Ages ago, great souls felt its urge and went forth on pilgrimages, each to the shrine of his ideal.
And today, all over the world, those in whom the vision dwells, go forth in like manner, giving to the quest the added joy of fellowship.
Czechoslovakia, and raising the question of why they were allowed to speak at a Communist university and Communists were not allowed to even to debate at ours.
First, if there is any truth in what these ""extremists"" have to say. it is a grave error and contrary to the spirit of an academic institution to deny students the right to hear them.
Second, if the views of the extremists are untrue— a distinct possibility— UR students still are cheated by being denied the opportunity of hearing them out.
Besides, to label everything a Communist or Bircher says as untrue smacks of self-appointed infallibility and forfeit.s to the opponents of democracy many otherwise valid concepts.
In a letter to the OSU Daily Barometer, he says that every few months a major catastrophe strikes a large portion of liumanity — that fateful day shortly after finals when students suddenly are faced with reality.
After a term of sloughing, self delusionment and cramming, one suddenly discovers that a ""B"" in Success 1963 is hard to come by.
Immediately following the above rude awakening, honor student and flunky alike begin to make noises against our competlve grading system.
Their arguments are quite sound, but only if they are taken out of context with our society.
Life is one long series of competions. and it is because of this very competition that democracy can even exist.
Now, as every businessman knows, it is easier to compete and succeed against and equal than against something superior.
In order to compete in a field, a company must have well-qualified personnel.
In order to be an individual of that capacity we must be able to stand on our mining who is most qualified to do a job.
Grades give an Indication of willingness to work and willingness to accept at least some of the rules of society.
Grades, then, reflect not only intellectual ability but also the degree to which a person will apply this ability.
We should abandon protectionism and instead teach Johnny how to compete.
And, to those who say that it's not the grade that counts, it's what you learn.
Instead, let's abandon selfdelusion and go out and face that cruel, nasty world as it really is.
But the struggle to win social equality for all has not been completely won.
Millions of people still dream . . . still ask . . . still fight for the right to be treated as human beings.
I hope that the students and administration will take some action to this effect very soon, Therman Thomas.
Junior own feet and face the hard tasks that confront us with the attitude of coming out victorious.
We need young men and women who are well skilled to carry on government business and light the way to new formulas.
A person who steals his way through college by getting examinations will be the person who faces difficulty tomorrow.
He may graduate from college with honors because he has stolen his way through by cheating on examinations, but he will be the same person who is turned down on a job because of a low score on the test.
We should want to strive for honorable grades and also accomplish something from the class.
You may not see it now but your grades determine the kind of future ahead of you, I DARE YOU to attend class reguiraly, A person who comes to college to lay around in the dormitory all day is wasting his time and somebody's money.
A college student not only upholds his standards at school but he also upholds his standards wherever he goes.
Education is expensive, and it is left up to the individual to take advantage of his college career to make the best out of it.
The world is rapidly changing day by day and it is calling for men and women with the ability to think, read, write, and express themselves to cope with these accompanying changes.
To stop all Soviet shipments of offensive weapons from reaching Cuba, in late October President Kennedy ordered; A A total embargo.
B General Eisenhower refused to campaign for Republican candidates during the Cuban crisis.
D The party in control of Congress fared better than in any election since 1936.
Answers to these questions — and many others of interest to taxpayers — are given by the Council of State Chambers of Commerce in a critical analysis of the Administration's budget proposals for 1964.
The study was made In Washington by Eugene F Rinta, a noted fiscal analyst.
The ""one truly heartening"" feature in the budget — the ""recognition by President Kennedy and his administration that . . . significant reduction of individual and corporate rates is essential for the attainment of our growth potential"" — was found to be jeopardized by the size of the budget itself.
The expenditure estimate for 1964 is S98. billion— which exceeds the highest budget total during World War 11 (the $98. billion total of fiscal 1945 1.
The 1964 total is S4. billion above the current estimates for 1963, and SI 1. billion above the 1962 fiscal year which ended last June 30.
The Council analysis further notes that the 1964 expenditure total is 29 per cent above that of 1960, the last full budget year of the previous administration.
That represents an annual increase of $5. billion over the four years since 1960.
A cursory comparison of budgeted 1964 expenditures by functional categories with current estimates for 1963 might Indicate that the Defense and Space programs account for the entire increase of $4. billion.
But the Rlnta analysis discloses that many categories of nondefense expenditures show a further rise in spending beyond the sharp increases that have already been effected since 1960.
Congress voted to buy bonds to help pay for the U.N.'s special operations in the Middle East and in the Congo, 12.
In September, Great Britain was admitted to membership in the Common Market.
By January 1, 1963, California had become the nation's most populous stated.
In both major leagues, balloting for the 1962 Most Valuable Player narrowed down to a contest between a slugging outfielder and a peppery Inflelder.
A His poetry, full of strewed syllables but few capital letters, speaks of his romantic individualism.
B For 28 years, her book, The Joy of Cooking, has been the kitchen bible to legions of women.
C She wrote gracefully ghostly short stories and a popular volume of memoirs called Out of Africa.
D Symbol of The Netherlands' resistance to Nazi aggression during World War H, she abdicated her throne to her daughter in 1948 after reigning as Queen for fifty years.
E He gave to ihe world's largest auto-making firm the leadership of a supersdiesman and daring investor.
F Humanitarian, author, politician, and First Lady, she was admired through much of the world for two generations.
G He was the second-generation head of a backslage family that owned and ran the nation's biggest chain of legitimate theaters.
Answers Are on Page 6, Column 3 Murnace Coleman, freshman from Jacksonville, iierforms a creative dance on the Freshman Talent Show February 22.
The $1 billion drop anticipated in farm price supports Is largely accounted for by anticipated substantial sales in 1964 of cotton expected to be placed under price support in the current year.
An indicated reduction of $160 million In Rural Electrification Administration and Farmers Home Administration loan programs is almost wholly accounted for by a bookkeeping device.
A drop of $248 million in net postal service outlays Is accounted for by a lower postal deficit due to the full year effect in 1964 of postal rate increases approved last year.
Foreign economic and technical assistance shows a reduction of $145 million from 1963, but the fact is that these activities are being expanded by $278 million, or more than 10 per cent, (Continued on Page 5, Col.
Railroad handkerchief blouses are the things that complete the denim ensembles.
These two items, denim and the bright red blouses, are leading the casual fashion list this season.
POEM OF THE MONTH ""Ecstasy"" By Veronica Lynne Owens Two young lovers starry-eyed, there on a moonlit beach; Dreaming and oh, so satisfied. as If Heaven were In their reach.
As if by magic, music's heard that roaring waves couldn't even erase; Too filled with love to utter a word, they share their first embrace.
The ""fascinating rhythm"" gay. have both their souls possessed; The art of dancing they convey, as they whirl with unusual zest.
There they would come forever more, for they found eternal bliss; The atmosphere they did adore, and shared the splendor of their first kiss.
Dreamy-eyed they said good-bye, to this Paradise by the sea; For. obviously.
THE TIGER'S ROAR February ■ March, 1963 BEST DRESSED GIRL CONTESTANTS #>^ Vivian Brown.
Junior Artvella DoaiiCh, Sophomore r GLAIVIOIIK MAGA/IND, :i national women's fashion magazine, annually sponsors a contest to find the ten best-dressed co-eds on the campuses of American colleges and universities.
Candidates who win in local contests are entered into the national competition.
At left, Frankie Strickland, senior tailoring and dressmaking major, was chosen by a majority of students at Savannah State College who cast ballots in the election to be the best-dressed girl on campus, Frankie is from Darien, Georgia.
She participates in the Home Economics Club, the Girls' Glee Club, and enjoys sports and planning social affairs.
Since there were twelve candidates, and since the total number of votes received by Frankie Strickland and Lottie Shellman was so close to being equal, it was decided to have a special run-off the following day.
Xm. -'.""-. r-^y^-^ Lottie Shellman, Runner-Up The contestants were nominated by an all-college student committee composed of presidents and officers of the various student organizations on campus.
In addition to the eight candidates whose pictures appear on this page, there were four others.
They are Anna Cooper, Barbara Davis, Mattie Lattimore and Delores Wilson.
This year is the first year Savannah State has participated in the contest.
Gwendolyn Buchanan and Lottie Fussell served as chairman and co-chairman, respectively, of the contest.
Expenditures for the conduct of foreign affairs indicate a reduction of $50 million but this is more than accounted for by the absence in 1964 of a oneshot $100 million outlay for United Nations bonds in 1963.
According to Mr Rinta's analysis, the foregoing types of budget reductions would appear to provide a weak foundation on which to base increases in other nondefense activities with the claim, as stated in the President's budget message, that expenditures for purposes otlier than defense, space and interest are being held at the 1963 level.
The analysis further pointed to a substantial increase in the number of Federal civilian personnel.
In a period of three years and five months to the projected end of the 1964 budget year, the Coxmcil study noted that the Kennedy Administration will have increased Federal civilian employment by more than 229.000.
Analyst Rinta notes that the President's tax program places primary emphasis on rate reductions designed to increase demand and. thus, energize the economy.
On this basis a balanced budget could be expected within a year or two.
You may obtain a copy of the Council analysis by writing to the Council of State Chambers of Commerce.
Evaluation of Foreie:ii Student Programs Called For By Committee Leading educators today endorsed a call for U S. colleges and universities to re-examine the philosophy, objectives and operation of their foreign student programs.
The Committee on the Foreign Student in American Colleges and Universities issued a 26-page report telling the schools that they must, among other things, spend more money, cooperate more closely with governments and agencies which sponsor such students, and place international education ""into its proper perspective"" as a basic and essential part of their educational mission.
The urgency of the need to improve foreign student programs is underlined by the recent increase in the number of such students, the Committee stresses.
The schools must strive for greater cooperation among themselves and with governments, foundations, international organizations and other agencies which sponsor foreign students.
Admission policies must be revised to put emphasis on admitting those students whose basic objectives can be best served.
One consideration for admission, the Committee contends, should be the candidates' potential contributions to their countries' development.
The authors suggest that a regional cooperative basis for English training may be the answer in many cases.
Orientation programs for foreign students must not only help the student master the details of living on the American campus, but must also look to the longrange objective of exposing the student to American life to give him an understanding of social and political institutions and of the ""plurality and diversity"" within this country.
Closer cooperation between academic advising and personal counseling must be established. the report says.
Special guests participatinR on the Freshman T-ilent Show held February 22 were Nathaniel Watson, a sixth grader at Hodge Elementary School who imitated Jackie Gleason, and Melvin Watson, fifth grader who imitated Frank Fontaine.
Imagine finding yourself in a strange city of 120,000 people which has sprung up overnight on vacant land.
Imagine pushing your way through the crowded supermarkets, churches, and theaters to the city's outskirts — and finding that another city of 120.000 souls has sprung up during the four hours it took you to explore the first one.
Imagine walking through the second city to discover that a third mecca has sprung up before you could even reach the outskirts of the second.
New people are coming into the world faster than you could jostle your way through the crowded streets which contain them.
The answers to these questions would appear to lie in the rate of advancement we make In nutrition and In agricultural practices during the years aliend.
Recent work in nutrition Is resulting in many interesting new food products which should help feed tomorrow's buigeonlng population.
Among them Is flshflour, which neither tastes or smells like fish, yet has much food value.
In Nigeria press-cake — the residue left after oils have been taken out of seeds — provides nibblers with a tasty morsel made from peanuts.
In Guatemala City, the Institute of Nutrition for Central America has made a drink called Incaparina.
Incaparina. made of corn, sorghum, and cottonseed meal costs only three cents a glass — and equals three glasses of milk in nutrition.
Agricultural Advances Most Important Important as these nutritional gains are. however, the most significant contributions In meeting tomorrow's food needs will undoubtedly have to come from improved agricultural practies.
Americans are inclined to take for granted their natural resources, good health, and wholesome food as a part of their heritage.
Little thought is given to the constant battle taking place in the production of food and other resources and the protection of health from opposing natural forces— pests.
Pesticides are the important weapons used against insects, diseases, weeds and rodents in this struggle.
Scientists have recognized the importance of pesticides and have reported their conclusions.
It is difficult to realize that our forefathers suffered from famine and that many deaths were caused by pests in those early days.
As recently as 1874, grasshoppers caused damage so great In our Middle West that Congress called It a national disaster.
Insect-borne diseases and other pests destroy their food supply and threaten their health.
Great strides have been made during the past 50 years as a result of the use of a broad spectrum of pesticide chemicals and research Is in progress which promises even greater progress, according to Bear.
He cites the fact that many new developments are now underway and others are still but a gleam in scientists' eyes.
There are many plant diseases caused by viruses, and as yet there are no chemical means for controlling them.
Thus it seems feasible that controls for this purpose might be developed.
A chemical sterilent which would cause insects to lay Infertile eggs Is still another idea which it is believed might have merit in man's future battle to control farm pests.
Direct and capital grants to accredited colleges and universities represent only one phase of Gulf's Aid to Education program.
Other sections of the plan comprise Gulf Merit Scholarships to children of employees and annuitants; employee giftmatching to Independent, nontax supported colleges; departmental assistance grants; graduate fellowships; and faculty salary supplementation grants.
POPULATION ON THE RISE 1 BILLION ■"" 1830 2 BILLION ""> 1930 3 BILLION ""' 1965 4 BILLION ""' 1980 5 BILLION ""' 1990 6 BILLION '""2000 ^fi^MMMvH:,im The population boom can readily be seen In this illustration.
College men have taken the raincoat out of the strictly foul-weatheicalegoiy-nnd turned it into an allweather fashion.
Today's young man uses his versatile raincoat as an all-around, all-purpose coat.
If you're in the market for a new raincoat this Spring, you've got a lot to choose from.
The wurd for this year's raincoat Icngth.s is brcvity~~ they measure knee length at their longest, several inches shorter in the newest models.
Set-in sleeves are also on the scone, and fly-front button closures are the rule.
Mfi-st Spring raincoats arc fitted with highb:d collars and have slash pockets.
In some areas of the country, notably the East and West coasts, the continentrd influence is showing in raincoats with all-around or half belts.
BLACK AND WHITE CONTRAST-Most rainwear this Spring will be seen either in very dark or very light shades.
Black, dark olive and dark blue are the colors on the nether end of the rainwear spectrum, with light natural shades, off-white, and pale olive providing the bright spots.
A dressy jet-black is a smart bet if you've got a few formal occasions coming up.
But patterns are on the move in popularity, particularlyin muted plaids and checks.
They're soft, subdued patterns in contrast with the stark dark and light solids.
Colorful stripes are the keynote in the lightweight self-liner raincoats, and big bright plaid is the idea in heavier, ?.ip-in linings for Winter-Wear raincoats.
THE RAIN IN SPAIN. ..or anyplace else, for that matter, soaks through just about everything except the fabrics you'll find in the newest rainwear.
They're predominantly polyester and cotton blends, all cotton poplin and cotton twill, polyesters and wool combinations, and all-wool gabardines.
The important thing to you is that enormous strides have been made in water repellency and stain resistance, making the solid light colors practical and popular, FADED BLUE DENIM... is the big color in rain jackets this Spring.
Ideally casual for campus wear, they're zippered up against the weather, with plenty of room at the waist and oversized deep slash pockets in which to bury your hands.
Generally' they're plain-bottomed, but some have a parka-type drawstring below the waist.
Linings run from light cotton blends and laminated plaids bonded to the inside of the shell to deep fleece and quilts for extra warmth.
THE HOBO HAT. ..which we introduced in this column a few months ago, has made its mark in rainwear this Spring.
A simple cone of processed cotton, it reverses to a felt-like material for fairweather wear.
It can be turned, pulled, yanked and folded into any shape that suits you.
When you change your mind, change your hat, with a few twists of the wrist, SUITS FOR SPRING .. .is next month's feature, with a look at the newest in colors, cuts and fabrics for Spring and Summer of '63.
The group sang compositions by noted composers such as Tschaikowsky, Handel.
Featured among the compositions were the wellknown ""Gloria"" by Antonio Vivaldi sung in Latin.
Accompaniment was provided by a brass ensemble composed of Troy Hickman, trumpet; Kenneth Swindell, trumpet; Paul Johnson, trombone; and Melvin Washington, baritone, all from the Instrumental field of the department of music.
Student Councils Invited To Enter Contest The Annual Richard Welling Student Government Achievement Competition was established in 1957 by the National Self Government Committee.
The Competition is designed to give suitable recognition to outstanding student government activities at USNSA member schools.
The Competition was named in honor of Richard Welling '1858-1946), the founder of the National Self-Government Committee.
Through his work in municipal reform as a young man, Mr Welling developed a strong and continuing interest in student self-government.
How To Enter Entries must consist of a report on the program being submitted, plus supporting materials as may be helpful to the judges (pictures, press releases, letters, descriptive brocliures. etc.i.
The report should be typewritten on 8'^ X 11 white paper, double spaced, and contained in an appropriate binder.
Judging USNSA and the National SelfGovernment Committee, Inc. select a qualified panel of judges.
Baritones are Harvey Bryant, William Day, Lawrence Hutchins, James Newberry, Leroy Stanley and Willie Turner.
The $17,271 total is more than double the amount given the previous year.
Gulf Marketing Department representatives simultaneously will present the grants to presidents of the 34 institutions on February 20, Thirly-four Direct Grants The direct grants, awarded to the 34 institutions, are given by Gulf in an effort to improve the economic well-being of privately operated colleges and universities and to assist them in the preservation of their independence and operation.
M, K, Curry, Jr, Bishop College, Dallas Dr, John J Seabrook Huston-Tillotson College, Austin Dr.
The funds are distributed annually in accordance with a formula designed to promote a balanced educational program in each school and to encourage increased financial support by it.':. alumni.
Ratings ELEMENTARY NEWSPAPERS The Oglethorpe Reporter — Atlanta, Georgia Superior J, F Beavers — College Park.
Georgia Excellent JUNIOR HIGH NEWSPAPERS The Carver Mirror — Albany, Georgia Superior HIGH SCHOOL NEWSPAPERS— (Division Ai The Johnson Explorer — Sol C Johnson, Savannah Superior HIGH SCHOOL NEWSPAPERS— (Division Bi The Hornet — Lee Street School, Blackshear Excellent COLLEGE NEWSPAPERS The Pen — St, Augustine's College, Raleigh.
N, CSuperior HIGH SCHOOL YEARBOOKS The Atom Smasher — Sol C Johnson, Savannah Superior The Hamiltonian — Hamilton High School, Avondale Estates Superior The Wildcat — Price High, Atlanta, Georgia Excellent The Fairmontontan — Fairmont High School, Griffin, Ga.
Director Publications were evaluated and judged by the staff of the Savannah Morning News.
He was the valedictorian of his high school class, the salutatorian of his college class, and was graduated summa cum laude from law school.
Attorney Gadsden has been active in many civic and social organizations.
Containing 33 pages of regular 8ij"" X 11"" size, the booklet touches on several areas of mathematics and somewhat resembles a professional manuscript in that clear, concise graphic and verbal illustrations appear on each topic in a stepby-step order.
To undertake a project such as this would be quite easy, but to get the finished product ""off the press"" definitely requires certain amounts of sound-thinking and the employment of organizational skills on the part of the projecteers.
Payne. plaque and congratulations from PresiSavannah State College began celebrating its Sixteenth Annual Men's Festival on Friday.
The Men's Festival Committee voted to cast aside tradition in this year's program by beginning its activities on Friday instead of Sunday.
The activities began with the presentation of the Morehouse College Men's Glee Club, under the direction of Albert T, Perkins, on Friday in Meldrim Auditorium.
North Carolina, who spoke in observance of Religious Emphasis Day on Sunday, April 7 at 6:00 P M.. in Meldrim Auditorium.
Mr Osborne H Brown, Director of Public Relations and Field Consultant Underlines linpiirtinue ul Toroign Language luslrudiiin Herman F, Bostick, Foreign Language Consultant for the Georgia State Department of pleted, the idea of writing a book was conceived and it was agreed that the undertaking would be a Joint effort on the part of all members of the class, certain committees were formed.
The ""Thinking Committee"" was the core of the project, and its members were charged more or less with the responsibility of steering the undertaking through its various steps of development.
This was done by taking suggestions from class members at regular intervals and allowing them from time to appraise the progress of the entire effort as the work went along.
Of course there was typing to be done, proofs to be read, and records to be kept.
Sylvia E, Bowen. assistant professor of mathematics and the instructor of the functional math class last quarter, stated that she was very much impressed with the entire effort and was especially delighted by the way the students carried the project from start to finish with almost no outside help.
Speaking on an assembly program sponsored by the Department of Foreign Languages, Bostick pointed out that the Federal Government through the National Defense Education Act of 1958 has made provisions for 89 foreign language institutes in the V Sand abroad.
Bostick said that in the state of Georgia some 50,000 elementary school children are now learning foreign languages and this figure may double when the educational television station for the Savannah area goes on the airAccording to the speaker, not one of Georgia's three Negro state-supported colleges have been approved for a summer institute, Devices Not to Replace Teachers Commenting on the increase in the use of mechanical teaching devices, Mr Bostick stated Services, Albany State College, Albany.
Georgia, who spoke at the All-College Assembly for students and faculty April 11. which Is celebrated annually as Education Day.
MAN OF THE YEAR AWARD MADE Also presented at this hour was the coveted plaque designating as ""Man of the Year"" the student whose achievements and contributions to the school and community have been most significant.
This recognition is one of the major highlights of this annual celebration.
The aims of the Men's Festival are to promote finer manhood, help prepare men to shoulder the heavy responsibilities of a democratic society through participation In wotthwhile activities, and to help prepare men for leadership responsibilities throughout the world.
Second place went to Charles McMillan, a native of Savannah who Is majoring in mathematics here at Savannah State.
In order to win the award, the successful candidate must have received votes from three-fourths of the men voting.
The six men nominated to receive the award were Norman B Elmore, senior; Bobby Hill, senior; Lawrence Hutchins, senior; Leander Merritt, junior, and Charles McMillan, senior.
Final activity of the celebration was an evaluation luncheon-meeting in Adams Hall at noon Thursday, the 11th.
Payne, who served as Honorary Chairman; Bobby Hill, General Chairman; Otis G Cox, General Secretary, and Dean Nelson R Freeman, Faculty Adviser.
Group sang numbers in German during assembly program sponsored by Department of Modern Languages.
An attempt by the faculty advlaer of the Sixteenth Annual Men's Festival to free the election of the Man of The Year from the usual lobbying effects of various campus factions is certainly a step in the right direction.
In spite of these efforts it seems that the men still continued) to put fraternal ties above what is supposed to be the real purpose and objective of the yearly celebration.
From the outset, even within one hour after a policy of nonfratcrnallsm was called for by the adviser, the men proceeded to elect officers in a manner very much like what has thus far been the custom— along fraternal lines.
In view of the fact that the election of student council officers and campus queens will take place within a few weeks, we should be especially careful In seeing to it that the most qualified persons are nominated and elected.
One very strong advocate of the tactics used in campus politics during past elections defends the practice on grounds that his fraternal brothers are ""always most qualified""— otherwise they would not be backed by the rest of the brothers, He did not stop there, but went on to say that under no circumstance would he vote against his brother and completely dismissed the possibility of a candidate not in the clique of campus politics being more qualified than his brother.
Looking at the issue for what its worth, we find that the whole situation is something akin to the present-day and quite famous philosophy of one group which holds that the members of another group are always incompetent and unable to hold positions where different kinds of skills and abilities are necessary.
If there is one thing that campus politics at Savannah State needs, it is to be cleansed of nil such outside effects as the situation described in the preceding paraf;-aphs.
By Bobby L Hill The calibre of conversation that transpires within a group. state, or nation is a clear indicator of the character of tlie people within.
Conversation is an equal measure of intelligence, success, and potentiality.
The mere fact that college students spend more time among students than among instructors is a vote for the importance of high calibre conversation in student circles.
The discussion carried on by students while eating, resting, or waiting is of paramount importance in today's ""Push-button"" oriented world.
The value of tliis conversation is coupled with the value of your dollar, your futui-e, and even the degree received from Savannah State College.
At Savannah State College, one seeking an Educational and rewarding conversation by browsing in the library; sitting in the college center; or visiting in one of the dormitories, without doubt, bends an ear in vain.
Where negative effects are inevitable a best defense is knowledge of the problems.
To acquire this important knowledge, one must read, study, and exchange ideas.
This ""idea exchange"" is best facilitated by informal discussion or conversation with those of equal or greater knowledge.
Savannah State College students have an urgent and collective obligation to alter, change, and shift their modes of conversation.
No longer can fruitless gab passing across the table tops in the ''Rec"" degrade and devalue the entire institution.
We cannot afford to discuss trivial issues when pertinent ones govern our very existence.
Instructors, students, and organizations must raise and answer the question.
STAFF FOR THIS ISSUE Veronica Owens — Darnell Dawson — Alvin Watkins ADVISORS Wilton C Scott Robert Holtt Miss Albertha E, Boston PHOTOGRAPHER Robert Mobley INTERCOLLEGIATE PRESS COLUMBfA SCHOLASTIC PRESS ASSOCIATION ASSOCIATED COLLEGE PRESS ASSOCIATION Aufuil 21.
GADSDEN HONORED (Coxhmir^l Iron, l'„n,I I which Mr Gadsden is associated are the American Bar Association and the Southeastern Lawyers Association in which he serves as a member of the Executive Board.
Mr, Gadsden was the first chairman of the Political Guidance Committee, a group which has successfully given direction to the Negro ballot in Chatham County.
He has run for office on two occasions — in 1962 for the Chatham County Democratic Executive Committee at which time he polled approximately 10.000 votes, and in 1963 for State Senator from the Third District of Georgia at which time he polled slightly more than 8,000 votes.
He is married to the former Miss Ida Jenkins of Savannah They have two cliildren — a daughter.
FOREIGN LANGUAGE lC.ml„„n;l Iron, Pagf I) that instructors will not be replaced by mechanical devices in spite of the many advantages to which these instruments can be used.
In addition to these four schools, he lias attended Middlebury College Language School.
QUIPS By Gwendolyn Buchannan For three days the girls wait for the night of the big dance featuring the famous jazz band.
Their escorts arrive and they can hardly wait to get on the dance floor.
One reason they put men's faces on money is that women are satisfied just to get their hands on it.
In a conversation out of class, one can't get in a word for the person who has an answer for every question, knows about everything and is always right.
About the subject matter in class, this very person knows nothing and hears nothing.
A student gets in line with about twelve students ahead of him to register.
When he finally reaches the window after standing for approximately a half hour, the window is closed.
President Is Seekiii«>; National Service Corps 'From the Peace Corps Volunteer) Designed to Serve Community Needs in the United States The formation of a national service corps to meet pressing American social needs has been recommended by President Kennedy.
Response Predicted Findings of the task force indicate tliat American citizens — from college students to retired persons — would respond to a call to increase the potency of volunteer-service organizations.
Like the Peace Corps Volunteers abroad, national service corpsmen would go only to communities to which they had been invited.
These communities would be expected to plan and organize support programs which would ultimately release corpsmen for service elsewhere The age minimum for national service corpsmen would be 18, They would serve for one year, with an option to sign up for a second.
Interest in inviting service corpsmen has come from several sources, among them.
Gallup Poll Report The Gallup Poll recently reported that 62 per cent of persons questioned on the issue believed that Congress should make funds available for a national service corps.
I have heard and I am sure you have too. many undesirable things that your fellow students are planning to do during our forthcoming election period to make it everything but successful.
We must learn now that we, as college students, can participate in an election without slinging mud and maligning those who are running for office.
Would On a 50-MHv HiktRaymond Johnson Gives Connnents On Atheism and Religions Faith By Elmer Thomas I was tired and I'm sure he was too after the long walk up to Sheppard's Lake.
Raymond Johnson sat down, took off his shoes, and paused for a minute to rest his weary feet.
While sitting there the sparkling water on the lake caught his attention, then his eyes moved about from the trees in bloom in an easterly direction, toward the clearing in the trees where the Sun was about to rise.
Yes sir, many great minds have pondered over the question of whether or not somebody's up there pulling the strings or not.
Some say that he started the wheels to turning and then left the whole thing alone.
Yes. those who for some reason or another say that this all began with an accident — no String-Puller — no Regulatorjust a long chain of actions and reactions stemming from some physical occurance eons of centuries ago.
To illustrate my point, suppose I was a gangster by profession, and I am just casually walking around in the bank building.
It seems that after I 'size up the situation' I might or might not decide to rob the place.
In fact it seems that there would be an endless number of things I might decide to do— maybe even apply for a loan.
Just then a turtle appeared from behind a tree and moved along past us.
Mr Johnson picked up an old bottomless tin tub and encircled the creature.
If you answer in the negative, then, I am confident that no one else would either.
So. this month during our college-wide election period, let's do everything humanly possible to make this the cleanest and most fruitful election in the liistory of Savannah State College.
Students remember to vote for the candidates by their qualifications and not for biased and maligned reasons.
If your friends are in contention for the office of Student Council President or ""Miss Savannah State College"" and you don't think they are qualified, cast your all-important ballot for the persons whom you feel will represent you and project the college's image in the best possible manner at all times.
No definite answer can be given to that question, of course, but it does appear that collegians are pretty resilient.
James Frltschcl, during a recent convocation program performed Frank Tlrro's ""An American Jazz Mass."" a work wlilch takes the classical liturgy of the church and puts It In a jnzz idiom.
Few convocations, including an appearance of a member of the Russian Embassy, caused as much comment and discussion.
In fact, there was so much stir that college convo officials decided to get a sampling of student opinion.
A questionnaire was drawn up and handed out at random to about a tenth of the 1,130 student body.
In it, three alternatives were offered and students were asked to check A Touch of All Artist Work of Tompkins High Students Impressive to Intern Teacher By Veronica Lynne Owens The nation's high school classrooms of today are literally bubbling over with budding and original talent.
One In particular that is noted for its outstanding Wolverine football team, is currently proving that talent at their school is not an ephemeral attribute.
During this Spring season at Tompkins High School, visible evidence can be seen of a ""touch of an artist"" at work.
A modest male student presently enrolled at the school is certainly indicative of the preceding classic phrase.
This is mainly true because he draws with the skill, depth and insight of a professionally trained artist even though he is young in years.
Even a cursory glance at some of his work reveals that his lines, dimensions and profiles have method in their arrangement.
And above all, his specialty seems to be accentuation and intricate detailing.
Consequently, valid evidence of his specialty may be seen in an attractive English Literature bulletin board display in one of his classes.
The eye-catching bulletin board depicts some of the leading characters in The Canterbury Tales venturing to their destination, Tabard Inn, The display is sketched in cutout form and each character seems to be animate and able to communicate with the viewers.
However, this young man's originality and uniqueness, by no means climaxes with his drawing ability.
This fact is exemplifited by his original and quite appropriate bulletin board title.
It is apparent that with each passing year this young man's ability In art has become refined and polished like a fine jewel.
Calvin Cloud proji-Lt, CHEMISTRY CAREER DAY One hundred and twenty high school students attended the Chemistry Career Day program sponsored by the chemistry department on March 22, Chemistry Career Day was designed to acquaint high school seniors with the many opportunities available in the field of chemistry.
Leander Merritt, John Kight, Ida Dukes and Theresa Smart, all chemistry majors, spoke briefly to the visitors on what the department had to offer, jobs in one and to add any remarks they wished.
As music it is alright, but as an aid to worship It contributes little or nothing; 2, I'm all for it.
However, it repeated too often it would not only become meaningless, but even monotonous because of the same rhythm, tones, etc.."" the same criticism frequently leveled against present forms of ritual.
Of the 67 colleges who checked number one. only one felt the ""Mass"" was sacrilegious.
Many agreed that It could be used only on special occasions or that it would be a long time before churches would accept it.
A few of those who indicated they were all for the new liturgy also had some reservations, but the majority felt it had something new to say; something important to add to the worship experience.
More than one-third of the nation's publicly supported community junior colleges are found in three states — Florida, California and Texas.
Most of the privately supported ones are located in eastern and southern states.
Private junior colleges in the South usually place major emphasis on academic courses with little or no emphasis on terminal programs.
They are dependent on income from tuition, contributions and endowments.
Public junior community colleges should include terminal, technical, vocational programs and many kinds of adult education and community services.
Community colleges, if available in the South, could offer opportunities for post-high school education to students of all types who will or can not attend college away from home.
There is conclusive evidence that the percentage of high school graduates who continue their education is much larger in communities where community colleges are located than in those where they are not. research and other areas, and also on various topics related to different areas of chemistry.
Career Day ended with a tour of the chemistry department by the seniors, after which they were served lunch In the school cafeteria.
Nearly one hundred students from thirteen African countries have now left Bulgaria according to the latest figures compiled by the Coordinating Secretariat of National Unions of Students, the administrative agency of the International Student Conference.
The students left as a result of racial discrimination, poor living conditions and the Bulgarian government's refusal to allow the formation of an AllAfrican Students' Union lAASU) in the country.
These include 28 from Ghana, 23 from Kenya, 7 from Ethiopia, 2 from Guinea, one each from Angola, South West Africa.
Tunisia and Zanzibar and at least 11 from Nigeria, 6 from Somalia, 5 from Togo, 4 from Niger and 3 from Mall.
Unconfirmed reports Indicate that 3 students from Algeria have left as well.
A number of other students are reliably reported to wish to leave, providing arrangements can be made for their departures.
However, at times, they are in disputed fervor over exactly where you coeds' waistlines should be.
But, there is one new faslilon item that they all agree is fabulous and provocative.
That highfashion item just happens to b^^ the sassy, swirly, dream-of-a ""Shift"" that you've heard so mucli about.
Well, it is because It has the distinction of being one of the most attractive, comfortable and durable garments introduced this Spring, Fashionably speaking, tlie new ""Shift"" is the answer to every female's prayer.
Just tlilnk of it, , , The easy, flowing lines of the ""Shift"" make it possible for it to be worn by all figures and heights.
This group is composed of flare, wrap around skirts complete with narrow sashes to flatter your waistiinesThe ""Shift"" dress is designed mainly for leisure, casual and street wear.
Adding to the fashion appeal of this swingy, new garmet Is the kaleidoscopic color sclieme from which you have to select.
It may be purchased in such leading fabrics as seersucker, denim, poplin, hopsacking. sailcloth, terrycloth. linen, twill, gingham. cord and synthetic blends.
Most of them aro cut in the famous A-line that accentuates and complement.s youthful figures.
This new look in the casual skirt has invaded college campu.ses everywhere and caught on like wild fire.
Other outstanding features of these skirts are tlie self-belts, slim, leather belts and narrow, matching cords.
In addition to being attractive on tlie outside, the wrap-around skirt also features hidden beauty.
Tlijs merely means that some of the skirts are lined with bright cotton material.
They also feature a minimum of buttons that don't quite make it to the hemline.
To complete the casual outfit, however, pert and smart little blouses have been introduced.
They feature the soft convertible collar and cuffed, three-quarter length sleeves.
Those are the perfect ingredients for all of you coeds to blend to achieve a supreme delight in the fashion world this Spring.
N, J— A recruiting drive for future college teachers culminated today in the award of first year Woodrow Wilson Fellowships to 1,475 college students and honorable mention to 1,154 others.
Each Fellowship covers tuition and fees for the first year at the graduate school of the Fellow's choice, plus a stipend of $1,500 and dependency allowances.
Sir Hugh Taylor, president of the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, said in making the announcement.
Norman B Elmore, SSC Senior Englisii Major, received ""Honorable Mention"" in this year's competition.
Toward that end we have chosen candidates who can meet the foreign language requirements of their graduate schools, ""All these winners— the largest number we have selected in any one year thus far — were chosen as 'good bets' for college teaching.
We hope they will follow that career, yet we do not hold them to such a firm commitment.
We ask only that they Elementary rurrieuluai Class kMtm ODtlined The Seminar in Elementary Curriculum is a course designed to acquaint the students with ideas, methods, and techniques used in teaching the Language Arts, Social Studies, Arithmetic, and Science in the elementary school.
The picture below shows a group of students, in the Seminar in Elementary Curriculum class, dramatizing an excerpt from the adventures of Robin Hood.
This Project was one of six planned by the students under the direction of the instructor to acquaint the students with various types of children's literature to enable the prospective elementary school teachers to teach the Language Arts more effectively.
Also, to help the students develop more knowledge and skill in the Language Arts area, the students are doing creative writings and developing poetry files.
In order that the students may develop more knowledge and skills in all phases of the course, the students pretend that they are actually a faculty.
Their classroom appears to be one that may be actually found in an elementary school.
Of course the faculty has inservice teachers' meetings wherein all of the teachers, at different grade levels, compete in presenting materials in a unique fashion to their colleagues.
These presentations are based on extensive reading and research in each of the four phases of the course.
The student,s in Education 341, under the guidance of the instructor, Mrs.
In order that those winning honorable mention may be chosen to receive alternate awards from universities or other sources, their names are now being circulated among the graduate schools of the United States and Canada.
Dissertation Fellowships to former Woodrow Wilson Fellows in the Humanities and Social Sciences who give evidence they can complete requirements for the Ph.D. in four years or less.
Eberle stated that the members of the Regulations Commitee were very anxious for ""... procedures be changed to provide for new and unifying campus political alignments,"" He also stated that the members of the committee would be glad to assist in any way possible if such assistance was desired.
As an individual, Dr, Eberle said that he intended , . , to recommend to the Regulations Committee, to the administration, and to the faculty that student elections be abolished unless there is immediate drastic improvement in the carrying out of elections and until such time as there is good evidence that the students are carrying out successfully these self-governing activities."" i ""ADVENTURES OF RUBIN HOOll From left to right.
Harold Taylor, former president of Sarah Lawrence College, on Sunday afternoon.
Taylor first became interested in experimental education and in the modern educational ideas with which he later became identified at Sarah Lawrence College.
During the McCarthy period he was a vigorous leader in the fight for the freedom of universities and teachers, and throughout his career has taken a prominent role in the struggle against racial and religious intolerance.
He has consistently tried out his educational ideas in practice, both in the classroom, in the Wisconsin and Sarah Lawrence student bodies, and in the community.
His articles, speeches and television appearances have received national attention and have dealt with the major political and social controversies of his generation.
While administering Sarah Lawrence College and increasing the range of its educational experiments — in music, theater and dance, in graduate education, teacher preparation, children's theater and music, adult education and foreign studies — he remained closely in touch, as a teacher, not only with the students and faculty at Sarah Lawrence College, but with students and scholars in every part of the United States and many foreign countries.
After serving for fourteen years as the President of Sarah Lawrence College, Dr.
Taylor retired from his post in August 195D to devote himself once more to teaching and writing.
Sin:e then he has travelled in Asia and Russia under a special grant from the Ford Foundation to confer with political leaders, intellectuals, educators, students, artists and writers about the Asian countriesSince his return to this country.
Taylor has been lecturing at colleges and universities and writing tv/o books, Art and Education and Education and Social Chang^e, and is conducting a study of the feasibility of founding a world university.
He is a trustee of the Putney School and of the Institute for International Order, chairman of the National Research Council on Peace Strategy, a dii-ector of the Peace Research Institute in Washington and vice chairman of the National Committee to Support the Public Schiols.
Taylor's lecture will be entitled, ""Reading, Writing and Thinking,"" RADIO DRAMA FEATURED On Wednesday, April 24, the library will present an original, one act thirty minute radio drama over Radio Station WSOK, from 11:30m. to 12:00 noon.
This radio play, ""'Let Freedom Ring."" was written especially for this occasion by Mrs.
Luetta Colvin Milledge, Assistant Professor of English at Savannah State College.
Kobirii.i U.-bh, Laordice Winfrey, Ma.xinc Koseberrv, and Jeunnetlc (irccn.
Another first place award was received for stories of the college that appeared In local, state and national publications.
The college received a second place in the printed magazine category for Its general information bulletin.
Elmer Thomas, student newspaper editor; Miss Veronica Owens, associate editor of the student yearbook; and Wilton C Scott, public relations director and publications advisor, who was one of the resource persons counseling student editors at the scholastic press meet.
A great i)art of the success '<\ ihi irniu.il M.ns Festival activities at Savannah State held recently can be attributed to the eiqht i;cnlleincn jnilured above.
Glee Club On Eastern Tour The Savannah State College Men's Glee Club is currently on a tour of cities on the eastern seaboard.
The singers will be in concert in Durham, North Carolina, Washington, D C, Atlantic City, New Jersey, Chester, Pennsylvania.
Montclair, New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, and Wilmington, North Carolina. magazines.
She directs the College Playhouse at Savannah State College and has presented several original productions on campus and in surrounding communities.
CONVOCATION On Thursday, April 25, the annual National Library Week Convocation will be held at the all-college assembly.
SPECIAL CAMUS EXHIBIT A Special exhibition on the work of the French writer.
Albert Camus, who won the Nobel Prize for his writings in 1957, will be featured.
The first part includes 27 books and one pamphlet in French, by Camus; the second part consists of seven panels containing manuscript pages of LA CHUTE, which is the property of the author's estate; and the third part includes 10 panels of photographs depicting the life of Camus.
The average college man wheels around in slacks and sports jackets every day and most nights.
With Spring definitely in the air, and young men's fancies starting to wheel and deal, let's take a look at suits on the Spring nntl Summer scene, WELCOME BACK TO LINEN— nebounding in fashion importance this Spring is the llax suit — natural linen in natural shades.
Most of these classic warm-weather suits are cut on natural shoulder lines, with straight-hanging jackets, narrow notched lapels, center vents and, naturally, tapered trousers.
The natural, neutral tones of linen will go anywhere you go — in style — and they're a natural fr.r dress-up wear straight through Spring and Summer.
BLUES BLOW COOL— colors are dark this Spring, headlined by blues and blue-grays in sharkskins and muted plaids with deep casts.
You'll also spot some dark blue unfinished worsted, lightweight flannels and serges for those definitely dress-up. after-dark occasions.
They're light, including blends of worsteds and polyesters that are comfortable, porous and dressy, The accent is on light, cool, comfortable fit for the warm weather months ahead.
This traditicnal hot-weather-wear feature has usually been seen in the traditional seersucker white and light-colored stripes, But new deep and dark stripes and lighttoned seersucker plaids are on the scene for the first time this year, and they're a good bet to steal the ""how.
PICKING UP THE TAB-Way out m front in dress-shirt popularity with young men is the snap-tab collar.
Gleaming white broadcloth shirts, with barrel cuffs and tabbed collars, are your best bet for dress-up occasions.
Less formal are white oxford tab collars and medium-spread collar white oxford button-downs, both with barrel cuffs.
TIEING IT UP — No young man's wardrobe is complete without a spread of regimental stripes on his tie rack — they're right for any occasion, short of a formal dinner.
For a change of pace, and for wear with your new widestriped shirts, take a look at the narrow solid knits that are returning to fashion favor, THE ONE-MAN COMBO ...is not the name of a swinging jazz solo, but a chie to the return of another fashion concept — matching and related tie and handkerchief sets.
You can choose a related color breast pocket handkerchief, picking up one of the colors in your tie — or take your cue from the new Continental matching sets that duplicate-the designs, both stripes and figures, in both the tie and handkerchief.
GEniNG TO THE BOTTOM OF THINGS ...is the.qukkest ».iy to find out what's news in shoes.
Mocassin design, with a moderate wing-tip, is the most popular model, and jet-black is the perfect underpinning for this Spring's black, dark gray and dark blue suits.
ON TOP OF THE FASHION NEWS. ..for Spring and Summer is new lightweight headgear.
Intermediate to dark shades of gray and olive will coordinate with your new Spring tailored wear.
Nearly needless to say, your hat completes the picture of the well-dressed young man, particulaVly so on any dress-up occasion.
THE SPRING SPORTSWEAR SCENE. ..is ti,6 subject for next month's column.
We'll take a look at the news in Sport Jackets, Slack-s, Sport Shirts and Sport Ilats.
The DePauw student government said that the $2,500 came entirely from individual student donations, and had been raised in student dormitories, nfter NSA sent out an appeal to its member schools to raise money for the African students.
NSA officers expressed profound approval at the DePauw student government's efforts, NSA International Commission officers telegraphed their thanks to the DePauw student government for the fund-raising effort.
The Coordinating Secretariat of National Unions of Students iCOSEC), administrative arm of the International Student Conference — of which NSA is a founding member — told CPS that many African students have been brought out of Bulgaria as soon as sufficient travel money is available.
NSA is forwarding money collected on American campuses to COSEC to underwrite the travel costs of the students, who eventually will be placed in American and Western European universities.
The angry students gathered in front of the Bulgarian Ministry of Educaton. blocking traffic, until they were forcibly dispersed by police, with many injuries to the students.
Three days later, on February 13, the first wave of 17 students, all from Ghana, arrived in Vienna from Sofia, complaining State Industrial Education Convention Attended By Coordinating Committee The Savannah State College Coordinating Committee, along with other committees from various sections of Georgia, attended the Fourteenth Annual Convention of the Georgia Youth Industrial Education Association.
The convention was held at the George Washington Carver Vocational Technical School In Atlanta, Georgia.
In the spring of each year a two-day conference is held to discuss information pertinent to Vocational Education.
Trade Contests; Thursday evening.:30-8:00, the first delegate assembly, Jessie that they had been subjected to racial discrimination and excessive political indoctrination.
Boyd, State President, Georgia Youth Industrial Education Association, was the speaker; Friday morning, second general assembly.
Theory Examinations, Oratorical and Essay Contests; Friday afternoon, delegate assembly, election of officers.
The members of the Savannah State College Coordinating Committee are Eddie Btvins, Chairman; Clyde W Hall, Robert Pindar, Charles Philson, Frank Tharpe, Eugene Jackson.
College ill Ohio to Begin Adniittiug High School Graduates as Sophomores ject already learned,"" the Rev.
This program, he said, was more than Advanced Placement, in the accepted sense.
O — College-bound high school students whose scores on standard tests indicate they have a superior knowledge of certain subject matter may hereafter waive up to five freshman courses and be admitted to sophomore classes at the College of Steubenville.
The tests involved are the Advanced Placement Tests and the Achievement Tests of the College Entrance Examination Board, Normally, achievement tests are given in a number of subjects.
For the present those which may earn a waiver of a freshman course at the College are English, mathematics, modern language, biology, physics, chemistry and history.
The College has been a cooperating institution in the Advanced Placement Program since 1960, However, because it is available to so few students, the present program — which seems more all-embracing — was proposed and accepted.
Any student who is freed of the demand to take a freshman course will be admitted into a course on the sophomore level.
The student still must meet the number of hours demanded for graduation but will take additional courses later in his junior and senior years to compensate for the freshman courses waived.
Choice of the subject to be studied and the area of interest will be made by the student.
Alpha Kappa Mu National Honor Society, Savannah State College, attended the society's twenty-fifth national convention held at Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College, Prairie View.
Elson K Williams, faculty advisor and director of Region V Elmore completed a year's term as a national officer and Dr.
Cruse, Miss Moss, and Mr Clemmons were also very active participants at the various sessions of the convention.
To help fill out a void in the teachers' backgrounds, in subject matter, so that they may begin an advanced degree program, at some graduate school without having so many undergraduate prerequisites to take.
II) hold a bachelor's degree, and be employed as a teacher of chemistry or general science, grades 7-12.
I2) have taught and/or held bachelor's degrees for at least three years show apparent ability to secure sufficient benefits from the Institute.
Expenses Costs of tuition and travel for participants selected will be borne by the National Science Foundation.
Roberts Receives Assistant Prineipalship Launey F Roberts, Jr.. teacher, Chatham County School System, since September, 1959 assigned, Tompkins Elementary School was recently appointed to Assistant Principal of the John W Hubert Junior High School, Savannah.
While pursuing his MA Degree, Mr, Roberts' formal education was being enriched through the variety of Dates Classes will be conducted on Saturdays from 8:30m. to 12:00m. on the college campus.
Couree Offerings Chemistry 200— Physical Laws of Chemistry — This course concerns itself with laws that include matter and its structure, mass energy, the states of matter, solutions, homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibris. the periodic table, and inorganice nonmenclature.
Lab experiments and problems that illustrate the application of these laws are stressed.
Lab experiments and problems that illustrate these principles are stressed.
Problems and lab experiments related to --the course work are emphasizedN, All applications should be completed and returned by August 15, 1963.
Charles Pratt, director, Inservice Institute in Chemistry, Savannah State College, Savannah, Georgia. experiences peculiar to a classroom situation.
He is enrolled in a program of studies geared for advanced educational administration which includes a workshop that commenced in June for a duration of nine weeks.
GTEA, CCTA, Mid-town Toastmasters Club; AF of M, Local 704; and a member of Palen Methodist Church, Savannah.
Mr Roberts is married to the former Harriet L Harris of Savannah, who is also a graduate of Savannah State College.
Roberts, having been conferred the baccalaureate degree, 1960, is employed with the Chatham County Department of Family and Children Services as a Public Welfare Worker, Mr and Mrs.
Siiiiiiiier Workshops ProoTPssiiig The Savannah State College Division of Technical Science, which is rated as an excellent center, reports that its six point summer program is in full swing.
Engineering Drawing Workshop; Electric Motor Rewinding Workshop; Machine Tool Operation Workshop; Electronic Workshop; In-service class, ""Modern Techniques of Evaluation,"" and Annual Workshop for Trades and Industrial Education teachers.
The workshop in engineering The machine tool operation drawing consists of a study in workshop involves the operation basic drafting instruments and equipment, geometrical construction and multiview projection.
Drafting room practice is provided for each participant, either the use of drafting machines and convention T-squares and triangles.
The electric motor rewinding workshop offers experiences in electrical magnetism and the construction and repairing of split phase motors.
Each student is required to completely rewind at least two electrical motors.
The first All-College Assembly was held in Meldrim Auditorium on June 13.
This uniqueness, he went on to say, was bound up in the fact that many of the students were in-service teachers.
Payne congratulated them for making the decision to attend the summer session.
This is a good sign, he said, because the times Indicate that education is challenged.
Payne in his introduction as an experienced teacher and an administrator.
Straight turning, taper turning and thread cutting are the basic operations covered.
Each student is provided with a lathe so that he can perform all operations individually.
Special Program Starting July 22 through August 9. the Savannah State College Division of Technical Sciences, with the Philco Corporation and Georgia Division of Vocational Education, will hold an Electronic Workshop for in-service teachers of post high school electronics.
The class will be taught by a representative of the Philco Corporation using the Philco TechRep Equipment and system.
Assisting the Philco representative will be Mr, W H, Sullivan, Electronic Engineer of division's staff.
The electronic laboratory in the technical science center will be utilized.
Concurrently, there will be an in-service class for trade and industrial education teachers entitled, ""Modern Techniques of Evaluation,"" The course will be concerned with the administration and use of standardized achievement tests, as well as the construction of teacher-made objective tests.
Column 1} faculty and parents packed into the gymnasium to witness these exercises with President William K, Payne, presiding.
Before the commencement address, speaking for the Board of Regents was its chairman, James A, Dunlap.
Mr Dunlap outlined a five-point improvement program for Savannah State College which he stated would cost an excess of $1 million.
In his address, Mr Solms pointed out that Georgia has made great strides in education in the past decade and said that even greater strides are expected in the future.
Economics, Athens; Bessie Samuel, Elementary Education, Savannah; Norman B, Elmore, English, Savannah; and Ernest B, Brunson, Building Construction Technology, Savannah.
The College is proud to have a person of such high academic qualifications, Dr, Warsi Is a native of Gorakhpur, India, He received his high school education at M, G, College, his bachelor of science degree at St.
Warsi received the highest marks In mathematics throughout his high school and university experiences.
He has done research in topology differential geometry and abstract algebra.
He has written three papers for publication and has several articles pending publication.
President, Savannah State College, announced Friday that the fall quarter at Savannah State College will begin on September 16.
The orientation period for Freshmen will extend from September 16 through September 20, Returning students will report on September 19 for physical examinations.
Although steps have been taken to expand housing and teaching facilities at the College, these additional facilities — a new dormitory for women, a new classroom building and the completion of physical education accommodations in Wiley Gymnasium — will not be available for use at the beginning of the fall quarter.
It is urgent therefore that beginning students and returning students who wish dormitory accommodations, complete arrangements for dormitory space as early as possible.
Puge 8, Column 4) Page 2 THE TIGER'S ROAR Summer.63 ll©a^(DI^lI^lL IF^(§I1 Attitndinal Expression Ihe Tiger's Hoar Slalf PETER JOHN BAKER Edltor-ln-Chlcf Assistant Editor Andrew Russell Layout Manager William Haglns Managing Editor Levern Carter Circulation Manager BC Carswell, Jr.
Tlio TlBti'i 1 il<r To 1 Ollieo a\ Snonnnli, Couigl . imilFT Tionllilr by h< .luJfi be oblBinc by »iii Tlaf>'» , Savann 1i, GcDicia.
MY KIND OF DEMOCRACY By William D Hagins It is evident tiiat the American Negro is tired of being denied first-class cltlzcnsiilp.
The recent demonstrations that have developed throughout the South, give evidence that the Negro no longer can accept being treated as second-class citizens.
We use the term ""new Negro,"" because the Negro of today is determined to obtain the rights which were granted him one hundred years ago by the Emancipation Proclamation.
The Negro's reasons are quite simple; his philosophy is even more concise.
His reasons are that he wants to take his place in an American society as a person who con share the responsibility of a democracy.
Next, he wants to show tlio world that he can do more than play ball, sing, or dance.
I can be a leader in politics, scientific research, and other aspects of human endeavors.
The Negro's philosophy is that, he is an American citizen, and he desires to live in a country which his forefather fought and died in every major American war.
Just recenlly President Kennedy sent a Civil Rights Bill to Congress, stating why discrimination in America must cease.
This will mark the Ilrst time in many years that a President of the United States has spoken so boldly against discrimination, and it appears that he int^ends to do something about it.
Now it is up to the men in Congress to show to America and to the world tliat they are persons who believe in the Constitution of the United States, and that tliey believe In the fact that a person cannot be judged by the color of his skin, but only by his merits.
EDITORIAL Pour years ago when I left SSC, I carried with me a reservoir of unforgettable memories, knowing that I was leaving a place with memories beyond measures.
With tlie passing of just four years upon my return, it seems as though it has been a decade.
When I enrolled for the summer session, the whole student body, to me. had changed.
I would surmise— and I grant you— that the students enrolled here are of the same nature I was four years ago; but they have failed to look Into the mirror of life and time and to see themselves, I ask you to check your attitudes, dispositions, and most of all your responsibilities; the impressions that you give Tiere will be lasting ones.
The attitudes displayed during the course of some such conversations leave an impression of dismay.
I have assumed that we all chose to study within the walls of SSC; I did.
And, if we do not utilize the good that is within her to destroy the bad that is without her. the bad without win inevitably destroy the good within.
It is possible that the all inclusive answer — if it were given — would be purely subjectivism.
I feel, the pessimistic viewers should examine their conscious, analyze their quality traits before unjustly imposing the entire responsibility on SSC, Everyone is not willing to assume responsibilities, and it is easier to cite the inadequacies of others rather than admit selfdeficiencies.
Savannah State College could not be guilty of all the litigation attributed to her stead.
It may appear that I am trying to defend SSC, If you think I am, then, and only then is it true.
But. this feeling of defense is peculiar to ail defenders of iMotheri SSC; therefore, this is food for thought in that it shows respect for the counsel.
I find it difficult actually to believe that some of us are aware of our attitudes — certainly not the injustices — imposed on our defenseless Alma Mater.
It is time for us to think earnestly about our position in relationship with our Alma Mater, especially what we say.
I am, in plainer words, a bundle of prejudices — made up of likings and dislikings— the veriest thrall to sympathies, apathies, antipathies.
If SSC were as Charles Lamb , she would haxe exacted the preceding quote thereby proclaiming the ill effects of such a bundle of prejudices.
She has to withstand the veriest thrall of sympathies, apathies, and antipathies.
Examine your present status in life and proportionately cite the environments wherein preparations for each flight were made.
I can agree, there are unfavorable features about our Alma Mater; I can name a few, but such is true in any school, college or university.
Therefore, it is a challenge to discover what makes the misgivings here with SSC more controversial than those compared with another institution of higher learning.
It has to be the humanity of a controversial nature that infiltrates the walls of SSC It is evident that such a negative attitude towards SSC is not widespread, and I sincerely feel that the few of us guilty of this should examine our conscious.
Idle gossip does not seek to rectify any irregularities in our college program.
When some few of us seek to downgrade the status of SSC, we are serving a like injustice to ourselves, I am curious to know how we manage to pursue a course of academic studies towards a baccalaureate degree and not maintain a sense ot loyalty towards the institution conferring such degrees.
There has been no survey to determine the extent of such attitudes of referral; however.
Nevertheless, this can not go unnoticed, and I feel everyone associated with Savannah State College should become more conscious of the descriptive representation presented.
If one comes to SSC with nothing, does nothing while here, he should expect to leave with nothing.
She is often evaluated by those not qualified to evaluate, degraded for having opened her arms to receive those seeking to receive more than they will ever be able to contribute, SSC is limited when it comes to performmg academic miracles; this is expecting too much.
Many years SSC has failed to recruit the better athletes due to the lack of finances.
SSC. in some instances, is able to get good athletes but is unable to keep them.
We have b een getting players from states as far away as Ohio, Indiana.
For the last few years athletes at SSC have not received what they had anticipated while attending school.
The athletes that will come here in September, and. in all probability, they will work hard to build a good team, and as soon as the season is over they have to start worrying and wondering about funds which will enable them to complete a full academic school year.
It is a bad reflection on the college as a whole, when players from other schools hold a conversation with our players, they are too embarrassed to talk about the situation.
The school recruits these athletes from other cities and states, and promises are made that are not kept.
After they get here, they find that it is different, especially after the season is over.
The writer has known athletes that have had to leave the college, because they owed the college a great deal of money, when they were supposed to have been receiving a grant-in-aid.
During the years of 1959-63, SSC lias had a successful basketball team.
The team has participated in many tournaments and came out as champions, but for some reason or another, the players seem to be confronted with the same problem of having to stay in school.
The state doesn't appropriate funds for athletic programs and other extra-curricular purposes, therefore, the school has to depend on the alumni association and other cliaritable organizations for their support.
The people of the community and a large number of the students have lost interest in the atliletic program.
They claim that the teams lose too many games for them to ""waste"" their ""money"" and ""time"" to come out to see a ""losing team"" play ball.
It will be a long time before SSC's Athletic Program advances to a status that will challenge its competitors, if the athletic program continues to receive this kind of support.
Summer.63 THE TIGER'S ROAR Dep£ Professor Leroy Brown, instructor in metal work, demonstrates the operation of the dial test indicator.
The dial indicator Is graduated to read thousandths of an inch so that practically any required degree of accuracy may be obtained.
The indicator is also used to check alignments, amount of concavity, wobble of material, centering and many other uses.
Leander Cannick, Levern Carter, Aberdeen Allen, and Professor Brown, demonstrator.
Advanced Electricity, Metal Work In jartnient of Engineering Technology By Levern Carter The Department of Engineering Technology, under the direction of Dr.
Clyde W Hall, offers for the first session Engineering Drawing, Advanced Electricity, and Advanced Metal Work.
Each student is required to engage in drafting room practices, which will include experiences in each of the above-stated instructional areas of the course.
Sol C, Johnson High School, Savannah; Willie Simmons, instructor, Harralson County Consolidated School.
Advanced Electricity, under the direction of Professor Leroy Brown, is designed to enable the students to get an understanding of AC and DC electric motor principles, circuity, and construction; to check service and rewind fractional horse-power motors, and to learn and practice safe work habits of the electrical industry.
Upon completion, it is hoped that the students will have a working knowledge of the outlined content.
Sol C Johnson, Savannah; Selton Daniels, industrial art education, Eatonton, and William L Simmons, instructor.
Theodore Pittman, industrial art education, Blakely; Leander Cannick, industrial art education, Savannah and George E Lovette, industrial art education.
By Levern Carter Savannah State College, Division of Technical Science, in co-operation with the Georgia State Division of Vocational Education, is sponsoring an electronics workshop from July 22 through August 9.
A specialist — to be named later from the headquarters* instructional staff of the Philco Corporation—will be in charge of the workshop.
Classes will be held in the college's modern electronics laboratoryPersons attending this workshop will receive five quarter hours' credit for this experience.
An Explosion into the Future."""" opened Saturday, June 22. at the Savannah State College Library.
It will continue through July 12, The Phelps-Stokes Fund is the sponsor of this exhibition, which is based on a seven-year survey.
The show is being circulated under the auspices of the Smitlisonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service.
Kimble, who resigned as director of the American Geographical Society to undertake the study.
He drew upon contributions from 46 specialists and scholars and himself visited Africa many times during the course of the project.
Westerners can no longer afford to ignore these changes since Africa now occupies a pivotal role in the future of the world.
Tropical Africa is a mosaic of tribes and tongues, of cultures, societies ajad nations.
Within Its borders lives herder and hunter, cultivator and fisherman, miner, manufacturer and trader, and the followers of every other art and calling.
While most of these people still belong to an antique world, almost all of them now know there is another word and, from time to time, make excursions into it.
The political map may show 40 or so clean-cut pieces, but there is nothing all-of-a-piece about the lives lived by the people in any one of them.
Charles Pratt, Head Department of Chemistry and Professor of Savannah State CollegeThis award is to assist Dr.
Pratt in his study of the ISOLATION OF FLAYONOL GLYCOSIDES BY PAPER ELECTROPHORESIS Dr, Shapley. in making this announcement, stated ""Sigma XI and RESA each year makes a number of grants to the most promising scientist at critical points in their research careers.
These two organizations with a combined active membership of 90,000 scientists jointly sponsor eight national lectureships, publish the AMERICAN SCIENTIST, and are currently making annual awards in support of research totaling $75,000.
In his opening statement, Mr Wells noted that the~e were three revolutions taking place in the world presently.
The present demonstrations in America by Negroes have been referred to by some writers as the Fourth American Revolution.
The demonstrations now being conducted by Negroes in America are full of religion, music, philosophy, and discipline, he stated.
Wells, assisted by Mr Robert Mobley of the SSC Audio Visual Aids Department, showed a series of slides on Africa, The pictures ranged from those of Jomo Kenyata — to the Silent Ancient Pyramids of Egypt.
Wells discussed a list of 25 test questions every Negro should know about Africa.
This test covered the areas of history, culture, economics, and some general information.
Willie G Tucker, Associate Professor of Chemistry at s,i\ ,iiiii,iii si,iti.
Cuenter Schwarz and Leandi r Miniil how a deionizing column works in the analysis of proh-in r\lr,irls.
The research program is directed by Dr, Charles Pratt, Head of the Department, assisted by two senior students, Leander Merritt and Carnell West.
The aim of the program is to establish the Amino Acid sequence of protein found in cottonseed.
The approach taken is by a derivative of the protein by reacting the terminal amino acid, which is then identified.
Repetitions of this procedure should lead to the complete identification of the protein, Dr, Schawrz found the research project very Interesting, and spent some tour hours questioning Meritt and West about some of Its details.
Schwarz felt that the rcsearcli project Is well on its way and was very optimistic about Its future development.
Workshops Outing Is Enjoyable The Elementary and Secondary Workshops enjoyed an evening of fun dancing and entertainment on July 2, from 7:30 to 11:00m. at Saul's Place on Wilmington Island.
It consisted of shrimps, fish, crabs, hush puppies, cole slaw, and ice tea.
The Workshoppers can truthfully say that the evening of July 2, 1963 was an unforgetable one.
The paper was concerned with flavonold compounds found in Spanlsli Moss.
Credit was given as his senior research project, a requirement for all chemistry majors before graduatlofl.
The project was sponsored by the National Science Foundation for Undergraduate Research and by the Research Corporation.
Savannah State College YMCA, W, K, Payne Chemical Society, and Alpha Kappa Mu Tutorial Society.
The Wall Street fellowships were awarded to Scott on the basis of his work with the high school press institute of Savannah State College, the latter grant was awarded to him on the basis of his general publicity and publications work on the collegiate level.
Scott is public relations director, Georgia Teachers and Education Association.
Illinois and the American Alumni Council workshop for editors of alumni publications tn Atlanta, Georgia.
THK TiGEirS ROAR Summer1963 SAVANNAH STATE md James Hawkim, B, HUMAN HELAC PRACTICING PIANO SCALEso B Giimilev, and Haiel Scotl.
D E, DEMONSTRATION GROUP— Fior ts, Heolure R MaU.ird, Mrs Evella S, Brown, and Mis.
Virginia Robin ANNUAL BUSINESS EXHIBIT— A scene from thc^ Filth Annual Busincii eriali and Methods ol Teaching Business Subjects in Ihc Division ol Busiplt 10 righl. back tow; Dr, J L, Wilson, oniof Ihe judges, and Mrs, Marjoi Bobbie F Williams and Jacqulyn Ryan.
Eogcnc Johnson, and Johnnie bers of School Libraiy Adminislralion and Organization CIhss following ptesenlation ol drama, ""School ind Present,' 1.
J SIBLINGS-Ernesline and Willie Julia Adams, a set of siblings at SSC's 8»lh CommencemenI ENereises, I Godlrey, Geoigia.
Willie Simmons, Leandoi Cannick, Adolphus Williams, Willie Nell Wiighl, Shellon Daniels.
Heniy Porler, Carolyn Porter, Floiino Boles, Elease David, Annie O Ruisell, and Willie Bell Johnson.
Hall oKpkins la in-service lencheig and rcgulai students Ihc technical drawing.
Both sisters received the B.S. degree in Elementary Educ^ 'School Libraries— Past and Present,"" which was presented by the students in the School Library Administration ii Organization Class, Thursday, June 2<t.
R ANNUAL BUSINESS EXHIBIT— Some members of the class, Materials and Methods ol Teaching Business Subjects, judge scrapbooks and piojecls.
Rear, standing; Evelyn Robinson, Jerry Mims, and Jacqulyn Ryan, S Paul Russell listens while Mrs.
Louise L Owens, Assistant Prolessoi ol languages and Literature, operates the audiometer — one of the machines used in the Reading Workshop T SCENE l—Showing the life process ol animals and plants.
Betty Smith, Hose Richardson, Thomasine H Burnett, and Deloros W Phoenix.
Beatrice Ketterer Wilson, Mildred L Ellison, James Hawkins, Ellen Dorris Sellers, Enmaline Maddox, Grace Wnghl, and Lee Bertha Wilson.
Marie Butler and Alberta Wilder in a class of Art Appreciation with Mis.
W K, Payne recently met with a group of IV-II graduates who held a Iwenly-yeai reunion.
Page 6 THE TIGER'S ROAR Summer.63 Summer Work§hop Tcchiiical ScicHces Personality ;rrf Irom f-.^r 1) Annual Trade and Industrial Education Workshop Starting August 12 through August 16. the college will be host for the annual Trade and Industrial Education Workshop.
Trade and Industrial Education Teacher Training, will direct this workshop.
This workshop will be concerned with the Youth Program of the GYEA and the Measurement of Student Achievement in T & I Situations.
First Engineering Technology Graduates Receive Appointmcnls Ernest B Brunson and Willie M Wllkerson. the first graduates under the engineering technology program, have each been notified of appointments starting June 24 and July 5, respectively, Brunson of Savannah, confirmation of appointment came from the Board of U, S Civil Service Examiners.
Louis, Missouri, stating that he had been selected for careerconditional appointment to the position of Chartographer, with a rating of GS-7 and a salary of S5540 per annum.
He will attend a six month chartographer training course and upon its satisfactory completion will be assigned as a chartographer.
Willie M, Wllkerson of Naylor, received an appointment with the Peace Corps.
After the termination of his training period, Wllkerson will be assigned to Cameroon In West Africa.
Both graduates majored in Building Construction Technology, Fashion Flares By Emma J Freer Fashions this summer have a carefree air in and out of the classroom.
Your fashion writer for this feature found it nice and interesting to be back on home grounds again After being on campus for three weeks.
Styles are fun and they are fine for some people, but not always for you.
The comfortable, casual shiftlike silhouette is the highlight of summer fashion; however, I understand the gents are not happy to have us In ""sacks"" again.
Lightweight is the key word as well as a variety of colors and textures.
This may sound strange, but his lines are more slim and silhouette than the females.
Girls, we haven't said anything about accessories, which is a must in every wardrobe.
LOVE TRUTH, BUT PARDON ERROR By Levern Carter Willie N, Wright, a native of Dublin, Georgia, received his elementary and secondary education in that city.
On June 2, 1958, a Bachelor of Science Degree was conferred upon him from Savannah State College In the Area of Industrial Education.
His teaching career had its be^_ . ginning at Haralson County Consolidated School, in Waco, Georgia, While at Haralson County Consolidated School he successfully set up the Industrial Arts Program whore technical drawing and general woodwork were taught.
In September.59 Mr Wright wa somployed by the Chatham County Board of Education to teach at Sol C Johnson High School.
At Johnson, he began the Brick Laying Shop which he has taught for four years.
For the school year 1962-63 Mr Wright served as chairman of his department where technical drawing, woodworking and brick laying are offered.
Wrighl His leisure time is spent in general house repair and cabinet making, both of which he hopes to pursue as a career.
In general house repair, his favorite is converting old style houses and designing them into modern structures with a minimum cost.
Mr Wright is an affiliant with the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity and serves as a member of the Board of Directors at the Frank Callen Boys Club.
Mr Wright is married to the former Miss Shirley Thomas, a 1958 graduate of Savannah State College and is the father of two lovely children, Dariu.s, two years, and Katrina Felicia, one year.
He is refreshing himself in the Division of Technical Science by taking Technical Drawing and Advance Electricity.
Library Students Present Drama By Vivian L Pressley The Library Science Class 301, School Administration and Organization presented an assembly program June 27. in Meldrim auditorium.
The purpose of this program was to acquaint school administrators, in-service teachers, and students with the services of school libraries.
This was done by contrasting past libraries with libraries of today in a short skit consisting of two scenes.
Scene I depicted a library of the past which emphasized limited materials, facilities, and activities.
Scene II showed a library of today with emphasis on a variety of activities, freedom of movement and extensive use of books, audio-visual aids, and other materials.
Modern Mathematics is not a required course for Mathematics majors; however, many of them along with many teachers have seen a need for taking this course.
However, in the world today it Is almost impossible to get along with the knowledge of mathematics as it was taught a few years ago.
In an effort to keep up with other nations in the world a new approach to arithmetic was necessary.
A modern arithmetic program introduces materials earlier than was previously thought possible or advisable in our schools.
The Members of the ""Mathematics 400"" class found the above, very important reasons to take a look at ""Modem Mathematics, Areas covered includes.
Introduction to Sets, Sentences and Solution Sets, Working With Real Numbers, Graphing On the Number Line, Venn Diactram Ordered Pairs and Lattices and Operations on Sets to name a few.
There are some who seem to feel that ""Modern Mathematics"" isn't really ""new"" at all— that the vocabulary and symbols are what is ""new"" about it and the early introduction of mathematical terms.
The modern approach to mathematics at this writing has not been accepted by some 'including states) and probably some never will see its need.
These are the people who will be caught in the changing of time, inability to put the old into a ""new"" setting.
SEERSUCKER COMES ON STRONG .-.snin ihis year it's ths Casey Stengel of sportswear fabrics — a hardy perennial whose cool, clean-cut look guarantees that you'll look the same.
Look for seersuckers •with bold new striping ranging from just under half-an-inch to anywhere in the medium range — it's a sure sign of '63.
Slacks and jackets, shirts and walk-shorts — all will turn up in the traditional seersucker pin-striped pattern as lyeH, in blues, greys And browns ■with white.
Available in blends of cotton and polyester iibers, these new glen-plaid seersucker shirts and jackets are most striking in black-and-white or brown-and-white combinations.
Let your conscience — and your budget^be your guide I THE ""LOOK OF LINEN"" moves to ths fore in fabrics, to let you take the rough ""with the smooth in your sportswear.
Natural tan is the most popular color, -with light blues and olive in place and show position.
You'll find these textured fabrics in crisply tailored jackets, slacks, sport shirts and ""walk-shorts.
Intrepid spirits on the fashion front will like ihe new ]inen-look jacket of bold, blazer stripes to jazz up an otherwise conservative wardrube.
MADRAS HAS THE INDIAN SIGN • — East Indian, that is — on Spring and Summer sportswear again this year.
This brilliant plaid is doing business at the same old stand, adding a colorful note to jackets, shirts and walk-shorts.
The stoppress news in Madras is that it now comes in bigger, bolder plaids and lighter backgrounds to make a new fashion point.
GOOD GUYS AND BAD GUYS both ulll go for the neWWeslemstyle"" sportswear— e\'en if the only thing waiting in the corral l3 a convertible.
The steady eye can pick this trend out of the crowd, %vith its yoke-front and contrasting border stitching.
Made of denim and denim-type fabrics, these sport shirts and slacka aid styled with the lean, narrow, action look.
FASHION UNDERFOOT emphasizes the casual, comfortable look of the slip-on, with the moccasin leading in popularity.
The canvas-topped deck shoe with rubber sole is no longer a purely practical shoe for sports.
And there's a new color in the cards — besides the standard white and navy blue, this year's models come in a natural hemp color with a rough weave — the ""Linen Look"" mentioned earlier.
This Guide is an indispensable aid in selecting your college wardrobe, with pointers on what's new and what's going to be now, tips on the care and feeding of clothes, what to wear with what, and all the important guide-lines to the image you'll v/ant to project next fall.
World College Organized With 24 UN Countries^ Sponsored By Qnakers An experimental world college, organized in cooperation with twenty-four member countries of the United Nations, will be in session this summer, from July ' 1 to August 12. at Harrow Hill. near Glen Head, Long Island, The experiment has been planned and will be directed by Dr.
The aim of the project is to try out in practice the idea of a world college, with a completely international faculty, studentbody and curriculum.
Tutorial and seminar methods of instruction will be used, concentrating on study projects by the students who will work singly or in groups of two or three on issues and ideas related to the development of world order, new Institutions of world culture and new bodies of knowledge which are free from national bias.
The governments invited to cooperate in the estabHshment of the project were selected by Dr.
Talyor. in consultation with various members of the United Nations delegations, to represent the aligned, non-aligned and neutral countries, Asia is represented by Japan, Malaya.
Poland and Roumania; the Middle East by the United Arab Republic and Israel; the western hemisphere by Mexico, Colombia, Paraguay.
Each of the countries will be represented by one student, either appointed by the nation itself or selected by the World College in consultation with officials of the participating governments.
The students range in age from twenty to twenty-six; both men and women, graduates and undergraduates are included.
Most of the students expect eventually to enter one or another field of service in international affairsFour faculty members will be in residence, one each from Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, and the West, Others, who will visit the campus for particular seminars and tutorial sessions, will include members of United Nations delegations, who have taught in the universities of their own countries, and visiting scholars now in the metropolitan area.
The subjects in the curriculum will range from the development of ideas for new forms of international cooperation in educational and scientific programs to studies of disarmament, the peaceful uses of outer space and the art forms of the countries represented at the college.
Although there will be no subject matter divisions or separate departments, the studies and curriculum will concentrate on building a new body of knowledge in the social sciences, the arts and the humanities, which represents a world point-of-view.
For example, a project may develop for the preparation of text-books for Soviet, Asian, African and American children in the history of the United States and the Soviet Union, Students will present to seminars and discussion groups the elements of their national culture and art forms with which they are most familiar The music, theater and dance of member countries will be performed where possible, with the aid of the students and of musicians, actors and dancers in the metropolitan area.
There will also be play readings and poetry readings of translations from the classics of national literatures.
Funds for the World College experiment are being provided through private donations to the Friends World College Committee, whose chairman is Dr.
The Committee's headquarters at Harrow Hill are the former home of Mr and Mrs.
Jr,. who donated their ten-acre estate two years ago to serve as a center for the work in world education Dr Harold Taylor, who is presently engaged in a study of the concept and feasibility of a world university, under the sponsorship of the Peace Research Institute, of which he is vice president, was invited during the past year by the Friends World College Committee to conduct an experimental project at Harrow Hill.
It is hoped that in the future some form of international financing through inter-governmental cooperation can be arranged for year-round world college programs both in this country and abroad.
In the meantime, the results of this summer project will be made available in published form to interested individuals and institutions, as wel as to UNESCO and other international bodies.
Taylor has expressed the hope that one result of this beginning experiment may be the development of a design for world education which might serve as a basis for further projects of this kind during the United Nations International Cooperation Year in 1965, Members of the SSC community will remember Dr.
Culver is business instructor at Wheeler County Training SchoolThe staff congratulates Mr and Mrs.
In-Service Teachers Put the Accent on Better Teaching The educational workshops In methods and materials of elementary and secondary teaching accented ""Better Teaching"" at its first reporting session on June 27 and 28.
Through a variation of panel discussions, skits, socio-dramas. and other means of demonstration, in-service teachers exhibited resource findings of common interest to all participants.
The areas of concern grew out of a list of problems drawn up in a general session of the two workshops during the beginning week.
A report from Group I dealt with a discussion of non-graded primaries, Individual differences, and grouping A second group dealing with ""Human Relations"" placed emphasis on guidance, studentteacher relations, and the problem of absenteeism.
Various methods of teaching and organizing learning experiences were brought into focus.
Emphasis was placed on having the psychological guidelines permeate all planning for motivation, competent teaching, an defficient learning.
Group IV gave its attention to ""Some Determining Bases for Grading and Promotion,"" Significant in this report was an analysis of the meaning, purposes, kinds, administration and scoring of test.
A discussion of the use of test findings by this group proved helpful to all the listeners.
Certainly, a number of helpful suggestions for better teaching grew out of the several reports.
Science Workshop For Elementary Teachers The Science Workshop for Elementary Teachers at Savannah State College, under the guidance of Dr, B, T Griffith, Chairman, Division of Natural Sciences and Mathematics; Dr.
Willie G Tucker, Associate Professor of Chemistry, all of Savannah State College, began on Monday, June 10.
James P Hawkins; Secretary, Rose M Richardson; Treasurer, Betty Smith; Program Chairman.
Beatrice Ketterer; Publicity Chairman, Mildred L, Ellison and Social Chairman, Emmaline Maddox.
A summary or review of the science taught in the various classes during the previous school year was given.
Many plans in the areas as outlined in the ""Science for Georgia Schools Guide,"" namely living matter, rocks, minerals and soil, air and water, universe and solar system, electricity and magnetism, heat, light, sound, properties of matter, health and safety, and man's use and control, have been formulated.
Mildred L Ellison, Hodge, Chatham; Mercide Sheppard, Chatham, Carolyn J Arnold, Chatham: Grace S Wright, Chatham; Lee B Wilson, Willow Hill, Bulloch; Doreather Woods, Chatham; Willie Frances Wood, Carroll: Emmaline T Maddox, Central High, Screven; Ellen D Sellers, Waynesboro High, Burke: Deloris Phoenix, Elenieulary and Secondary Workshops Organized The Elementary and Secondary Workshops of Savannah State College met and organized Monday, June 10 with Dr.
The workshops are comprised of in-service teachers from various states and school systems.
These teachers have brought with them Ideas, skills. potentialities, and problems.
It was highly improbable to work with every individual problem; therefore, the workshops were divided into groups.
Evella S Brown, elementary teacher, Eulonta Elementary School, Daiien; Mrs, Lula Culver, business and English teacher, Wheeler County Training School, Alamo; Mr James E Deen. high school teacher.
Alma; Mr, Keer, A Ellison, mathematics and science teacher, Todd Grant High School.
Darien; Mr, Russell Ellington, physical education and mathematics teacher.
Mr Martin C Griffin, mathematics teacher, Waynesboro High & Industrial, Waynesboro; Mrs.
Brunswick; Miss Dorothy Jones, eighth grade teacher, Waynesboro High & Industrial School, Waynesboro; Mrs.
Louvinla Y James, supply teacher, Chatham County, Savannah; Mr Jeff Dunbar, high school teacher.
Delores Jefferson, third grade teacher, Bartow Elementary School, Cartersvllle; Mr, Charles Jones, science and mathematics teacher, Telfair Jr.
Annie B Jenkins, first grade teacher, LaGrange; Mr George Mays, high school teacher, Georgia Training School.
Cartersvllle; Mr William Pompey, junior high school teacher, Lomax Junior High, Valdosta; Mrs.
Bertha Routt, second grade teacher, Williams James School, Statesboro; Mrs, Betty J Shaw, elementary teacher, Hinesvllle; Mrs.
Bernice C Thomas, member of staff, Boggs Academy, Keysville. and Mrs, Aleathea Wright, supply teacher.
Monteith, Chatham ; James P Hawkins, Pearl Smith, Chatham; Beatrice D Ketterer, Homerville High.
Clinch; Ollie M Marshall, Robert W Gadsden, Chatham; Rose M Richardson, John W, Hubert, Chatham; Betty Mae Smith.
John W Hubert, Chatham; Alberta Royal Warren, Annie Daniels, Screven; Mary J, Ferguson.
Chatham; Carrie C Williams, Liberty Elementary, Liberty, African Exhibition iCoiiltmiftI from I'age 3) million and occupy an area well over twice the size of the United States.
Most of these groups talk differently from their neighbors, sometimes so differently that villagers living on opposite banks of a river are unable to communicate with each other.
Many of them have dlffei-ent ways of raising food and family, of settling disputes, of dealing with Illnesses and emergencies, and even of burying the dead.
Into It go water and soil, heat and aridity, marsh and jungle, mantled hill and naked valley, beaches fringed with palm and coral, ""sunny fountains"" that sometimes freeze.
Kohcrl Il4»ll Direrlor of SSCs Itcadin^ Workshop The Reading Workshop of SSC was organized June 10, with Mr Robert Holt.
Group 1 worked extensively on Diagnostic Reading, where much research was used in the College Llbi'ary, at home, and the reading center.
Miss Vera Adkins demonstrated the use of the Teleblnocular, and Mrs, Louis Owens demonstrated the Audiometer.
The findings included developing reading readiness, grouping. improving rates, and vocabulary.
Research findings were presented on study skills, comprehension, and reference skills.
SSC Ahimnns Receives M.A. in Ethication Among the 1 ,300 candidates for degrees at Ball State Teachers College in Muncie, Indiana.
Jefferson William Scruggs received his Master of Arts in Education Degree Sunday, June 9 Scruggs, who received his Bachelor of Science Degree in Industrial Arts at Savannah State College in 1954. is now employed by the Board of School Commissioners of Indianapolis as an Instructor of a multiple activity laboratory.
For seven years, he has been a faculty member of Mary E, Cable Junior High School associated with the industrial arts department.
Page 8 THE TIGER'S ROAR Summer.63 SSC Science Workshop Provides Innumerable Experiences For Teachers The science workshop, at Savannah State College is providing opportunities for teachers on the elementary level to increase their knowledge in the various branches of the natural sciences, and also ample opportunities to understand better the PROBLEM SOLVING approach to the teaching of science.
Each teacher is required to present a problem for investigation in the specific area of science in which she Is seeking more Information.
After this, she Is assisted in using literature on this problem with the expectation that she will develop a hypothesis of her own, relative to the answer which she expects to find through experimental work.
The teacher is then guided in her thinking on what methods to use In search for the answer to her problem, and what materials would be needed In making this study.
After this has been decided, the teacher is now ready for experimental work. which might result in producing the answer to her problem, and it will provide the opportunity for the teacher to arrive at a conclusion based on her own experimental work.
Special study in all the areas listed under ""Suggested Principles for Science Curriculum "" publlslied in Science for Georgia Schools, is required of all participants in the workshop.
Tucker, Ph.D.. in Chemistry at Savannah State College, on Chemistry and its related areas.
To help fill out a void in the teacher's background in subject matter, To increase the teacher's capacity to motivate students into science careers.
The lectures are divided into four main units; The Periodic System and Atomic Structure; Common compounds and reactions used daily at home. school and work; Introduction to Nuclear Chemistry and Introduction to Organic Chemistry.
The periodic chart is used with all of the lectures in order to instill in the elementary teacher the concept of periodicity of elements and compounds in a given group or series.
Some of the teachers are expected to make periodic charts of all the co:nmon elements as a workshop project that can be used as an aid in their respective science classes.
In the unit on nuclear chemistry, the theory of natural and artificial radioactivity is briefly discussed and a few equations are used for illustrative purposes.
The production and acceleration of high energy particles is also included in this unit.
In the unit on organic chemistry, no details will be given on special classes of compounds.
Only common organic compounds will be treated as certain alcohols, flavorings, acids, and some carbohydrates.
After getting a working knowledge of the atom, its structure, and its contributions to our everyday living, the area on electricity and magnetism attracted a majority of the teachers.
These questions served as bases for experimental work, and several simple experiments have been performed to bring out these principles.
In the area covering the Universe and the Solar System, the participants have been provided an opportunity to study space science.
These models are made with plywood cut in a round figure about eighteen Inches In diameter.
The large sun Is represented with a large electric light bulb in the center of the figure.
The other planets are placed in the figure In their positions relative to the sun with smaller light bulbs.
All bulbs are wired for AC electricity, which will light up the entire figure and will show what is meant by space, or outer space.
The teachers in the workshop have heard many interesting discussions on life in both plants and animals How life Is maintained in the bodies of both plants and animals has been the chief topic for discussions.
These discussions have provided opportunities to study many different principles of the biological sciences.
Aquariums and terrariums have been made to demonstrate certain principles of association that exist between the plant kingdom and the animal kingdom.
The teachers are making special posters on nutrition, exercise, cleanliness, and correct posture as they relate to good health.
Some of the causative agents of diseases are being discussed, and some experimental work with bacteria is being done to show the teachers that these same experiments could be used In the elementary schools.
Everyone appears to be most interested in the work, and will be better prepared to teach the sciences to pupils on the elementary level beginning next school term, In-Servioe Teacher Heads Suiiiiuer Session Staff Peter J Baker.
Marys, Georgia was selected Student Advisor and Editor-inChief of the Tiger's R,oar summer staff during its initial meeting Wednesday.
June 12. at 12;15 m. in the Office of Public Relations under the direction of Wilton C Scott, Director of Public Relations and Publications Advisor, Savannah State College, Savannah.
Mr Scott and Mr Baker in their summer publication efforts, will be assisted by Andrew S Russell, Instructor.
Mr, Scott was host at the staff luncheon held in Adams Hall, Friday, June 14. at 12;30m.
During the luncheon, the staff members heard remarks from Miss Albertha E Boston, Assistant Professor in the Division of Business Administration and faculty advisor during the regular school year to the Tiger's Roar, and Prince Mitchell.
Acting Alumni Secretary, The principle speakers for the occasion were Mr Baker and Mr Wilton C Scott.
Additional Peace Corps Volunteers Requests from 47 nations for additional Peace Corps Volunteers late this year have prompted the addition of a July 20 date for national administration of the Peace Corps Placement Test.
More than 2.000 prospective Volunteers wilt enter training during the last five months of 1963 to supplement the 5,000 now ir the field and the 3,000 in training during the summer.
Only requirement for admission is that the applicant has already submitted a Peace Corps Questionnaire or brings his completed application with him.
The test, which can't be ""passed"" or ""failed"" in the traditional sense, includes one-halfhour sections on general aptitude and modern language aptitude.
Students who have had any prior training in Spanish or French take an additional onehour test of proficiency in the appropriate one.
Scholastic Standing of Social Greek Letter Organizations at SSC The followings the scholastic standing of Social Greek Letter organizations at Savannah State College as of May 18, 1963.
Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, 2.514, IV, Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, 2.475, V Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.
Library Students between the ages of 7 and 9 appeared In both scenes as users of the library.
The program was narrated by Miss Mildred Harris, senior Social Science major, and summarized by Mrs, Vivian Pressley. in-service teacher from Fitzgerald, In Scene I Mrs, Sallie Phillips. an in-service teacher from Lesxy, acted as a typified old librarian.
Constance Smith, in-service teacher, Tennllle. acted as modern school librarian, who is concerned with bringing books and children together, as well as the role of working closely with teachers and pupils In planning their course work.
Vidalia, served as assistant librarian whose responsibility was that of audio visual materials.
Thelma Hines portrayed the modern teacher who seeks help from the librarian and the library for strengthening her classroom program.
Sociology; Mr Jerome Smith, senior, Health & Physical Education; Mr Joe William, senior.
Health & Physical Education, and Mr Robert Florence, senior, Social Science.
Religion, of which the rewards are distant, and which is animated only by Faith and Hope, will glide by degrees out of the mind, unless it be invigorated and reimpressed by eternal ordinances, by stated calls to worship, and the salutory influence of example.
Those who obey their conscience are of my religion, and I am of the religion of all those who are brave and good We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to make us love, one another.
We cannot make a religion for others, and we ought not to let others make a religion for us.
ISeiv ErroU Garner Concert Album Now in Release ""One World Concert Erroll Garner's first concert recording in seven years is in current release.
Titled ""ONE WORLD CONCERT."" the album has met with raves from ""Variety,"" ""Billboard"" and ""Cash Box."" the trade papers of the record industry.
The ""ONE WORLD CONCERT"" title refers to the universality of Garner's impact and musical appeal.
World-acclaimed, Garner's concert itinerary in 1963 will include the United States, Canada, England and Europe.
Garner, himself, is making half a dozen network television appearances in conjunction with the release of the ""ONE WORLD CONCERT"" album.
Garner spent several weeks selecting the numbers for tliis albmn from the more than twelve hours of recorded material from his performances at the Seattle Fair.
The spontaneity and dynamic quality of Garner's extemporaneous in-person performance is captured completely in the ""ONE WORLD CONCERT"" album.
Further, authentic sound quality has been uniquely reproduced in this recording, bringing the at-home listener to the front row of a Garner concertFall Quarter lConliniie<l jrom Page I Cohunii 5) should be directed to Mr, Nelson R Freeman, Director of Student Personnel, Students seeking admission to Savannah State College for the first time, are reminded that all details connected with Initial admission must be completed by September 5.
Applicants are also reminded that the final administration of the College Entrance Board Scholastic Achievement Test, which is required for admission, is scheduled for August 14.
Applications for this examination must be made before July 17 or, with a $2.50 penalty before July 31.
Beach High School, DEAN'S LIST Each person whose name is listed here has attained an average of 3.50 or higher on a full program during the spring quarter 1963.
Each is therefore accorded a place on the Dean's List for the summer quarter 1963 Name Average Beaton, Juliette 3.68 Branch, Margie 3.66 David, Elease 3.50 Duncan, Annie B, 3.93 3,64 Flynn, Comer 4.00 Grant, Moses A 3.66 Hamilton, Ernestine 3.66 Jenkins, Clyde E 3.61 Jennings.
Emmitt 3.66 Moran, Ellsa M 3.72 Owens, Veronica 4.00 Pittman, Theodore 3.66 Randolph.
Army Needs Linjiuists The United States Army Reserve is interested in recruiting college graduates to participate in a language training program for Army Military Intelligence and Army Security Agency Reserve units.
After receiving basic and specialist training for their military occupation, they will attend the Army Language School at Monterey, California, where they will be taught to speak, read, and write a foreign language.
