In 1962, Cuba obtained nuclear launching pads in which they set up multiple missiles.
These missiles were so important to the United States because of how close they were to United States territory.
In 1962, the pilot of an American spy plane passed over Cuba and photographed a missile being installed.
The pilot immediately told John F Kennedy, the current United States President.
Of course, President Kennedy was extremely upset by this and called together a group known as ExComm.
They are…show more content…When the pilot of an American U2 spy plane was passing over Cuba, photographs were taken of an enormous missile being installed only 90 miles off the coast of Florida.
President John F Kennedy was taken aback by this and immediately wanted the missile removed.
This all began when Fidel Castro, a Cuban politician and the Prime Minister of Cuba, aligned himself with the Soviet Union.
Cuba depended very much on the Soviet Union for military and economic aid.
Obviously, the United States did not want a nuclear war to erupt out of this so JFK scheduled a meeting with ExComm.
In these meetings were the president, vice president, Executive Committee, the Attorney General, and other governmental officials.
After that came a thirteen day military standoff, in which the United States pondered over the solution that would resolve the confrontation.
Bobby eventually ended up writing a book called Thirteen Days that is very popular, especially among schools.
The plan that the United States proposed was to make a naval blockade around Cuba.
If he did not suggest the idea of writing a letter to Nikita S Khrushchev, a nuclear war could have struck between Cuba and the United States.
By writing the letter, Robert helped by preventing a war between the two countries, saving many people’s lives.
He thought of a peaceful yet effective idea, which most people can not do.
His campaign was extremely successful and he took office in January of 1965.
Many people like Bobby as the senator and suggested he run for president.
In March of 1968, Bobby started his campaign for United States President after finishing as the Senate.
His campaign turned out very successful and he was thought very likely to win the election.
But on June 6, 1968, Robert was assassinated by Sirhan Bishara Sirhan shortly after winning the California presidential primary.
He was shot multiple times by the assassin and died that day, upsetting his family, friends, and the United States.
Bobby has continued to be appreciated for all that he did for the United States even though he has past away.
On October 14, a U2 spy plane flying over Cuba took pictures of potential nuclear missiles that were examined by many government officials.
Eventually, the missiles were deemed not nuclear, but still capable of reaching the United States.
Two days later, President Kennedy was briefed on the dire situation and immediately assembled the National Security Council to determine how to address the issue.
This was put in place because Cuba had just signed a trade agreement with the USSR, and Kennedy knew that the USSR having access to planting their missiles only 90 miles away from United States territory could be very dangerous.
In this manner, Castro and the Cubans were being defensive in their action of seeking help from the Soviet Union and merely placing nuclear missiles in Cuba; it cannot be termed to be aggression against the United States of America if it was a measure undertaken to secure a nation.
Was there anything wrong about the British becoming allies, and seeking for the help from the894 Words4 PagesGood EssaysRead MoreBetter EssaysThe Bay Of Pigs1858 Words8 PagesThe Bay Of PigsThe Bay of Pigs was an invasion that the CIA had financed which involved training a group of Cuban refugees to land in Cuba.
The primary goal of the invasion was to get rid of the communist government led by Fidel Castro.
The Outcome of the invasion was unexpected, and the invasion failed miserably.
The plan failed due to last minute cancellations of airstrikes, and the lack of knowledge that Castro had ordered 20,000 troops in advance to go to the attack site; this resulted in having the Cuban Air Force dominating the sky, which did not allow the U.S army to fight back.
As noted above, the cultural, socio-political context is important to understand the seriousness of this crisis and1105 Words5 PagesBetter EssaysRead MoreGood EssaysPositive And Negative Effects Of The Cold War In Guatemala236 Words1 PagesPositive And Negative Effects Of The Cold War In GuatemalaIn 1952 the United States got involved after Nicaragua solicited United States assistance to overthrow the Guatemalan leader, Jacobo Arbenz Guzman.
President Truman authorized the shipment of weapons and money to anti-Arbenz groups.
But, within five weeks the operation to topple Arbenz quickly fizzled when representatives loyal to the president uncovered the plot and took steps to solidify their power.
Later Eisenhower sought to defend American interests abroad with an increase in funds for nuclear weapons and covert operations.
After that, convinced that Arbenz threatened United States national security because of his alleged Communist sympathies, Eisenhower approved the first-ever clandestine military action in Latin America.
The Bay Of Pigs1236 Words5 PagesBay Of Pig Operation: The Bay Of PigsThe Bay of Pigs Operation The Bay of Pigs Operation is the United States final measure in preventing the spread of communism into the western hemisphere.
For years the CIA and other intelligence agencies have taken interest in Cuba, following the overthrow of United States backed Cuban Leader Fulgencio Batista by rebel leader Fidel Castro.
It was brought to the attention of the administration by way of a U-2 spy plane that the Soviet Union was supplying materials and constructing nuclear missile sites on the island of Cuba.
Knowing the lack of respect that Khrushchev had for Fidel and the amount of effort that the United States put in attempting the invasion of Cuba, twice, the conclusion can be made as the Cuba was an area that was significant to the Cold War and for the two great powers to balance with each other.
The amount of effort it took to solve the problem shows that the problem wasn’t as great since it was easy to resolve.92 Words7 PagesBetter EssaysRead MoreGood EssaysCold War Tension Dbq505 Words3 PagesCold War Tension DbqAround 1945, tensions began arising between the United States and the USSR, which lead to the Cold War.
During a 40 year time period, each nation tried to spread their political and economic systems.
Both the United States and the USSR wanted to spread their ideologies across the world.
The origin of the Cold War was distrust; in “fighting” this war, the political and military tactics were the most effective.
An embargo is when there is a ban against a trade from a particular country.
The United States placed an embargo on Cuba except for food and medicine.
Words3 PagesGood EssaysRead MoreGood EssaysRhetorical Analysis Of Space858 Words4 PagesRhetorical Analysis Of SpaceStarting around 1947, the United States entered a war-like situation against the Soviet Union.
The two nations competed on gigantic scales, trying to achieve more in terms of invention, creativity, and efficiency.
Because space was considered uncharted territory, which is still true in some cases today, the president wanted to ease the audience and the rest of the country into the new exploration age that the United States was headed towards.
To achieve his purpose, John F Kennedy appeals to the peoples’ pathos by speaking of conquering wary circumstances858 Words4 PagesGood EssaysRead MoreGood EssaysContainment Dbq Analysis684 Words3 PagesContainment Dbq AnalysisContainment was used by the United States so they could prevent communism spreading and was used towards the Guatemalans, Greece, Turkey, and Cuba during the cold war.
In which was successful in stopping communism from spreading but did require people being killed or be put in jail which is bad because they got punished for something they believed on.
This happened around 1954 because at that time they were fighting the cold war so they had to come with a quick and effective way to stop communism from spreading and containment was the solution.
Containment was a big step for the Unites states, they were to intimidate the Soviet Union.
Those people were terrified of a nuclear missile attack during the Cold War time period.
This would hopefully alleviate some of the fear of the citizens of the United States.
He shows pathos by continuing to ease the citizens’ fear of a missile attack by showing compassion towards the people.
