POSTWAR A History of Europe Since 1945 United States $39.95 THE DEFINITIVE HISTORY OF POSTWAR EUROPE FOR OUR TIME Tony Judt’s Postwar is cause for celebration.
The product of a decade’s labor, it is sweeping narrative history in the grand tradition, a deeply learned and absorbing chronicle of Europe since the fall of Berlin, weaving East and West, North and South, into a majestic sixty-year tapestry studded with brilliant new insight.
Tony Judt has drawn on forty years of reading and writing about modem Europe to craft this account of the continent’s remarkable journey— tumultuous and uneven—out of the devastation of history’s most savage war.
While his range is vast, and seemingly no country, no vital theme, no crucial individual, no watershed event fails to get its moment in the narrative sun, Postwar is the very opposite of the dutiful plod.
Animated and propelled by the celebrated force of its author’s point of view, it is never less than brilliant.
Witty, opinionated and full of fresh and surprising stories and asides, visually rich and rewarding, with useful and provocative maps, photos and cartoons, Postwar is a rare joy for lovers of history and lovers of Europe alike, a show from which one exits, dazzl ed, into the present moment, with much mental furniture rearranged, if not smashed into kindling, and all of Europe indelibly in mind.
WITH 9 MAPS AND 77 PHOTOGRAPHS 1005 TONY JUDTwas bom in London in 1948.
In Postwar, he brings that formidable knowledge to bear on the inspiring story of Europe’s transformation from lethal division and devastating war to a peaceful, prosperous pancontinental union.
It is hard to imagine how a better—and more readable—history of the emergence of today’s Europe from the ashes of 1945 could ever be written.” —IAN KERSHAW “An epically important subject has, to the benefit of us all, found the author it deserves.
Tony Judt, long one of the wisest heads and clearest voices around, has produced a magisterial history and a solid foundation for clear thinking about the future.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA ISBN 1-59420-065-3 Printed in the United States of America Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law.
Please purchase only authorized electronic editions and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials.
It is not really even a continent—just a subcontinental annexe to Asia.
It is dwarfed by Russia, which covers seventeen million square kilometers.
But in the intensity of its internal differences and contrasts, Europe is unique.
Most of these consist of states and nations with their own languages; quite a few of them incorporate additional nations and languages without states; all have their distinct and overlapping histories, politics, cultures and memories; and every one of them has been copiously studied.
Even for the brief, sixty-year period of Europe’s history since the end of the Second World War—indeed, for this period above all—the secondary literature in English alone is inexhaustible.
No one, then, can aspire to write a fully comprehensive or definitive history of contemporary Europe.
But I do know that it can sometimes render the dispassionate disengagement of the historian quite difficult to find.
Without, I hope, abandoning objectivity and fairness, Postwar offers an avowedly personal interpretation of the recent European past.
In a word that has acquired undeservedly pejorative connotations, it is opinionated.
Some of its judgments will perhaps be controversial, some will surely prove mistaken.
For good and ill they are my own—as are any mistakes which are bound to have crept into a work of this length and scope.
But if the errors are contained, and at least some of the assessments and conclusions in this book prove durable, then I owe this in large measure to the many scholars and friends on whom I have relied in the course of researching and writing it.
A book of this kind rests, in the first instance, on the shoulders of other books.
To avoid adding to what is already a very long book addressed to a general readership, a full apparatus of references is not provided here.
XIII PREFACE & ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The classics of modern history writing to which I have looked for inspiration and example include Eric Hobsbawm’s The Age of Extremes, George Lichtheim’s Europe in the Twentieth Century, A J P Taylor’s English History 1914-1945 and the late Francois Furet’s The Passing of an Illusion.
Utterly different in every other respect, these books and their authors share an assurance born of wide learning and the sort of intellectual self-confidence rarely found among their successors—as well as a clarity of style that should be a model for every historian.
Among those scholars from whose own writings on recent European history I have learned the most I should especially mention and thank Harold James, Mark Mazower and Andrew Moravcsik.
To Alan S Milward I—along with everyone who studies modern Europe—owe a special debt for his learned, iconoclastic studies of the postwar economy.
To the extent that I can claim familiarity with the history of central and eastern Europe—a subject often slighted by general European histories, written as they are by specialists in the continent’s western half—I owe this to the work of a gifted cohort of younger scholars, including Brad Abrams, Catherine Merridale, Marci Shore and Timothy Snyder, as well as to my friends Jacques Rupnik and Istvan Deak.
From Timothy Garton Ash I have learned not only about central Europe (a subject that for many years he made his own) but also and especially about the two Germanies in the era of Ostpolitik.
In the course of many years of conversation with Jan Gross—and thanks to his path-breaking writings—I have learned not only some Polish history but also how to understand the social consequences of war, a subject on which Jan has written with matchless insight and humanity.
The sections on Italy in this book owe a transparent debt to the work of Paul Ginsborg, just as the chapters dealing with Spain reflect what I have learned from reading and listening to the remarkable Victor Perez-Diaz.
My closing reflections on ‘Europe as a Way of Life’ were much influenced by the writings of a brilliant international lawyer, Anne-Marie Slaughter, whose work on ‘disaggregated states’ argues forcefully for the EU form of international governance not because it is inherently better or because it represents an ideal model but because—in the world in which we find ourselves—nothing else will work.
All across Europe, friends, colleagues and audiences have taught me far more about the continent’s recent past and its present than I could ever have gleaned from books and archives.
I am especially grateful to Krzysztof Czyzewski, Peter Kellner, Ivan Krastev, Denis Lacorne, Krzysztof Michalski, Mircea Mihaes, Berti Musliu, Susan Neiman and David Travis for their hospitality and their help.
I am indebted to Istvan Rev for his invaluable insistence that—however distasteful the experience—I must visit Budapest’s House of Terror.
Dino Buturovic kindly scrutinized my account of the Yugoslav linguistic imbroglio.
I could not have developed the Remarque Institute—which hosted many of the workshops and lectures from which I have learned so much—without the generous support and patronage of Yves-Andre Istel; and I could not have written this book while running Remarque without the uncomplaining and ultra-efficient collaboration of its Administrative Director Jair Kessler.
Like so many, I am deeply beholden for friendship and advice to my agents Andrew Wylie and Sarah Chalfant; they have been unfailingly supportive of a project that took longer—and grew larger—than they can ever have anticipated.
Thanks to the hospitality of Leon Wieseltier, some of the evaluations and opinions that surface in Chapters 12 and 14 were first published in essay form in the remarkable arts pages that he cultivates at the back of The New Republic.
Others—Jessica Cooperman and Avi Patt—did invaluable work as research assistants.
Alex Molot diligently identified and accumulated the published and unpublished statistical reports and data series on which a book of this sort inevitably and very properly depends.
My family has lived with postwar Europe for a very long time—in the case of my children for the whole of their young lives.
Not only have they been tolerant of the absences, travels and obsessions to which it has given rise, but they have made distinctive contributions to its content.
To Daniel, the book owes its title; to Nicholas, the reminder that not all good stories get a happy ending.
To my wife Jennifer the book also owes a lot—not least two very careful and constructive readings.
Postwar is dedicated to her. xv Postwar Shortly after Germany’s defeat in 1945 , a child walks past the corpses of hundreds of former inmates ofBergenBelsen concentration camp, laid out along a country road.
German soldiers publicly hanged in Kiev in 1946 following their conviction for war crimes.
However mixed the Soviet motivation in staging post-war trials and executions, the appalling crimes committed by the German army, the SS and their local collaborators were real enough.
Draza Mihailovic, wartime leader of Yugoslavia’s Chetnik resistance, before a military court in June 1946.
For Communist partisans the Chetniks posed almost as great a threat as the foreign occupiers; after the war Tito suppressed them ruthlessly.
Accused of‘horizontal collaboration with the German occupiers, a Frenchwoman is shaved and paraded around the town of Laval a few hours after its liberation by American troops in August 1944.
Thousands of women in France, Belgium and the Netherlands suffered similar retribution.
Women queuing for coal in London at the height of the bitter winter of February 1947.
The fuel shortage was so acute that most of these women had to wait all day to collect their weekly ration.
A mother and her children drawing their family allowance in Stratford, east London, on August 6th 1946—the day the allowances were first introduced.
Europe’s post-war welfare states wrought an authentic social revolution, dramatically improving the life-chances of middle and working classes alike.
Bread made from Marshall Plan flour’ being distributed to Greek orphans.
Even in impoverished Greece the Plan’s morale-boosting functions were at least as important as its material contribution to economic recovery.
Note that the USSR’s Western supporters are marching under a French banner.
Czechs assemble in Prague’s Wenceslas Square on February 25 th 1948 to hear Klement Gottwald announce the formation of a new government.
Note the range of contrasting emotions among the spectators—the Communist coup was by no means greeted with universal dismay.
Stalin broke with Communist Yugoslavia in the spring of 1948 not because of its policies but in irritation at Tito’s insubordination, his personality cult and his growing challenge to Moscow’s monopoly of Communist authority.
Dean Acheson, United States Secretary of State and moving spirit behind the policy of‘containment’; Ernest Bevin, the post-war UK Foreign Minister who first conceived of an Atlantic Alliance; Robert Schuman, the French statesman who proposed a European Coal & Steel Community.
The option of ‘dissolving the people and electing another one’proved unattainable, though not for want of trying.
As Communist Interior Minister, Rajk had himself been responsible for the death of many innocents; but his trial and subsequent execution turned him into a martyr for future generations.
Jean-Paul Sartre admiring rare books in the Leningrad National Library, June 23rd 1954.
Sartre's indulgence for Communism in these years derived from romantic illusions (and anti-Americanism ) rather than ideology; but in subsequent decades it was to sully his international reputation and dim his post-war lustre.
EUf 30PE MAF 3 1 r 1 ' fir m Imre Nagy following his appeal to the UN, November ist 1956.
Nagy paid dearly for his role in the doomed Hungarian revolt but in the long run Moscow paid the higher price, extinguishing the illusions of its own followers.
Despite their protests to the contrary Western governments were not sorry to see the perennial crisis over Berlin resolved by the Soviet Unions decision to erect a physical barrier between the two halves of the occupied city.
But his contributions to deStalinization (notably the ‘Secret Speech’ of February 1956) were invaluable—albeit the consequences exceeded his wishes.
The Marriage of Maria Braun , film director Rainer Fassbinder’s acid dissection of the shortcomings of the post-war Federal Republic.
To its youthful critics, West Germany’s obsession with prosperity, political demobilization and collective forgetting were just the old German defects in a new guise.
In reality Konrad Adenauer (who hailed from the Catholic Rhineland) heartily disliked Prussian Berlin.
But he was not above wielding the divided city as a lever to extract concessions from his Western Allies.
Vietminh troops escorting French soldiers into captivity after the battle ofDien Bien Phu, May 1954.
France’s humiliating expulsion from Vietnam contributed to a disastrous reluctance, particularly on the part of the army, to relinquish the country’s remaining holdings in North Africa.
Egyptians demanding the withdrawal of AngloFrench forces, December 1956.
Charles de Gaulle seized power in May 1958 in a virtual coup; but he re-established France as a presence in world affairs and his Fifth Republic has proven more stable than its predecessors.
The OAS waged a bloody war of vengeful terror against those it held responsible for the loss of Algeria.
Dean Acheson’s famous 1962 quip about Britain’s post-imperial discomfiture prompted the cartoonist Vicky to depict British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan’s humiliating and obsequious ‘special relationship’ with Washington in terms that remain, over four decades later, as depressingly timely as ever.
A Czechmade Tatra-603 on display at the Brno Trade Fair, September 1959.
Although modern consumer durables — cars, fridges, washing machines—were now within reach of many west European households, vast distinctions of wealth, class and privilege remained.
Fun in the sun was now a realistic aspiration for a growing number of European holidaymakers.
Bardot remained for a while on the Cote d’Azur she had made famous but many of her friends moved away, fleeing the onslaught of mass tourism.
Four decades later they remain the outstanding—perhaps the only — common reference point for Sixties-generation memories worldwide.
The 1950s’ ‘lost generation — teenagers caught between their Depressionera parents and the baby-boomers to follow — lacked entertainment or recreation facilities.
Many—the blouson noirs , Halbstarker or skinknuttar —turned to gang violence.
Workers from automobile plants and tire factories demonstrating in Turin’s Piazza San Carlo, September 25 th 1969.
In Italy as in France, mass strikes and workers’ protests posed a greater threat to the authorities than the transient radicalism of the universities.
Notwithstanding the Marxian iconography — Mao, Stalin, Engels and Marx atop a flag with hammer and sickle—the rebels of 1968 were not notably doctrinaire.
The Soviet invasion extinguished the Prague Spring — and any remaining illusions about Communism itself.
Frustrated by their growing isolation from a prosperous local population unmoved by the mirage of an ‘independent Basquia’, ETA gunmen killed an annual average of 34 people through the Eighties.
The thirty-year-long, three-way confrontation between IRA gunmen, Protestant gunmen and the British Army resulted in nearly two thousand deaths.
In West Germany there were nearly three million ‘guest workers’, mostly from Mediterranean countries.
Europe’s ‘economic miracle’ depended heavily on the contribution of these migrants—and the remittances they sent home.
Post-war west European welfare legislation chiefly benefitted employed workers and families.
Francisco Franco and his anointed successor, Prince Juan Carlos, October 1971.
In retrospect the transition to parliamentary democracy in Mediterranean Europe appears smooth and even inevitable.
At the time, however, many on Left and Right alike expected something else and were surprised at the outcome.
Chancellor Willy Brandt—and GDR premier Willi Stoph—in Erfurt, March 1970, during the first inter-German talks.
Brandt’s Ostpolitik opened contacts and eased tensions in central Europe—but to some West Germany seemed to be legitimizing and even propping up its Communist neighbours.
Margaret Thatcher’s success in extracting a huge EEC budget rebate for Britain owed much to her skill at seducing and browbeating not just the British electorate but even seasoned cynics like Francois Mitterrand.
Though Karol Wojtyla did not single-handedly bring down Communism—as many fondly believed — his contribution to the discrediting of the regime in Poland was immense.
Michnik was one of the most courageous and original critics of Communism in eastern Europe.
Notably influential was his emphasis upon non-violence and upon eroding Communist power from within, rather than seeking to confront or overthrow it.
The last Soviet leader was never as popular at home as he was farther west; but success abroad encouraged him to pursue reform at home, perhaps beyond his initial intentions.
East German refugees in a sealed train, heading through Prague to the West, November 1989.
The Bolshevik Revolution began with Lenin crossing Germany in a sealed train, so sending Communist citizens to freedom this way was altogether fitting.
But outside Romania the transitions of 1989 saw little serious violence — perhaps because many Communist cadres understood better than their critics that these regimes were doomed.
The scandals of Yeltsin's presidency should not obscure his achievements.
He was much quicker than Gorbachev to understand what was happening and to adapt—notably to the re-emergence of national states in the wake of empire.
Thirty thousand people died as a result of the Chernobyl explosion in 1986.
Nor was Chernobyl the first nuclear disaster in Soviet history — merely the worst.
Communist industrial policy coupled economic dysfunction with environmental irresponsibility.
The death of the Aral Sea—like the poisoning of Lake Baikal—was an ecological catastrophe and a huge mortgage on the future.
Demonstrators in Kiev in September 1991 (one week after Ukrainian independence) holding photos ofNKVD victims.
The memory of Soviet repression was especially strong in Ukraine, subjected by Stalin to an induced, punitive famine that amounted to neargenocide.
An estimated five million Gypsies live in Europe, at least two million in Romania alone.
Criminal syndicates tricked or abducted girls from Romania and the former USSR into prostitution in western Europe and the Balkans.
While awaiting entry to the EU, Hungary joined NATO as a second best —and was promptly committed to the war in Kosovo.
As a UN peacekeeping contingent of armed Dutch soldiers stood by, Serb irregulars under Ratko Mladic marched 7,400 Bosnian men and boys out of the town and shot them.
In the final act of the Yugoslav wars, Milosevic sought to terrorize the Albanian community into departing.
This blatant exercise in ethnic cleansing belatedly triggered armed intervention by NATO, its first ever.
Here his supporters, waving the flags of Turkey and the EU, greet Prime Minister Erdogan as he returns to Ankara in December 2004, after securing a starting date for EU membership talks. les capitalistes disent CONSTITUTION EUROPEENNE Cern&iH/c, 1 'bcrCdtn Alternative libertaire BP 295.75921PARIS Cedex 19 www.alternativelit3tertaire.org France—an EU founding member—rejected the proposed ‘European Constitution’ in a national referendum, May 2005.
Some French voters feared too little European regulation; some feared too much European regulation.
Even in Scandinavia the new populism prompted mainstream parties to show their own ‘firmness’ by restricting asylum and foreigners’ rights.
Tony Blair’s ‘Third Way’ between the European ‘model’ and the unrestricted market—like his efforts to triangulate between the EU and London’s ‘special relationship’ with Washington—had limited success.
When offered the chance, many Brits sought medical care on the Continent.
Moroccans in the Andalucian city ofAlmeria protesting against Spanish racism, February 2000.
While much of western Europe had become increasingly multicultural, the incidence of prejudice and tension remained high—notably along the EU’s porous Mediterranean frontier.
Islam was Europe’s fastest growing religion—an ironic legacy of Christian Europe’s imperial past.
German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, speaking on the sixtieth anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz.
Edmund Burke ‘Events, dear boy, events’ Harold Macmillan World history is not the soil in which happiness grows.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel I first decided to write this book while changing trains at the Westbahnhof, Vienna’s main railway terminus.
I had just returned from Prague, where the playwrights and historians of Vaclav Havel’s Civic Forum were dislodging a Communist police state and tumbling forty years of‘real existing Socialism’ into the dustbin of history.
And in the taxi on the way to the railway station Austrian radio carried the first reports of an uprising against the nepotistic dictatorship of Nicolae Ceau§escu in Romania.
A political earthquake was shattering the frozen topography of postWorld War II Europe.
But with the passing of the old order many longstanding assumptions would be called into question.
What had once seemed permanent and somehow inevitable would take on a more transient air.
A HISTORY OF EUROPE since 1945 satellites to its east: all these could no longer be understood as the products of ideological necessity or the iron logic of politics.
They were the accidental outcomes of history—and history was thrusting them aside.
Whatever shape Europe was to take in the years to come, the familiar, tidy story of what had gone before had changed for ever.
It seemed obvious to me, in that icy central-European December, that the history of post-war Europe would need to be rewritten.
Vienna in 1989 was a palimpsest of Europe’s complicated, overlapping pasts.
This stroke of doubly unmerited good fortune authorized Vienna to exorcise its past.
Its Nazi allegiance conveniently forgotten, the Austrian capital—a ‘Western’ city surrounded by Soviet ‘eastern’ Europe—acquired a new identity as outrider and exemplar of the free world.
In Communism’s dying years the city was to become a sort of listening post of liberty, a rejuvenated site of encounters and departures for eastern Europeans escaping West and Westerners building bridges to the East.
Meanwhile, across the Leitha and Danube rivers just a few kilometres to the east, there lay the ‘other’ Europe of bleak poverty and secret policemen.
INTRODUCTION Just as the city’s two principal railway stations involuntarily acknowledged the geographical schism of Europe—one facing optimistically, profitably west, the other negligently conceding Vienna’s eastern vocation—so the very streets of the Austrian capital bore witness to the chasm of silence separating Europe’s tranquil present from its discomforting past.
The imposing, confident buildings lining the great Ringstrasse were a reminder of Vienna’s one-time imperial vocation— though the Ring itself seemed somehow too big and too grand to serve as a mere quotidian artery for commuters in a medium-sized European capital—and the city was justifiably proud of its public edifices and civic spaces.
And of the Jews who had once occupied many of the inner city’s buildings and who contributed decisively to the art, music, theatre, literature, journalism and ideas that were Vienna in its heyday, the city was most reticent of all.
The very violence with which the Jews of Vienna had been expelled from their homes, shipped east from the city and stamped out of its memory helped account for the guilty calm of Vienna’s present.
Post-war Vienna—like post-war western Europe—was an imposing edifice resting atop an unspeakable past.
After 1989 nothing—not the future, not the present and above all not the past—would ever be the same.
Although it was in December 1989 that I decided to undertake a history of postwar Europe, the book did not get written for many years to come.
The inevitable confusions attendant upon a revolutionary transformation have sorted themselves out and at least some of the longer-term consequences of the upheaval of 1989 are now intelligible.
The next time I was in Vienna the city was struggling to house tens of thousands of refugees from neighbouring Croatia and Bosnia.
Three years after that Austria abandoned its carefully-cultivated post-war autonomy and joined the European Union, whose own emergence as a force in European affairs was a direct consequence of the east-European revolutions.
But like everything else in the twentieth-century its story is back-shadowed by the thirty-year war that began in 1914, when the European continent embarked upon its descent into catastrophe.
The First World War itself was a traumatic killing field for all the participants— half of Serbia’s male population between 18 and 55 died in the fighting—but it resolved nothing.
Indeed, because Germany didn’t pay its First World War debts the cost of victory to the Allies exceeded the cost of defeat to Germany, which thus emerged relatively stronger than in 1913.
The ‘German problem’ that had surfaced in Europe with the rise of Prussia a generation before remained unsolved.
The little countries that emerged from the collapse of the old land empires in 1918 were poor, unstable, insecure—and resentful of their neighbours.
Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria had all been defeated in the Great War and awaited an occasion for territorial redress.
It metamorphosed instead into domestic affairs—into nationalist polemics, racial prejudice, class confrontation and civil war.
Europe in the Twenties and especially the Thirties entered a twilight zone between the afterlife of one war and the looming anticipation of another.
The internal conflicts and inter-state antagonisms of the years between the world wars were exacerbated—and in some measure provoked—by the accompanying collapse of the European economy.
Indeed economic life in Europe was struck a triple blow in those years.
The First World War distorted domestic employment, destroyed trade and devastated whole regions—as well as bankrupting states.
Many countries—in central Europe above all—never recovered from its effects.
Those that did were then brought low again in the Slump of the Thirties, when deflation, business failures and desperate efforts to erect protective tariffs against foreign competition resulted not only in unprecedented levels of unemployment and wasted industrial capacity but also the collapse of international trade (between 1929 and 1936 Franco-German commerce fell by 83 percent), accompanied by bitter inter-state competition and resentment.
The scale of the disaster that Europe had brought upon itself was perfectly clear to contemporaries even as it was happening.
Some, on the far Left and far Right alike, saw the 4 INTRODUCTION self-immolation of bourgeois Europe as an opportunity to fight for something better.
The Thirties were Auden’s ‘low, dishonest decade’; but they were also an age of commitment and political faith, culminating in the illusions and lives lost to the civil war in Spain.
On the eve of the continent’s final descent into the abyss the prospect for Europe appeared hopeless.
Whatever it was that had been lost in the course of the implosion of European civilization—a loss whose implications had long since been intuited by Karl Kraus and Franz Kafka in Zweig’s own Vienna—would never be recaptured.
In Jean Renoir’s eponymous film classic of 1937, the Grand Illusion of the age was the resort to war and its accompanying myths of honour, caste and class.
But by 1940, to observant Europeans, the grandest of all Europe’s illusions—now discredited beyond recovery—was ‘European civilisation’ itself.
In the light of what had gone before it is thus understandably tempting to narrate the story of Europe’s unexpected recovery after 1945 in a self-congratulatory, even lyrical key.
And this, indeed, has been the dominant underlying theme of histories of post-war Europe, above all those written before 1989—just as it was the tone adopted by European statesmen when reflecting upon their own achievements in these decades.
An irenic, pacific continent had risen, ‘Phoenix-like’, from the ashes of its murderous—suicidal—past.
Like many myths, this rather agreeable account of Europe in the second half of the twentieth century contains a kernel of truth.
Eastern Europe—from the Austrian border to the Ural Mountains, from Tallinn to Tirana—doesn’t fit.
And if the satellite countries of the Soviet bloc engaged in international cooperation superficially comparable to developments further west, this was only because Moscow imposed ‘fraternal’ institutions and exchanges upon them by force.
The history of the two halves of post-war Europe cannot be told in isolation from one another.
Communism may have been the wrong solution, but the dilemma to which it was responding was real enough.
And so, in the decades that followed, the uncertainties of the immediate post-war years were forgotten.
But the possibility that things might take a different turn—indeed, the likelihood that they would take a different turn—had seemed very real in 1945; it was to head off a return of the old demons (unemployment, Fascism, German militarism, war, revolution) that western Europe took the new path with which we are now familiar.
Post-national, welfare-state, cooperative, pacific Europe was not born of the optimistic, ambitious, forward-looking project imagined in fond retrospect by today’s Euro-idealists.
Shadowed by history, its leaders implemented social reforms and built new institutions as a prophylactic, to keep the past at bay.
This becomes easier to grasp when we recall that authorities in the Soviet bloc were in essence engaged in the same project.
They, too, were above all concerned to install a barrier against political backsliding—though in countries under Communist rule this was to be secured not so much by social progress as through the application of physical force.
Recent history was re-written—and citizens were encouraged to forget it—in accordance with the assertion that a Communist-led social revolution had definitively erased not just the shortcomings of the past but also the conditions that had made them possible.
But the Communist myth bears unintended witness to the importance (and the difficulty) in both halves of Europe of managing a burdensome inheritance.
World War One destroyed old Europe; World War Two created the conditions for a new Europe.
But the whole of Europe lived for many decades after 1945 in the long shadow cast by the dictators and wars in its immediate past.
That is one of the experiences that Europeans of the post-war generation have in common with one another and which separates them from Americans, for whom the twentieth century taught rather different and altogether more optimistic lessons.
And it is the necessary point of departure for anyone seeking to understand European history before 1989—and to appreciate how much it changed afterwards.
In Berlin’s terms this book is decidedly not a ‘hedgehog’ I have no big theory of contemporary European history to propose in these pages; no one overarching theme to expound; no single, all-embracing story to tell.
It does not follow from this, however, that I think the post-World War Two history of Europe has no thematic shape.
The constituent states of Europe could no longer aspire, after 1945, to international or imperial status.
The two exceptions to this rule—the Soviet Union and, in part, Great Britain—were both only half-European in their own eyes and in any case, by the end of the period recounted here, they too were much reduced.
Most of the rest of continental Europe had been humiliated by defeat and occupation.
It had not been able to liberate itself from Fascism by its own efforts; nor was it able, unassisted, to keep Communism at bay.
Only with considerable effort and across long decades did Europeans recover control of their own destiny.
Shorn of their overseas territories Europe’s erstwhile seaborne empires were all shrunk back in the course of these years to their European nuclei, their attention re-directed to Europe itself.
For a brief moment in the 1980s, to be sure, it seemed as though the intellectual Right might stage a revival around the equally nineteenth-century project of dismantling ‘society’ and abandoning public affairs to the untrammelled market and the minimalist state; but the spasm passed.
After 1989 there was no overarching ideological project of Left or Right on offer in Europe—except the prospect of liberty, which for most Europeans was a promise now fulfilled.
This decidedly unanticipated transformation of Europe from a geographical expression into a role-model and magnet for individuals and countries alike was a slow, cumulative process.
Its emergence in this capacity could certainly not have been predicted from the circumstances of 1945, or even 1975.
But once it became clear, after 1992, that Europe did occupy this novel place in the international scheme of things, its relations with the United States in particular took on a different aspect— for Europeans and Americans alike.
Western Europeans wanted the United States to involve itself in European affairs after 1945—but they also resented that involvement and what it implied about Europe’s decline.
Moreover, despite the United States presence in Europe, especially in the years after 1949, the two sides of the ‘West’ remained very different places.
The Cold War was perceived quite differently in western Europe from the rather alarmist response it aroused in the US, and the subsequent ‘Americanisation’ of Europe in the Fifties and Sixties is often exaggerated, as we shall see.
Eastern Europe, of course, saw America and its attributes rather differently.
But there, too, it would be misleading to overstate the exemplary influence of the United States upon eastern Europeans both before and after 1989.
Dissident critics in both halves of Europe—Raymond Aron in France, for example, or Vaclav Havel in Czechoslovakia—were careful to emphasize that they did not regard America as any sort of model or example for their own societies.
And although a younger generation of post-’89 eastern Europeans did aspire for a while to liberalize their countries on the American model, with limited public services, low taxes and a free market, the fashion has not caught on.
The future of eastern Europe’s ‘little Americas’ lay squarely in Europe.
Finally, Europe’s post-war history is a story shadowed by silences; by absence.
The continent of Europe was once an intricate, interwoven tapestry of overlapping languages, religions, communities and nations.
Many of its cities—particularly the smaller ones at the intersection of old and new imperial boundaries, such as Trieste, Sarajevo, Salonika, Cernovitz, Odessa or Vilna—were truly multicultural societies avant le mot , where Catholics, Orthodox, Muslims, Jews and others lived in 8 INTRODUCTION familiar juxtaposition.
What the Polish writer Tadeusz Borowski called ‘the incredible, almost comical melting-pot of peoples and nationalities sizzling dangerously in the very heart of Europe’ was periodically rent with riots, massacres and pogroms —but it was real, and it survived into living memory.
The tidier Europe that emerged, blinking, into the second half of the twentieth century had fewer loose ends.
Thanks to war, occupation, boundary adjustments, expulsions and genocide, almost everybody now lived in their own country, among their own people.
For forty years after World War Two Europeans in both halves of Europe lived in hermetic national enclaves where surviving religious or ethnic minorities— the Jews in France, for example—represented a tiny percentage of the population at large and were thoroughly integrated into its cultural and political mainstream.
Only Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union—an empire, not a country and anyway only part-European, as already noted—stood aside from this new, serially homogenous Europe.
But since the 1980s, and above all since the fall of the Soviet Union and the enlargement of the EU, Europe is facing a multicultural future.
Between them refugees; guest-workers; the denizens of Europe’s former colonies drawn back to the imperial metropole by the prospect of jobs and freedom; and the voluntary and involuntary migrants from failed or repressive states at Europe’s expanded margins have turned London, Paris, Antwerp, Amsterdam, Berlin, Milan and a dozen other places into cosmopolitan world cities whether they like it or not.
This new presence of Europe’s living ‘others’—perhaps fifteen million Muslims in the EU as currently constituted, for example, with a further eighty million awaiting admission in Bulgaria and Turkey—has thrown into relief not just Europe’s current discomfort at the prospect of ever greater variety, but also the ease with which the dead ‘others’ of Europe’s past were cast far out of mind.
Since 1989 it has become clearer than it was before just how much the stability of post-war Europe rested upon the accomplishments of Josef Stalin and Adolf Hitler.
Between them, and assisted by wartime collaborators, the dictators blasted flat the demographic heath upon which the foundations of a new and less complicated continent were then laid.
This disconcerting kink in the smooth narrative of Europe’s progress towards Winston Churchill’s ‘broad sunlit uplands’ was left largely unmentioned in both halves of postwar Europe—at least until the Sixties, after which it was usually invoked uniquely in reference to the extermination of Jews by Germans.
With only the occasional controversial exception, the record of other perpetrators—and other victims—was kept closed.
Good versus Evil, AntiFascists against Fascists, Resisters against Collaborators and so forth.
Poles, French, Swiss, Italians, Romanians and others are now better placed to know—if they wish to know—what really happened in their country just a few short decades ago.
Even Germans, too, are revisiting the received history of their country—with paradoxical consequences.
Now—for the first time in many decades—it is German suffering and German victimhood, whether at the hands of British bombers, Russian soldiers or Czech expellers—that are receiving attention.
Whether these discussions are a good or a bad thing is a matter for debate.
Europe is not re-entering its troubled wartime past—on the contrary, it is leaving it.
Germany today, like the rest of Europe, is more conscious of its twentiethcentury history than at any time in the past fifty years.
As this book tries to show, the long shadow of World War Two lay heavy across postwar Europe.
Silence over Europe’s recent past was the necessary condition for the construction of a European future.
Today—in the wake of painful public debates in almost every other European country—it seems somehow fitting that Germans, too, should at last feel able openly to question the canons of well-intentioned official memory.
We may not be very comfortable with this; it may not even be a good portent.
Sixty years after Hitler’s death, his war and its consequences are entering history.
Postwar in Europe lasted a very long time, but it is finally coming to a close.
Wells, War in the Air ‘The human problem the war will leave behind it has not yet been imagined, much less faced by anybody.
Anne O’Hare McCormick ‘Everywhere there is a craving for miracles and cures.
Norman Lewis, Naples *44 Europe in the aftermath of the Second World War offered a prospect of utter misery and desolation.
Photographs and documentary films of the time show pitiful streams of helpless civilians trekking through a blasted landscape of broken cities and barren fields.
Orphaned children wander forlornly past groups of worn out women picking over heaps of masonry.
Shaven-headed deportees and concentration camp inmates in striped pyjamas stare listlessly at the camera, starving and diseased.
Even the trams, propelled uncertainly along damaged tracks by intermittently available electric current, appear shell-shocked.
Everyone and everything—with the notable exception of the well-fed Allied occupation forces—seems worn out, without resources, exhausted.
This image will need to be nuanced if we are to understand how that same shattered continent was able to recover so rapidly in years to come.
But it conveys an essential truth about the European condition in the wake of Germany’s defeat.
The European war that began with Hitler’s invasion of Poland in September 1939 and ended with Germany’s unconditional surrender in May 1945 was a total war.
Indeed, in those countries occupied by Nazi Germany, from France to the Ukraine, from Norway to Greece, World War Two was primarily a civilian experience.
Formal military combat was confined to the beginning and end of the conflict.
In some countries the occupation lasted most of the war; everywhere it brought fear and deprivation.
Unlike World War One, then, the Second War—Hitler’s War—was a nearuniversal experience.
And it lasted a long time—nearly six years for those countries that were engaged in it from beginning to end.
In Czechoslovakia it began earlier still, with the Nazi occupation of the Sudetenland in October 1938.
In eastern Europe and the Balkans it did not even end with the defeat of Hitler, since occupation and civil war continued long after the dismemberment of Germany.
Folk memories of the Thirty Years War in seventeenth-century Germany, during which foreign mercenary armies lived off the land and terrorized the local population, were still preserved three centuries later, in local myths and in fairy tales.
Well into the nineteen-thirties Spanish grandmothers were chastening wayward children with the threat of Napoleon.
But there was a peculiar intensity to the experience of occupation in World War Two.
In part this was because of the distinctive Nazi attitude towards subject populations.
Previous occupying armies—the Swedes in seventeenth-century Germany, the Prussians in France after 1815—lived off the land and assaulted and killed local civilians on an occasional and even random basis.
But the peoples who fell under German rule after 1939 were either put to the service of the Reich or else were scheduled for destruction.
Overseas, in their colonies, European states had habitually indentured or enslaved indigenous populations for their own benefit.
They had not been above the use of torture, mutilation or mass murder to coerce their victims into obedience.
But since the eighteenth century these practices were largely unknown among Europeans themselves, at least west of the Bug and Prut rivers.
It was in the Second World War, then, that the full force of the modern European state was mobilized for the first time, for the primary purpose of conquering and exploiting other Europeans.
Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, Bohemia-Moravia and, especially, France made significant involuntary contributions to the German war effort.
The Nazis lived for as long as they could off the wealth of their victims—so successfully in fact that it was not until 1944 that German civilians themselves began to feel the impact of wartime restrictions and shortages.
By then, however, the military conflict was closing in on them, first through Allied bombing campaigns, then with the simultaneous advance of Allied armies from east and west.
And it was in this final year of the war, during the relatively brief period of active campaigning west of the Soviet Union, that much of the worst physical destruction took place.
From the point of view of contemporaries the war’s impact was measured not in terms of industrial profit and loss, or the net value of national assets in 1945 when compared to 1938, but rather in the visible damage to their immediate environment and their communities.
It is with these that we must begin if we are to understand the trauma that lay behind the images of desolation and hopelessness that caught the attention of observers in 1945.
Very few European towns and cities of any size had survived the war unscathed.
By informal consent or good fortune the ancient and early-modern centers of a few celebrated European cities—Rome, Venice, Prague, Paris, Oxford—were never targeted.
But in the first year of the war German bombers had flattened Rotterdam and gone on to destroy the industrial English city of Coventry.
Whole districts of central London, notably in the poorer quarters around the docklands in the East End, had fallen victim to the Luftwaffe’s blitzkrieg in the course of the war.
But the greatest material damage was done by the unprecedented bombing campaigns of the Western Allies in 1944 and 1945, and the relentless advance of the Red Army from Stalingrad to Prague.
The French coastal towns of Royan, Le Havre and Caen were eviscerated by the United States Air force.
Hamburg, Cologne, Dusseldorf, Dresden and dozens of other German cities were laid waste by carpet-bombing from British and American planes.
In the east, 80 percent of the Byelorussian city of Minsk was destroyed by the end of the war; Kiev in the Ukraine was a smouldering ruin; while the Polish capital Warsaw was systematically torched and dynamited, house by house, street by street, by the retreating German army in the autumn of 1944.
When the war in Europe ended—when Berlin fell to the Red Army in May 1945 after taking 40,000 tons of shells in the final fourteen days—much of the German capital was reduced to smoking hillocks of rubble and twisted metal.
Ruined cities were the most obvious—and photogenic—evidence of the devastation, and they came to serve as a universal visual shorthand for the pity of war.
Because much of the damage had been done to houses and apartment buildings, and so many people were homeless as a result (an estimated 25 million people in 16 THE LEGACY OF WAR the Soviet Union, a further 20 million in Germany—500,000 of them in Hamburg alone), the rubble-strewn urban landscape was the most immediate reminder of the war that had just ended.
Many roads, rail tracks and bridges had been blown up—by the retreating Germans, the advancing Allies or the French Resistance.
But the French—like the British, the Belgians, the Dutch (who lost 219,000 hectares of land flooded by the Germans and were reduced by 1945 to 40 percent of their pre-war rail, road and canal transport), the Danes, the Norwegians (who had lost 14 percent of the country’s pre-war capital in the course of the German occupation), and even the Italians—were comparatively fortunate, though they did not know it.
The Nazis treated western Europeans with some respect, if only the better to exploit them, and western Europeans returned the compliment by doing relatively little to disrupt or oppose the German war effort.
In eastern and south-eastern Europe the occupying Germans were merciless, and not only because local partisans—in Greece, Yugoslavia and Ukraine especially—fought a relentless if hopeless battle against them.
The material consequences in the East of the German occupation, the Soviet advance and the partisan struggles were thus of an altogether different order from the experience of war in the West.
In the Soviet Union, 70,000 villages and 1,700 towns were destroyed in the course of the war, along with 32,000 factories and 40,000 miles of rail track.
In Greece, two-thirds of the country’s vital merchant marine fleet was lost, one-third of its forests were ruined and a thousand villages were obliterated.
Meanwhile the German policy of setting occupation-cost payments according to German military needs rather than the Greek capacity to pay generated hyperinflation.
Yugoslavia lost 25 percent of its vineyards, 50 percent of all livestock, 60 percent of the country’s roads, 75 percent of all its ploughs and railway bridges, one in five of its pre-war dwellings and a third of its limited industrial wealth—along with 10 percent of its pre-war population.
In Poland three-quarters of standard gauge rail tracks were unusable and one farm in six was out of operation.
Yet the material damage suffered by Europeans in the course of the war, terrible though it had been, was insignificant when set against the human losses.
It dwarfs the mortality figures for the Great War of 1914-18, obscene as those were.
No other conflict in recorded history killed so many people in so short a time.
The numbers of civilian dead exceeded military losses in the USSR, Hungary, Poland, Yugoslavia, Greece, France, the Netherlands, Belgium and Norway.
Only in the UK and Germany did military losses significantly outnumber civilian ones.
Civilian deaths on the territory of pre-war Poland approached 5 million; in Yugoslavia 1. million; in Greece 430,000; in France 350,000; in Hungary 270,000; in the Netherlands 204,000; in Romania 200,000.
The greatest military losses were incurred by the Soviet Union, which is thought to have lost 8. million men and women under arms; Germany, with 4 million casualties; Italy, which lost 400,000 soldiers, sailors and airmen; and Romania, some 300,000 of whose military were killed, mostly fighting with the Axis armies on the Russian front.
In proportion to their populations, however, the Austrians, Hungarians, Albanians and Yugoslavs suffered the greatest military losses.
Taking all deaths—civilian and military alike—into account, Poland, Yugoslavia, the USSR and Greece were the worst affected.
Poland lost about one in five of her pre-war population, including a far higher percentage of the educated population, deliberately targeted for destruction by the Nazis.
Yugoslavia lost one person in eight of the country’s pre-war population, the USSR one in 11, Greece one in 14.
To point up the contrast, Germany suffered a rate of loss of 1/15; France 1/77; Britain 1/125.
The Germans captured some 5. million Soviet soldiers in the course of the war, three quarters of them in the first seven months following the attack on the USSR in June 1941.
Of these, 3. million died from starvation, exposure and mistreatment in German camps— more Russians died in German prisoner-of-war camps in the years 1941-45 than in all of World War One.
Of the 750,000 Soviet soldiers captured when the Germans took Kiev in September 1941, just 22,000 lived to see Germany defeated.
The Soviets in their turn took 3. million prisoners of war (German, Austrian, Romanian and Hungarian for the most part); most of them returned home after the war.
In view of these figures, it is hardly surprising that post-war Europe, especially central and eastern Europe, suffered an acute shortage of men.
In the Soviet Union the number of women exceeded men by 20 million, an imbalance that would take more than a generation to correct.
In Yugoslavia—thanks to German reprisal actions in which all males over 15 were shot—there were many villages with no adult men left at all.
Much has been made of this over-representation of women in post-war Germany especially.
But whereas Fassbinder’s Maria carried the burden of a later generation’s resentful disillusion, the real women of 1945 Germany faced more immediate difficulties.
In the final months of the war, as the Soviet armies pushed west into central Europe and eastern Prussia, millions of civilians—most of them German—fled before them.
A slightly larger number of women in Berlin were raped in the Soviet march on the city, most of them in the week of May 2nd-7th, immediately preceding the German surrender.
Both of these figures are surely an underestimate, and they do not include the uncounted number of assaults on women in the villages and towns that lay in the path of the Soviet forces in their advance into Austria and across western Poland into Germany.
Milovan Djilas, Tito’s close collaborator in the Yugoslav partisan army and at the time a fervent Communist, even raised the matter with Stalin himself.
Many of its infantry and tank crews had fought their way back for three terrible years in an unbroken series of battles and marches across the western USSR, through Russia and Ukraine.
In the course of their advance they saw and heard copious evidence of German atrocities.
The Wehrmacht’s treatment of war prisoners, of civilians, of partisans and indeed of anyone or anything that got in its way, first in its proud advance to the Volga and the gates of Moscow and Leningrad, then in its bitter, bloody retreat, had left its mark on the face of the land and in the soul of the people.
When the Red Army finally reached central Europe, its exhausted soldiers encountered another world.
The contrast between Russia and the West was always great—Czar Alexander I had long ago regretted allowing Russians to see how Westerners lived—and it had grown even sharper during the war.
While German soldiers wreaked devastation and mass murder in the East, Germany itself remained prosperous—so much so that its civilian population had very little sense of the material cost of war until quite late in the conflict.
Wartime Germany was a world of towns, of electricity, of food and clothing and shops and consumer goods, of reasonably well-fed women and children.
The contrast with his own devastated homeland must have seemed unfathomable to the common Soviet soldier.
The Germans had done terrible things to Russia; now it was their turn to suffer.
With the tacit consent of its commanders, the Red Army was turned loose on the civilian population of the newlyconquered German lands.
On its route west the Red Army raped and pillaged (the phrase, for once, is brutally apt) in Hungary, Romania, Slovakia and Yugoslavia; but German women suffered by far the worst.
Between 150,000 and 200,000 ‘Russian babies’ were born in the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany in 1945-46, and these figures make no al20 THE LEGACY OF WAR lowance for untold numbers of abortions, as a result of which many women died along with their unwanted foetuses.
In Berlin alone, there were some 53,000 lost children by the end of 1945.
The Quirinale gardens in Rome became briefly notorious as a gathering place for thousands of Italy’s mutilated, disfigured and unclaimed children.
In liberated Czechoslovakia there were 49,000 orphaned children; in the Netherlands, 60,000; in Poland it was estimated that there were about 200,000 orphans, in Yugoslavia perhaps 300,000.
Few of the younger children were Jewish—such Jewish children as survived the pogroms and exterminations of the war years were mostly adolescent boys.
Thanks to early and effective intervention by the newly formed United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration and the occupying allied armies, large-scale epidemics and the uncontrolled spread of contagious diseases were avoided—the memory of the Asian ’flu that swept through Europe in the wake of the First World War was still fresh.
During the Dutch ‘hunger winter’ of 1944-45 (when parts of the country had already been liberated) the weekly calorie ration in some regions fell below the daily allocation recommended by the Allied Expeditionary Force for its soldiers; 16,000 Dutch citizens died, mostly old people and children.
In Germany, where the average adult intake had been 2,445 calories per day in 1940-41 and was 2,078 calories per day in 1943, it had fallen to 1,412 calories for the year 1945-46.
But the situation was not much better in most of Italy and somewhat worse in some districts of Yugoslavia and Greece.
The problem lay partly in destroyed farms, partly in disrupted communications and mostly in the sheer numbers of helpless, unproductive mouths needing to be fed.
Where Europe’s farmers could grow food they were reluctant to supply it to the towns.
Most European currencies were worthless; and even if there had been the wherewithal to pay peasants for their food in some hard currency, the latter held little attraction for them—there was nothing to buy.
One third of the population of Piraeus, in Greece, suffered from trachoma in 1945 due to acute vitamin deficiency.
Robert Murphy, the United States political adviser for Germany, reported in October 1945 that an average of ten people daily were dying at the Lehrter railway station in Berlin from exhaustion, malnutrition and illness.
In the British Zone of Berlin, in December 1945, the death rate of children under one year was one in four, while during that same month there were 1,023 new cases of typhoid and 2,193 cases of diphtheria.
For many weeks after the end of the war, in the summer of 1945, there was a serious risk, in Berlin especially, of disease from rotting corpses.
The Czechoslovak authorities in January 1946 reported that half of the 700,000 needy children in the country were infected with the disease.
Otherwise healthy children died from a shortage of milk (millions of head of European cattle were slaughtered in the battles across southern and eastern Europe in 1944-45) and most were chronically undernourished.
Infant mortality in Vienna during the summer of 1945 was nearly four times the rate in 1938.
Even in the relatively prosperous streets of western cities children went hungry and food was strictly rationed.
The problem of feeding, housing, clothing and caring for Europe’s battered civilians was complicated and magnified by the unique scale of the refugee crisis.
But in World War Two it was state policies rather than armed conflict that did the worst damage.
Stalin had continued his pre-war practice of transferring whole peoples across the Soviet empire.
Well over a million people were deported east from Sovietoccupied Poland and the western Ukraine and Baltic lands between 1939-41.
In the same years the Nazis too expelled 750,000 Polish peasants eastwards from western Poland, offering the vacated land to Volksdeutsche , ethnic Germans from occupied eastern Europe who were invited to ‘come home’ to the newly-expanded Reich.
This offer attracted some 120,000 Baltic Germans, a further 136,000 from Sovietoccupied Poland, 200,000 from Romania and others besides—all of whom would in their turn be expelled a few years later.
Hitler’s policy of racial transfers and genocide in Germany’s conquered eastern lands must thus be understood in direct relation to the Nazis’ project of returning to the Reich (and settling in the 22 THE LEGACY OF WAR newly-cleared property of their victims) all the far-flung settlements of Germans dating back to medieval times.
The Germans removed Slavs, exterminated Jews and imported slave workers from west and east alike.
Between them Stalin and Hitler uprooted, transplanted, expelled, deported and dispersed some 30 million people in the years 1939-43.
Newly-resettled Germans joined millions of established German communities throughout eastern Europe in headlong flight from the Red Army.
Those who made it safely into Germany were joined there by a pullulating throng of other displaced persons.
Women who had lost husbands and children, men who had lost their wives; men and women who had lost their homes and children; families who had lost vast farms and estates, shops, distilleries, factories, flour-mills, mansions.
There were also little children who were alone, carrying some small bundle, with a pathetic label attached to them.
From the Balkans came not just ethnic Germans but more than 100,000 Croats from the fallen wartime fascist regime of Ante Pavelic, fleeing the wrath of Tito’s partisans.
Then there were the newly-released men and women who had been recruited by the Nazis to work in Germany.
Brought into German farms and factories from all across the continent, they numbered many millions, spread across Germany 3 They had good grounds for fear.
Involuntary economic migration was thus the primary social experience of World War Two for many European civilians, including 280,000 Italians forcibly removed to Germany by their former ally after Italy’s capitulation to the Allies in September 1943.
Most of Germany’s foreign workers had been brought there against their will— but not all.
Some foreign workers caught in the slipstream of German defeat in May 1945 had come of their own free will—like those unemployed Dutchmen who accepted offers of work in Nazi Germany before 1939 and stayed on.
Even at the derisory wages paid by wartime German employers, men and women from eastern Europe, the Balkans, France and the Benelux countries were often better off there than staying at home.
Another group of displaced persons, the survivors of the concentration camps, felt rather differently.
Their ‘crimes’ had been various—political or religious opposition to Nazism or Fascism, armed resistance, collective punishment for attacks on Wehrmacht soldiers or installations, minor transgressions of Occupation regulations, real or invented criminal activities, falling foul of Nazi racial laws.
But even these survivors were better off than the Jews, since they had not been systematically and collectively scheduled for extermination.
Of those who were liberated 4 out of 10 died within a few weeks of the arrival of Allied armies—their condition was beyond the experience of Western medicine.
But the surviving Jews, like most of Europe’s other homeless millions, found their way into Germany.
Germany was where the Allied agencies and camps were to be situated—and anyway, eastern Europe was still not safe for Jews.
What was taking place in 1945, and had been underway for at least a year, was thus an unprecedented exercise in ethnic cleansing and population transfer.
Jewish survivors leaving a Poland where they were unsafe and unwanted, for example, or Italians departing 4 Yet they, too, had little real choice—during the Depression years anyone who refused a proffered work contract from Germany risked losing his Dutch unemployment benefits.
Many ethnic minorities who had collaborated with occupying forces (Italians in Yugoslavia, Hungarians in Hungarian-occupied northern Transylvania now returned to Romanian rule, Ukrainians in the western Soviet Union, etc) fled with the retreating Wehrmacht to avoid retribution from the local majority or the advancing Red Army, and never returned.
Their departure may not have been legally mandated or enforced by local authorities, but they had little option.
Elsewhere, however, official policy was at work well before the war ended.
The Germans of course began this, with the removal and genocide of the Jews, and the mass expulsions of Poles and other Slav nations.
Under German aegis between 1939 and 1943 Romanians and Hungarians shunted back and forth across new frontier lines in disputed Transylvania.
The Soviet authorities in their turn engineered a series of forced population exchanges between Ukraine and Poland; one million Poles fled or were expelled from their homes in what was now western Ukraine, while half a million Ukrainians left Poland for the Soviet Union between October 1944 and June 1946.
In the course of a few months what had once been an intermixed region of different faiths, languages and communities became two distinct, mono-ethnic territories.
Bulgaria transferred 160,000 Turks to Turkey; Czechoslovakia, under a February 1946 agreement with Hungary, exchanged the 120,000 Slovaks living in Hungary for an equivalent number of Hungarians from communities north of the Danube, in Slovakia.
Other transfers of this kind took place between Poland and Lithuania and between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union; 400,000 people from southern Yugoslavia were moved to land in the north to take the place of 600,000 departed Germans and Italians.
Between a genuine popular desire to punish local Germans for the ravages of war and occupation, and the exploitation of this mood by post-war governments, the German-speaking communities of Yugoslavia, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, the Baltic region and the western Soviet Union were doomed and they knew it.
As early as 1942 the British had privately acceded to Czech requests for a post-war removal of the Sudeten German population, and the Russians and Americans fell into line the following year.
In June 1945 their land was expropriated and on August 2nd of that year they lost their Czechoslovak citizenship.
Nearly three million Germans, most of them from the Czech Sudetenland, were then expelled into Germany in the course of the following eighteen months.
Whereas Germans had comprised 29 percent of the population of Bohemia and Moravia in 1930, by the census of 1950 they were just 1. percent.
From Hungary a further 623,000 Germans were expelled, from Romania 786,000, from Yugoslavia about half a million and from Poland 1. million.
In part this merely recognized what had already taken place, but it also represented a formal acknowledgement of the implications of shifting Poland’s frontiers westwards.
Some seven million Germans would now find themselves in Poland, and the Polish authorities (and the occupying Soviet forces) wanted them removed—in part so that Poles and others who lost land in the eastern regions now absorbed into the USSR could in their turn be resettled in the new lands to the west.
In the Potsdam Declaration it was agreed ‘that any transfers that take place should be effected in an orderly and humane manner’, but under the circumstances this was hardly likely.
Some Western observers were shocked at the treatment of the German communities.
Indeed, the 13 million expellees were settled and integrated into West German society with remarkable success, though memories remain and in Bavaria the subject can still provoke intense feeling.
To contemporary ears it is perhaps a little jarring to hear the German expulsions described as a ‘crime against humanity’ a few months after the revelation of crimes on an altogether different scale committed in the name of those same Germans.
But then the Germans were alive and present, whereas their victims—Jews above all—were mostly dead and gone.
At the conclusion of the First World War it was borders that were invented and adjusted, while people were on the whole left in place.
There was a feeling among Western policymakers that the League of Nations, and the minority clauses in the Versailles Treaties, had failed and that it would be a mistake even to try and resurrect them.
For this reason they acquiesced readily enough in the population transfers.
If the surviving minorities of central and eastern Europe could not be afforded effective international protection, then it was as well that they be dispatched to more accommodating locations.
The term ‘ethnic cleansing 5 did not yet exist, but the reality surely did—and it was far from arousing wholesale disapproval or embarrassment.
The geographical re-arrangement of Poland—losing 69,000 square miles of its eastern borderlands to the Soviet Union and being compensated with 40,000 square miles of rather better land from German territories east of the Oder-Neisse rivers—was dramatic and consequential for Poles, Ukrainians and Germans in the affected lands.
Bulgaria recovered a sliver of land from Romania in the Dobrudja region; the Czechoslovaks obtained from Hungary three villages on the right bank of the Danube opposite Bratislava; Tito was able to hold on to part of the formerly Italian territory around Trieste and in Venezia Giulia that his forces occupied at the end of the war.
Otherwise land seized by force between 1938 and 1945 was returned and the status quo ante restored.
With certain exceptions, the outcome was a Europe of nation states more ethnically homogenous than ever before.
Romania still had a sizeable Hungarian minority in Transylvania and uncounted numbers—millions—of gypsies.
But Poland, whose population was just 68 percent Polish in 1938, was overwhelmingly populated by Poles in 1946.
The ancient diasporas of Europe—Greeks and Turks in the south Balkans and around the Black Sea, Italians in Dalmatia, Hungarians in Transylvania and the north Balkans, Poles in Volhynia , Lithuania and the Bukovina, Germans from the Baltic to the Black Sea, from the Rhine to the Volga, and Jews everywhere—shriveled and disappeared.
Most of the initial management of the displaced persons and refugees— gathering them up, establishing camps for them and providing food, clothing and medical help was undertaken by the Allied armies occupying Germany, the United States Army especially.
There was no other authority in Germany but also in Austria and in northern Italy, the other areas in which refugees congregated.
Only the army had the resources and the organizational capacity to administer the demographic equivalent of a medium-sized country.
This was an unprecedented charge for a huge military machine that, just a few weeks before, had been devoted almost exclusively to the business of fighting the Wehrmacht.
Once the system of camps had been set in place, however, responsibility for the care and eventual repatriation or resettlement of the displaced millions fell increasingly on the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration.
UNRRA was founded in November 9th 1943 at a Washington meeting of representatives from 44 future UN members, held in anticipation of likely post-war needs, and went on to play a vital role in the post-war emergency.
The agency spent $10 billion between July 1945 and June 1947, almost all of it furnished by the governments of the USA, Canada and the United Kingdom.
A lot of that aid went directly to former allies in eastern Europe—Poland, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia—and to the Soviet Union, as well as to the administration of displaced persons in Germany and elsewhere.
Of the former Axis countries only Hungary received UNRRA assistance, and not very much at that.
At its peak, in September 1945, the number of liberated United Nations civilians (i.e. not including citizens of former Axis countries) being cared for or repatriated by UNRRA and other Allied agencies was 6,795,000—to whom should be added a further 7 million under Soviet authority and many millions of displaced Germans.
Then came 2 million French (prisoners of war, labourers and deportees), 1. million Poles, 700,000 Italians, 350,000 Czechs, more than 300,000 Dutch, 300,000 Belgians and countless others.
In Poland UNRRA helped maintain food consumption at 60 percent of pre-war levels, in Czechoslovakia at 80 percent.
In Germany and Austria it shared responsibility for handling displaced persons and refugees with the International Refugee Organisation , whose statutes were approved by the General Assembly of the UN in December 1946.
In its first budget the United States’ share was 46 percent, rising to 60 percent by 1949; the United Kingdom contributed 15 percent, France 4 percent.
Because of disagreement between the Western allies and the Soviet Union over the issue of forced repatriations, the IRO was always regarded by the USSR (and later by the Soviet bloc) as a purely Western instrument and its services were thus confined to refugees in areas controlled by Western armies of occupation.
Moreover, since it was devoted to servicing the needs of refugees, German displaced persons were also debarred from its benefits.
This distinction between displaced persons (assumed to have, somewhere, a home to go to) and refugees was just one of many nuances that were introduced in these years.
This distinction was also invoked when establishing priorities for the repatriation of refugees.
The first to be processed and sent home were UN nationals liberated from concentration camps; then came UN nationals who had been prisoners of war, followed by UN nationals who were displaced persons (former forced labourers in many cases), then displaced persons from Italy and finally the nationals of former enemy states.
Italians had to wait longer, as former enemy nationals and because the Italian government had no coordinated plan to repatriate its citizens.
Some displaced persons from eastern Europe were technically stateless and had no country to which to return.
Under an agreement signed at Halle, in Germany, in May 1945 all former prisoners of war and other citizens of the Soviet Union were to return home, and it was assumed that they would wish to do so.
A large number of former Soviet, Polish, Romanian and Yugoslav citizens also preferred to remain in temporary camps in Germany rather than return to their countries.
In the case of Soviet citizens this reluctance often arose from a well-founded fear of reprisals against anyone who had spent time in the West, even if that time had been passed in a prison camp.
Throughout 1945 and 1946 Western authorities preferred to ignore such feelings on the whole and oblige Soviet and other east European citizens to return home, sometimes by force.
With Soviet officials actively rounding up their own people from German camps, refugees from the East sought desperately to convince bemused French, American or British officials that they did not want to return ‘home’ and would rather stay in Germany—of all places.
By 1953 a total of five and a half million So7 At the end of May 1945 the British Army turned over to Yugoslav authorities 10,000 Slovenian soldiers and civilians who had fled to Austria.
Most of them were trucked south to the Kocevje forests and summarily shot.
Many more were sent directly into Siberian exile or else assigned to labour battalions.
A total of one and a half million Poles, Hungarians, Bulgarians, Romanians, Yugoslavs, Soviet nationals and Jews thus successfully resisted repatriation.
Together with Balts these formed the overwhelming majority of displaced persons left in the western zones of Germany and Austria, and in Italy.
In 1951 the European Convention on Human Rights would codify the protection to which such displaced aliens were entitled, and finally guarantee them against forcible return to persecution.
West European states, short of labour and in the midst of economic and material reconstruction, were initially quite open to importing certain categories of stateless person.
Belgium, France and Britain especially needed coalminers, construction workers and agricultural labourers.
In 1946-47 Belgium took in 22,000 displaced persons (along with their families) to work in the mines of Wallonia.
Britain took 86,000 persons in this way, including many veterans of the Polish army and Ukrainians who had fought in the Waffen SS ‘Halychnya’ Division.
The criteria for admission were simple—western European states were interested in strong manual workers, and were not embarrassed to favour Balts, Poles and Ukrainians on those grounds, whatever their wartime record.
Single women were welcome as manual workers or domestics—but the Canadian Labor Department in 1948 rejected girls and women applying to emigrate to Canada for jobs in domestic service if there was any sign that they had education beyond secondary school.
Refugees in general, then, were not met with open arms—post-war polls in the United States and western Europe revealed very little sympathy for their plight.
Most people expressed a desire to see immigration reduced rather than increased.
At first the Western authorities treated Jewish DPs like any other, corralling them in camps in Germany alongside many 8 The Halychnya or Galician Division of the Waffen SS was made up of Ukrainians who had been citizens of inter-war Poland and whose region of origin was incorporated into the USSR after the war.
By the end of September 1945, all Jews in the United States Zone were being cared for separately.
There had never been any question of returning Jews to the east—no-one in the Soviet Union, Poland or anywhere else evinced the slightest interest in having them back.
Nor were Jews particularly welcome in the west, especially if educated or qualified in non-manual professions.
A further 165,000 eventually left for France, Britain, Australia and North or South America.
There they would be joined by the remaining displaced persons and refugees from World War Two, to whom should be added a new generation of political refugees from east-central European countries in the years 1947-49.
Overall the United States admitted 400,000 people in these years, with another 185,000 arriving in the course of the years 1953-57.
Some people, notably certain categories of ethnic Germans from Yugoslavia and Romania, were left in limbo because the Potsdam agreements did not cover their case.
But in the course of half a dozen years, operating in a scarred, embittered and impoverished continent emerging from six years of terrible war and already anticipating the divisions of the Cold War, the Allied Military Governments and the UN civilian agencies succeeded in repatriating, integrating or resettling unprecedented numbers—many millions— of desperate people from all across the continent and dozens of different nations and communities.
By the end of 1951, when UNRRA and the IRO were replaced by the newly-established United Nations High Commission for Refugees, there were just 177,000 people left in displaced persons camps in Europe—mosdy the aged and the infirm, because no-one wanted them.
The last DP camp in Germany, at Foehrenwald in Bavaria, closed in 1957.
The displaced persons and refugees of Europe had survived not just a general war but a whole series of local, civil wars.
Indeed, from 1934 through 1949, Europe saw an unprecedented sequence of murderous civil conflicts within the boundaries of existing states.
In many cases subsequent foreign occupation—whether by Germans, Italians or Russians—served above all to facilitate and legitimize the pursuit 32 THE LEGACY OF WAR of pre-war political agendas and antagonisms by new and violent means.
Typically they joined forces with factions within the occupied nation to fight a common foe.
In this way, a political tendency or ethnic minority that had been at a disadvantage in peacetime politics was able to exploit the altered circumstances to settle local scores.
Since 1945 the term ‘collaborators’ has acquired a distinctive and pejorative moral connotation.
But wartime divisions and affiliations often carried local implications altogether more complicated and ambiguous than the simple post-war attributions—of ‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’—would imply.
Thus in occupied Belgium some Flemish-speakers, repeating a mistake they had already made in the First World War, were tempted by the promise of autonomy and a chance to break the French-speaking elite’s hold on the Belgian state, and welcomed German rule.
Here as elsewhere the Nazis willingly played the communal card so long as it suited their purposes—Flemish-speaking Belgian prisoners of war were released in 1940 when hostilities ceased, whereas French-speaking Walloons remained in p-o-w camps throughout the war.
In France and Belgium, as also in Norway, resistance against the Germans was real, especially in the last two years of the occupation when Nazi efforts to pressgang young men into forced labour in Germany drove many of them to opt for the maquis as a lesser risk.
But not until the very end of the occupation did the number of active resisters exceed the numbers of those who collaborated with the Nazis out of belief, venality or self-interest—in France it has been estimated that the likely numbers of fully engaged men and women was about the same on both sides, between 160,000-170,000 at most.
The Fascists had been in power for twenty years when Mussolini was overthrown in a palace coup in July 1943.
Perhaps for this reason, there was little local resistance to the regime; most active antiFascists were in exile.
After September 1943, when the country officially became a ‘co-belligerent’ on the Allied side, the German-occupied north of the country was torn between a puppet regime—Mussolini’s ‘Republic of Said’—and a small but courageous partisan resistance co-operating with and sometimes supported by the advancing Allied armies.
But here, too, what was presented by both camps as a majority of right-thinking Italians locked in conflict with a marginal band of murderous terrorists in league with a foreign power was actually, for the years 1943-45, a genuine civil war, with significant numbers of Italians engaged on either side.
The anti-Fascist resistance was in reality one side in a struggle among Italians whose memory came to be conveniently occluded in the post-war decades.
Slovaks and Croats took advantage of the German presence to establish notionally independent states in accordance with the cherished projects of pre-war separatist parties.
In Poland the Germans were not looking for collaborators; but further north—in the Baltic States and even Finland—the Wehrmacht was initially welcomed as an alternative to occupation and absorption by the Soviet Union.
Ukrainians especially did their best to capitalize on German occupation after 1941 to secure their long-sought independence, and the lands of eastern Galicia and western Ukraine saw a murderous civil conflict between Ukrainian and Polish partisans under the aegis of both antiNazi and anti-Soviet partisan warfare.
Poles and Ukrainians fought with or against the Wehrmacht, the Red Army and each other according to the moment and the place.
In Poland this conflict, which after 1944 transmuted into guerilla warfare against the Communist state, took the lives of some 30,000 Poles in the years 1945-48.
In the Soviet-occupied Ukraine, the last partisan commander, Roman Shukhevych, was killed near Lviv in 1950, though sporadic anti-Soviet activity persisted for a few years more in Ukraine and Estonia in particular.
It was in the Balkans, however, that the Second World War was experienced above all as a civil war, and a uniquely murderous one at that.
In Yugoslavia the meaning of conventional labels—collaborator, resister—was particularly opaque.
Thus Ante Pavelics Ustase regime in the Croatian puppet state murdered Serbs and Muslims.
For this reason if no other the Muslims of Bosnia sometimes cooperated with the German armies in their own defence.
Titos Communist partisans, despite their strategic goal of ridding Yugoslavia of German and Italian forces, devoted time and resources to destroying the Chetniks first—not least just 9 The wartime ‘Chetnik’ partisans were named after upland guerilla bands who had fought against Serbia’s Ottoman rulers in the eighteenth century.
Further south, Greece—like Yugoslavia—experienced World War Two as a cycle of invasion, occupation, resistance, reprisals and civil war, culminating in five weeks of clashes in Athens between Communists and the royalist-backing British forces in December 1944, after which an armistice was agreed upon in February 1945.
Fighting broke out again in 1946, however, and lasted three more years, ending with the rout of the Communists from their strongholds in the mountainous north.
While there is no doubt that the Greek resistance to the Italians and the Germans was more effective than the better known resistance movements in France or Italy— in 1943-44 alone it killed or wounded over 6,000 German soldiers—the harm it brought to Greeks themselves was greater still by far.
The KKE guerillas and the Athens-based and western-backed government of the king terrorized villages, destroyed communications and divided the country for decades to come.
By the time the fighting was over, in September 1949,10 percent of the population was homeless.
The Greek civil war lacked many of the ethnic complexities of the fighting in Yugoslavia and Ukraine, 10 but in human terms it was costlier still The post-war impact of these European civil wars was immense.
Together with the unprecedented brutality of the Nazi and, later, Soviet occupations they corroded the very fabric of the European state.
In the truest sense of a much-abused term, they transformed World War Two— Hitler’s war—into a social revolution.
To begin with, the serial occupation of territory by foreign powers inevitably eroded the authority and legitimacy of local rulers.
Purportedly autonomous in name, the Vichy regime in France—like Father Jozef Tiso’s Slovak state or Pavelic’s Ustase regime in Zagreb—was a dependent agent of Hitler and most people knew it.
Further east the Nazis and later the Soviets replaced preexisting institutions with men and machinery of their own, except where it suited them to exploit for a while local divisions and ambitions for their own advantage.
Ironically, it was only in those countries allied with the Nazis—Finland, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary—and thus left to rule themselves that a degree of real local independence was preserved, at least until 1944.
Some countries—Poland, the Baltic states, Greece, Yugoslavia—were occupied three times in five years.
With each succeeding invasion the previous regime was destroyed, its authority dismantled, its elites reduced.
The result in some places was a clean slate, with all the old hierarchies discredited and their representatives compromised.
In Greece, for example, the pre-war dictator Metaxas had swept aside the old parliamentary class.
Then the Germans too were pushed out in their turn, and those who had collaborated with them stood vulnerable and disgraced.
The liquidation of old social and economic elites was perhaps the most dramatic change.
The Nazis’ extermination of Europe’s Jews was not only devastating in its own right.
Later, often in the very same towns, another important part of the local bourgeoisie—the Germans—was also removed, as we have seen.
The outcome was a radical transformation of the social landscape—and an opportunity for Poles, Balts, Ukrainians, Slovaks, Hungarians and others to move up into the jobs of the departed.
This leveling process, whereby the native populations of central and eastern Europe took the place of the banished minorities, was Hitler’s most enduring contribution to European social history.
The German plan had been to destroy the Jews and the educated local intelligentsia in Poland and the western Soviet Union, reduce the rest of the Slav peoples to neo-serfdom and place the land and the government in the hands of resettled Germans.
But with the arrival of the Red Army and the expulsion of the Germans the new situation proved uniquely well adapted to the more truly radicalizing projects of the Soviets.
One reason for this was that the occupation years had seen not just rapid and bloodily-enforced upward social mobility but also the utter collapse of law and the habits of life in a legal state.
It is misleading to think of the German occupation of continental Europe as a time of pacification and order under the eye of an omniscient and ubiquitous power.
Most common people who did not have access to farm produce were obliged, for example, to resort to the black market or illegal barter just to feed their families.
Theft—whether from the state, from a fellow citizen or from a looted Jewish store—was so widespread that in the eyes of many people it ceased to be a crime.
The ultimate authority of the modern state has always rested in extremis on its monopoly of violence and its willingness to deploy force if necessary.
But in occupied Europe authority was a function of force alone, deployed without inhibition.
Curiously enough, it was precisely in these circumstances that the state lost its monopoly of violence.
This was most obviously true in the more remote regions of Greece, Montenegro and the eastern marches of Poland where the authority of modern states had never been very firm.
But by the end of World War Two it also applied in parts of France and Italy.
As occupying forces, both Nazis and Soviets precipitated a war of all against all.
They discouraged not just allegiance to the defunct authority of the previous regime or state, but any sense of civility or bond between individuals, and on the whole they were successful.
Indeed, it was often prudent to go further and curry pre-emptive favour with the authorities by getting your neighbour in trouble.
Throughout German-occupied Europe until the very end, the incidence of anonymous reports, personal accusations and plain rumours was strikingly high.
Between 1940 and 1944 there were huge numbers of denunciations to the SS, the Gestapo and local police in Hungary, Norway, the Netherlands and France.
Under Soviet rule, too—notably in Soviet-occupied eastern Poland from 1939-41—the Jacobin-style encouragement of informers and the revolutionary habit of casting doubt on the loyalty of others flourished unrestrained.
For most Europeans in the years i939~45 rights —civil, legal, political—no longer existed.
The state ceased to be the repository of law and justice; on the contrary, under Hitler’s New Order government was itself the leading predator.
The Nazis’ attitude to life and limb is justifiably notorious; but their treatment of property may actually have been their most important practical legacy to the shape of the post-war world.
Europe’s Jews were simply stripped of money, goods, homes, shops and businesses.
Their property was divided up among Nazis, collaborators and their friends, with the residue made available for looting and theft by the local community.
The right’ of possession was shown to be fragile, often meaningless, resting exclusively on the goodwill, interests or whim of those in power.
There were winners as well as losers in this radical series of involuntary property transactions.
With Jews and other ethnic victims gone, their shops and apartments could be occupied by local people; their tools, furniture and clothes were confiscated or stolen by new owners.
This process went furthest in the ‘killing zone’ from Odessa to the Baltic, but it happened everywhere—returning concentration camp survivors in Paris or Prague in 1945 often found their home occupied by wartime ‘squatters’ who angrily asserted their own claim and refused to leave.
In this way hundreds of thousands of ordinary Hungarians, Poles, Czechs, Dutch, French and others became complicit in the Nazi genocide, if only as its beneficiaries.
In every occupied country factories, vehicles, land, machinery and finished goods were expropriated without compensation for the benefit of the new rulers in what amounted to wholesale de facto nationalization.
In central and eastern Europe especially, substantial private holdings and a number of financial institutions were taken over by the Nazis for their war economy.
The disastrous turn to autarky in the region after 1931 had entailed a high level of state intervention and manipulation and in Poland, Hungary and Romania the state-owned business sector had expanded considerably in the immediate pre-war and early war years, as a pre-emptive defense against German economic penetration.
State-direction of the economy in eastern Europe did not begin in 1945.
The post-war dispossession of the German populations from Poland to Yugoslavia completed the radical transformation that had begun with the Germans’ own removal of the Jews.
Many ethnic Germans in the Sudetenland, Silesia, Transylvania and northern Yugoslavia owned significant holdings in land.
When these were taken into state hands for redistribution the impact was immediate.
In Czechoslova38 THE LEGACY OF WAR kia, goods and property seized from the Germans and their collaborators amounted to one-quarter of the national wealth, while the redistribution of farmland alone directly benefited over 300,000 peasants, agricultural labourers and their families.
Like the war itself, they represented both a radical caesura, a clear break with the past, and a preparation for even bigger changes still to come.
In liberated western Europe there was little German-owned property to redistribute and the war had not been experienced as quite the cataclysm that it was further east.
But there, too, the legitimacy of constituted authorities was cast into question.
The local administrations in France, Norway and the Benelux countries had not covered themselves in glory.
On the contrary, they had on the whole performed with alacrity the occupiers’ bidding.
So confident were they of the reliability of the French police and militias that they assigned (in addition to their administrative staff) a mere 6,000 German civil and military police to ensure the compliance of a nation of 35 million.
In postwar testimony the head of German security in Amsterdam averred that ‘the main support of the German forces in the police sector and beyond was the Dutch police.
Contrast Yugoslavia, which required the unflagging attention of entire German military divisions just to contain the armed partisans.
The Norwegians, Danes, Dutch, Belgians, French and, after September 1943, the Italians were humiliated and exploited.
But unless they were Jews, or Communists or resisters of one kind or another they were, on the whole, left alone.
In consequence, the liberated peoples of western Europe could imagine a return to something resembling the past.
Indeed, even the parliamentary democracies of the inter-war years now looked a bit less shabby thanks to the Nazi interlude—Hitler had successfully discredited at least one radical alternative to political pluralism and the rule of law.
The exhausted populations of continental western Europe aspired above all to recover the trappings of normal life in a properly regulated state.
The situation in the newly liberated states of western Europe, then, was bad enough.
McCloy was speaking of Germany, where the Alu Note though that the Protectorate of Bohemia was run in 1942 by just 1,900 German bureaucrats.
Thus it was Hitler, at least as much as Stalin, who drove a wedge into the continent and divided it.
The history of central Europe—of the lands of the German and Habsburg Empires, the northern parts of the old Ottoman Empire and even the westernmost territories of the Russian Czars—had always been different in degree from that of the nation states of the West.
Before 1939 Hungarians, Romanians, Czechs, Poles, Croats and Balts might look enviously upon the more fortunate inhabitants of France or the Low Countries.
But they saw no reason not to aspire to similar prosperity and stability in their own right.
The Czech economy in 1937 outperformed its Austrian neighbour and was competitive with Belgium.
East of the Elbe, the Soviets and their local representatives inherited a sub-continent where a radical break with the past had already taken place.
Exiled governments from Oslo, Brussels or the Hague could return from London and hope to take up the legitimate authority they had been forced to relinquish in 1940.
It remained only to decide the political shape of the new order that must now replace the unrecoverable past.
Resolution of Czechoslovak resistance organizations, demanding severe punishment for Father JozefTiso, November 1946 In order for the governments of liberated Europe to be legitimate, to claim for themselves the authority of properly-constituted states, they had first to deal with the legacy of the discredited wartime regimes.
The Nazis and their friends had been defeated, but in view of the scale of their crimes this was obviously not enough.
It was important to define the latter’s activities as crimes and punish them accordingly.
For most Europeans World War Two was experienced not as a war of movement and battle but as a daily degradation, in the course of which men and women were betrayed and humiliated, forced into daily acts of petty crime and self-abasement, in which everyone lost something and many lost everything.
Moreover, and in marked contrast to the still living memory of the Great War in many places, there was in 1945 little of which to be proud and much about which to feel embarrassed and more than a little guilty.
As we have seen, most Europeans experienced the war passively—defeated and occupied by one set of foreigners and then liberated by another.
The only source of collective national pride were the armed partisan resistance movements that had fought the invader—which is why it was in western Europe, where real resistance had actually been least in evidence, that the myth of Resistance mattered most.
In liberated Poland, for example, the Soviet authorities did not welcome public praise for armed partisans whose sentiments were at least as much anticommunist as anti-Nazi.
In post-war Yugoslavia, as we have seen, some resisters were more equal than others—at least in the eyes of Marshall Tito and his victorious Communist fighters.
In Greece, as in Ukraine, the local authorities in 1945 were rounding up, imprisoning or shooting every armed partisan they could find.
They were men and women who worked or slept with the occupier, who threw in their lot with Nazis or Fascists, who opportunistically pursued political or economic advantage under cover of war.
Sometimes they were a religious or national or linguistic minority and thus already despised or feared for other reasons; and although ‘collaboration’ was not a pre-existing crime with legal definitions and stated penalties, collaborators could plausibly be charged with treason, a real crime carrying satisfactorily severe punishment.
Indeed it had been going on throughout the war, on an individual basis or under instructions from underground resistance organizations.
But in the interval between the retreat of the German armies and the establishment of effective control by Allied governments, popular frustrations and personal vendettas, often coloured by political opportunism and economic advantage, led to a brief but bloody cycle of score-settling.
In France some 10,000 people were killed in ‘extrajudicial’ proceedings, many of them by independent bands of armed resistance groups, notably the Milices Patriotiques, who rounded up suspected collaborators, seized their property and in many cases shot them out of hand.
About a third of those summarily executed in this way were dispatched before the Normandy landings of June 6th 1944, and most of the others fell victim during the next four months of fighting on French soil.
The same sentiment was felt in Italy, where reprisals and unofficial retribution, especially in the Emilia-Romagna and Lombardy regions, resulted in death tolls approaching 15,000 in the course of the last months of the war—and continued, sporadically, for at least three more years.
The frequency with which women were charged—often by other women—with consorting with Germans is revealing.
But the popularity of the charge and the vindictive pleasure taken in the punishment is a reminder that for men and women alike the occupation was experienced above all as a humiliation.
Jean-Paul Sartre would later describe collaboration in distinctly sexual terms, as ‘submission to the power of the occupier, and in more than one French novel of the 1940s collaborators are depicted as either women or weak men, seduced by the masculine charms of their Teutonic rulers.
Wreaking revenge on fallen women was one way to overcome the discomforting memory of personal and collective powerlessness.
Anarchic acts of retributive violence in liberated eastern Europe were also widespread but took different forms.
In the West the Germans had actively sought collaborators; in occupied Slav lands they ruled directly and by force.
The only collaboration they encouraged on a sustained basis was that of local separatists, and even then only so long as it served German ends.
As a result, once the Germans retreated the first victims of spontaneous retribution in the East were ethnic minorities.
The Soviet forces and their local allies did nothing to discourage this.
On the contrary, spontaneous score-settling contributed towards a further removal of local elites and politicians who might prove an impediment to post-war Communist ambitions.
In Bulgaria, for example, the newly-constituted Fatherland Front encouraged unofficial retribution against wartime collaborators of all colours, invoking the charge of‘Fascist sympathiser’ on a wholesale basis and inviting denunciations of anyone suspected of pro-Western sentiments.
In Poland, the main target of popular vengeance was frequently Jews—150 Jews were killed in liberated Poland in the first four months of 1945.
Attacks on a smaller scale took place in Slovakia (at Velke Topolcany in September 1945) and in Kunmadaras in May 1946, but the worst pogrom occurred in Kielce , on July 4th 1946, where 42 Jews were murdered and many more injured following a rumour of the abduction and ritual murder of a local child.
In a sense these, too, were reprisals against collaborators, for in the eyes of many Poles Jews were suspected of sympathy for the Soviet occupiers.
The exact number of people killed in Soviet-occupied eastern Europe, or in Yugoslavia, during the first months of ‘unauthorised’ purging and killing is not known.
The first task of the new authorities was to assert a monopoly of force, legitimacy and the institutions of justice.
If anyone was to be arrested and charged with crimes committed during the occupation, this was the responsibility of the appropriate authorities.
If there were to be trials, they should take place under the rule of law.
If there was to be bloodletting, then this was the exclusive affair of the state.
This transition took place as soon as the new powers felt strong enough to disarm the erstwhile partisans, impose the authority of their own police and damp down popular demands for harsh penalties and collective punishment.
The disarming of the resisters proved surprisingly uncontentious in western and central Europe at least.
But it was tacitly understood by all that newly re-constituted institutions of government must take upon themselves the task of punishing the guilty.
In the first place, any law addressing the actions of collaborators with the Germans would necessarily be retroactive—before 1939 the crime of ‘collaboration with the occupier’ was unknown.
There had been previous wars in which occupying armies sought and obtained cooperation and assistance from the people whose land they had overrun, but except in very particular instances—like that of the Flemish nationalists in German-occupied Belgium during 1914-18—this was regarded not as an invitation to crime but simply as part of the collateral damage of war.
As noted, the only sense in which the crime of collaboration could be said to fall under existing law was when it amounted to treason.
But men and women brought before French courts had often worked not for the Nazis but rather with the regime of Vichy, led and administered by Frenchmen and ostensibly the legitimate heir to the pre-war French state.
Here, as in Slovakia, Croatia, the Protectorate of Bohemia, Mussolini’s Social 44 RETRIBUTION Republic at Said, Marshal Ion Antonescu’s Romania and in wartime Hungary, collaborators could and did claim in their defence that they had only ever worked for or with the authorities of their own state.
In the case of senior police or government officials who were palpably guilty of serving Nazi interests via the puppet regimes that employed them, this defence was at best disingenuous.
But lesser figures, not to speak of the many thousands charged with accepting employment in these regimes or in agencies or businesses that worked with them, could point to a genuine confusion.
The French, Belgian and Norwegian governments-in-exile had tried to anticipate these dilemmas by issuing wartime decrees warning of harsh post-war retribution.
But these were intended to deter people from cooperating with the Nazis; they did not address the broader questions of jurisprudence and fairness.
Above all, they could not resolve in anticipation the problem of weighing individual against collective responsibility.
But such a procedure would still pass over many individuals whose punishment was widely demanded; it would include people whose chief offence was inertia or cowardice; and above all it would entail a form of collective indictment, something anathema to most European jurists.
Instead, it was individuals who were brought to trial, with results that varied greatly with time and place.
There were multiple procedural irregularities and ironies, and the motives of governments, prosecutors and juries were far from unsullied—by self-interest, political calculation or emotion.
But as we assess the criminal proceedings and associated public catharsis that marked the transition in Europe from war to peace, we need to keep constantly in mind the drama of what had just taken place.
In the circumstances of 1945 it is remarkable that the rule of law was re-established at all— never before, after all, had an entire continent sought to define a new set of crimes on such a scale and bring the criminals to something resembling justice.
The numbers of people punished, and the scale of their punishments, varied enormously from country to country.
In Norway, a country with a population of just 3 million, the entire membership of the Nasjonal Sammlung, the main organisation of pro-Nazi collaborators, was tried, all 55,000 of them, along with nearly 40,000 others; 17,000 men and women received prison terms and thirty death sentences were handed down, of which twenty-five were carried out.
In neighbouring Belgium many more death sentences were passed , but a smaller percentage carried out.
Roughly the same numbers of collaborators were sent to prison but whereas the Dutch soon amnestied most of those convicted, the Belgian state kept them in prison longer, and former collaborators convicted of serious crimes never recovered their full civil rights.
Contrary to longstanding post-war myth the Flemish population was not disproportionately targeted for punishment, but by effectively repressing the supporters of the wartime New Order the pre-war Belgian elites— Catholic, Socialist, Liberal—re-established their control of Flanders and Wallonia alike.
The contrast between Norway, Belgium, the Netherlands , where the legitimate governments had fled into exile, and France, where for many people the Vichy regime was the legitimate government, is suggestive.
In France, where wartime collaboration was widespread, it was for just that reason punished rather lightly.
Since the state itself was the chief collaborator, it seemed harsh and more than a little divisive to charge lowly citizens with the same crime—the more so since three out of four of the judges at the trials of collaborators in France had themselves been employed by the collaborationist state.
In the event, 94 people in every 100,000—less than 0. percent of the population—went to prison for wartime offences.
Of the 38,000 imprisoned, most were released under the partial amnesty of 1947 and all but 1,500 of the remainder under an amnesty in 1951.
In the course of the years 1944-51, official courts in France sentenced 6,763 people to death for treason and related offences.
Eleven thousand civil servants (1. percent of state employees, but a far smaller number than the 35,000 who had lost their jobs under Vichy) were removed or otherwise sanctioned, but most of them were re-instated within six years.
All in all the epuration , as it was known, touched some 350,000 persons, most of whose lives and careers were not dramatically affected.
No-one was punished for what we should now describe 46 RETRIBUTION as crimes against humanity.
Responsibility for these, like other war crimes, was imputed to the Germans alone.
Although a former Axis power, Italy was authorized by the Allied governments to carry out its own trials and purges—it had, after all, switched sides in September 1943.
But there was considerable ambiguity as to what and who should be prosecuted.
Whereas elsewhere in Europe most collaborators were by definition tarred with ‘Fascism’, in Italy the term embraced too broad and ambiguous a constituency.
Having been governed by its own Fascists from 1922-43, the country was initially liberated from Mussolini’s rule by one of his own marshals, Pietro Badoglio, whose first anti-Fascist government itself consisted largely of former Fascists.
The only obviously prosecutable Fascist crime was collaboration with the enemy after September 8th 1943.
As a result, most of those charged were in the occupied north and were connected to the puppet government installed at Salo on Lake Garda.
This obscure piece of legislation was designed to get around the difficulty of prosecuting men and women for acts committed while in the employ of recognised national authorities.
But the High Court established in September 1944 to try the more important prisoners was staffed by judges and lawyers who were themselves mosdy ex-Fascists, as were the personnel of the Extraordinary Assize Courts set up to punish minor employees of the collaborationist regime.
In these circumstances the proceedings were hardly calculated to garner much respect among the population at large.
By February 1946, 394,000 government employees had been investigated, of whom just 1,580 were dismissed.
Since many of those doing the questioning could just as easily have found themselves on the other side of the table, they were decidedly sympathetic to this line of defense.
Following the highly-publicized trials of a few senior Fascists and generals the promised purge of government and administration petered out.
The High Commission assigned the task of administering the purge was shut down in March 1946 and three months later the first amnesties were announced, including the cancellation of all prison sentences under five years.
At most 50 people were judicially executed for their crimes, but that does not include 55 Fascists massacred by partisans in Schio Prison on July 17th 1945.
During the Cold War, Italy’s suspiciously painless transition from Axis power to democratic ally was often blamed upon foreign pressure as well as the political influence of the Vatican.
To be sure, the Catholic Church got off very lightly indeed, in view of Pius XII’s warm relations with Fascism and the pro-actively blind eye he turned to Nazi crimes in Italy and elsewhere.
And the Anglo-American military authorities certainly were reluctant to remove compromised administrators while they were trying to re-establish normal life throughout the peninsula.
And on the whole the purge of Fascists was more efficiently carried out in regions where the left-wing Resistance and its political representatives held sway.
After two decades in exile and many years as a high-ranking official in the Communist International, Togliatti had few illusions about what was and what was not possible in the aftermath of the European war.
In a country where many millions of people, by no means all of them on the political Right, were compromised by their association with Fascism, Togliatti saw little advantage in pushing the nation to the brink of civil war—or, rather, in prolonging a civil war already under way.
Moreover Togliatti, from his privileged standpoint as a senior figure in the international Communist movement whose strategic perspective reached beyond the shores of Italy, had the Greek situation in mind as a caution and a warning.
In Greece, despite a significant level of wartime collaboration among the bureaucratic and business elites, post-war purges were directed not at the Right but the Left.
The civil war of 1944-45 had convinced the British that only the firm re-establishment of a conservative regime in Athens would stabilize this small but strategically vital country.
To purge or otherwise threaten businessmen or politicians who had worked with Italians or Germans could have radical implications in a country where the revolutionary Left seemed poised to seize power.
Very few people were severely punished for wartime collaboration with the Axis powers, but the death penalty was liberally assigned in the war against the Left.
But so, in a sense, were the more conventional proceedings in western Europe.
Any judicial process brought about as the direct consequence of a war or a political struggle is political.
The mood at the trials of Pierre Laval or Philippe Petain in France, or the police chief Pietro Caruso in Italy, was hardly that of a conventional judicial proceeding.
Score-settling, blood-letting, revenge and political calculation played a crucial role in these and many other post-war trials and purges.
This consideration needs to be borne in mind as we turn to official post-war retribution in central and eastern Europe.
There is no doubt that from the point of view of Stalin and the Soviet occupation authorities throughout the territories under Red Army control, the trials and other punishments of collaborators, Fascists and Germans were always and above all a way of clearing the local political and social landscape of impediments to Communist rule.
Many men and women were accused of Fascist felonies when their major crime was membership of the wrong national or social group, association with an inconvenient religious community or political party, or simply an awkward visibility or popularity in the local community.
Purges, land expropriation, expulsions, prison sentences and executions aimed at extirpating incriminated political opponents were important staging points in a process of social and political transformation, as we shall see.
But they also targeted and punished genuine Fascists and war criminals Thus in the course of his attack on the Catholic church in Croatia Tito also prosecuted the notorious Cardinal Alois Stepinac of Zagreb, apologist for some of the worst crimes of the Croat JJstase regime, who might well have considered himself fortunate to spend the next fourteen years under house arrest before dying in his bed in i960.
Draza Mihajlovic, the Chetnik leader, was tried and executed in July 1946.
In his wake many tens of thousands of other non-Communists were killed in the two years following Yugoslavia’s liberation.
The Yugoslavs executed and deported many ethnic Hungarians for their role in Hungarian military massacres in the Vojvodina during January 1942, and their land was made over to non-Hungarian supporters of the new regime.
This was a calculated political move, but in many cases the victims were surely guilty as charged.
Further north, in Hungary, post-war Peoples’ Courts really did begin by trying actual war criminals, notably activists in the pro-German regimes of Dome Sztojay and Ferenc Szalasi during 1944.
The ratio of fascists and collaborators condemned in Hungary did not exceed the numbers found guilty in post-war Belgium or the Netherlands—and there is no doubt that they committed serious crimes, including anticipating and enthusiastically executing German plans to round up and transport to their death hundreds of thousands of Hungarian Jews.
Only later did the Hungarian authorities add categories like ‘sabotage’ and ‘conspiracy’, whose overt purpose was to net a broader range of opponents and others likely to resist a Communist takeover.
The language is redolent of Soviet legalspeak and certainly anticipates Czechoslovakia’s grim future.
But there really had been traitors, collaborators and Fascists in occupied Czechoslovakia; one of them, Father Tiso, was hanged on April 18th 1947.
Whether Tiso and others received a fair trial—whether they could have received a fair trial in the atmosphere of the time— is a legitimate question.
But the treatment they got was no worse than that accorded to, say, Pierre Laval.
Post-war Czech justice was much preoccupied with the troubling and vague category of‘crimes against the nation’, a device for visiting collective punishment on Sudeten Germans especially.
But the same was true of French justice in those years, with perhaps less cause.
It is hard to judge the success of the post-war trials and anti-Fascist purges in formerly-occupied Europe.
The pattern of sentencing was much criticized at the time—those who were tried while the war was still going on, or immediately following a country’s liberation, were apt to receive tougher punishments than those prosecuted later.
As a result, minor offenders dealt with in the spring of 1945 received far longer prison terms than major collaborators whose cases did not come to court for another year or more.
In Bohemia and Moravia a very high percentage of death sentences was carried out because of a rule requiring that prisoners be executed within two hours of the passing of judgment; elsewhere, 2 The Domobran was the wartime Croatian Home Guard.
What caused greater offence, and may ultimately have undercut the value of the whole proceedings in some places, was the manifest inconsistency of the punishments, not to mention that many of them were being passed by judges and juries whose own wartime record was spotty or worse.
Writers and journalists, having left a written record of their wartime allegiance, came off worst.
Highly publicized trials of prominent intellectuals—like that of Robert Brasillach in Paris in January 1945—provoked protests from bona fide resisters like Albert Camus, who thought it both unjust and imprudent to condemn and execute men for their opinions, however ghastly these might be.
In contrast, businessmen and high officials who had profited from the occupation suffered little, at least in western Europe.
In Italy the Allies insisted that men like Vittorio Valletta of FIAT be left in place, despite his notorious engagement with the Fascist authorities.
In France, prosecutions for economic collaboration were pre-empted by selective nationalization—of the Renault factories, for example, in retribution for Louis Renault’s considerable contribution to the German war effort.
And everywhere small businessmen, bankers and officials who had helped administer occupation regimes, build the ‘Atlantic Wall’ against an invasion of France, supply German forces and so forth were left in place to perform similar services for the successor democracies and provide continuity and stability.
The very scale of destruction and moral collapse in 1945 meant that whatever was left in place was likely to be needed as a building block for the future.
The provisional governments of the liberation months were almost helpless.
The unconditional cooperation of the economic, financial and industrial elites seemed vital if food, clothing and fuel were to be supplied to a helpless and starving population.
But a price for this was paid in political cynicism and a sharp falling away from the illusions and hopes of the liberation.
But sentiments like those of Giannini were widespread in Europe by late 1945 and prepared the way for a rapid shift in mood.
Having assigned blame for the recent past, and punished those whose cases were the most egregious or psychologically satisfying, the majority of people in the lands recently occupied by the Germans were more interested in putting uncomfortable or unpleasant memories behind them and getting on with their fractured lives.
In any case, very few men and women at the time were disposed to blame their countrymen for the worst crimes.
For these, it was universally agreed, the Germans must take full responsibility.
Indeed, so widespread was the view that ultimate blame for the horrors of World War Two must fall on German shoulders alone that even Austria was held exempt.
Under an Allied agreement of 1943, Austria had been officially declared Hitler’s ‘first victim’ and was thus assured different treatment from Germany at the war’s end.
This appealed to Winston Churchill’s insistence on the Prussian origins of Nazism, a view driven by his generation’s obsession with the emergence of the Prussian threat to European stability in the course of the last third of the nineteenth century.
But it also suited the other Allies—Austria’s pivotal geographical position and the uncertainty over central Europe’s political future made it seem prudent to detach her fate from that of Germany.
Nevertheless, Austria could hardly be treated as just another Nazi-occupied country whose local Fascists and Nazi-collaborators would need to be punished, after which normal life could be resumed.
Austrians had been disproportionately represented in the SS and in concentration camp administrations.
In the circumstances, Austria got off lightly, astonishingly so.0,000 Austrians were investigated for war crimes, of whom 23,000 were tried, 13,600 condemned, 43 sentenced to death and just 30 executed.
In 1947 the Austrian authorities passed a law distinguishing between ‘more’ and ‘less’ incriminated Nazis.0,000 of the latter were amnestied the following year and their voting rights restored.
After that Austrians simply forgot about their involvement with 52 RETRIBUTION Hitler altogether.
The Austrian Social Democrats, indisputably anti-Nazi, had nonetheless to overcome the record of their pre-1933 calls for Anschluss with Germany.
Another reason is that all parties were interested in massaging and flattering the votes of exNazis, a significant electoral constituency that would shape the country’s political future.
And then, as we shall see, there were the new configurations shaped by the onset of the Cold War.
In the same Moscow Declaration of October 30th 1943 that relieved Austria of responsibility for its Nazi allegiance, the Allies warned the Germans that they would be held responsible for their war crimes.
In a series of trials between 1945 and 1947 the Allied occupying powers in Germany prosecuted Nazis and their collaborators for crimes of war, crimes against humanity, murder and other common felonies committed in pursuit of Nazi goals.
US, British and French military courts tried lower-level Nazis in their respective zones of occupied Germany and together with the Soviet Union they delivered Nazis to other countries—notably Poland and France—for trial in the places where their crimes had been committed.
The numbers were too great and the arguments against collective guilt too compelling.
In any case, it was not clear what could follow from finding many millions of people guilty in this way.
The responsibilities of the Nazi leaders were clear, however, and there was never any doubt about their likely fate.
From the outset the German War Crimes trials were as much about pedagogy as justice.
However, the exemplary benefits of trials were not always self-evident.
In an early series of trials of concentration camp commanders and guards, many escaped punishment altogether.
Their lawyers exploited the Anglo-American system of adversarial justice to their advantage, crossexamining and humiliating witnesses and camp survivors.
It is thus hard to know how far the trials of Nazis contributed to the political and moral re-education of Germany and the Germans.
They were certainly resented by many as ‘victors’ justice’, and that is just what they were.
But they were also real trials of real criminals for demonstrably criminal behaviour and they set a vital precedent for international jurisprudence in decades to come.
The trials and investigations of the years 1945-48 (when the UN War Crimes Commission was disbanded) put an extraordinary amount of documentation and testimony on record , at the very moment when Germans and others were most disposed to forget as fast as they could.
They made clear that crimes committed by individuals for ideological or state purposes were nonetheless the responsibility of individuals and punishable under law.
There were, however, two unavoidable shortcomings to the Allied punishment of German war criminals.
The presence of Soviet prosecutors and Soviet judges was interpreted by many commentators from Germany and Eastern Europe as evidence of hypocrisy.
The behaviour of the Red Army, and Soviet practice in the lands it had ‘liberated’, were no secret—indeed, they were perhaps better known and publicized then than in later years.
And the purges and massacres of the 1930s were still fresh in many people’s memory.
To have the Soviets sitting in judgment on the Nazis—sometimes for crimes they had themselves committed—devalued the Nuremberg and other trials and made them seem exclusively an exercise in antiGerman vengeance.
The Soviet presence at Nuremberg was the price paid for the wartime alliance and for the Red Army’s pre-eminent role in Hitler’s defeat.
But the second shortcoming of the trials was inherent in the very nature of judicial process.
Precisely because the personal guilt of the Nazi leadership, beginning with Hitler himself, was so fully and carefully established, many Germans felt licensed to believe that the rest of the nation was innocent, that Germans in the collective were as much passive victims of Nazism as anyone else.
Allied Occupation Sectors ENMARK POLAND r**furt an der Ota CZECHOSLOVAKIA DIVIDED BERLIN. 1945-89 /ft Brttefr sectors 'ST-ICV We* Berlin flK§||N : : r \ M Intanaianal borders Zone txxjndanes postwar: a history of Europe since 1945 Kohl, speaking half a century later), but there was little genuine appreciation that they had been perpetrated by Germans.
The United States Army in Germany was accompanied by a host of psychologists and other specialists, whose assigned task was to discover just why the Germans had strayed so far.
The British undertook similar projects, though with greater skepticism and fewer resources.
The Soviets, on the other hand, were initially in full agreement and aggressive denazification measures were one of the few issues on which the Allied Occupation authorities could agree, at least for a while.
The real problem with any consistent programme aimed at rooting out Nazism from German life was that it was simply not practicable in the circumstances of 1945.
On May 8th 1945, when the war in Europe ended, there were 8 million Nazis in Germany.
In the shattered city of Cologne, of the 21 specialists in the city waterworks office—whose skills were vital for the reconstruction of water and sewage systems and in the prevention of disease—18 had been Nazis.
Civil administration, public health, urban reconstruction and private enterprise in post-war Germany would inevitably be undertaken by men like this, albeit under Allied supervision.
There could be no question of simply expunging them from German affairs.
Sixteen million Fragebogen were completed in the three western zones of occupied Germany, most of them in the area under American control.
There, the United States authorities listed 3. million Germans as ‘chargeable cases’, though many of them were never brought before the local denazification tribunals, set up in March 1946 under German responsibility but with Allied oversight.
German civilians were taken on obligatory visits to concentration camps and made to watch films documenting Nazi atrocities.
Nazi teachers were removed, libraries restocked, newsprint and paper supplies taken under direct Allied control and reassigned to new owners and editors with genuine anti-Nazi credentials.
On May 5th 1946, the future West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer spoke out against the denazification measures in a public speech in Wuppertal, demanding that the ‘Nazi fellow travellers’ be left in peace.
In his view, confronting Germans with the crimes of the Nazis—whether in trials, tribunals or reeducation projects—was more likely to provoke a nationalist backlash than induce contrition.
Just because Nazism did have such deep roots in his country, the future Chancellor thought it more prudent to allow and even encourage silence on the subject.
Germans in the 1940s had little sense of the way the rest of the world saw them.
They had no grasp of what they and their leaders had done and were more preoccupied with their own post-war difficulties—food shortages, housing shortages and the like—than the sufferings of their victims across occupied Europe.
Indeed they were more likely to see themselves in the role of victim and thus regarded trials and other confrontations with Nazi crimes as the victorious Allies’ revenge on a defunct regime.
With certain honorable exceptions, Germany’s post-war political and religious authorities offered scant contradiction to this view, and the country’s natural leaders—in the liberal professions, the judiciary, the civil service—were the most compromised of all.
It was one thing to oblige Germans to attend documentary films, quite another to make them watch, much less think about what they were seeing.
The unfortunate people to which I belonged was both sentimental and callous.
In Bavaria about half the secondary schoolteachers had been fired by 1946, only to be back in their jobs two years later.
In 1949 the newly-established Federal Republic ended all investigations of the past behaviour of civil servants and army officers.
In Bavaria in 1951,94 percent of judges and prosecutors, 77 percent of finance min3 In 1946 the West German Landerrat recommended to the Allied authorities that in view of current shortages in Germany, food rations for displaced persons be reduced.
General Lucius Clay confined his reply to a reminder that the food in question was provided by other European nations, victims of Germany’s own war of aggression.
Of the newly-constituted West German Diplomatic Corps, 43 percent were former SS men and another 17 percent had served in the SD or Gestapo.
Hans Globke, Chancellor Adenauer’s chief aide throughout the 1950s, was the man who had been responsible for the official commentary on Hitler’s 1935 Nuremberg Laws.
The chief of police in the Rhineland-Palatinate, Wilhelm Hauser, was the Obersturmfuhrer responsible for wartime massacres in Byelorussia.
Universities and the legal profession were the least affected by denazification, despite their notorious sympathy for Hitler’s regime.
Friedrich Flick, convicted as a war criminal in 1947, was released three years later by the Bonn authorities and restored to his former eminence as the leading shareholder in Daimler-Benz.
Farben and Krupp were all released early and re-entered public life little the worse for wear.
By 1952 Fordwerke, the German branch of Ford Motor Company, had reassembled all its senior management from the Nazi years.
Opinion poll data from the immediate post-war years confirm the limited impact of Allied efforts.
In October 1946, when the Nuremberg Trial ended, only 6 percent of Germans were willing to admit that they thought it had been ‘unfair’, but four years later one in three took this view.
This is not especially surprising, given that respondents had just emerged from twelve years under an authoritarian government committed to this view.
What does surprise is a poll taken six years later in which a slightly higher percentage of West Germans—37 percent—affirmed that it was better for Germany to have no Jews on its territory.
But then in that same year 25 percent of West Germans admitted to having a ‘good opinion’ of Hitler.
In the Soviet-occupied zone the Nazi legacy was treated a little differently.
Although Soviet judges and lawyers took part in the Nuremberg trials, the main emphasis in denazification in the East was on the collective punishment of Nazis and the extirpation of Nazism from all areas of life.
The local Communist leadership was under no illusions about what had taken place.
This was more than Adenauer or most West German politicians were willing to concede, at least in public.
But Ulbricht, like the Soviet authorities to whom he answered, was less interested in extracting retribution for Nazi crimes than in securing Communist power in Germany and eliminating capitalism.
It was a Marxist commonplace and Soviet official doctrine that Nazism was merely Fascism and that Fascism, in turn, was a product of capitalist self-interest in a moment of crisis.
Accordingly, the Soviet authorities paid little attention to the distinctively racist side of Nazism, and its genocidal outcome, and instead focused their arrests and expropriations on businessmen, tainted officials, teachers and others responsible for advancing the interests of the social class purportedly standing behind Hitler.
In this way the Soviet dismantling of the heritage of Nazism in Germany was not fundamentally different from the social transformation that Stalin was bringing about in other parts of central and eastern Europe.
The opportunistic dimension of Soviet policy towards ex-Nazis was a function of weakness.
The Communists in occupied Germany were not a strong movement—and their arrival in the baggage train of the Red Army was hardly calculated to endear them to voters.
Their only political prospect, beyond brute force and electoral fraud, lay in appealing to calculated self-interest.
To the east and south Communists did this by encouraging the expulsion of ethnic Germans and offering themselves as guarantor and protector for the new Polish/Slovak/Serb occupants of the Germans’ vacated farms, businesses and apartments.
The two perspectives—doctrine and calculation—were not necessarily in conflict.
But they also understood that Nazism was not just a trick perpetrated on an innocent German proletariat.
The German working class, like the German bourgeoisie, had failed in its responsibilities.
Thus on the one hand Soviet occupation forces fired from their jobs huge numbers of ex-Nazis—520,000 by April 1948—and appointed ‘anti-Fascists’ to administrative posts in their zone of occupation.
On the other hand, German Communist leaders actively encouraged former Nazis whose records were not too publicly compromised to join them.
Ex-Nazis were only too happy to expunge their past by throwing in their lot with the victors.
As party members, local administrators, informers and policemen they proved uniquely well-adapted to the needs of the Communist state.
But the adaptability of ex-Nazis was also a product of their vulnerability to blackmail.
The Soviet authorities were quite prepared to conspire with their former enemies in lying about the nature and extent of Nazism in eastern Germany—asserting that Germany’s capitalist and Nazi heritage was confined to the western zones and that the future German Democratic Republic was a land of workers, peasants and antiFascist heroes—but they also knew better and had the Nazi files to prove it, should the need arise.
Black-marketeers, war profiteers and ex-Nazis of all sorts thus made excellent Communists, for they had every incentive to please.
The newly-formed Stasi took over not just the role and the practices of the Nazi Gestapo but many thousands of its employees and informers.
Political victims of the incoming Communist regime, often charged in a blanket manner as ‘Nazi criminals’, were arrested by ex-Nazi policemen, tried by ex-Nazi judges and guarded by ex-Nazi camp guards in Nazi-era prisons and concentration camps taken over en bloc by the new authorities.
The ease with which individuals and institutions switched from Nazism or Fascism over to Communism was not unique to East Germany, except perhaps in scale.
In post-war Hungary the Communists openly courted former members of the Fascist Arrow Cross, even going so far as to offer them support against Jews seeking the return of their property.
In wartime London the Slovak Communists Vlado Clementis and Eugen Lobl were stalked by Soviet agents recruited from pre-war Czech Fascist parties, whose testimony would be used against them in their show trial a decade later.
If denazification aborted, it was because for political purposes Germans had spontaneously ‘denazified’ themselves on May 8th 1945.
In the East the Communists’ strongest suit was their promise to make a revolutionary new beginning in countries where everyone had something to forget— things done to them or things they had done themselves.
This distrust of short-term memory, the search for serviceable myths of antiFascism—for a Germany of anti-Nazis, a France of Resisters or a Poland of victims—was the most important invisible legacy of World War Two in Europe.
In its positive form it facilitated national recovery by allowing men like Marshall Tito, Charles De Gaulle or Konrad Adenauer to offer their fellow countrymen a plausible and even prideful account of themselves.
Such accounts allowed countries that had suffered war passively, like the Netherlands, to set aside the record of their compromises, and those whose activism had proven misguided, like Croatia, to bury it in a blurred story of competing heroisms.
Without such collective amnesia, Europe’s astonishing post-war recovery would not have been possible.
But only much later would it become clear just how much post-war Europe rested on foundation myths that would fracture and shift with the passage of years.
In the circumstances of 1945, in a continent covered with rubble, there was much to be gained by behaving as though the past was indeed dead and buried and a new age about to begin.
The price paid was a certain amount of selective, collective forgetting, notably in Germany.
George C Marshall The sheer scale of the European calamity opened new opportunities.
A return to the way things had been before 1939 was out of the question almost everywhere.
This was naturally the view of the young and the radical, but it was just as evident to perspicacious observers of an older generation.
AntiFascist resisters everywhere saw themselves in battle not just with the wartime occupiers and their local surrogates but with an entire political and social system which they held directly responsible for the disasters their countries had undergone.
It was the politicians and bankers and businessmen and soldiers of the inter-war years who had brought their countries to catastrophe, who had betrayed the sacrifices of the First World War and laid the ground for the Second.
They, and their system, were the target of wartime plans for post-war change.
In much of eastern Europe the slate was indeed wiped clean, as we have seen.
Seen from the point of view of the wartime Resistance movements, post-war politics would be the continuation of their wartime struggle, a natural projection and extension of their clandestine existence.
To oppose the authorities, to advocate social change or even political reform, was to place your self beyond the law.
For this new generation, politics was therefore about resistance—resistance to authority, resistance to conventional social or economic arrangements, resistance to the past.
Claude Bourdet, an activist in the French resistance and a prominent left-wing magazine editor and writer in the post-war years, captured the mood in his memoirs, Vaventure incertainer.
From resisting Fascism to resisting a post-war retreat to the errors of the thirties seemed a natural step.
Out of this came the oddly optimistic mood upon which many observers remarked in the immediate aftermath of Liberation.
In spite of the destitution all around—indeed, because of it—something new and better was bound to emerge.
Our life today is dominated by a sense of stupor and by an instinctive search for a direction.
The chief impediment to radical change in the aftermath of Hitler’s defeat was not the reactionaries or Fascists, who had thrown in their lot with the dictators and been swept away with them, but the legitimate governments-in-exile, most of which had sat out the war in London planning their return.
Anything less would mean anarchy—or else an indefinite occupation by Allied armies.
The wartime resistance groups, organized by 1944-45 into various political movements, were just as suspicious in return.
In France and Norway the legislators elected in 1936 were disqualified by their actions in 1940.
In Belgium and the Netherlands their absence in the intervening five years had cut off the returning governments from any appreciation of local suffering and the change in public mood brought about under Nazi occupation.
The returning authorities were quite willing to compromise in matters of policy—in particular on social and economic reforms, as we shall see.
Since this was also the preference of the Allied occupying forces, West and East, the illusions of the Resistance were soon shattered.
In eastern Europe it was the Soviets who determined the shape of post-war governments and who directed their actions.
In western Europe, provisional authorities took office pending new elections.
And in every case the resistance movements were encouraged and eventually forced to hand in their weapons and disband their organizations.
It is striking, in retrospect, how little resistance there was to this restoration of the institutional status quo.
In Poland and parts of the western Soviet Union armed partisan groups survived for a few more years, but theirs was a specifically national and anti-Communist struggle.
In Norway, Belgium, France and Italy the organized resistance merged peacefully into post-war political parties and unions with only muted protests.
In Belgium in November 1944 armed members of the wartime resistance were given two weeks to hand over their weapons.
This led to a large protest rally in Brussels on November 25th at which the police opened fire, injuring 45 people.
More typically, 200,000 French resistance fighters were successfully integrated into the regular army when their organization, the Forces Francoises de VInterieur , was disbanded without protest.
Communist leaders like Maurice Thorez in France and Palmiro Togliatti in Italy played a major role in ensuring the peaceful cooperation of their followers.
But many were willing to believe that the energies and ambitions of the resistance would now be channeled into political projects for national renewal.
But Parri was no politician and when he fell, six months later, political power shifted definitively into the hands of the traditional parties.
De Gaulle, in France, was a far better political strategist but he, too, abandoned office rather than accommodate his wartime ambitions to parliamentary routine—thus paying unintended tribute to his own success in re-establishing the continuity of the Republic.
Rather than being governed by a new, fraternal community of resisters, then, most Europeans in the immediate post-war years instead found themselves ruled by coalitions of left and left-centre politicians rather similar to the Popular Fronts of the 1930s.
The only pre-war political parties able to operate normally in these years were those with anti-Fascist credentials—or, in Soviet-occupied eastern Europe, those to whom it suited the new authorities to ascribe such credentials at least for the time being.
In practice this meant Communists, Socialists and a handful of liberal or radical groups.
These, together with the newlyprominent Christian Democratic parties, thus constituted the parties of government in the first post-war years and they brought with them many of the policies and men of the Popular Front era.
It is thus not especially odd that the reform programs of post-war European governments echoed and recapitulated the unfinished business of the 1930s.
If experienced party politicians had so little difficulty displacing wartime activists after 1945 this was because, although they shared a common anti-Fascist ethos and a widespread desire for change, the Resistance and its heirs were rather vague on specifics.
The Action Programme of the French National Resistance Council had no king to depose, but its ambitions were otherwise similarly imprecise.
Resistance units had been too preoccupied fighting, or just surviving, to busy themselves with detailed plans for post-war legislation.
Among clandestine organizations only the Communists had practical knowledge of politics, and except in the French case not much of that.
But Communists in particular were reluctant to tie their hands with detailed programmatic statements that might alienate future tactical allies.
The disasters of the inter-war decades—the missed opportunities after 1918, the great depression that followed the stock-market crash of 1929, the waste of unemployment, the inequalities, injustices and inefficiencies of laissez-faire capitalism that had led so many into authoritarian temptation, the brazen indifference of an arrogant ruling elite and the incompetence of an inadequate political class—all seemed to be connected by the utter failure to organize society better.
If democracy was to work, if it was to recover its appeal, it would have to be planned.
In post-war western and central Europe only Communists put their faith in Soviet-style Plans , and even they had no notion of how such Plans might be applied to their local circumstances.
The Soviet obsession with numerical targets, production quotas and centralized direction was alien to all but a few of the contemporary western advocates of planning.
The latter—and they came in many varieties—were drawing on a very different set of sources.
Throughout the interwar depression, from Hungary to Great Britain, voices were raised in support of a planned economy of one kind or another.
Some of the ideas propounded, notably in Austria and among the British Fabians, derived from an older Socialist tradition, but many more had their origins in pre-1914 liberal reformism.
The nineteenthcentury ‘caretaker’ state, its attention confined to security and policing, was outmoded, so the argument ran.
If only on prudential grounds—to forestall political upheavel—it would now be necessary to intervene in economic affairs to regulate imbalances, eliminate inefficiencies and compensate for the inequities and injustice of the market.
Before 1914 the main emphasis in such reformist projects was confined to calls for progressive taxation, protection of labour and, occasionally, state ownership of a restricted number of natural monopolies.
But with the collapse of the international economy and the ensuing war, planning took on a greater urgency and ambition.
Competing proposals for a national Plan, in which the state would intervene actively to support, discourage, facilitate and if necessary direct key economic sectors, circulated widely among young engineers, economists and civil servants in France and Germany.
For most of the inter-war years, would-be planners and their supporters languished in frustration at the political margins.
Until then, capitalism was condemned to suffer and eventually collapse of its own contradictions.
The idea that one might ‘plan’ a capitalist economy seemed to both sides a non-sense.
The frustrated advocates of economic planning thus frequently found themselves attracted to authoritarian parties of the radical Right, distinctly more hospitable to their approach.
In Belgium Hendrik de Man likewise failed to convince his fellow Socialists of the viability of his ‘Plan’ and began propounding more authoritarian solutions.
Mussolini’s cheerleaders in France and Britain, before 1940, envied what they saw as his success in overcoming Italy’s economic disadvantages through state-led planning and the establishment of umbrella agencies for whole economic sectors.
Albert Speer, the administrator of Hitler’s New Order, was much admired abroad for his programme of economic direction and regulation.
In September 1943, Speer and Jean Bichelonne, Vichy’s Minister of Industrial Production, worked out a system of tariff reductions based on inter-war ‘plan-ist’ ideas that closely anticipated European trading relations and Franco-German economic coordination in later years.
In ‘Jeune Europe’, a club founded in 1933 for young thinkers and politicians keen to set a new direction in policy making, the future Belgian statesman and Europhile Paul-Henri Spaak exchanged ideas about an enhanced role for the state with similarly-minded contemporaries from across the continent, including Otto Abetz, the future Nazi administrator of wartime Paris.
Many of its advocates got their first experience, as civil servants and business administrators, in wartime occupation regimes—in France, Italy, Belgium and Czechoslovakia, not to speak of Germany and Italy.
Indeed in Britain it was the war above all that placed the government at the heart of economic life.
The Emergency Powers Bill of May 1940 authorised the government to direct anyone to do anything in the national interest, to control any property and assign any industrial plant to any national end it chose.
Fascism and war were thus the bridge linking heterodox, marginal and often controversial notions of economic planning with mainstream post-war economic policy.
Yet this compromised heritage had little impact on planning’s appeal— whatever its associations with far Right, far Left, occupation or war, planning was quite distinctly not associated with the discredited politics of the inter-war years, a point widely held in its favour.
In many countries this reflected a well-founded awareness, enhanced by the experience of war, that in the absence of any other agency of regulation or distribution, only the state now stood between the individual and destitution.
But contemporary enthusiasm for an interventionist state went beyond desperation or self-interest.
There was a great faith in the ability of government to solve large-scale problems by mobilizing and directing people and resources to collectively useful ends.
Obviously this way of seeing things was particularly attractive to socialists; but the idea that a well-planned economy meant a richer, fairer and better-regulated society was taken up by a very broad constituency, including the Christian Democratic parties then rising to prominence all over Western Europe.
Taylor exaggerated as always, he was wrong in the long run and he might have been surprised to learn about the pianist enthusiasms of many New Dealers prominent in the contemporary United States administration of Germany.
What all planners had in common was belief in an enhanced role for the state in social and economic affairs.
Beyond this there was great variation, usually a consequence of distinctive national political traditions.
In Britain, where very little actual planning ever took place, the real issue was control —of industries and social and economic services—through state ownership as an end in itself.
In Italy the Fascist institutional legacy—which had brought large tracts of the economy under state oversight—was left largely intact after the war.
In West Germany, after 1948, the economy would remain mostly in private hands but with detailed, publicly-approved arrangements for factory management, employer-employee relations and conditions of employment and distribution.
In the Netherlands central planning entailed a variable mix of predictive and prescriptive edicts for the use of private enterprise.
Most countries of western Europe had rapidly growing public sectors, when measured by government expenditure or the number of public-sector employees.
But only in France did rhetorical enthusiasm for state planning translate into the real thing.
One fifth of France’s total industrial capacity was in state ownership by May 1946.
A month later the Commissariat General du Plan was established, with Monnet at its head.
In the course of the following months Monnet set up Modernization Commissions for various industries (mining, electricity, transportation, building materials, steel and agricultural machinery; oil, chemicals, fertilizers, shipping and synthetic fibres would later be added) and these in turn delivered proposals and sectoral plans.
Exactly one year after its creation, in January 1947, the Commissariat saw its first national Plan approved by the French Cabinet—without discussion.
Under its auspices France became the first western country to commit itself wholeheartedly to economic growth and modernization as public policy.
The first Monnet Plan was largely an emergency measure to address France’s post-war crisis.
Upon leaving school he spent many years living and working abroad, notably in London; after the First World War he was named Secretary General of the new League of Nations.
He passed much of the Second World War in the US, negotiating arms supplies on behalf of the British government and the Free French.
His devotion to economic planning and his later contribution to the Schuman Plan for European economic cooperation thus drew upon a familiarity with large-scale organization and inter-state collaboration that was strikingly unusual for a Frenchman of his class and time.
The Monnet Plan confined itself to providing government with a strategy and levers for actively fostering certain favoured objectives.
In Czechoslovakia a Central Planning Commission with some Monnet-like features and aspirations was established in June 1946 to guide and coordinate the sizeable public sector nationalized by President Benes in 1945.
In the year before the Prague Communist coup of February 1948, 93 percent of all those employed in transport and 78 percent of those in industry already worked for the state.
In the Czechoslovak case nationalization and state planning of the economy thus began well in advance of the Communist take-over and represented the policy preferences of a genuine majority of the electorate—only in February 1949, a year after the Communist coup, was the Planning Commission purged and renamed as the ‘State Planning Office’, with a very different remit.
Elsewhere in the region large-scale nationalizations, like those mandated under Poland’s January 1946 Nationalization Law, were the work of coalition governments in which Communists dominated.
The chief purpose of planning in post-war continental Europe was public investment.
In eastern Europe the emphasis was inevitably upon basic expenditure—on roads, railways, factories, utilities.
But that left very little over for food and housing, much less medical, educational and other social services; and nothing at all for non-essential consumer goods.
This was not a pattern of expenditure likely to endear itself to any electorate, especially in countries that had already suffered years of material deprivation, and it is not surprising that this sort of planning under conditions of dire shortage was almost always accompanied, sooner or later, by authoritarian rule and the police state.
The British, as we shall see, were constrained to accept years of‘austerity’ as the price for economic recovery.
In France or Italy, where there was almost no long-term private capital market, all major investments had to be publicly funded—which was why the first Monnet Plan was skewed towards capital investment in major industries at the expense of domestic consumption, housing and services.
The economics of Planning drew directly upon the lessons of the 1930s—a successful strategy for post-war recovery must preclude any return to economic stagnation, depression, protectionism and above all unemployment.
The same considerations lay behind the creation of the modern European welfare state.
In the conventional wisdom of the 1940s, the political polarizations of the last inter-war decade were born directly of economic depression and its social costs.
Both Fascism and Communism thrived on social despair, on the huge gulf separating rich and poor.
If the democracies were to recover, the condition of the people’ question must be addressed.
But the ‘welfare state ’—social planning—was more than just a prophylactic against political upheaval.
By 1945 two generations of European doctors, anthropologists, public health officials and political commentators had contributed to widespread debates and polemics about ‘race health’, population growth, environmental and occupational well-being and the public policies through which these might be improved and secured.
There was a broad consensus that the physical and moral condition of the citizenry was a matter of common interest and therefore part of the responsibility of the state.
As a consequence, rudimentary welfare provisions of one kind or another were already widespread before 1945, although their quality and reach varied widely.
Germany was typically the most advanced country, having already instituted pension, accident and medical insurance schemes under Bismarck, between 1883 and 1889.
But other countries began to catch up in the years immediately before and after World War One.
Embryonic national insurance and pension schemes were introduced in Britain by Asquith’s Liberal governments in the first decade of the century; and both Britain and France established ministries of health immediately following the end of the Great War, in 1919 and 1920 respectively.
Romania and Hungary already had accident and sickness insurance schemes in place before World War 72 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE One, and all the countries of eastern Europe introduced national pension systems between the wars.
Family allowances were a key element in plans to increase the birth rate—a particular obsession after 1918 in countries badly hit by wartime losses—and were introduced first in Belgium , next in France and in Hungary and the Netherlands just before the outbreak of war.
But none of these arrangements, not even those of the Nazis, represented comprehensive welfare systems.
They were cumulative ad hoc reforms, each addressing a particular social problem or improving upon the demonstrated shortcomings of previous schemes.
This drew on the nineteenth-century Poor Law principle of ‘least eligibility’ and required an applicant for public assistance to demonstrate his virtual destitution in order to qualify.
Nowhere was there yet any recognition of an obligation upon the state to guarantee a given set of services to all citizens, whether male or female, employed or workless, old or young.
Just as World War One had precipitated legislation and social provisions in its wake—if only to deal with the widows, orphans, invalids and unemployed of the immediate post-war years—so the Second World War transformed both the role of the modern state and the expectations placed upon it.
The change was most marked in Britain, where Maynard Keynes correctly anticipated a post-war ‘craving for social and personal security.
The post-1945 European welfare states varied considerably in the resources they provided and the way they financed them.
The provision of social services chiefly concerned education, housing and medical care, as well as urban recreation areas, subsidized public transport, publicly-funded art and culture and other indirect benefits of the interventionary state.
Social security consisted chiefly of the state provision of insurance—against illness, unemployment, accident and the perils of old age.
Every European state in the post-war years provided or financed most of these resources, some more than others.
The important differences lay in the schemes set in place to pay for the new public provisions.
Some countries collected revenue through taxation and provided free or heavily-subsidized care and services—this was the system chosen in Britain, where it reflected the contemporary preference for state monopolies.
In other countries cash benefits were paid to citizens according to socially-determined criteria of eligibility, with the beneficiaries left to purchase services of their own choice.
These differences reflected varying systems of national finance and accounting, but they also signified a fundamental strategic choice.
In isolation, social insurance, however generous, was not in principle politically radical—we have seen how relatively early it was introduced in even the most conservative of regimes.
Comprehensive welfare systems, however, are inherently re-distributive.
Their universal character and the sheer scale on which they operate require the transfer of resources—usually through taxation—from the privileged to the less well off.
The welfare state was thus in itself a radical undertaking, and the variations among the European welfare states after 1945 reflected not just institutional procedures but also political calculation.
In eastern Europe, for example, the Communist regimes after 1948 on the whole did not usually favour universal welfare systems—they did not need to, since they were at liberty to redistribute resources by force without spending scarce state funds on public services.
Peasants, for instance, were frequently excluded from the social insurance and pension arrangements on political grounds.
In western Europe only six countries—Belgium, Italy, Norway, Austria, the Federal Republic of Germany and the UK—introduced compulsory and universal unemployment insurance after 1945.
Subsidized voluntary schemes remained in the Netherlands until 1949, in France through 1967, in Switzerland until the mid-1970s.
In Catholic Europe long-established local and communal coverage against unemployment probably impeded the development of universal systems of insurance by reducing the need for them.
In countries where inter-war unemployment had been especially traumatic—the UK, or Belgium—welfare spending was driven in part by the desire to maintain full or close to full employment.
Where it had not been so significant—in France or Italy, for example—this was reflected in a rather different balance of priorities.
But it also derived from the rather distinctive sources of British reformism.
The social legislation of post-war Britain was based on the justly famous wartime report by Sir William Beveridge, published in November 1942 and an immediate best-seller.
Beveridge was born in 1879, the son of a British judge in imperial India, and his sensibilities and ambitions were those of the great reforming 74 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE Liberals of Edwardian Britain.
His Report was at once an indictment of the social injustices of pre-1939 British society and a policy template for root and branch reform once the war was over.
The last of these was not a welfare provision in itself, but it underpinned everything else since it took for granted that the normal situation of a healthy post-war adult was to be in full-time paid work.
On this assumption generous provision could be made for unemployment insurance, pensions, family allowances, medical and other services, since these would be paid for by levies on wage packets, as well as by progressive taxation of the working population at large.
Non-working women with no private health insurance of their own got coverage for the first time.
The humiliation and social dependency of the old Poor Law/Means Test system was done away with—on the rare occasion when the citizen of the Welfare State needed public assistance he or she was now entitled to it by right.
Medical and dental services were provided free of charge at the point of service, pension provision was made universal, family allowances (at 5/per week for second and subsequent children) were introduced.
The main parliamentary Bill legislating these provisions received the Royal Assent in November 1946 and the National Health Service Act—the core of the welfare system—was introduced into law on July 5th 1948.
The British Welfare State was both the completion of an earlier cycle of reforms, with its roots in the mid-nineteenth century Factory Acts, and a genuinely radical departure.
The contrast between the Britain of George Orwell’s Road to Wigan Pier and that of Conservative Prime Minister Harold Macmillan’s famous put-down to a heckler twenty years later is a tribute to the National Health Service and the provisions for security, income maintenance and employment that accompanied it.
It is all too easy, looking back today upon the miscalculations of the first post-war reformers, to minimize and even dismiss their achievement.
Within a few years many of the universal provisions of the NHS proved unsustainably expensive; the quality of the services provided has not been maintained across the years; and over time it has become clear that certain of the fundamental actuarial assumptions—including the optimistic prediction of permanent full employment—were short-sighted or worse.
But anyone who grew up in post-war Britain has good reason to be grateful for the Welfare State.
The same is true for the post-war generation all across the European continent, although nowhere outside Britain was comprehensive social coverage attempted on so generous a scale and all at once.
It is not by chance that most Europeans, when asked what they think of their public services, nearly always speak first of the safety net of insurance and pension provisions which the post-war state has provided for them.
Even in Switzerland, a country distinctly under-provisioned by European welfare standards, the December 1948 Federal Old Age and Survivors’ Insurance Act is regarded by many citizens as one of their country’s finest achievements.
Its cost, to countries not yet recovered from the slump of the thirties and the destruction of the war, was very considerable.
France, which devoted just 5 percent of its Gross Domestic Product to social services in 1938, was committing 8. percent in 1949—a 64 percent increase.
In Britain by 1949 nearly 17 percent of all public expenditure was on social security alone (that is, not including the public provision of services and facilities not included under this heading), a 50 percent increase over the 1938 level at a moment of severe strain on the country’s finances.
Even in Italy, a much poorer country whose governments tried to avoid carrying high social security costs by diverting services and provisions into the private sector or the workplace, government spending on social services as a share of GDP rose from 3. percent in 1938 to 5. percent in 1949.
The first reason is that, precisely because times were difficult, the postwar welfare systems were a guarantee of a certain minimum of justice, or fairness.
This was not the spiritual and social revolution for which many in the wartime Resistance had dreamed, but it was a first step away from the hopelessness and cynicism of the pre-war years.
Secondly, the welfare states of western Europe were not politically divisive.
In many cases they had not previously been eligible for work-related health, unemployment or retirement benefits and had been obliged, before the war, to purchase such services and benefits from the private sector.
Taken with the state provision of free or subsidized secondary and higher education for their children, this left the salaried professional and white-collar classes with both a better quality of life and more disposable income.
Far from dividing the social classes against each other, the European welfare state bound them closer together than ever before, with a common interest in its preservation and defense.
But the chief basis of support for state-funded welfare and social service provisions lay in the popular sense that these corresponded to the proper tasks of gov76 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE ernment.
The post-war state all across Europe was a ‘social’ state, with implicit responsibility for the well-being of its citizens.
It had an obligation to provide not only the institutions and services necessary for a well-regulated, safe and prosperous land, but also to improve the condition of the population, as measured by a broad and expanding range of indices.
Obviously it would prove easier to achieve the ideals of the social state, ‘from cradle to grave’, in the small population of a wealthy, homogenous country like Sweden than in one like Italy.
But faith in the state was at least as marked in poor lands as in rich ones—perhaps more so, since in such places only the state could offer hope or salvation to the mass of the population.
And in the aftermath of depression, occupation and civil war, the state—as an agent of welfare, security and fairness—was a vital source of community and social cohesion.
Many commentators today are disposed to see state-ownership and state-dependency as the European problem, and salvation-from-above as the illusion of the age.
But for the generation of 1945 some workable balance between political freedoms and the rational, equitable distributive function of the administrative state seemed the only sensible route out of the abyss.
The post-1945 urge for change went well beyond the provision of welfare.
The years following World War Two were a sort of foreshortened Age of Reform, during which many long-pressing problems were belatedly addressed.
One of the most important of these was the matter of agrarian reform, which many well-informed contemporaries saw as Europe’s most pressing dilemma.
The weight of the past still hung heavily upon the continent’s peasantry.
Only in England, the Low Countries, Denmark, the Alpine lands and parts of France was it possible to speak of a prosperous, independent class of farmers.
The overwhelming majority of Europe’s predominantly rural population lived in conditions of indebted penury.
One reason for this was that large tracts of the best arable and, especially, pasture land were still in the hands of a relatively few wealthy landowners, often absent and in many cases adamantly opposed to any improvement in the conditions of their land, their tenants or their workers.
Another factor was the long decline in agricultural prices relative to industrial ones, a process exacerbated since the eighteen-seventies by the importation of cheap grain and later meat from the Americas and the British Dominions.
By the 1930s European peasants had lived for nearly three generations with this relentless deterioration in their circumstances.
Those who stayed behind had often proved easy prey for nationalist and Fascist demagogues.
The first objective had already been attempted after World War One through a series of land reforms—notably in Romania and Italy but in some measure virtually everywhere—whose goal was to redistribute large holdings, reduce the number of ‘microfundia’ and give farmers a better chance of producing efficiently for the market.
But these reforms failed in their goal—partly because in the disastrous economic circumstances of inter-war Europe, with prices falling even faster than before 1914, the newly ‘independent’ landholding peasants were actually more vulnerable than ever.
In a Romanian land reform of March 1945, one million hectares of land were taken out of the hands of‘kulaks’ and ‘war criminals’ and distributed to upwards of 600,000 hitherto poor or landless peasants.
In Hungary, where the inter-war regime of Admiral Horthy had blocked any significant land redistribution, one-third of the country’s surface area was expropriated from the previous owners, in accordance with the December 1944 Szeged Programme of the provisional post-war coalition government.
The wartime Czechoslovak National Front government drew up a similar programme the same year and duly redistributed significant tracts of land— notably farms seized from Sudeten Germans and Hungarians—in the immediate post-war months.
Between 1944 and 1947 every east European country saw the creation of a large class of smallholders beholden to the new authorities for their land.
A few years later those same smallholders would in their turn be dispossessed by the Communist regimes in their drive for collectivization.
But in the meantime whole classes of landed gentry and large farmers, in Poland, East Prussia, Hungary, Romania and Yugoslavia simply disappeared.
In western Europe only Southern Italy saw anything comparable to the dramatic changes further East.
Sweeping reform laws in 1950 announced the redistribution of estate land across Sicily and the Mezzogiorno , following land seizures and occupations in Basilicata, the Abruzzi and Sicily.
But for all the fuss, little changed— much of the land redistributed from the old latifundia lacked water, roads or housing.
Of 74,000 hectares redistributed in Sicily after World War Two, 95 percent was ‘marginal’ or inferior land, unsuited to cultivation.
The impoverished peasants to whom it was offered had no money and no access to credit; they could do little with their new holdings.
New legal rights for tenant farmers in France and elsewhere gave them an incentive to invest in their smallholdings, while innovative credit systems and rural banks made it possible for them to do so.
Statesubsidized farm price support systems helped reverse the decades-long decline in 78 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE agricultural prices by encouraging farmers to produce as much as possible while guaranteeing to purchase their output at a fixed, minimum rate.
Meanwhile the unprecedented post-war demand for labour in the cities drained off surplus workers from poorer rural districts, leaving a more efficient farming population with fewer mouths to feed.
The political dimensions of the agrarian problem were indirectly addressed in the broader package of political reforms introduced in the first post-war years.
Many of these were constitutional in nature, once again completing the unfinished business of 1918.
The Greeks, in contrast, voted in September 1946 to retain their monarchy.
Belgians kept theirs, too, but removed the incumbent, King Leopold III, as punishment for his cooperation with the Nazis.
The French had no monarch on whom to vent their memory of wartime humiliation, and merely voted in 1946 to replace the disgraced Third Republic with a numerical successor.
Like the German Basic Law of 1949, the constitution of the Fourth Republic was designed to eliminate so far as possible the risk of any surrender to authoritarian or caesarist sirens—an aspiration which was to prove singularly unsuccessful.
The Provisional or Constituent Assemblies which promulgated these post-war constitutions, proposed popular referenda on controversial topics and voted major institutional reforms were mostly canted to the Left.
Elsewhere Communists did not fare so well in free elections, though better than they would ever manage again, ranging from 13 percent in Belgium to just 0. percent in the United Kingdom.
The Communists’ initial political leverage in western Europe came from their association with Socialist parties, most of which before 1947 were reluctant to break with the Popular Front-style alliance that had re-formed itself in the resistance movements.
Socialist parties in France and Italy did almost as well as the Communists in initial post-war elections and considerably better in Belgium.
Nevertheless, outside Britain and the Nordic countries the ‘old Left’ of Communists and Socialists was never able to govern alone.
In western Europe the balance was always held, and in many cases dominated by, a new political animal, the Christian Democratic parties.
Catholic parties were familiar in continental Europe—they had long thrived in the Netherlands and Belgium.
Even ‘Christian Democracy’ itself was not an altogether new idea—its origins lay in early-twentieth-century Catholic reformism and Catholic movements of the political center that tried without success to make their way in the turbulent years following World War One.
But after 1945 the situation was quite different and wholly to their advantage.
In the first place, these parties—especially the Christian Democratic Union in West Germany, the Christian Democrats in Italy and the Popular Republican Movement in France—now had a near-monopoly of the Catholic vote.
Traditional Catholic voters in Italy, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and southern and western Germany would rarely vote Socialist and almost never Communist.
But, and this was the peculiarity of the post-war era, even conservative Catholics in many countries often had no choice but to vote Christian Democrat, despite the reformist bent of Christian Democrat politicians and policies, because conventional right-wing parties were either under a shadow or else banned outright.
Even non-Catholic conservatives turned increasingly to the Christian Democrats, as a bar to the ‘Marxist’ Left.
But a large part of the Christian Democratic parties’ appeal to women lay in their programme.
Christian Democracy avoided class-based appeals and emphasized instead social and moral reforms.
In particular, it insisted upon the importance of the family , a properly Christian theme with significant policy implications at a time when the needs of single-parent, homeless and destitute families had never been greater.
If anything, Christian Democrats of the first post-war years saw ffee-market liberals rather than the collectivist Left as their main opponents and were keen to demonstrate that the modern state could be adapted to nonsocialist forms of benevolent intervention.
As a consequence, in Italy and West Germany Christian Democrat parties secured a near monopoly of political power for many years to come.
In France—thanks to the corrosive effects of two colonial wars, followed in 1958 by De Gaulle’s return to power—the MRP did rather less well.
Catholic parties of a Christian Democrat bent exercised unbroken power in the Benelux countries for more than a generation, in Austria through 1970.
Konrad Adenauer was born in 1876, Alcide de Gasperi five years later, Churchill himself in 1874.
This shortfall manifested itself in the generally rather mediocre quality of younger politicians in these years—Palmiro Togliatti (who had spent much of the previous twenty years as a political operative in Moscow) was an exception.
At first sight it may seem rather odd that so much of the rehabilitation of postwar Europe was the work of men who reached maturity and entered politics many decades before.
In the first place such older men were rather unusual in surviving politically and ethically unscathed from thirty years of turmoil—their political credibility enhanced, as it were, by their scarcity value.
Their instincts and interests were very well suited to the post-war mood.
Parliaments and democracies were seen by many—and not just Fascists and Communists—as decadent, stagnant, corrupt and in any case inadequate to the tasks of the modern state.
War and occupation dispelled these illusions, for voters if not for intellectuals.
In the cold light of peace, the dull compromises of constitutional democracy took on a new appeal.
What most people longed for in 1945 was social progress and renewal, to be sure, but combined with the reassurance of stable and familiar political forms.
Statesmen whose experience reached back beyond the troubled inter-war decades to the more settled and self-confident era before 1914 thus had a particular attraction.
In the continuity of their person they could facilitate a difficult transition from the over-heated politics of the recent past to a coming era of rapid social transformation.
Whatever their party ‘label’, the elder statesmen of Europe were all, by 1945, skeptical, pragmatic practitioners of the art of the possible.
This personal distance from the over-confident dogmas of inter-war politics faithfully reflected the mood of their constituents.
The prospects for political stability and social reform in post-World War Two Europe all depended, in the first place, on the recovery of the continent’s economy.
No amount of state planning or political leadership could conjure away the Himalayan task facing Europeans in 1945.
The damage to London, where three and a half million homes in the metropolitan area were destroyed, was greater than that wrought by the Great Fire of 1666.
Only 27 percent of the residential buildings in Budapest in 1945 were habitable.
Forty percent of German housing stock was gone, 30 percent of British, 20 percent of French.
In Italy 1. million homes were destroyed, mostly in cities of 50,000 or more people.
The problem of homelessness, as we have seen, was perhaps the most obvious consequence of war in the immediate post-war era—in West Germany and Britain the housing shortage would last well into the mid-1950s.
There were no bridges across the Seine between Paris and the sea, just one left intact across the Rhine.
And it was true that in almost every European country involved in the Second World War the national economy stagnated or shrunk when compared even with the mediocre performance of the inter-war years.
But war is not always an economic disaster—on the contrary, it can be a powerful stimulus to rapid growth in certain sectors.
Thanks to World War Two the United States surged into an unassailable commercial and technological lead, much as Britain had done during the Napoleonic wars.
And indeed, as Allied surveyors soon realized, the destructive economic impact of the war against Hitler was by no means as total as they had first thought, even in Germany itself.
The bombing campaign, for all its human costs, had wrought less economic damage than its advocates expected.
Little more than 20 percent of German industrial plant had been destroyed by May 1945; even in the Ruhr, where much Allied bombing had been concentrated, two thirds of all plant and machinery had survived intact.
Elsewhere, in the Czech lands for example, industry and agriculture thrived under the German occupation and emerged virtually unscathed—Slovakia, like parts of Hungary, saw accelerated industrialization during the war years and actually emerged better off than before.
The dramatically skewed nature of much of the damage, such that it was people and places that suffered terribly while factories and goods were relatively spared, contributed to an unexpectedly speedy recovery after 1945 of core economic sectors.
The UK, the USSR, France, Italy and Germany all emerged with a larger stock of machine tools than they started with.
In Italy only the aeronautic and shipbuilding industries suffered serious damage.
Engineering firms situated in the North, and thus out of reach of the heaviest fighting during the Italian campaign, did rather well , their wartime output and investment more than compensating for any harm they suffered.
As for the machine tool industry in what became West Germany, it lost just 6. percent of its equipment through war damage.
Ireland, Spain, Portugal, Switzerland and Sweden all remained neutral throughout the conflict.
On the contrary, most of the European neutrals were intimately engaged, albeit indirectly, in the Nazi war effort.
Germany depended heavily on Franco’s Spain for its wartime supply of manganese.
In 1941-42 60 percent of Switzerland’s munitions industry, 50 percent of its optical industry and 40 percent of its engineering output was producing for Germany, remunerated in gold.
The Btihrle-Oerlikon small arms firm was still selling rapid-fire guns to the Wehrmacht in April 1945.
All told, the German Reichsbank deposited the gold equivalent of 1,638,000,000 Swiss francs in Switzerland during the Second World War.
And it was Swiss authorities before the outbreak of the conflict who asked that German passports indicate whether their holders were Jewish, the better to restrict unwanted arrivals.
The Swiss authorities, in their defence, had good reason to keep the Nazis friendly.
Although the Wehrmacht high command postponed its June 1940 plans for an invasion of Switzerland, it never abandoned them; the experience of Belgium and the Netherlands was a grim reminder of the fate awaiting vulnerable neutral states that got in Hitler’s way.
For similar reasons the Swedes also extended their cooperation to Berlin, on whom they were historically dependent for coal.
Selling iron ore to Germany was something Sweden had been doing for many years— even before the war half of German iron-ore imports came across the Baltic, and three-quarters of all Swedish iron-ore exports went to Germany.
In any case, Swedish neutrality had long been slanted toward Germany out of fear of Russian ambitions.
Co-operation with the Nazis—allowing the transit of 14,700 Wehrmacht troops at the start of Operation Barbarossa, as well as German soldiers on leave from Norway passing through on their way home, deferring the draft for Swedish iron mine workers so as to ensure regular deliveries to Germany—was thus not a departure from habit.
Before the war neither Switzerland nor Sweden had been especially prosperous—indeed they contained significant regions of rural poverty.
But even in Eastern Europe the economic infrastructure at least was repaired with remarkable speed.
Despite the worst efforts of the retreating Wehrmacht and the advancing Red Army, the bridges, roads, railways and cities of Hungary, Poland and Yugoslavia were rebuilt.
By 1947, transportation networks and rolling stock in central Europe had been brought up 84 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE to or surpassed their pre-war levels.
In Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Albania and Romania, where there was less war-related destruction, this process took less time than in Yugoslavia or Poland.
But even the Polish economy recovered quite rapidly—in part because the western territories newly seized from Germany were actually more fertile and better supplied with industrial towns and factories.
In western Europe, too, material damage was repaired with remarkable speed— quickest, on the whole in Belgium, somewhat slower in France, Italy and Norway, slowest in the Netherlands, where the worst harm (to farms, dykes, roads, canals and people) had all come in the last months of the war.
The Belgians benefited from Antwerp’s privileged status as the only major European port more or less intact at the end of the war, and from the high concentration of Allied troops in their country, pumping a steady flow of hard cash into an economy that had long specialized in coal, cement and semi-finished metals, all vital for reconstruction work.
Half the nation’s vital fishing and merchant fleet was lost in the war.
Thanks to deliberate German destruction in the course of the Wehrmacht’s retreat, Norway’s industrial output in 1945 was just 57 per cent that of its 1938 level, with nearly a fifth of the country’s capital stock gone.
In later years the contrast with Sweden was not lost on embittered Norwegians.
But even Norway was able to restore most of its rail and road network by the end of 1946; and in the course of the following year, as in the rest of western and most of eastern Europe, fuel shortages and inadequate communications were no longer an impediment to economic recovery.
To contemporary observers, however, it was Germany’s capacity to recover which seemed the most remarkable of all.
This was a tribute to the efforts of the local population who worked with a striking singularity of purpose to rebuild their shattered country.
The day Hitler died, 10 percent of German railways were operational and the country was at a literal standstill.
In May 1945 German coal production was barely one-tenth that of 1939; a year later it had quintupled in output.
In April 1945 it seemed to Saul K Padover, a psychologist with the advancing United States Army in western Germany, that it would surely take the flattened city of Aachen 20 years to rebuild.
But within a few weeks he was already recording the re-opening of the city’s tyre and textile factories and the beginnings of economic life.
One reason for the speed of Germany’s initial recovery was that once the workers’ houses had been rebuilt, and the transport networks put back in place, industry was more than ready to deliver the goods.
At the Volkswagen works 91 percent of the machinery had survived wartime bombing and post-war looting, and by 1948 the factory was equipped to produce one in every two cars made in western Germany.
Thanks to wartime investment, one-third of German industrial equipment was less than five years old in 1945, compared to just 9 percent in 1939.
By early 1947 the chief impediment to a German recovery was no longer war damage, but rather raw material and other shortages—and, above all, uncertainty over the country’s political future.
The year 1947 was to prove crucial, the hinge on which was suspended the fate of the continent.
Until then Europeans had been consumed with repairs and reconstruction, or else were busy putting in place the institutional infrastructure for long-term recovery.
In the course of the first eighteen months following the Allied victory the mood of the continent swung from relief at the mere prospect of peace and a fresh start, to stony resignation and growing disillusion in the face of the magnitude of the tasks still ahead.
By the beginning of 1947 it was clear that the hardest decisions had not yet been taken and that they could not be postponed much longer.
To begin with, the fundamental problem of food supply was not yet overcome.
Only UNRRA supplies built up in the spring of 1946 kept Austrians from starving in the twelve months that followed.
Caloric provision in the British Zone of Germany fell from 1,500 per day per adult in mid-1946 to 1,050 in early 1947.
Italians, who suffered two consecutive years of hunger in 1945 and 1946, had the lowest average food levels of all the west European populations in the spring of 1947.
In French opinion polls taken in the course of 1946 ‘food’, ‘bread’, ‘meat’ consistently outpaced everything else as the public’s number one preoccupation.
In Romania the 1945 harvest failed, through mismanaged land reforms and bad weather.
From western Wallachia through Moldavia, into the western Ukraine and the middle Volga region of the USSR, poor harvests and drought led to near-famine conditions in the autumn of 1946, with aid agencies describing one-year old children weighing just three kilograms and sending back reports of cannibalism.
Canals froze, roads were impassable for weeks at a time, frozen points paralyzed whole rail networks.
Coal, still in short supply, could not keep up with domestic demand and anyway could not be moved.
Industrial production slumped—steel output, having just begun to recover, promptly fell back by 40 percent over the previous year.
A few months later, in June 1947, the continent entered one 86 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE of the hottest, driest summers since records began.
But all these imports had to be paid for in hard currency, usually dollars.
One was the effective disappearance of Germany from the European economy.
But until its political future was resolved Germany’s economy—for all its restored potential—remained frozen, effectively blocking the economic recovery of the rest of the continent.
The second problem concerned not Germany but the USA, though the two were connected.
In 1938,44 percent of Britain’s machinery imports by value came from the USA, 25 percent from Germany.
This sharply increased demand for American goods was, ironically, an indication of an upswing in European economic activity—but to buy American products or materials required American dollars.
Europeans had nothing to sell to the rest of the world; but without hard currency they could not buy food to stop millions from starving, nor could they import the raw materials and machinery needed to move forward their own production.
In 1947 the UK, whose national debt had increased fourfold since 1939, was buying nearly half its total imports from the USA and fast running out of cash.
France, the world’s largest importer of coal, was running an annual payments deficit with the United States of $2,049 million.
Most other European countries did not even have currencies in which to trade.
The inflation in neighbouring Hungary, the worst in recorded history and far exceeding that of 1923 Germany, peaked at 5 quintillion paper pengos to the dollar—meaning that by the time the pengo was replaced by the forint in August 1946 the dollar value of all Hungarian banknotes in circulation was just one-thousandth of one cent.
As we shall see, it was one of their main reasons for pressing forward with a solution to the problem of Germany with or without Soviet cooperation.
In the opinion of wellinformed Presidential counselors like George Kennan, Europe in the spring of 1947 was teetering on the edge.
The frustrations of western Europeans, who had initially been led to expect quicker recovery and a return to normal economic conditions, and the hopelessness of Germans and other central Europeans, compounded by the unanticipated subsistence crisis of 1947, could only strengthen the appeal of Communism or else the risk of a descent into anarchy.
Although the Communist parties of Italy, France and Belgium remained in governing coalitions until May 1947, through their trade union affiliates and popular demonstrations they were able to mobilize popular anger and capitalize on the failures of their own governments.
The electoral successes of local Communists, combined with the aura of the invincible Red Army, made an Italian (or French, or Czech) ‘road to Socialism’ seem plausible and seductive.
In Italy the figure was two and a quarter million, far more than in Poland or even Yugoslavia.
Even in Denmark and Norway, one voter in eight was initially attracted to the promise of a Communist alternative.
In the western zones of Germany the Allied authorities feared that nostalgia for the better days of Nazism, together with a reaction against denazification programmes, food shortages and endemic minor crime, could yet turn to neo-Nazi or even Soviet advantage.
The west European states were perhaps fortunate that their Communist parties in the spring of 1947 were still pursuing the moderate, democratic path adopted in 1944.
In Italy the British ambassador described Togliatti as a moderating influence on his more ‘hotheaded’ Socialist allies.
For his own reasons Stalin was not yet encouraging his many supporters in central and western Europe to exploit popular anger and frustration.
But even so, the spectre of civil war and revolution was never far away.
In France the economic hardships of the winter of 1947 were already leading to popular disillusion with the new post-war Republic.
The European continent, as she had noted a few months before, was slowly entering a new ice age.
In a Policy Planning Staff paper six weeks later he suggested that the real problem was not Communism, or if so then only indirectly.
The hurdles the continent faced seemed too great, now that the initial burst of post-war hope and rebuilding had drained away.
It is widely believed by scholars today that for all the contemporary gloom the initial post-war recovery and the reforms and plans of the years 1945-47 laid the groundwork for Europe’s future well being.
And to be sure, for western Europe at least 1947 would indeed prove the turning point in the continent’s recovery.
World War Two and its uncertain aftermath might well have precipitated Europe’s terminal decline.
To Konrad Adenauer like many others, the scale of European chaos seemed worse even than in 1918.
With the precedent of the post-World War One mistakes uppermost in their thoughts, many European and American observers indeed feared the worst.
At best, they calculated, the continent was in for decades of poverty and struggle.
German residents of the American Zone expected it to be at least twenty years before their country recovered.
In October 1945 Charles de Gaulle had imperiously informed the French people that it would take twenty-five years of ‘furious work’ before France would be resuscitated.
When United States Secretary of State George C Marshall returned on April 28th 1947 from a Moscow meeting of Allied Foreign Ministers, disappointed at Soviet unwillingness to collaborate in a solution for Germany and shaken by what he had seen of the economic and psychological state of western Europe, he was clear in his own mind that something rather dramatic would have to be done, and very soon.
And judging from the resigned, doomladen mood in Paris, Rome, Berlin and elsewhere, the initiative would have to come from Washington.
Between the end of the war and the announcement of the Marshall Plan, the United States had already spent many billions of dollars in grants and loans to Europe.
The chief beneficiaries by far had been the UK and France, which had received $4. billion and $1. billion in loans respectively, but no country had been excluded—loans to Italy exceeded $513 million by mid-1947 and Poland , Denmark , Greece and many other countries were indebted to the United States as well.
American aid hitherto was not used for reconstruction or long-term investment but for essential supplies, services and repairs.
Furthermore, the loans—especially those to the major western European states—came with strings attached.
Over the course of the following months Keynes successfully negotiated a substantial American loan agreement to supply the dollars that Britain would need to buy goods no longer available under Lend-Lease, but the American terms were unrealistically restrictive—notably in their requirement that Britain give up imperial preferences for its overseas dominions, abandon exchange controls and make sterling fully convertible.
The result, as Keynes and others predicted, was the first of many post-war runs on the British pound, the rapid disappearance of Britain’s dollar reserves and an even more serious crisis the following year.
The terms of the loan negotiated in Washington in May 1946 between the United States and France were only slightly less restrictive.
In addition to a write-off of $2.25 billion of wartime loans, the French got hundreds of millions of dollars in credits and the promise of low-interest loans to come.
In return, Paris pledged to abandon protectionist import quotas, allowing freer entry to American and other foreign products.
Like the British loan, this agreement was designed in part to advance the United States agenda of freer international trade, open and stable currency exchanges and closer international cooperation.
In practice, however, the money was gone within a year 90 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE and the only medium-term legacy was increased popular resentment (much played upon by the Left) at America’s exploitation of its economic muscle.
By the spring of 1947, then, Washington’s bilateral approaches to Europe’s economic troubles had manifestly failed.
The trading deficit between Europe and the United States in 1947 would reach $4,742 million, more than double the figure for 1946.
If this was a ‘hiccup of growth’, as later commentators have suggested, then Europe was close to choking.
That is why Ernest Bevin, the British Foreign Minister, responded to Marshall’s Commencement Address by describing it as ‘one of the greatest speeches in world history’, and he was not wrong.
To begin with, beyond certain framing conditions it was to be left to the Europeans to decide whether to take American aid and how to use it, though American advisers and specialists would play a prominent role in the administration of the funds.
Secondly, the assistance was to be spread across a period of years and was thus from the start a strategic programme of recovery and growth rather than a disaster fund.
By the time Marshall Aid came to an end, in 1952, the United States had spent some $13 billion, more than all previous United States overseas aid combined.
Immediately following Marshall’s speech the foreign ministers of Britain, France and the USSR met in Paris, at Bevin’s suggestion, to consider their response.
On July 2nd the Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov walked out and two days later Britain and France formally invited representatives of 22 European countries to discuss the proposals.
All of these—Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Luxemburg, Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Greece, Turkey, Ireland, Iceland, Austria and Portugal—would be among the eventual beneficiaries.
But despite the initial interest shown by Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria and Albania, no future Communist state took part in the European Recovery Programme or received a dollar in Marshall aid It is worth pausing to consider the implications of this.
The fact that the money was to be confined to the West (with Greece and Turkey as honorary west Europeans) undoubtedly made it easier for Truman to secure passage of the ERP through Congress the following year.
In June 1947, however, the offer of aid through Marshall’s new programme was made to all European countries without distinction.
Stalin and Molotov were of course suspicious of American motives—the terms Marshall was proposing were quite incompatible with the closed Soviet economy—but their sentiments were not widely shared elsewhere in eastern Europe, in what was not yet a bloc.
Thus Jan Masaryk, Czechoslovakia’s non-Communist Foreign Minister, enthusiastically accepted the joint Franco-British invitation of July 4th.
Gottwald was told to withdraw his country’s acceptance of the invitation to Paris.
Meeting with a delegation from the Czech government, including Masaryk, Stalin advised the Czechs that ‘e consider this matter to be a fundamental question on which friendship with the USSR depends.
The next day the Czech coalition government duly announced that it would not be sending a delegation to Paris.
But the Red Army had long since left Czechoslovakia and the Communists did not yet have a monopoly of power.
Yet Masaryk and his colleagues buckled at the first display of Stalin’s displeasure.
Had the nonCommunist Czech parties insisted on accepting Marshall Aid they would have carried the overwhelming majority of their fellow citizens (and quite a few Czech Communists) with them, making it that much harder for Stalin to justify enforcing his will.
In the broader context of post-Munich politics the Czech decision to favour the Soviet embrace was understandable; but it almost certainly paved the way for the Communists’ successful coup in Prague seven months later.
Czechoslovakia’s exclusion from the Marshall Aid programme was an economic and political catastrophe for the country.
The same is true of the ‘choice’ imposed on every other country in the region, and above all, perhaps, for the Soviet Union itself.
His decision to stand aside from the European Recovery Program was one of Stalin’s greatest strategic mistakes.
Whatever their private calculations, the Amer92 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE icans would have had no choice but to include eastern Europe in the ERP, having made the offer available to all, and the consequences for the future would have been immeasurable.
Instead, the aid was confined to the West and marked a parting of the ways between the two halves of the continent.
Rather than merely offering aid in cash it proposed the provision of goods, free of charge, delivered to European countries on the basis of annual requests formulated as part of a four-year plan by each recipient state.
These goods, when sold in each country, would generate so-called ‘counterpart funds’ in the local currency which could be used according to bilateral agreements reached between Washington and each national government.
Some countries used these funds to purchase more imports; others, like Italy, transferred them into their national reserves in anticipation of future foreign exchange needs.
This unusual way of furnishing assistance carried innovative implications.
The programme obliged European governments to plan ahead and calculate future investment needs.
It laid upon them a requirement to negotiate and confer not just with the United States but with each other, since the trading and exchanges implied in the programme were intended to move from the bilateral to the multilateral as soon as possible.
It constrained governments, businesses and labour unions to collaborate in planning increased rates of output and the conditions likely to facilitate them.
Although the United States administrators of the Plan made no secret of their expectations, they left it to Europeans to take responsibility for determining the level of aid and the manner of its distribution.
European politicians—accustomed to the blunt self-interest of the United States in earlier bilateral loan negotiations—were rather taken by surprise.
Idealists in the New Deal mould—and there were many in post-war American administrations—saw an opportunity to reconstruct Europe in the American image, emphasizing modernization, infrastructural investment, industrial productivity, economic growth and labour-capital cooperation.
Thus ‘productivity missions’, funded by the Marshall Plan, brought to the United States many thousands of managers, technicians and trade unionists to study the American way of business—five thousand from France alone (one in four of the overall total) between 1948 and 1952.
One hundred and forty-five ‘European productivity teams’ arrived in the United States just between March and July 1951—in most cases consisting of men who had never before set foot outside Europe.
These American urgings met, it must be said, with limited immediate success.
Most European politicians and planners were not yet ready to contemplate grand projects of international economic integration.
The Marshall Planners’ greatest achievement in this respect was perhaps the European Payments Union, proposed in December 1949 and inaugurated a year later.
Its limited objective was to ‘multilateralize’ European trade by establishing a sort of clearing-house for debits and credits in European currencies.
This was designed to overcome the risk that each European country might try to save badly needed dollars by restricting imports from other European countries, to everyone’s eventual disadvantage.
Using the Bank of International Settlements as their agent, European states were encouraged to secure credit lines proportional to their trading requirements.
Then, instead of using up scarce dollars they could settle their obligations through an intra-European transfer of credits.
All that mattered was not whom you traded with but the overall balance of credits and debits in European currencies.
By the time it was wound up in 1958, the Payments Union had quietly contributed not merely to the steady expansion of intra-European trade but to an unprecedented degree of mutually advantageous collaboration—financed, it should be noted, by a substantial injection of United States dollars to furnish the initial credit pool.
From a more conventional American perspective, however, free trade and its attendant benefits were themselves a sufficient objective and justification for the ERP programme.
The United States had been particularly hard hit by the trading and export slump of the thirties and spared no effort to convince others of the importance to post-war recovery of liberalized tariff regimes and convertible currencies.
Like English Liberals’ enthusiasm for free trade in the era before 1914, such American pleas for the unrestricted movement of goods were not altogether un-selfinterested.
Even if not everyone saw it at the time, Eu94 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE rope in 1947 faced a choice.
One part of that choice was recovery or collapse, but the deeper question was whether Europe and Europeans had lost control of their destiny, whether thirty years of murderous intra-European conflict had not passed the fate of the continent over to the two great peripheral powers, the United States and the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union was quite content to await such a prospect—as Kennan noted in his memoirs, the pall of fear hanging over Europe in 1947 was preparing the continent to fall, like a ripe fruit, into Stalin’s hands.
But for American policymakers, Europe’s vulnerability was a problem, not an opportunity.
This is the broader context of the Marshall Plan, a lowering political and security landscape in which American interests were inextricably interwoven with those of a fragile and sickly European sub-continent.
The better-informed European recipients of Marshall Aid, notably Bevin and Georges Bidault, his counterpart at the French Foreign Ministry on the Quai d’Orsay, understood this perfectly well.
But European domestic interest in the European Recovery Program itself, of course, and the uses to which it was put, varied considerably from country to country.
In Belgium, where American assistance was probably least urgently needed, the Marshall Plan may even have had a longterm prejudicial impact, allowing the government to spend heavily on investment in traditional industrial plants and politically-sensitive industries like coal mining without counting the long-term cost.
In the Plan’s first year, aid to Italy was largely devoted to urgently needed imports of coal and grain, together with help for struggling industries like textiles.
In fact, under Alcide De Gasperi and the Christian Democrats, Italian economic planning at the end of the forties rather resembled its east European counterpart, with consumer goods deliberately disfavoured, food consumption held down to pre-war levels and resources diverted to infrastructural investment.
American observers became nervous and tried unsuccessfully to encourage the government to introduce more progressive taxes, relax its austere approach, allow reserves 95 postwar: a history of Europe since 1945 to fall and avoid bringing about a recession.
Here, as also in western Germany, American Marshal Planners would have liked to see social and economic policies slanted more to the Centre and away from traditional deflationist policies.
ERP dollars—$1. million in 1948-49 and a further $1. million in the next three years—financed almost fifty percent of French public investment under the Monnet Plan during the Marshall years, and the country could never have managed without it.
It is thus more than a little ironic that it was in France that the Marshall Plan faced the greatest popular criticism.
The Plan’s relatively poor image in France represented a partial public relations success for the French Communists, perhaps their greatest.
In Austria the local Communists—backed by Soviet forces still occupying the eastern region of the country—never made any dent in the popularity of Americans and their aid; the latter put food in people’s mouths and this was what mattered most.
In the circumstances of a brutal civil war Marshall Aid, extended to Greece in April 1948, made the difference between survival and destitution.
Western Europe indubitably recovered, and precisely over the period of the Marshall Plan.
By 1949 French industrial and agricultural production both exceeded 1938 levels for the first time.
By the same criterion sustained recovery was achieved in 1948 by the Netherlands, in 1949 by Austria and Italy, in 1950 by Greece and West Germany.
Between 1947 and 1951 the combined GNP of western Europe rose by 30 percent.
In the short-term the chief contribution of the Program to this recovery was surely the provision of dollar credits.
These underwrote trade deficits, facilitated the large-scale importation of urgently needed raw materials and thus carried Western Europe through the crisis of mid-’47.
Without Marshall Aid it is not clear how the fuel shortages, food shortages, cotton shortages and other commodity scarcities could have been overcome at a politically acceptable price.
For while the economies of western Europe surely could have continued to grow without American assistance, this could only have been achieved by repressing home demand, cutting back on newly-introduced social services and further reducing the local standard of living.
This was a risk most elected governments were understandably reluctant to run.
In 1947 the coalition governments of western Europe were trapped and they knew it.
It is all very well for us to recognize in hindsight that Marshall Aid ‘merely’ broke a logjam born of renewed demand, that Washington’s new approach overcame a ‘temporary’ dollar shortfall.
Even if the ERP did no more than buy time, that was a crucial contribution, for time was precisely what Europe appeared to lack.
The Marshall Plan was an economic program but the crisis it averted was political.
Some observers were disappointed at the Americans’ apparent failure to persuade Europeans to cooperate in integrating their planning as much as they had initially hoped.
And it is true that whatever collaborative habits and institutions the Europeans did eventually acquire were only indirectly indebted to American efforts, if at all.
But in the light of Europe’s recent past, any moves in this direction represented progress; and Marshall’s invitation did at least oblige the mutually-suspicious European states to sit down together and co-ordinate their responses and, ultimately, much else.
Indeed, one might almost say that the Marshall Plan helped Europeans feel better about themselves.
It helped them break decisively with a legacy of chauvinism, depression and authoritarian solutions.
It made co-ordinated economic policy-making seem normal rather than unusual.
It made the beggar-your-neighbour trade and monetary practices of the thirties seem first imprudent, then unnecessary and finally absurd.
None of this would have been possible had the Marshall Plan been presented as a blueprint for the ‘Americanization’ of Europe.
On the contrary, post-war Europeans were so aware of their humiliating dependence upon American aid and protection that any insensitive pressure from that quarter would certainly have been politically counter-productive.
Western Europe was able to benefit from American help because it was a long-established region of private property, market economics and, except in recent years, stable polities.
But for just this reason, western Europe had to make its own decisions and would ultimately insist on doing so.
The rest—convertible currencies, good labour relations, balanced budgets and liberalized trade—would depend on Europeans themselves.
The obvious comparison, however, was not between American visions and European practices but between 1945 and 1918.
In more respects than we now recall, the two post-war eras were uncannily alike.
In the 1920s Americans were already encouraging Europeans to adopt United States production techniques and labour relations.
In the 1920s many American observers saw Europe’s salvation in economic integration and capital investment.
And in the 1920s Europeans, too, looked across the Atlantic for guidance about their own future and for practical aid in the present.
But the big difference was that after World War One the United States gave only loans, not grants; and these were nearly always supplied through the private capital market.
When they were called in at the onset of the Depression, the effect was disastrous.
The contrast in this respect is striking—after initial stumbles in 1945-47, American policymakers went to some lengths to correct the mistakes of the previous post-war era.
The Marshall Plan is significant not just for what it did but for what it was careful to avoid.
There was one European problem, however, that the European Recovery Plan could neither solve nor avoid, yet everything else depended upon its resolution.
France was to use Marshall counterpart funds to build huge new steel mills in Lorraine, for example, but without German coal these would be useless.
In the spring of 1948 German industrial output was still only half that of 1936.
The British economy would never recover while the country was spending unprecedented sums just to sustain the helpless population of its zone of occupation in northwest Germany.
Without Germany to buy their produce the trading economies of the Low Countries and Denmark were moribund.
The logic of the Marshall Plan required the lifting of all restrictions upon German production and output, so that the country might once again make its crucial contribution to the European economy.
Indeed, Secretary of State Marshall made clear from the outset that his Plan meant an end to French hopes of war reparations from Germany—the point, after all, was to develop and integrate Germany, not make of it a dependent pariah.
But in order to avoid a tragic re-run of the events 98 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE of the 1920s—in which frustrated efforts to extract war reparations from a prostrate Germany had led, as it seemed in retrospect, direcdy to French insecurity, German resentment and the rise of Hitler—it was clear to the Americans and their friends that the Marshall Plan would only work as part of a broader political setdement in which French and Germans alike could see real and lasting advantage.
There was no mystery to this—a post-war setdement in Germany was the key to Europe’s future, and this was as obvious in Moscow as it was in Paris, London or Washington.
But the shape such a settlement should take was an altogether more contentious matter.
Sir Michael Howard ‘Make no mistake, all the Balkans, except Greece, are going to be Bolshevised, and there is nothing I can do to prevent it.
Jean-Paul Sartre ‘Nobody in the world can understand what Europeans feel about the Germans until one talks to Belgians, Frenchmen or Russians.
The author of these words, written to his diary in 1945, was Saul K Padover, the psychologist with the American armies whom we met in Chapter Three.
His observation should be borne in mind in any account of the post-war division of Europe.
The point of the Second World War in Europe was to defeat Germany, and almost all other considerations were set aside so long as the fighting continued.
The Allies’chief wartime concern had been to keep one another in the war.
The Americans and British worried incessantly that Stalin might make a separate peace with Hitler, especially once the Soviet Union had recovered territory lost after June 1941.
Stalin, for his part, saw the delay in establishing a Second Front as a ploy by the Western Allies to bleed Russia dry before coming forward to benefit from her sacrifices.
This mutual unease illuminates the wartime accords and understandings reached by the three major Allied governments.
At Casablanca, in January 1943, it was agreed that the war in Europe could only end with an unconditional German surrender.
At Teheran, eleven months later, the £ Big Three’ (Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill) agreed in principle upon a post-war dismantling of Germany, a return to the so-called ‘Curzon Line’ 1 between Poland and the USSR, recognition of Tito’s authority in Yugoslavia and Soviet access to the Baltic at the former East Prussian port of Konigsberg.
The obvious beneficiary of these agreements was Stalin, but then since the Red Army played by far the most important role in the struggle with Hitler, this made sense.
For the same reason, when Churchill sat down with Stalin in Moscow in October 1944 and initialed the notorious ‘percentages agreement’, he was merely conceding to the Soviet dictator ground that the latter was already sure to seize.
But thirdly, and however heartless this must seem from the point of view of the countries concerned, it really wasn’t significant.
To be sure, the Allies all signed the Declaration on Liberated Europe—‘To foster the conditions in which the liberated peoples may exercise those rights, all three governments will jointly assist the people in any European liberated state or former Axis satellite state in Europe ... ’ to form representative governments, facilitate free elections, etc.
And it was the postwar cynicism of the Soviet Union with regard to this commitment that would be thrown in the face of the West by understandably aggrieved spokesmen for the imprisoned nations.
But nothing was decided at Yalta that had not already been agreed at Teheran or elsewhere.
For by then Stalin hardly needed Western permission to do whatever he wished in eastern Europe, as the British at least understood perfectly well.
In fact, Yalta left the truly important issue—arrangements for post-war Germany—off the table precisely because it was so important and intractable.
And it is unlikely that the Western leaders could have got a better deal out of Stalin during these last months of the war, even if it had occurred to them to try.
The only hope for the Poles and others was that Stalin would be generous to them in return for Western goodwill.
But he had the latter in any case, and long after the defeat of Hitler it was the Western Allies who sought Stalin’s cooperation, not the other way around.
The Soviet Union had to be kept in the war against Germany (and later, as it was then supposed, Japan); the problem of central Europe could wait upon the peace.
Had it been otherwise Roosevelt and Churchill might have protested more strongly in August 1944, when 200,000 Poles were killed by the Germans in a hopeless uprising in Warsaw while the Red Army looked on from the other side of the Vistula.
Western leaders may not have shared Stalin’s view of the Poles’ underground Home Army as ‘a handful of power-hungry adventurers and criminals’, but they were certainly not about to antagonize their major military ally just six weeks after the D-Day landings in Normandy.
For Poles then and since this was a betrayal of the very purpose of the war—after all, Britain and France had declared war on Hitler in September 1939 over his violation of Poland.
But for the Western Allies the case for leaving Stalin a free hand in the east was self evident.
There were good reasons for taking this stance—the search for a settlement of the German Question was going to prove horribly difficult, as perceptive observers could already see, and it made sense to sustain for as long as possible the anti-German alliance that bound the wartime partners together.
But as a result, the shape of post-war Europe was dictated in the 2 Stalin had broken off relations with the Polish government-in-exile in London in 1943 following the latter’s demand for an international examination of the Katyn massacre.
The Germans, who uncovered the site, correctly claimed that it was the location of a mass execution by the Soviets of captured Polish officers.
The Soviet authorities and their Western supporters, then and for the next half century, angrily denied it.
In south-east Europe the war was over by the end of 1944, with Soviet forces in full control of the northern Balkans.
By May 1945, in central and eastern Europe, the Red Army had liberated and re-occupied Hungary, Poland and most of Czechoslovakia.
In the West, where the British and Americans were fighting virtually separate wars in north-western and south-western Germany respectively, Eisenhower certainly could have reached Berlin before the Russians but was discouraged by Washington from doing so.
Churchill would have liked to see a Western advance on Berlin but Roosevelt was conscious both of his generals’ concern for loss of life (one fifth of all United States troop losses in World War Two were sustained at the Battle of the Bulge in the Belgian Ardennes in the previous winter) and of Stalin’s interest in the German capital.
As a result, in Germany and in Czechoslovakia (where the United States army initially advanced 18 miles short of Prague and liberated the Pilsen region of western Bohemia, only to hand it over to the Red Army shortly afterwards), the line dividing what were not yet ‘eastern’ and ‘western’ Europe fell a little further west than the outcome of the fighting might have suggested.
Meanwhile, further south, on May 2nd 1945 the Yugoslav Army of National Liberation and the British Eighth Army came face to face in Trieste drawing through that most cosmopolitan of central European cities a line that would become the first true frontier of the Cold War.
So long as Germany remained the enemy it was easy to forget the deeper disputes and antagonisms separating the Soviet Union from its wartime allies.
Four years of wary cooperation in a life or death struggle with a common foe had done little to obliterate nearly thirty years of mutual suspicion.
For the fact is that in Europe the Cold War began not after the Second World War but following the end of the First.
The years 1941-45 were just an interlude in an international struggle between Western democracies and Soviet totalitarianism, a struggle whose shape was obscured but not fundamentally altered by the threat posed to both sides by the rise of Fascism and Nazism at the heart of the continent.
It was Germany that brought Russia and the West together in 1941, much as it had succeeded in doing before 1914.
From 1918-34 the Soviet strategy in central and western Europe—splitting the Left and encouraging subversion and violent protest—helped shape an image of ‘Bolshevism’ as fundamentally alien and hostile.
Four years of troubled and controversial ‘Popular Front’ alliances did something to dispel this impression, despite the contemporary trials and mass murders in the Soviet Union itself.
But the MolotovRibbentrop Pact of August 1939, and Stalin’s collaboration with Hitler in his dismemberment of their common neighbours the following year, considerably undermined the propaganda gains of the Popular Front years.
Only the heroism of the Red Army and Soviet citizens in the years 1941-45, and the unprecedented crimes of the Nazis, helped dispel these earlier memories.
The unraveling of the wartime alliance and the subsequent division of Europe were thus not due to a mistake, to naked self-interest or malevolence; they were rooted in history.
Before the Second World War relations between the United States and the UK on the one hand, and the USSR on the other, had always been tense.
The difference was that none of them had had responsibility for large tracts of the European continent.
Moreover they had been separated by, among other considerations, the presence of France and Germany.
But with French humiliation in 1940 and German defeat five years later, everything was different.
The renewed Cold War in Europe was always likely, but it was not inevitable.
It was brought about by the ultimately incompatible goals and needs of the various interested parties.
Thanks to German aggression the United States was now, for the first time, a power in Europe.
That the United States had overwhelming strength was self-evident, even to those mesmerized by the achievements of the Red Army.
The United States had put 12 million men under arms to fight Germany and its allies, and by the time Japan surrendered the American fleet was larger than all other fleets in the world combined.
So far as Germany was concerned—and 85 percent of the American war effort had gone on the war against Germany—the initial American intent was quite severe.
A directive from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, JCS1067, was presented to President Truman on April 26th 1945, two weeks after Roosevelt’s death.
The logic of this initial American approach to the German question was thus demilitarization, denazification, deindustrialization—to strip Germany of her military and economic resources and re-educate the population.
But from the outset the ‘Morgenthau strategy’ was vigorously criticized within the United States Administration itself.
Most of pre-war Germany’s best agricultural land was now under Soviet control or else had been transferred to Poland.
Meanwhile western Germany was awash in refugees who had access neither to land nor food.
Restrictions on urban or industrial output might keep Germany prostrate but they wouldn’t feed it or rebuild it.
That burden, a very considerable one, would fall on the victorious occupiers.
If, in American treatment of Germany, the balance of advantage swung increasingly to ‘peace’ this was largely due to the darkening prospect for USSoviet relations.
Among a restricted circle of Washington insiders, it was obvious from the outset that the incompatibility of Soviet and Western interests would lead to conflict and that clearly delimited zones of power might be a prudent solution to post-war problems.
Harriman and Kennan differed implicitly on how to respond to Soviet actions, but they did not disagree in their account of what Stalin was doing.
Other American leaders were much more sanguine, however, and not just in the spring of 1945.
Charles Bohlen, another United States diplomat and the recipient of the Kennan letter quoted above, believed in the possibility of a post-war settlement based on broad principles of self-determination and Great Power cooperation.
Recognising the need to maintain Soviet cooperation in working out a solution in Germany itself, Bohlen and others—like the post-war Secretary of State James Byrnes—placed their faith in Allied military occupation of the former Axis states and their satellites, together with free elections along the lines adumbrated at Yalta.
Only later—after observing the workings of Soviet power under the auspices of Allied Control Councils in Romania and Bulgaria especially—did they accept the incompatibility of these goals and come to share Kennan’s preference for the realpolitik of separate spheres.
One ground for initial optimism was the widely held view that Stalin had no interest in provoking confrontation and war.
And in that case the US, which had a monopoly of atomic weapons, risked little by keeping communications open with the Soviet Union and seeking mutually compatible solutions to common problems.
Another element in United States policy in the initial post-war period were the new international institutions that the Americans had helped bring about and whose success they sincerely desired.
Of these the United Nations, whose Charter was ratified on October 24th 1945 and whose General Assembly first met in January 1946, is obviously the best known; but it was the financial and economic agencies and agreements associated with ‘Bretton Woods’ which perhaps mattered more to policymakers at the time.
The economic meltdown of the inter-war years seemed to Americans especially to be the root source of the European crisis.
Unless currencies were convertible and nations stood to benefit mutually from increased trade, there was nothing to prevent a return to the bad days of September 1931, when the postWorld War One monetary system fell apart.
Members agreed to tariff and other concessions for contracting partners, as well as codes for trade practices and procedures for handling breaches and disputes.
All of this was in itself a dramatic break from earlier ‘mercantilist’ approaches to trade and was intended, in due course, to inaugurate a new age of open commerce.
Implicit in the Bretton Woods goals and institutions, which also included a new ‘World Bank’, was an unprecedented degree of external interference in national practices.
Put differently, the high ideals of those setting out plans and institutions for a better international system presumed a stable era of international cooperation from which all would gain.
The Soviet Union was originally integral to the financial system proposed at Bretton Woods—it was to be the third-largest contributor to the International Monetary Fund quota.
It was perhaps naive for the Americans to imagine that these proposals would be acceptable to Russian—or indeed French—policy-makers; in any case, they got around this impediment by the simple expedient of drawing up their plans without consulting the Russians or the French or anyone else.
Nevertheless, they sincerely expected that the mutual benefits to be had from an increase in international commerce and financial stability would eventually overcome national traditions and political mistrust.
Putting the matter thus has the effect of depicting the makers of United States foreign policy, Kennan aside, as remarkably innocent.
And so, perhaps, they were, and not only those like Senator Estes Kefauver or Walter Lippmann, who simply refused to believe what they were told about Soviet actions in eastern Europe and elsewhere.
At least through mid-1946, many United States leaders spoke and acted as though they truly be3 India and some of the British overseas Dominions had substantial holdings in sterling, built up as credit during the war years especially.
Had the pound been freely convertible into dollars in the immediate post-war era many of these holdings might have been run down, thus further weakening Britain’s already fragile stock of foreign exchange.
That is why, after an initial, disastrous experiment with convertibility imposed from Washington as a condition for the United States loan, Britain re-imposed sterling controls in 1947.
Even Lucretius Patrascanu, a senior figure in the Romanian Communist leadership (and later victim of a show trial in his own country), was moved to comment, at the time of the Paris Peace Treaty negotiations in the summer of 1946, that £ he Americans are crazy.
The United States in 1945 and for some time to come seriously expected to extricate itself from Europe as soon as possible, and was thus understandably keen to put in place a workable settlement that would not require American presence or supervision.
This aspect of American post-war thinking is not well remembered or understood today, but it was uppermost in American calculations at the time—as Roosevelt had explained at Yalta, the United States did not expect to remain in occupation of Germany (and thus in Europe) more than two years at most.
The abrupt ending of Lend-Lease was part of a general cutting back of economic and military commitments to Europe.
The American defense budget was reduced by five-sixths between 1945 and 1947.
At the end of the war in Europe the United States had 97 combat-ready ground divisions in place; by mid-1947 there were just twelve divisions, most of them under strength and engaged in administrative tasks.
This met the expectations of American voters, only 7 percent of whom in October 1945 placed foreign problems ahead of domestic concerns; but it played havoc with America’s European allies, who began seriously to fear a reprise of inter-war isolationism.
They were only half-mistaken; as the British knew, in the event of a Soviet invasion of western Europe after 1945 American strategy consisted of an immediate retreat to peripheral bases in Britain, Spain and the Middle East.
But even as they were reducing their military commitment to Europe, American diplomats were being taken through a steep learning curve.
It was hardly a ringing commitment to European defense but, prompted perhaps by a letter from Truman in June , it reflected growing United States frustration at the difficulty of working with the Soviet Union.
Wallace, of course, was notoriously ‘soft’ on Communism, but his distaste for American involvement with Britain and Europe was widely shared across the political spectrum.
Churchill above all would not have been surprised, either by Wallace or the editorialist of the Wall Street Journal As early as 1943 he had taken the full measure of Roosevelt’s desire to see the liquidation of the British Empire—indeed, there were times when Roosevelt seemed at least as concerned with reducing post-war Britain as with containing Soviet Russia.
Of these, only the second objective was achieved—the third falling victim to the impossibility of the first.
None of these, it might be noted, directly concerned Europe proper—except the second point, which explains British engagement in Greece.
If British leaders were wary in their dealings with Stalin it was not from any anxiety over his plans in central Europe but rather in anticipation of future Soviet moves in Central Asia and the Near East.
This made sense in the light of Britain’s continuing priorities—in East Asia, India, Africa and the Caribbean.
But those selfsame Imperial illusions (as some, and not only in Washington, were already calling them) made British strategists much more realistic than their American allies when it came to Europe.
From London’s point of view, the war had been fought to defeat Germany, and if the price for this was a Soviet imperium in eastern Europe, then that was how things would be.
By 1945, when the extent of Russian domination was becoming clear, British leaders were less optimistic than their American counterparts.
Following the Russian-engineered coup in Bucharest in February 1945, and subsequent heavy-handed Soviet pressure in both Romania and Bulgaria, it was ob110 THE IMPOSSIBLE SETTLEMENT vious that the local price of Soviet hegemony was going to be high.
The real British fear in Europe was not that the USSR might control eastern Europe—by late 1944 that was a fait accompli —but that it might draw a prostrate, resentful Germany into its orbit as well and thus establish mastery over the whole continent.
To prevent this, as the British Chiefs of Staff concluded in the autumn of 1944, it would probably be necessary to divide Germany and then occupy the western part.
As General Alan Brooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, had confided to his diary on July 27th 1944, ‘Germany is no longer the dominating power in Europe.
She... cannot fail to become the main threat in fifteen years from now.
Therefore, foster Germany, gradually bring her up and bring her into a Federation of Western Europe.
Of all the Allied powers it was Britain which came closest to anticipating and even seeking the settlement that finally emerged.
But the British were in no position to impose such an outcome, nor indeed to impose very much at all, on their own.
By the end of the war it was obvious that London was no match for Washington and Moscow.
Britain had exhausted itself in the epic struggle with Germany and could not much longer sustain even the outer trappings of a great power.
Between Victory-inEurope Day in 1945 and the spring of 1947 British forces were reduced from a peak of 5. million men and women under arms to just 1. million.
In the autumn of 1947 the country was even forced to cancel naval manoeuvres in order to save fuel oil.
In these circumstances the British were understandably concerned not that the Russians would attack—British policy was predicated on the assumption that Soviet aggression might take any form except war—but that the Americans would retreat.
What remained of Europe wasn’t strong enough to stand up to Russia by itself.
Without the stopping power of the Americans, the Russians might easily have tried sweeping right forward.
And of course they understood very well the American ambivalence about overseas engagement, for it was not so different from their own stance in earlier days.
From the mid-eighteenth century through to the dispatch of the British Expeditionary Force to France in 1914, the English had preferred to fight by proxy, maintaining no standing army, avoiding protracted continental engagements and keeping no permanent force on European soil.
In the past, a maritime power seeking to fight a European war with someone else’s soldiers could look to the Spanish, the Dutch, the Swiss, the Swedes, the Prussians and of course the Russians for allies.
Hence the British decision, in January 1947, to go ahead with their own atomic weapons programme.
In the circumstances of the initial post-war years Britain’s best hope lay in encouraging continued American engagement in Europe (which meant publicly espousing the American faith in a negotiated settlement) while collaborating with the Soviets in so far as this was still realistic.
So long as the fear of German revanchism took precedence over anything else, this policy could just about be sustained.
But what was painfully clear was that the limbo in Germany, where the country’s economy was held hostage to unresolved political discussions and the British were footing enormous bills in their zone of occupation, could not long continue.
The German economy needed to be revived, with or without Soviet agreement.
It was the British—who had fought two long wars against Germany from beginning to end and had been brought low by their hard-won victories—who were thus most keen to close that chapter, establish some modus vivendi in continental affairs and move on.
In better times the British would have retreated to their Isles, much as they suspected the Americans of wanting to retreat to their continent, and left the security of western Europe to its traditional guardians, the French.
This image of France as a— the —European Great Power was shaken at Munich, but outside the chancelleries of Eastern Europe it was not yet broken.
In six traumatic weeks, the cardinal reference points of European inter-state relations changed forever.
France ceased to be not just a Great Power but even a power, and despite De Gaulle’s best efforts in later decades it has never been one since.
For the shattering defeat of June 1940 was followed by four years of humiliating, demeaning, subservient occupation, with Marshall Petain’s Vichy regime playing Uriah Heep to Germany’s Bill Sikes.
Whatever they said in public, French leaders and policymakers could not but know what had happened to their country.
In public, post-war French statesmen and politicians insisted upon their country’s claim to recognition as a member of the victorious Allied coalition, a world power to be accorded equal standing with her peers.
This illusion could be sustained, in some degree, because it suited the other powers to pretend it was so.
The Soviet Union wanted a tactical ally in the West who shared its suspicion of the ‘Anglo-Americans’; the British wanted a revived France to take its place in the counsels of Europe and relieve Great Britain of continental obligations; even the Americans saw some advantage, though not much, in granting Paris a seat at the top table.
So the French were given a permanent seat on the new United Nations Security Council, they were offered a role in the joint military administrations of Vienna and Berlin, and an occupation district was carved for them out of the American zone in south-west Germany, in an area contiguous to the French frontier and well west of the Soviet front line.
But the net effect of these encouragements was to pour further humiliation upon an already humbled nation.
On the Allied Control Council in Germany they consistently blocked or vetoed the implementation of decisions taken at the Potsdam Conference of the Big Three on the grounds that France had not been party to them.
The French provisional authorities initially refused to cooperate with UNRRA and Allied military governments in the handling of displaced persons on the grounds that French refugees and DPs should be located and administered as part of an independent and exclusively French operation.
Above all, French post-war governments felt very strongly their sense of exclusion from the highest councils of Allied decision-making.
Decisions were being taken in Washington and London, the French came to believe, that directly concerned them but over which they had no influence Like Britain, France was an Empire, at least on paper.
But Paris had become estranged from its colonial holdings in the course of the occupation.
In any case, and despite the country’s significant possessions in Africa and South-East Asia, France was first and always a continental power.
Soviet moves in Asia, or the coming crisis in the Middle East, were matters with which the French, unlike the British, were by now only indirectly concerned.
Precisely because France was now shrunk, Europe loomed larger in its field of vision.
The country had paid an incalculable price in territorial and material loss and in human lives and suffering.
The failure after 1918 to put in place a system of controls and alliances capable of restraining a renascent, vengeful Germany haunted the Quai d’Orsay, home of the French Foreign Ministry.
The country’s first priority after the defeat of Hitler was to ensure that this mistake was not repeated.
The mining districts of the Ruhr, the Saarland and parts of the Rhineland should be separated from the German state, their resources and output placed at French disposal.
But it would also have served the purpose of placing Germany’s huge primary resources at the service of France’s own plans for recovery—indeed, the Monnet Plan presumed the availability of German coal deliveries in particular, without which the French steel industry was helpless.
Even in 1938 France had been the world’s biggest importer of coal, buying from abroad some 40 percent of its requirements in coal and coke.
By 1944 French domestic coal output had fallen to less than half that of 1938.
Without German coal and coke, the post-war French recovery would be stillborn.
In the first place they fell foul of the same objections raised by Keynes to French policy a quarter century earlier.
It made little sense to destroy German resources if they were vital to Frances own recovery; and there was simply no way to oblige Germans to work for France while being held down to a low standard of living at home with little prospect for improvement.
The risk of provoking a nationalist backlash in Germany against post-war foreign oppression appeared at least as great in the 1940s as it had twenty years earlier.
But the most serious objection to French plans for post-war Germany was that they took little account of the interests or plans of France’s Western allies, an imprudent oversight at a time when France was utterly dependent on those same allies not just for her security but for her very livelihood.
On secondary issues—such as a customs and monetary union with the Saarland, on which the French got their way in 1947—the Western Allies could accommodate French demands.
But on the central issue of Germany’s future, Paris had no leverage with which to oblige the ‘Anglo-Americans’ to do its bidding.
French diplomats in the aftermath of German defeat could thus hope that a natural concordance of interests—shared fear of Germany and suspicion of the ‘AngloAmericans’—might translate into sustained Soviet support for French diplomatic goals.
He had no interest in serving as a counterweight to assist the French in offsetting the foreign policy heft of London and Washington, though this was only finally made clear to the French in April 1947, at the Moscow gathering of Allied foreign ministers, when Molotov refused to back Georges Bidault’s proposals for a separate Rhineland and foreign control of the Ruhr industrial belt.
Yet the French continued to dream up alternative ways to secure an impossible independence of policy.
And the French Ministry of War could—confidentially—propose, as late as 1947, that France should adopt a stance of international neutrality, making preventive ententes or alliances with the USA and the USSR and lining up against whichever of the two initiated aggression against her.
If France finally abandoned these fantasies and came round to the position of her Western partners in 1947, it was for three reasons.
France was in no position to impose a German solution of her own, and no-one else wanted the one she was proposing.
The former was indirectly but unambiguously dependent upon French agreement on a strategy for the latter.
But thirdly, and decisively, French politicians and the French national mood shifted definitively in the second half of 1947.
At the same time there was something of a war scare in Paris, coupling the country’s continued worries about German revanchism with new talk of an impending Soviet invasion.
In these circumstances, and following their rebuff by Molotov, the French turned reluctantly towards the West.
Asked by United States Secretary of State George Marshall in April 1947 whether America ‘could rely on France’, Foreign Minister Bidault replied ‘yes’—given time and if France could avoid a civil war.
If they wanted economic recovery and some level of American and British security guarantees against German revival or Soviet expansion, then they had to go along—especially now that France was embroiled in a costly colonial war in Indo-China for which she urgently needed American help.
The Americans and British could guarantee France against a renascent military 6 Marshall was probably not much reassured to learn from Bidault that this public emphasis upon the German threat was strictly for domestic consumption.
But none of this resolved France’s long-standing dilemma—how to secure privileged French access to the materials and resources located there.
If these objectives were not to be obtained by force or by annexation, then an alternative means had to be found.
In short, if you could not destroy Germany, then join her up to a European framework in which she could do no harm militarily but much good economically.
If the idea had not occurred to French leaders before 1948 this was not through a shortage of imagination, but because it was clearly perceived as a pis aller , a secondbest outcome.
A ‘European’ solution to France’s German problem could only be adopted once a properly‘French’ solution had been abandoned, and it took French leaders three years to accept this.
In those three years France had, in effect, to come to terms with the abrupt negation of three hundred years of history.
The situation of the Soviet Union in 1945 was precisely the opposite of that of France.
After two decades of effective exclusion from the affairs of Europe, Russia had re-surfaced.
The resilience of the Soviet population, the successes of the Red Army and, it must be said, the Nazis’ capacity to turn even the most sympathetic anti-Soviet nations against them, had brought Stalin credibility and influence, in the counsels of governments and on the streets.
Stalin had direct or indirect control of a huge swathe of eastern and central Europe.
His armies had only narrowly been blocked, by the rapid advance of the British under Montgomery, from moving forward through north Germany as far as the Danish border.
As Western generals well knew, there was absolutely nothing to stop the Red Army advancing to the Atlantic if Stalin ordered it.
There is no doubt that Stalin wanted a Soviet atomic bomb—it is one of the reasons why he insisted on Soviet control of those parts of eastern Germany and, especially, Czechoslovakia where there were uranium deposits; within a few years 200,000 east Europeans would be working in these mines as part of the Soviet atomic programme.
But the atomic bomb, though it worried the Soviet leaders and made Stalin even more suspicious of American motives and plans than he already was, did little to alter Soviet military calculations.
These derived directly from Stalin’s political goals, which in turn drew on longstanding Soviet and Russian objectives.
Stalin wanted back the land the Bolsheviks had lost, at the 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and in the course of the war with Poland two years later.
This goal had been partly achieved in the secret clauses of his 1939 and 1940 pacts with Hitler.
The rest he owed to Hitler’s decision to invade the Soviet Union in June 1941, allowing the Red Army in turn to reoccupy the disputed territories in the course of its advance on Berlin.
That way, the Soviet occupation and annexation of Bessarabia , the Bukovina , subCarpathian Ruthenia , western Ukraine , eastern Finland, the three independent Baltic republics and Konigsberg/Kaliningrad in East Prussia could all be presented as the spoils of victory, rather than deriving from unsavoury deals with the Fascist enemy.
For the Soviet Union the point of this territorial aggrandizement was twofold.
This was a matter of some importance to Stalin, who now became the leader of a huge Eurasian bloc in world affairs, its newfound power symbolized by the Soviet Union’s insistence on a system of vetoes in the new UN Security Council.
However, land represented not just prestige but also and above all security.
From the Soviet viewpoint a glacis to its west, a broad swathe of land across which Germans especially would have to pass if they wished to attack Russia, was a vital security concern.
The interpretation of that last phrase would prove, to say the least, contentious.
But in 1945 the Americans and British were not disposed to give Stalin an argument on the matter.
Looking back, we may be tempted to see in these territorial seizures and economic spoliation the first stages of the bolshevization of Europe’s eastern half, and so of course they 7 Under the terms of a secret Czech-Soviet agreement of March 1945, the USSR had the right to mine and extract uranium from the Jachymov deposits in Western Bohemia.
But at the time this was not obvious to everyone—to Western observers there was even something familiar and reassuringly traditional about Moscow’s initial post-war stance.
Overall, it is not possible to understand the Communist regime in Russia unless we take seriously its ideological claims and ambitions.
But there were moments, and the years 1945-47 are one of them, when even if one knew little of Bolshevik doctrine it would be possible to make reasonably good sense of Soviet foreign policy simply by looking to the policies of the czars.
It was Peter the Great, after all, who introduced the strategy by which Russia would dominate through ‘protection’ of its neighbours.
It was Catherine the Great who drove the Empire forward to the south and south-west.
And it was Czar Alexander I, above all, who established the template for Russian imperial engagement in Europe.
At the Vienna Congress of 1815, where—as in 1945—the victorious and mutually suspicious allied powers met to re-establish continental equilibrium following the defeat of a tyrant, Alexander’s purposes had been quite explicit.
The concerns of small nations were to be subordinated to those of the Great Powers.
Since British interests lay overseas and no other continental power matched that of Russia, the Czar would serve as arbiter of a post-war continental arrangement.
Local protests would be treated as threats to the arrangement at large and put down with appropriate energy.
Russian security would be defined by the territory under Czarist control— never again must a Western army be able to reach Moscow unimpeded—and by the success with which its occupants were forcibly reconciled to the new system.
There is nothing in that account which does not apply to Soviet calculations in 1945.
They are linked, as it were, by the calculations of Sazunov (Russia’s foreign minister on the outbreak of war in 1914), who was already envisaging the future of eastern Europe as a cluster of small, vulnerable, states; nominally independent but effectively clients of Great Russia.
To these enduring themes of Czarist foreign policy in Europe, Stalin added distinctive calculations of his own.
That was one reason why he evinced no haste in reaching a settlement there—time, Stalin believed, was on his side.
On the contrary, defensiveness and a wary suspicion characterized all aspects of Soviet foreign policy—‘the Kremlin’s neurotic view of world affairs’ as George Kennan described it in 1946.
Hence the famous February 9th 1946 speech at the Bolshoi Theatre, where Stalin announced that the Soviet Union was returning to its pre-war emphasis on industrialization, war-preparedness, and the inevitability of conflict between capitalism and Communism, and made explicit what was already obvious, that henceforth the Soviet Union would cooperate with the West only when it suited her.
Stalin was retreating to the ‘hard’ line taken by the Bolsheviks before 1921 and again between 1927 and the onset of the Popular Fronts.
The Bolshevik regime had always been insecure—it was born, after all, of a minority coup in unpropitious circumstances and a highly unsympathetic environment— and Stalin, like all tyrants, needed to invoke threats and enemies, whether domestic or foreign.
Like the USA after Pearl Harbor, but with rather better cause, the Soviet leadership was obsessed to the point of paranoia with ‘surprise attacks’ and challenges to its new-won standing.
And the Russians continued for many decades to see Germany as the main threat.
That he anticipated a coming cooling of relations with the West and was out to make the best of his assets and take advantage of Western weakness is doubtless true.
But it is far from obvious that Stalin had any clear strategy beyond that.
This fits with what we know of Stalin’s general approach, and it applies beyond the East German case as well.
The Soviets were certainly not planning for World War Three in the near term.
Between June 1945 and the end of 1947 the Red Army was reduced from 11,365,000 9 In 1990 Edvard Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Secretary, reportedly observed that despite a fortyyear-long Cold War with the United States, when his grandchildren played war games, Germany was still the enemy.
Of course, Soviet calculations were by no means self-evident to western contemporaries, and even those who read Stalin as a cautious pragmatist could not be absolutely certain.
Stalin himself was famously risk-averse, which is why some commentators then and since regretted the West’s failure to exercise ‘containment’ sooner and further forward.
But no-one wanted another war in these years, and whereas Stalin could readily be dissuaded from trying to destabilize Paris or Rome (since he had no armies there), the Soviet presence further east was a non-negotiable affair, as everyone recognized.
In the Allied Control Councils in Bulgaria or Romania the Soviets did not even pretend to take note of British or American wishes, much less those of the locals.
Only in Czechoslovakia was there a degree of ambiguity, the Red Army having long since withdrawn.
From his standpoint, Stalin operated in what passed in Moscow for good faith.
He and his colleagues assumed that the Western Allies understood that the Soviets planned to occupy and control ‘their’ half of Europe; and they were willing to treat Western protests at Soviet behaviour in their zone as pro forma, the small change of democratic cant.
When it seemed to them that the West was taking its own rhetoric too seriously, demanding freedom and autonomy in Eastern Europe, the Soviet leadership responded with genuine indignation.
We have not been asked, although we do not say that we like one or another of these governments.
Everyone expected World War Two to end, like its predecessor, with an allembracing Peace Treaty, and five separate treaties were indeed signed in Paris in 1946.
These settled territorial and other business in Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Finland and Italy, though not in Norway, which remained technically in a state of war with Germany until 1951.
Just as the war had been about Germany, so was the peace, and the spectre of German revanchism haunted Soviet calculations every bit as much as it did those of the French.
Beyond this level of general common intention, however, the difficulties began.
Thus it was agreed to treat the German economy as a single unit, but the Soviets were also granted the right to extract and remove goods, services and financial assets from their own zone.
They were further accorded 10 percent of reparations from the Western zones in exchange for food and raw materials to be supplied from eastern Germany.
But these accords introduced a contradiction, by treating the economic resources of East and West as separate and distinct.
There was no final agreement on Germany’s new frontiers with Poland and even the common ground of democratization posed practical difficulties in implementation.
Accordingly, the Allied leaders agreed to differ and to defer, instructing their Foreign Ministers to meet and continue the talks at a later date.
Their goal, in principle, was to draw up definitive arrangements for post-war Germany and prepare Peace Treaties between the Allied Powers and German and Austria.
It was in the course of these encounters— notably in Moscow during March and April 1947—that the gap separating Soviet and Western approaches to the German problem became clear.
The Anglo-American strategy was driven in part by calculations of political prudence.
If the Germans in the Western zone of occupation remained beaten down and impoverished, and were offered no prospect of improvement, then they would sooner or later turn back to Nazism—or else to Communism.
In the regions of Germany occupied by American and British military governments, therefore, the emphasis switched quite early to reconstructing civic and political institutions and giving Germans responsibility for their domestic affairs.
This offered emerg122 THE IMPOSSIBLE SETTLEMENT ing German politicians considerably more leverage than they could have hoped for when the war ended and they didn’t hesitate to exploit it—intimating that unless matters improved and the occupiers followed their advice, they could not answer for the future political allegiance of the German nation.
Fortunately for the Western allies, Communist occupation policies in Berlin and the Soviet-occupied territory of eastern Germany were not such as to attract disaffected German sentiments and votes.
From the outset, the Soviets established in their zone of occupation a de facto Communist-led government without Allied consent and set about rendering superfluous the Potsdam accords by ruthlessly extracting and dismantling whatever fell within their grasp.
There was never any prospect of the Communists gaining control of the country or even the Soviet zone except by force.
In the Berlin city elections on October 20th 1946, Communist candidates came far behind both the Social Democrats and Christian Democrats.
But by this time the Western occupiers were running into difficulties of their own.
By July 1946 Britain had been forced to import 112,000 tons of wheat and 50,000 tons of potatoes to feed the local population of its zone (the urban and industrial north-west of Germany), paid for out of an American loan.
The Americans were not under the same economic constraints and their zone had not suffered as much war damage, but the situation appeared no less absurd to them—the United States Army in particular was not well pleased, since the cost of feeding millions of hungry Germans fell on its own budget.
Moreover the British Cabinet, meeting in May 1946, was still reluctant to accept a formal division of occupied Germany into eastern and western halves, with all the implications that would have for European security.
But it was becoming obvious that the four Occupying Powers were not about to reach an agreement.
Once the main Nuremberg Trial ended in October 1946 and the terms of the Paris Peace Treaties were finalized the following month, the wartime Allies were bound by little more than their co-responsibility for Germany, the contradictions of which thus came increasingly to the fore.
The Americans and British agreed at the end of 1946 to fuse the economies of their two occupation zones into a so-called ‘Bizone 5 ; but even this did not yet signify a firm division of Germany, much less a commitment to integrating the Bizone into the West.
And United States Secretary of State Marshall was still optimistic, in early 1947, that whatever arrangements were made to resolve the German economic conundrum need not result in a divided Germany.
The real break came in the spring of 1947, at the Moscow meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the US, Britain, France and the Soviet Union, convened once again to seek agreement on a Peace Treaty for Germany and Austria.
The British and Americans were determined to build up the Western German economy, in order that the Germans might support themselves but also to contribute to the revival of the European economy in general.
The Soviet representatives wanted a restoration of reparations from the Western zones of Germany and, to this end, a united German administration and economy as initially envisaged at Potsdam.
But by now the Western Allies were no longer seeking a single German administration.
For this would entail not just the abandonment of the population of the western zones of Germany—by now a political consideration in its own right—but the effective handing over of the country to the Soviet sphere of control, given the military asymmetry of the time.
As Robert K Murphy, the political adviser to the United States Military Government in Germany, recognized, ‘it was the Moscow Conference of 1947 ... which really rang down the Iron Curtain.
Ernest Bevin had abandoned any serious hope of agreement over Germany before he even arrived in Moscow, but for Marshall (and Bidault) it was the defining moment.
For the Americans especially, Germans were rapidly ceasing to be the enemy.
The Foreign Ministers—Molotov, Bevin, Marshall and Bidault—met one last time, in London, from November 25th through December 16th 1947.
It was a curious gathering, since their relations had already in practice broken down.
The Western Allies were moving forward with independent plans for West European recovery, while two months earlier Stalin had established the Cominform, instructed the Communist parties of France and Italy to take an intransigent line in their countries’ affairs and clamped down sharply on the Communist-controlled countries in what was now a Soviet bloc.
The Ministers discussed, as in the past, the prospects for an all-German government under Allied control and other terms for an eventual Peace Treaty.
But there was no further agreement on the common administration of Germany or plans for its future and the meeting broke up without scheduling any future gatherings.
Instead Britain, France and the United States began tripartite discussions on Germany’s future at an extended conference, once again held in London, beginning on February 23rd, 1948.
In the shadow of the Prague coup, France and Britain extended their Dunkirk Treaty into the Brussels Pact of March 17th, binding Britain, France and the Benelux countries in a mutual defense alliance.
There was now nothing to inhibit the Western leaders and the London Conference rapidly agreed to extend the Marshall Plan to western Germany and lay down schemes for an eventual government for a West German state (an arrangement apu This proved an easy accommodation.
In the words of one American GI, pleasantly surprised at his reception in Germany following the rather frosty French response to their liberators, ‘Hell, these people are cleaner and a damned sight friendlier than the French.
On March 10th, Sokolovsky condemned plans for western Germany as the enforced imposition of capitalist interests upon a German population denied the chance to demonstrate its desire for Socialism, and repeated Soviet assertions that Western powers were abusing their presence in Berlin—which he claimed was part of the Soviet Zone—to interfere in eastern German affairs.
He then swept out of the room, followed by the rest of the Soviet delegation.
To the extent that the Cold War was about Germany, the final outcome—a divided country—was probably preferred by all parties to a Germany united against them.
No one planned this outcome in May 1945, but few were deeply discontented with it.
But Adenauer could hardly have espoused the division of Germany as a goal, however much he welcomed it in private.
His chief opponent in the first years of the Federal Republic, the Social Democrat Kurt Schumacher, was a Protestant from West Prussia and a tireless advocate of German unity.
In contrast to Adenauer he would readily have accepted a neutralized Germany as the price for a single German state, which was what Stalin appeared to be offering.
And Schumacher’s position was probably the more popular one in Germany at the time, which was why Adenauer had to tread carefully and ensure that the responsibility for a divided Germany fell squarely on the occupying forces.
By 1948 the United States, like Great Britain, was not unhappy to see the emergence of a divided Germany, with American influence dominant in the larger, western segment.
It is sometimes suggested that certain key American decisions and declarations, notably the Truman Doctrine of March 1947, precipitated Stalin’s retreat from compromise to rigidity and that in this sense the responsibility for European divisions lay with Washington’s insensitivity or, worse, its calculated intransigence.
For the Truman Doctrine, to take this example, had remarkably little impact on Soviet calculations.
President Truman’s March 12th 1947 announcement to Congress that ‘It must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or outside pressure’ was a direct response to London’s inability to continue with aid to Greece and Turkey following the British economic crisis of February 1947.
Stalin was not much interested in Turkey and Greece—the chief beneficiaries of the aid package—and he understood perfectly well that his own sphere of interest was unlikely to be affected by Truman’s grandstanding.
On the contrary, he continued to suppose that there were very good prospects for a split within the Western camp of which the American assumption of erstwhile British responsibilities in the Eastern Mediterranean was a sign and precursor.
Whatever led Stalin to adjust his calculations in Eastern Europe, it was decidedly not the rhetoric of American domestic politics.
The immediate cause of the division of Germany and Europe lies rather in Stalin’s own errors in these years.
In central Europe, where he would have preferred a united Germany, weak and neutral, he squandered his advantage in 1945 and subsequent years by uncompromising rigidity and confrontational tactics.
If Stalin’s hope had been to let Germany rot until the fruit of German resentment and hopelessness fell into his lap, then he miscalculated seriously—though there were moments when the Allied authorities in western Germany wondered whether he might yet succeed.
In that sense the Cold War in Europe was an unavoidable outcome of the Soviet dictator’s personality and the system over which he ruled.
All the Soviet Union needed to do was accept the Marshall Plan and convince a majority of the Germans of Moscow’s good faith in seeking a neutral, independent Germany.
In 1947 this would radically have shifted the European balance of advantage.
Whatever Marshall, Bevin or their advisers might have thought of such maneuvers, they would have been helpless to prevent them.
That such tactical calculations were beyond Stalin cannot be credited to the West.
Looking back, it is somewhat ironic that after fighting a murderous war to reduce the power of an over-mighty Germany at the heart of the European continent, the victors should have proven so unable to agree on post-war arrangements to keep the German colossus down that they ended up dividing it between them in order to benefit separately from its restored strength.
It had become clear—first to the British, then to the Americans, belatedly to the French and finally to the Soviets— that the only way to keep Germany from being the problem was to change the terms of the debate and declare it the solution.
In the words of Noel Annan, a British intelligence officer in occupied Germany, ‘It was odious to find oneself in alliance with people who had been willing to go along with Hitler to keep Communism at bay.
But the best hope for the West was to encourage the Germans themselves to create a Western democratic state.
Anthony Eden ‘This war is not as in the past; whoever occupies a territory also imposes upon it his own social system.
Josef Stalin’s famous aphorism—reported by Milovan Djilas in his Conversations with Stalin —was not quite as original as it appeared.
Nevertheless, Stalin’s point was clear—and put to Djilas well in advance of the Communist take-over of eastern Europe.
From the Soviet side the war had been fought to defeat Germany and restore Russian power and security on its western frontiers.
The territories running in a north-south arc from Finland to Yugoslavia comprised small, vulnerable states whose inter-war governments had been uniformly hostile to the Soviet Union.
Poland, Hungary and Romania in particular had been consistently unfriendly to Moscow and suspicious of Soviet intentions towards them.
The only acceptable outcome for Stalin was the establishment—in those parts of the region not preemptively absorbed into the USSR itself—of governments that could be relied upon never to pose a threat to Soviet security.
But the only way to guarantee such an outcome was to align the political system of the states of eastern Europe with that of the Soviet Union and this, from the start, was what Stalin wanted and intended.
In many places the Soviet occupiers were at first welcomed as liberators and harbingers of change and reform.
On the other hand, however, the Soviet Union had almost no leverage in the domestic affairs of its western neighbours beyond the authority of its overwhelming military presence.
Communists in much of the region had been banned from public life and legal political activity for most of the previous quarter century.
Even where Communist parties were legal, their identification with Russia and the rigid, sectarian tactics imposed from Moscow for most of the period after 1927 had reduced them to a marginal irrelevance in East European politics.
By the end of the war, or very shortly thereafter, every country in eastern Europe had such a coalition government.
In view of continuing scholarly disagreement over responsibility for the division of Europe, it is perhaps worth emphasizing that neither Stalin nor his local representatives were in any doubt as to their long-term goal.
Coalitions were the route to power for Communist parties in a region where they were historically weak; they were only ever a means to this end.
Communists also put themselves in key positions on ‘denazification’ committees, district commissions and in the trade unions.
This reflected the initial post-war disposition of government places—with the Communists in a minority—and reassured Western observers.
The Communists’ stated objective in 1945 and 1946 was to ‘complete’ the unfinished bourgeois revolutions of 1848, to re-distribute property, guarantee equality and affirm democratic rights in a part of Europe where all three had always been in short supply.
These were plausible goals, at least on the surface, and they appealed to many in the region and in western Europe who wanted to think well of Stalin and his purposes.
Their appeal to Communists themselves, however, was sharply diminished in a series of local and national elections in eastern Germany, Austria and Hungary.
Despite every advantage of military occupation and economic patronage, Communist candidates were consistently defeated by representatives of the old Liberal, Social Democratic and Agrarian/Smallholder parties.
The result was that Communist parties adopted instead a strategy of covert pressure, followed by open terror and repression.
In the course of 1946 and into 1947 electoral opponents were maligned, threatened, beaten up, arrested, tried as ‘Fascists’ or ‘collaborators’ and imprisoned or even shot.
Vulnerable or unpopular politicians from non-Communist parties were targeted for public opprobrium, while their colleagues consented to this mistreatment in the hope it would not be applied to them.
Thus in Bulgaria, as early as the summer of 1946, seven out of twenty-two members of the ‘Praesidium’ of the Agrarian Union and thirty-five out of the eighty members of its governing Council were in prison.
Agrarians, Liberals and other mainstream parties proved an easy target, tarred with the brush of Fascism or anti-national sentiment and picked off in stages.
The more complicated impediment to Communist ambitions were the local Socialist and Social-Democratic parties who shared the Communists’ own reforming ambitions.
It was not easy to charge Social Democrats in central or eastern Europe with ‘Fascism’ or collaboration—they had usually been as much the victim of repression as Communists.
And in so far as there was an industrial working-class constituency in overwhelmingly rural eastern Europe, its allegiance was traditionally Socialist, not Communist.
Thus since the Socialists could not easily be beaten, the Communists chose instead to join them.
In the circumstances of post-liberation eastern Europe this seemed to many socialists a sensible proposition.
By then the Socialist parties had been split and split again over the issue of fusion, so that long before they disappeared they had ceased to be an effective political force in their country.
Western Socialists often encouraged them to merge with the Communists, either in the innocent belief that everyone would benefit, or else in the hope of moderating Communist behaviour.
Following the decimation, imprisonment or absorption of their main opponents, Communists did indeed do rather better at elections in 1947 and thereafter, with some help from violent assaults on their remaining opponents, intimidation at polling stations and blatantly abusive vote counts.
In keeping with this transition from united front coalitions to a Communist monopoly of power, Soviet strategy in the course of 1948 and 1949 reverted to a radical policy of state control, collectivization, destruction of the middle-class and purges and punishment of real and imagined opponents.
This account of the initial Soviet take-over in eastern Europe describes a process common to all the countries of the region.
Where Communists could reasonably hope to secure power by legal or ostensibly legal means this appears to have been Stalin’s preference, at least through the autumn of 1947.
But the point was power, not legality, which is why Communists’ tactics became more confrontational and less embarrassed by judicial or political constraints, even at the cost of alienating foreign sympathy, once it was clear that electoral success would elude them.
In Bulgaria and Romania the Soviet hand was heaviest—in part because both countries had been at war with the USSR, in part because of local Communist weakness, but mostly just because they were so obviously consigned by geography to the Soviet sphere from the outset.
In Bulgaria the Communist leader Georgy Dimitrov declared bluntly as early as October 1946 that anyone who voted for the anticommunist opposition would be regarded as a traitor.
But the opposition was fore-doomed—the only thing preventing the occupying Red Army and its local allies from openly destroying all dissent right away was the need to work with the Western Allies on a Peace Treaty for Bulgaria and to secure Anglo-American recognition of a Communist-led government as Bulgaria’s legitimate authority.
Once the peace treaties were signed, the Communists had nothing to gain by waiting and the chronology of events is thus revealing.
On June 5th 1947 the United States Senate ratified the Paris Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Finland and Italy, despite the misgivings of American diplomats in Sofia and Bucharest.
The very next day the leading anti-Communist politician in Bulgaria, the Agrarian leader Nikola Petkov (who had refused to follow more accommodating Agrarians into the Communists’ Fatherland Front), was arrested.
On September 15th the Bulgarian Peace Treaty officially came into force and four days later the USA offered to extend diplomatic recognition to the government in Sofia.
Within 96 hours Petkov was executed, his sentence having been delayed until the official American announcement.
With Petkov judicially murdered, the Bulgarian Communists need fear no further impediments.
Although the Soviets guaranteed the return to Romania of northern Translyvania , Stalin had no intention 'The Bulgarians had actually oscillated quite markedly over the years from enthusiastic pro-Germanism to ultra-Slavophilism.
Worse, the Romanian Communist leaders were frequently not even Romanian, at least by traditional Romanian criteria.
Ana Pauker was Jewish, Emil Bodnaras was Ukrainian, Vasile Luca was of Transylvanian German background.
Perceived as an alien presence, the Romanian Communists were utterly dependent on the Soviet forces.
In Romania as in Bulgaria (or Albania, where Enver Hodxa mobilized the southern Tosk communities against tribal resistance from the northern Ghegs), subversion and violence were not one option among others—they were the only road to power.
The Poles, too, were fore-doomed to the Soviet sphere after World War Two.
This was because of their location, on the route from Berlin to Moscow; their history, as longstanding impediments to Russian imperial ambitions in the west; and because in Poland, too, the prospects of a Soviet-friendly government emerging spontaneously by popular choice were minimal.
The difference between Poland and the Balkan states, however, was that Poland had been a victim of Hitler, not his ally; hundreds of thousands of Polish soldiers had fought with the Allied armies on Eastern and Western fronts; and the Poles nursed expectations about their postwar prospects.
These considerations allowed Polish Communists, for all their marginality (many of them, too, were of Jewish origin), to claim a place in Polish national and even nationalist political traditions.
Nevertheless, Poland’s Communists too would always have been an insignificant minority in electoral terms.
But Mikolajczyk, prime minister of the wartime government-in-exile, was fatally handicapped by his party’s characteristically Polish insistence on being both anti-Nazi and anti-Soviet.
Stalin was more or less indifferent to the success of ‘Socialism’ in Poland, as later events would reveal.
But he was far from indifferent to the general tenor of Polish policy, especially Polish foreign policy.
Indeed, together with the outcome of the German standoff, it was more important to him than anything else, at least in Europe.
Remnants of the wartime Home Army continued to fight a guerilla war with the Communist authorities for a few more years, but theirs, too, was a hopeless cause.
In Poland, the Soviet Union had so obvious an interest in the political complexion of the country that the Poles’ wartime illusions—before and after Yalta— can seem quixotic.
In Hungary, however, notions of a ‘Hungarian road to Socialism’ were not altogether fanciful.
Had there been widespread public support for the local Communists their Soviet advisers might have been willing to play out the ‘democratic’ tactic longer than they did.
But in Hungary, too, the Communists proved consistently unpopular, even in Budapest.
In new elections in August 1947, shamelessly falsified by the Communist Interior Minister Laszlo Rajk, the Communists still managed to secure only 22 percent of the vote, although the Smallholders were duly reduced to a 15 percent share.
In these circumstances Hungary’s road to Socialism converged rapidly with that of its eastern neighbours.
It is easy, in retrospect, to see that hopes for a democratic Eastern Europe after 1945 were always forlorn.
Central and Eastern Europe had few indigenous democratic or liberal traditions.
The inter-war regimes in this part of Europe had been corrupt, authoritarian and in some cases murderous.
The real governing class in inter-war Eastern Europe was the bureaucracy, recruited from the same social groups who would furnish the administrative cadre of the Communist states.
For all the rhetoric of‘Socialism’, the transition from authoritarian backwardness to Communist ‘popular democracy’ was a short move and an easy one.
Moreover the alternative of a return to the politicians and policies of pre-1939 Romania or Poland or Hungary significantly weakened the anti-Communist case, at least until the full force of Soviet terror was felt after 1949.
The Soviet Union was now the self-appointed protector of the new borders of Romania and Poland, not to speak of the redistributed land of expelled Germans and others all across the region.
This was a reminder, as though it were needed, of the omnipresence of the Red Army.
The 37th Army of the 3rd Ukrainian Front was detached from the forces occupying Romania in September 1944 and stationed in Bulgaria, where it remained until the Peace Treaties were signed in 1947.
Soviet forces remained in Hungary until the mid-Fifties , in Romania until 1958.
The German Democratic Republic was under Soviet military occupation throughout its forty-year life and Soviet troops transited regularly across Poland.
The Soviet Union was not about to leave this part of Europe, whose future was thus intimately bound up with the fate of its giant neighbour, as events were to show.
Thanks to Munich they had few illusions about the Western powers and Edvard Benes’s London-based government-in-exile was the only one that made unambivalent overtures to Moscow well before 1945.
Benes may not have been as alert as his mentor, the late President Tomas Masaryk, to the risks of a Russian or Soviet embrace, but he was not a fool either.
That is why Benes, alone of the eastand south-east European wartime prime-ministers-inexile, was able to bring his government home—where, in April 1945, he reconfigured it with seven Communists and eleven ministers from the other four parties.
They had made a respectable showing at the last pre-war Czechoslovak elections, obtaining 849,000 votes in 1935.
The Communists were certainly not beyond using patronage and pressure to secure support.
And, as elsewhere, they had taken the precaution of obtaining the vital ministries and placing their men in crucial positions within the police and elsewhere.
But in anticipation of the elections of 1948 the homegrown Communists of Czechoslovakia were preparing to come to full power by a ‘Czech road’ that still looked quite different from those to the east.
But at least until the autumn of 1947 Stalin left Czechoslovakia alone.
Prague billboards carried portraits of Stalin alongside those of President Benes himself, long before the Communists had even established a government of their own, much less secured a monopoly of power.
We have seen that Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk and his colleagues did not hesitate, in the summer of 1947, to decline Marshall Aid at Moscow’s behest.
Stalin, in short, had nothing to complain of in Czechoslovak behaviour.
Nevertheless, in February 1948 the Communists engineered a political coup in Prague, taking advantage of the imprudent resignation of non-Communist ministers (over an important but obscure issue of Communist infiltration of the police) to seize control of the country.
The Prague coup was of enormous significance, precisely because it came in a more or less democratic country that had seemed so friendly to Moscow.
It galvanized the Western allies, who inferred from it that Communism was on the march westwards.
In the West, Prague awoke Socialists to the realities of political life in eastern Europe.
On February 29th 1948 the ageing Leon Blum published in the French Socialist paper he Populaire a hugely influential article, criticizing western Socialists’ failure to speak out about the fate of their comrades in eastern Europe.
Thanks to Prague, a significant part of the non-Communist Left in France, Italy and elsewhere would now firmly situate itself in the Western camp, a development that consigned Communist parties in countries beyond Soviet reach to isolation and growing impotence.
If Stalin engineered the Prague coup without fully anticipating these consequences, it was not just because he had always planned to enforce his writ in a certain way throughout the bloc.
Nor was it because Czechoslovakia mattered much in the grand scheme of things.
What happened in Prague—and what was happening at the same time in Germany, where Soviet policy was moving swiftly from stonewalling and disagreement to open confrontation with her former allies—was a return by Stalin to the style and strategy of an earlier era.
This shift was driven in general terms by Stalin’s anxiety at his inability to shape European and German affairs as he wished; but also and above all by his growing irritation with Yugoslavia.
Alone of the Communist parties in Europe, the Yugoslavs had come to power by their own efforts, depending neither on local allies nor foreign help.
To be sure, the British in December 1943 had stopped sending aid to the rival Chetnik partisans and had swung their support behind Tito, and in the immediate postwar years the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration spent more money in aid to Yugoslavia than anywhere else in Europe, 72 percent of that money coming from the United States.
But for contemporaries what mattered was that the Yugoslav Communist partisans had fought the only successful resistance war against the German and Italian occupiers.
Buoyed by their victory, Tito’s Communists had no truck with coalitions of the kind being set up elsewhere in liberated eastern Europe and set about immediately destroying all their opponents.
Tito pressed forward with mass arrests, imprisonment and execution of his opponents, together with forced collectivization of the land, at a time when Communists in neighbouring Hungary and Romania were still carefully calibrating a more accommodating image.
Yugoslavia, it seemed, was on the hard, cutting edge of European Communism.
Moscow lavished unstinting praise on Tito and his party, evinced great enthusiasm for their revolutionary achievements and held Yugoslavia up as a model for others to emulate.
The Yugoslav leaders in return took every occasion to insist on their respect for the Soviet Union; they saw themselves as introducing the Bolshevik model of revolution and government into the Balkans.
As Milovan Djilas recalled, ‘all of us were pre-disposed towards in spirit.
But Yugoslav devotion to Bolshevism was, from Stalin’s point of view, always a little too enthusiastic.
Stalin, as we have already seen, was interested less in revolution than in power.
It was for Moscow to determine the strategy of Communist parties, for Moscow to decide when a moderate approach was called for and when a radical line should be adopted.
As the origin and fountainhead of world revolution, the Soviet Union was not a model for revolution but the model.
Under the appropriate circumstances lesser Communist parties might follow suit, but they were ill advised to trump the Soviet hand.
Stalin did not come to these conclusions all at once, although his frustration with the ‘inexperienced’ Tito is recorded as early as January 1945.
Beyond the growing sense in Moscow that Tito was getting above himself and setting up the indigenous Yugoslav revolution as a counter-model to that of the Soviets, the disagreements between Stalin and Tito arose over practical issues of regional policy.
This idea had a certain appeal beyond Yugoslavia’s borders—it made economic sense for Bulgaria, in the view of Traicho Kostov, one of the Communist leaders in Sofia, and would represent a further break with the small-state nationalism that had so hampered these countries’ prospects before the war.
Stalin himself was not initially averse to talk of a Balkan federation, and Dimitrov, Stalin’s confidante in the Comintern and the first Communist leader of Bulgaria, spoke openly of the prospect as late as January 1948.
But there were two problems with the otherwise appealing plan to embrace all of south-eastern Europe into a common federal arrangement under Communist rule.
What began as a basis for mutual co-operation among local Communists soon came, in Stalin’s suspicious eyes, to appear more like a bid for regional hegemony by one of them.
This alone would probably, in time, have led Stalin to cap Tito’s ambitions.
But in addition, and crucially, Tito was making problems for Stalin in the West.
The Yugoslavs openly backed and encouraged the Greek insurgency, both in 1944 and, more significantly, when the Greek civil war flared up again three years later.
This support was consistent with Tito’s own rather narcissistic activism— helping the Greek Communists to emulate his own successes—and it was coloured, too, by Yugoslav interests in the disputed ‘Slav’ regions of Greek Macedonia.
But Greece was in the Western sphere of interest, as Churchill and subsequently Truman had made very clear.
Stalin had no interest in provoking a quarrel with the West over Greece, a secondary issue for him.
The Greek Communists naively supposed that their uprising would trigger Soviet help, perhaps even the intervention of Soviet forces, but this was never in the cards.
On the contrary, Stalin regarded them as undisciplined adventurers pursuing a lost cause and likely to provoke an American intervention.
Tito’s provocative encouragement to the Greek insurgents thus annoyed Stalin— who rightly reasoned that without Yugoslav assistance the Greek imbroglio would long since have resolved itself peacefully 5 —and alienated him still further from his Balkan acolyte.
But it wasn’t just in the south Balkans that Tito was embarrassing Stalin and fuelling Anglo-American irritation.
Tito’s combination of Yugoslav irridentism and partisan revolutionary fervour was thus a growing embarrassment to Stalin.
According to the Official British History of the Second World War , it was widely believed in Western military circles after May 1945 that if a Third World War were to break out soon, it would be in the Trieste region.
But Stalin was not interested in provoking a Third World War, and surely not over an obscure corner of north-east Italy.
For all these reasons, Stalin was already privately exasperated over Yugoslavia by the summer of 1947.
It cannot have pleased him that the railway station in the Bulgarian capital was covered with posters of Tito as well as Stalin and Dimitrov, nor that Hungarian Communists were beginning to speak of emulating the Yugoslav model of Communist rule—even the slavishly loyal Rakosi reportedly sung Tito’s praises to Stalin himself, at a Moscow meeting in late 1947.
Tito was not just a diplomatic embarrassment for the Soviet Union in its relations with the Western Allies; he was causing trouble within the international Communist movement itself.
From the late Twenties through to the outbreak of war, Moscow had indeed succeeded in imposing its control over the world Communist movement, except in China.
In its resistance against the Germans the Soviet Union had been forced'to invoke patriotism, liberty, democracy and many other ‘bourgeois’ goals.
Communism had lost its revolutionary edge and become, deliberately, part of a broad anti-Fascist coalition.
This had been the tactic of the pre-war Popular Fronts too, of course, but in the Thirties Moscow had been able to keep tight control of its foreign parties—through financial aid, personal intervention and terror.
In wartime that control had been lost—symbolized by the shutting down of the Comintern in 1943.
Like the Czechs, but with even less guidance from the USSR, they pursued what they described as the French or Italian ‘road to Socialism’, working within governing coalitions and treating national and Communist objectives as unproblematically compatible.
Communist ministers were ejected from the governments of France and Italy in May 1947.
Communists in Western Europe were unsure how to respond to the Marshall Plan, only belatedly taking their cue from Stalin’s rejection of it.
In general, communications between Moscow and its Western parties were poor.
Within weeks of the dispatch of the letter to Thorez, on June 2nd, Moscow was establishing commercial treaties with its eastern European neighbours and satellites, part of a concerted reaction against the Marshall Plan and the threat it posed to Soviet influence in the region.
To implement the new approach, Stalin called a meeting in Szklarska Por^ba, in Poland, for late September 1947.
Invited to take part were the Communist parties of Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, France, Italy and of course the Soviet Union.
At Szklarska Por^ba the French and Italian representatives were subjected to patronizing lectures on revolutionary strategy from the Yugoslav delegates Edvard Kardelj and Milovan Djilas, whose exemplary ‘leftism’ was singled out for praise by Zdanov and Malenkov, the Soviet delegates.
Peaceful co-existence, of the kind they had been pursuing in domestic politics, was at an end.
An ‘anti-imperialist democratic camp’ (in Zdanov’s words) was forming and a new line was to be followed.
Henceforth Moscow expected Communists to pay closer attention and subordinate local considerations to Soviet interests.
The western European Communists certainly suffered as a consequence—they were marginalized in domestic affairs and in the Italian case lost heavily in the April 1948 general elections, in which the Vatican and the United States Embassy intervened massively on the antiCommunist side.
In Zdanov’s ‘two camps’ theory, Communists in the Western camp were now consigned to a secondary, spoiler role.
Instead, however, the Tito-Stalin rift was publicly initiated by Stalin’s condemnation of the Balkan Federation idea in February 1948 and the Soviet cancellation of trade negotiations, followed by the recall from Belgrade of Soviet military and civilian advisers the following month.
It was pursued through a series of formal communications and accusations in which both sides claimed the best of intentions, and culminated in Tito’s refusal to attend the forthcoming second Cominform conference.
The split was then consummated at that conference, on June 28th 1948, with a formal resolution expelling Yugoslavia from the organization for its failure to acknowledge the leading role of the Red Army and the USSR in the country’s liberation and socialist transformation.
Officially, Belgrade was charged with conducting a nationalist foreign policy and pursuing incorrect domestic policies.
In fact, Yugoslavia represented the international equivalent of a ‘left opposition’ to 6 The PCI actually increased its vote somewhat at the 1948 elections, but only at the expense of the Socialists, who lost heavily.
The victorious Christian Democrats outscored the combined Left by over four million votes.
Stalin needed to break Tito in order to make very clear to Tito’s fellow Communists that Moscow would brook no dissent.
But both he and his country were more vulnerable than they seemed at the time, and without growing Western backing Tito would have been hard put to survive the Soviet economic boycott—in 1948 46 percent of Yugoslav trade was with the Soviet bloc, a figure that was reduced to 14 percent one year later—and credible threats of Soviet intervention.
The Yugoslavs certainly paid a high rhetorical price for their opinionated actions.
In the course of the next two years Cominform attacks were steadily ratcheted up.
It is significant that the attacks on Tito and his followers coincided with the full flowering of the Stalinist personality cult and the purges and show trials of the coming years.
For there is little doubt that Stalin truly did see in Tito a threat and a challenge, and feared his corrosive effect on the fealty and obedience of other Communist regimes and parties.
If Stalin went to such trouble to assert and re-assert his authority in eastern Europe, it was in large measure because he was losing the initiative in Germany.
On June 1st 1948 the Western Allies, meeting in London, announced plans to establish a separate West German state.
The old Reichsmark was withdrawn, with every German resident entitled to exchange just forty of them for the new marks at a 1:1 ratio, thereafter at a ratio of 10:1.
The following day the Western military government in Berlin blocked Soviet efforts to extend the new Eastern zone currency to West Berlin—an important point of principle, since the city of Berlin was under four-power rule and the Western zone had not hitherto been treated as part of Soviet-occupied eastern Germany.
As the Soviet troops tightened their control over surface connections into the city, the American and British governments decided upon an airlift to provision their own zones and on June 26th the first transport plane landed at Tempelhof airfield in Berlin.
Over those eleven months the Western allies shipped some 2. million tons of food on 277,500 flights, at the cost of the lives of 73 Allied airmen.
Stalin’s purpose in blockading Berlin was to force the West to choose between quitting the city (taking advantage of the absence in the Potsdam protocols of any written guarantee of Allied surface access to it), or else abandoning their plans for a separate West German state.
This was what Stalin really wanted—Berlin for him was always a negotiating chip—but in the end he secured neither objective.
Not only did the Western allies hang on to their share of Berlin (somewhat to their own surprise, and to the amazed gratitude of the—West—Berliners themselves), but the Soviet blockade, following hard on the Prague coup, only made them more determined to move ahead with plans for West Germany, just as it made a division of the country more acceptable to Germans themselves.
On January 31st 1949 he publicly proposed lifting the blockade in exchange for a postponement of plans for a West German state.
The Western allies had no intention of making any such concession, but it was agreed to convene a meeting to discuss the matter and on May 12th the Soviet Union ended the blockade in exchange for nothing more than a conference of Foreign Ministers scheduled for May 23rd.
The conference duly took place and lasted for a month, but predictably found 8 Had he wished to do so, there was little practical impediment.
In the spring of 1948 the Soviet Union had three hundred divisions within reach of Berlin.
The United States had only 60,000 soldiers in all of Europe, fewer than 7,000 of them in Berlin.
Indeed it had only just begun when the West German parliamentary council in Bonn formally passed into effect the ‘Basic Law’ establishing a West German government; a week later Stalin responded by announcing plans for a complementary East German state, formally created on October 7th.
By the time the conference broke up, on June 20th, the military government in West Germany had been replaced by High Commissioners from the US, Britain and France.
The Federal Republic of Germany had come into being, though the Allies reserved certain powers of intervention and even the right to resume direct rule if they judged it necessary.
In the first place, it led directly to the creation of two German states, an outcome none of the Allies had sought four years earlier.
For the Western powers this had become an attractive and attainable objective; indeed, for all the lip service thenceforth paid to the desirability of German unification, no-one would be in any hurry to see it happen.
For Stalin, once he appreciated that he could neither compete with the Allies for the allegiance of the Germans nor force them to abandon their plans, a separate East German Communist state was the least bad outcome.
Secondly, the Berlin crisis committed the United States for the first time to a significant military presence in Europe for the indefinite future.
This was the achievement of Ernest Bevin, the British Foreign Minister—it was Bevin who successfully urged the Americans to lead the airlift to Berlin, once Truman had been assured by Marshall and General Clay that the risk was worth taking.
The French were all the less involved in the Berlin crisis because from July 18th to September 10th 1948 the country was in the midst of a political crisis with no clear governing majority in the Assemblee Nationale.
But thirdly, and this followed from the first two, the Berlin crisis led directly to a reappraisal of Western military calculations.
If the West was going to protect its German clients from Soviet aggression then it would need to give itself the means to do so.
The Americans had stationed strategic bombers in Britain at the start of the Berlin crisis and these were equipped to carry atomic bombs, of which the United States had 56 at the time.
But Washington had no established policy on the use of atomic bombs and in the event of a Soviet advance United States strategy in Europe still presumed a retreat from the continent.
In its aftermath Europe entered a period of heightened insecurity, with much talk of war.
It was in this atmosphere that the United States Congress passed the Marshall Plan legislation and the European allies signed the Brussels Pact, on March 17th 1948.
The Brussels Pact, however, was a conventional 50-Year Treaty binding Britain, France and the Benelux countries to ‘collaborate in measures of mutual assistance in the event of a renewal of German aggression’, whereas European politicians were becoming markedly more aware of their helpless exposure to Soviet pressure.
In a speech to Parliament on January 22nd 1948, Bevin had committed Britain to engagement with her continental neighbours in a common defense strategy, a ‘Western European Union’, on the grounds that British security needs were no longer separable from those of the continent—a significant break with past British thinking.
This western European Union was officially inaugurated with the Brussels Pact, but as Bevin explained to Marshall in a message of March 11th, such an arrangement would be incomplete unless extended to the concept of North Atlantic security as a whole—a point to which Marshall was all the more sympathetic because Stalin was just then applying considerable pressure on Norway to get it to sign a ‘nonaggression’ pact with the Soviet Union.
At Bevin’s urging, then, secret discussions took place in Washington between British, United States and Canadian representatives to draft a treaty for Atlantic defense.
On July 6th 1948, ten days after the start of the Berlin airlift and immediately following Yugoslavia’s expulsion from the Cominform, these talks were opened to other members of the Brussels Pact, among whom the French were not well pleased to discover that once again the ‘Anglo-Americans’ had been arranging the world behind their back.
By April of the following year the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation had been agreed and signed by the US, Canada, and ten European states.
As late as 1947 few would have predicted that the United States would commit itself to a European military alliance.
Indeed, there were many in the United States Congress who were notably reluctant to approve Article V of the Treaty (which bound NATO members to come to one another’s aid if attacked), and the Treaty only secured Congressional approval, after three months of discussion, because it was represented as an Atlantic defense pact, rather than a Euro-American alliance.
The United States Chiefs of Staff in 1949 calculated that it would be 1957 at the earliest before an effective defense on the Rhine could be mounted.
And perhaps more important, it would serve as a reinsurance policy against German revanchism.
Indeed it was only because of the promise of NATO protection that the French government, with the outcome of World War One still firmly in mind, conceded its approval for a West German state.
The French thus welcomed NATO as the guarantee against a revived Germany that they had been unable to obtain by diplomatic means in the previous three years.
The Dutch and Belgians also saw in NATO an impediment to future German revanchism.
The Italians were included to help shore up Alcide De Gasperi’s domestic support against Communist critics.
The British regarded the NATO Treaty as a signal achievement in their struggle to keep the United States engaged in Europe’s defense.
And the Truman Administration sold the agreement to Congress and the American people as a barrier to Soviet aggression in the North Atlantic.
An integrated Allied command in peacetime, after all, was an unheard of departure from practice.
In the spring of 1950 Washington was still worrying about how to explain to the French and other Europeans that the only realistic hope for West European defense was to rearm Germany, a subject that made everyone uneasy and was thought likely to provoke an unpredictable response from Stalin.
The appeal of neutrality—as an alternative to defenseless confrontation—was growing, in Germany and France alike.
If the Korean War had not broken out just at this moment (a reasonable counter-factual, since it nearly didn’t) the contours of recent European history might look very different indeed.
Stalin’s support for Kim II Sung’s invasion of South Korea on June 25th 1950 was his most serious miscalculation of all.
The Americans and West Europeans immediately drew the conclusion that Korea was a diversion or prelude, and that Germany would be next—an inference encouraged by Walter Ulbricht’s imprudent boast that the Federal Republic would be next to fall.
The Soviet Union had successfully tested an atomic bomb just eight months earlier, leading American military experts to exaggerate Soviet preparedness for war; but even so, the budget increases requested in National Security Council paper #68 (presented on April 7th 1950) would almost certainly not have been approved but for the Korean attack.
The risk of a European war was greatly exaggerated, but not completely absent.
Stalin was contemplating a possible assault—on Yugoslavia, not West Germany— but abandoned the idea in the face of Western rearmament.
And just as the West misread the Soviet purpose in Korea, so Stalin—accurately advised by his intelligence services of the rapid United States military build-up that followed—mistakenly assumed that the Americans had aggressive designs of their own on his sphere of control in eastern Europe.
But none of these assumptions and miscalculations was clear at the time, and politicians and generals proceeded as best they could on the basis of limited information and past precedent.
The United States defense budget rose from $15. billion in August 1950 to $70 billion by December of the following year, following President Truman’s declaration of a National Emergency.
By 1952-53 defense expenditure consumed 17. percent of the United States GNP, compared with just 4. percent in 1949.
In every NATO member state, defense spending increased to a post-war peak in the years 1951-53.
The economic impact of this sudden leap in military investment was equally unprecedented.
Germany especially was flooded with orders for machinery, tools, vehicles and other products that the Federal Republic was uniquely well-placed to supply, all the more so because the West Germans were forbidden to manufacture arms and could thus concentrate on everything else.
West German steel output alone, 2. million tonnes in 1946 and 9 million tonnes in 1949, grew to nearly 15 million tonnes by 1953.
The dollar deficit with Europe and the rest of the world fell by 65 percent in the course of a single year, as the United States spent huge sums overseas on arms, equipment stockpiles, military emplacements and troops.
The cost of living in West Europe went up as government spending fuelled inflation—in France consumer prices rose 40 percent in the two years following the outbreak of war in Korea.
The West Europeans, who had only just begun to reap the benefits of Marshall Aid, were clearly in no condition to sustain for very long what amounted to a war economy and the 1951 United States Mutual Security Act recognized this, effectively closing out the Marshall Plan and transforming it into a programme of military assistance.
By the end of 1951 the United States was transferring nearly $5 billion of military support to Western Europe.
From a psychological boost to European confidence, NATO thus became a major military commitment, drawing on the seemingly limitless resources of the United States economy and committing the Americans and their allies to an unprecedented peacetime build up of men and materiel.
General Eisenhower returned to Europe as Supreme Allied Commander and Allied military headquarters and administrative facilities were established in Belgium and France.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation was now, unambiguously, an alliance.
Its primary task was what military planners called the ‘forward defense’ of Europe:e. confrontation with the Red Army in the middle of Germany.
To perform this role, it was agreed at the NATO Council meeting in Lisbon in February 1952 that the alliance would need to raise at least ninety-six new divisions within two years.
Thanks to Korea the Americans had felt obliged to bring up this sensitive matter (Dean Acheson first raised it formally at a Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Sep152 THE COMING OF THE COLD WAR tember 1950), even though President Truman himself was initially reluctant.
On the one hand no-one wanted to put weapons in the hands of Germans just five years after the liberation of Europe; on the other hand, and on the analogy of the economic difficulties of the Bizone just three years previous, there was something perverse about spending billions of dollars to defend the West Germans from Russian attack without asking them to make a contribution of their own.
And if Germany was to become, as some anticipated, a sort of buffer zone and future battlefield, then the risk of alienating German sympathies and encouraging neutralist sentiments could not be ignored.
But after June 1950 Soviet sensibilities were no longer a prime consideration.
The British, however reluctantly, saw no option but to find some device for arming Germany while keeping it firmly under Allied control.
It was the French who had always been most firmly opposed to putting weapons in German hands, and France had certainly not joined NATO just to see it become an umbrella for German remilitarisation.
France managed to block and postpone the rearmament of Germany until 1954.
But long before then French policy had been undergoing a signal transformation, allowing Paris to accept with some equanimity a limited restoration of Germany.
Unhappy and frustrated at being reduced to the least of the great powers, France had embarked upon a novel vocation as the initiator of a new Europe.
The nineteenth century had seen a variety of more or less unsuccessful customs unions in central and western Europe and even before World War One there had been occasional idealistic talk, drawing on the idea that Europe’s future lay in a coming together of its disparate parts.
In 1924 the French economist Charles Gide joined other signatories across Europe in launching an International Committee for a European Customs Union.
Three years later a junior minister in the British Foreign Office would profess himself‘astonished’ at the extent of continental interest in the ‘panEuropean’ idea.
More prosaically, the Great War had brought French and Germans, in a curious way, to a better appreciation of their mutual dependence.
Once the post-war disruption had subsided and Paris had abandoned its fruitless efforts to extract German reparations by force, an international Steel Pact was signed, in September 1926, by France, Germany, Luxembourg, Belgium and the region of the Saar, to regulate steel production and prevent excess capacity.
Like other ambitious projects of the 1920s, the Steel Pact barely survived the 1929 crisis and ensuing depression.
The situation was equally obvious to Germans, and when the Nazis occupied France in 1940 and reached agreement with Petain on a system of payments and deliveries amounting to the forced application of French resources to the German war effort, there were nevertheless many on both sides who saw in this latest Franco-German ‘collaboration’ the germ of a new ‘European’ economic order.
Thus Pierre Pucheu, a senior Vichy administrator later to be executed by the Free French, envisaged a post-war European order where customs barriers would be eliminated and a single European economy would encompass the whole continent, with a single currency.
Pucheu’s vision—which was shared by Albert Speer and many others—represented a sort of updating of Napoleon’s Continental System under Hitlerian auspices, and it appealed to a younger generation of continental bureaucrats and technicians who had experienced the frustrations of economic policy making in the 1930s.
What made such projects especially seductive was that they were typically presented in terms of a shared, pan-European interest, rather than as self-interested projections of separate national agendas.
They were ‘European’ rather than German or French, and they were much admired during the war by those who wanted desperately to believe that some good might come out of the Nazi occupation.
The fact that the Nazis themselves had apparently unified much of Europe in a technical sense—removing frontiers, expropriating property, integrating transportation networks and so forth—made the idea even more plausible.
And the attraction of a Europe liberated from its past and its mutual antagonisms was not lost abroad, either.
In public, after 1945, few were willing to say a good word about the wartime New Order—whose inefficiency and bad faith Kennan rather underestimated.
And there were enthusiasts for the ‘Movement for European Unity 5 formed in January 1947 at Churchill’s instigation.
Winston Churchill had been an early and influential advocate of a European assembly of some kind.
Hard as it is to say now, I trust that the European family may act unitedly as one, under a Council of Europe.
But the post-war political circumstances seemed unpropitious for such ideals.
The best that might be expected was the creation of a sort of forum for European conversation, which is what a May 1948 Congress of the European Unity Movement in The Hague proposed.
The ‘Council of Europe 5 which grew out of this suggestion was inaugurated in Strasbourg in May 1949 and held its first meeting there in August of that year; delegates from Britain, Ireland, France, the Benelux countries, Italy, Sweden, Denmark and Norway took part.
The Council had no power and no authority; no legal, legislative or executive status.
Its most important asset was the mere fact of its existence, though in November 1950 it issued a ‘European Convention on Human Rights’ that would assume greater significance in decades to come.
As Churchill himself had recognized, in a speech given in Zurich on September 19th 1946, ‘The first step in the re-creation of the European family must be a partnership between France and Germany.
But in those first post-war years the French, as we have seen, were in no mood to envisage such a partnership.
Their small neighbours to the north were moving rather faster, however.
Even before the war ended the exiled governments of Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands signed the ‘Benelux Agreement 5 , eliminating tariff barriers and looking forward to the eventual free movement of labour, capital and services between their countries.
The Benelux Customs Union came into effect on January 1st 1948, and there followed desultory conversations between the Benelux countries, France and Italy over projects to extend such cooperation across a larger space.
But these half-formed projects for a ‘Little Europe 5 all came to grief on the shoals of the German problem.
Everyone agreed, as the Marshall Plan negotiators in Paris in July 1947 concluded, that the ‘German economy should be integrated into the economy of Europe in such a way as to contribute to a raising of the general standard of life.
Western Germany, even after it became a state in 1949, had no organic links to the rest of the continent except via the mechanisms of the Marshall Plan and the Allied occupation—both of them temporary.
Most Western Europeans still thought of Germany as a threat, not a partner.
But in 1947 only 29 percent of the Dutch population had a ‘friendly’ view of Germans and for the Netherlands it was important that an economically revived Germany be politically and militarily weak.
Neither country could envisage an accommodation with Germany unless it was balanced by the reassuring involvement of Great Britain.
With the Prague coup, the agreement on a West German state, the Berlin blockade and the plans for NATO it became clear to French statesmen like Georges Bidault and Robert Schuman that France must re-think its approach to Germany.
There was now to be a West German political entity including the Ruhr and the Rhineland— only the tiny Saarland had been temporarily separated from the main body of Germany, and the coal of the Saar region was not suitable for coking.
On October 30th 1949, Dean Acheson appealed to Schuman for France to take the initiative in incorporating the new West German state into European affairs.
The French were well aware of the need to do something —as Jean Monnet would later remind Georges Bidault, the United States would surely encourage a newly-independent West Germany to increase its steel production, at which point it might well flood the market, force France to protect its own steel industry and thus trigger a retreat to trade wars.
As we saw in Chapter Three, Monnet’s own plan—and with it the revival of France—depended upon a successful resolution of this dilemma.
This constituted a genuine diplomatic revolution, albeit one that had been five years in the making.
More than a coal and steel cartel, but far, far less than a blueprint for European integration, Schuman’s proposal represented a practical solution to the problem that had vexed France since 1945.
In Schuman’s scheme the High Authority would have the power to encourage competition, set pricing policy, direct investment and buy and sell on behalf of participating countries.
But above all it would take control of the Ruhr and other vital German resources out of purely German hands.
Robert Schuman announced his Plan on May 9th 1950, informing Dean Acheson the day before.
For the first time the Federal Republic of Germany was entering an international organization on equal terms with other independent states—and would now be bound to the Western alliance, as Adenauer wished.
Italy and the Benelux countries followed suit, though the Dutch were at first reluctant to commit themselves without the British.
But the British declined Schuman’s invitation and without Britain there was no question of the Scandinavians signing on.
It is perhaps worth pausing to remark on a feature of the Community which did not escape notice at the time.
All six foreign ministers who signed the Treaty in 1951 were members of their respective Christian Democratic parties.
De Gasperi from the Trentino, in north-east Italy; Adenauer from the Rhineland; Schuman from Lorraine.
When De Gasperi was born—and well into his adult life—the Trentino was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and he studied in Vienna.
Schuman grew up in a Lorraine that had been incorporated into the German Empire.
As a young man, like Adenauer, he joined Catholic associations—indeed the same ones that the Rhinelander had belonged to ten years earlier.
When they met, the three men conversed in German, their common language.
And their common Christian Democratic concern for social cohesion and collective responsibility disposed all of them to feel comfortable with the notion of a trans-national ‘High Authority’ exercising executive power for the common good.
In the Protestant lands of Scandinavia and Britain (or to the Protestant perspective of a North German like Schumacher), the European Coal and Steel Community carried a certain whiff of authoritarian incense.
Tage Erlander, the Swedish Social Democratic Prime Minister from 1948-68, actually ascribed his own ambivalence about joining to the overwhelming Catholic majority in the new Community.
At the time this was not an extreme point of view, nor was it uncommon.
It was not really even a particularly effective economic lever, since the High Authority never did exercise the kind of power Monnet intended.
Instead, like so many of the other international institutional innovations of these years, it provided the psychological space for Europe to move forward with a renewed self-confidence.
It was not a project for European integration, Monnet’s flights of fantasy notwithstanding, but rather the lowest common denominator of West European mutual interest at the time of its signing.
It was a political vehicle in economic disguise, a device for overcoming Franco-German hostility.
Meanwhile, the problems that the European Coal and Steel Community was designed to address began to resolve themselves.
In the last quarter of 1949 the Federal Republic of Germany regained the industrial output levels of 1936; by the end of 1950 it had surpassed them by one-third.
A year later, in 1950, that trade balance was negative, as Germany was consuming its own raw materials to fuel local industry.
By 1951 the balance was once again positive and would stay so for many years to come, thanks to the German export of manufactured goods.
By the end of 1951 German exports had grown to over six times the level of 1948 and German coal, finished goods and trade were fuelling a European economic renaissance—indeed by the late Fifties western Europe was suffering the effects of a glut of coal.
How much of this can be attributed to the ECSC is a mat158 THE COMING OF THE COLD WAR ter of some doubt—it was Korea, not Schuman, that sent the West German industrial machine into high gear.
The British had nothing against a European customs union—they were quite in favour of one, at least for other Europeans.
What made them uncomfortable was the idea of a supernational executive implied in the institution of a High Authority, even if it only directed the production and pricing of two commodities.
But the British saw the ECSC as the thin edge of a continental wedge in British affairs, whose implications were the more dangerous for being unclear.
The British economy—particularly that part of it which relied on trade—appeared in far healthier condition than that of its continental neighbours.
In 1947 British exports represented, by value, the sum of the exports of France, Italy, western Germany, the Benelux countries, Norway and Denmark combined.
Whereas western European states at that time traded chiefly with one another, Britain had extensive commerce with the whole world— indeed, Britain’s trade with Europe in 1950 was much less than it had been in 1913.
In the eyes of British officials, therefore, the country had more to lose than to gain by committing itself to participation in binding economic arrangements with countries whose prospects looked very uncertain.
A year before Schuman’s proposal, the UK position, expressed in private by senior civil servants, was that ‘there is no attraction for us in long-term economic cooperation with Europe.
In 1950 the British Commonwealth covered large tracts of Africa, South Asia, Australasia and the Americas, much of it still in British hands.
The Commonwealth was a major source of raw materials and food, and the Commonwealth was integral to British national identity, or so it seemed at the time.
To most policymakers it was obviously imprudent—as well as practically impossible—to make Britain part of any continental European system that would cut the country off from this other dimension of its very existence.
Britain, then, was part of Europe but also part of a world-wide Anglophone imperial community.
The British people tended to be ambivalent about America—perceiving it from afar as a ‘paradise of consumer splendours’ in contrast to their own constricted lives, but resenting it for just that reason.
Their governments, however, continued to profess faith in what would later be called the ‘special relationship’ between the two countries.
In some degree this derived from Britain’s presence at the wartime ‘top table’, as one of the three Great Powers at Yalta and Potsdam, and as the third nuclear Power following the successful test of a British bomb in 1952.
It drew, too, on the close collaboration between the two countries during the war itself.
And it rested, a little, on the peculiarly English sense of superiority towards the country that had displaced them at the imperial apex.
The Americans were frustrated by the UK’s reluctance to merge its fate with Europe and irritated by Britain’s insistence upon preserving its imperial standing.
However, there was more to London’s stance in 1950 than imperial self-delusion or bloody-mindedness.
In France the war had revealed everything that was wrong with the nation’s political culture; in Britain, it had seemed to confirm everything that was right and good about national institutions and habits.
World War Two, for most Britons, had been fought between Germany and Great Britain and the British had emerged triumphant and vindicated.
This sense of quiet pride at the country’s capacity to suffer, endure and win through had marked Britain off from the continent.
In the elections of 1945 Labour won a clear parliamentary majority for the first time in its history and, as we have seen, pressed through a broad range of nationalizations and social reforms culminating in the constitution of the world’s first universal welfare state.
The government’s reforms were mostly popular—in spite of prompting remarkably little change in the deepest habits and affinities of the nation.
Domestic politics in post-war Britain were taken up with matters of social justice and the institutional reforms it required.
This was to a considerable degree the result of a cumulative failure on the part of previous governments to address social inequalities; the belated re-centering of debate around urgently needed public expenditure—on health, education, transport, housing, pensions and the like—seemed to many to constitute a well-earned reward for the country’s recent sacrifices.
But it also meant that most British voters (and many British Members of Parliament) had absolutely no idea of how poor their country was and what it had cost them to win their epic struggle with Germany.
The cost of World War Two to Britain was twice that of World War One; the country lost one quarter of its national wealth.
This accounts for Britain’s recurrent post-war currency crises, as the country struggled to pay off huge dollar-denominated debts from a drastically reduced income.
These problems would have been bad enough for any medium-sized European country in Britain’s straitened post-war circumstances; they were hugely exacerbated in this case by the global scale of British imperial responsibilities.
The cost to Britain of remaining a Great Power had greatly increased since 1939.
The country’s expenditure on all military and diplomatic activity in the years 1934-38 was £6 million per annum.
In 1947, on military expenditure alone, the government budgeted £209 million.
Hong Kong, Malaya, the Persian Gulf and North Africa, Trieste and Austria, West Germany and the United Kingdom itself.
In addition there was a large and expensive diplomatic, consular and intelligence establishment spread worldwide, together with the colonial civil service, a significant bureaucratic and administrative burden in its own right even though it had recently been reduced by Britain’s departure from India.
Bread ra162 THE COMING OF THE COLD WAR tioning, never imposed during the war, was introduced in 1946 and not abandoned until July 1948.
The government ostentatiously celebrated a ‘bonfire of controls’ on November 5th 1949; but many of those same controls had to be re-imposed with the belt-tightening of the Korean War, and basic food rationing in Britain only ended in 1954—long after the rest of western Europe.
The British proved remarkably tolerant of their deprivations—in part because of a belief that these were, at least, shared fairly across the community—although the accumulated frustration with rations and regulations, and a certain air of puritanical paternalism that clung to some Labour ministers (notably the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Stafford Cripps), contributed to Conservative electoral recovery in the 1950s.
The sense that there was no choice and that the government knew best made the first generation of post-war England, in novelist David Lodge’s recollections of his youth, ‘cautious, unassertive, grateful for small mercies and modest in our ambition,’ in marked contrast to the generation that would succeed them.
Britain remained a deferential, class-divided society—and the welfare state, as we have seen, benefited the ‘middling sort’ above all.
But income and wealth really were redistributed as a result of post-war legislation—the share of the national wealth held by the richest 1 percent of the population fell from 56 percent in 1938 to 43 percent in 1954; and the effective disappearance of unemployment pointed an optimistic contrast with the grim pre-war decade.
Between 1946 and 1948 150,000 Britons migrated to Canada, Australia and New Zealand and many more contemplated following in their footsteps; but beginning in 1951 it seemed as though the worst of the austerity years were over and the country offered itself the optimistic spectacle of a ‘Festival of Britain’, marking the centennial of Prince Albert’s great Exhibition of 1851.
The title itself points to something distinctive about the country—no documentary film-maker in France or Italy or Germany or Belgium would have thought to use it.
The film is a celebration of Englishness, strongly coloured by shared recollections of suffering and glory in the recent war, and it is suffused with an only partly self-conscious pride in the peculiarities of the place.
And there is no reference whatsoever to England’s neighbours or allies.
The British rejected Robert Schuman’s invitation in 1950 because of what they took to be the disutility of joining a European economic project, and because of their longstanding discomfort with continental entanglements.
But the British decision to stand aside from the ECSC was above all an instinctive, psychological and even emotional one, a product of the utter peculiarity of recent British experience.
In the absence of Britain power within the ‘little Europe’ of the West fell by default to France.
The French duly did what the British might have done in other circumstances and made ‘Europe’ in their own image, eventually casting its institutions and policies in a mould familiar from French precedent.
At the time it was the continental Europeans, not the British, who expressed regret at the course of events.
Monnet, too, would later look back and wonder how different things might have been had Britain chosen to take the initiative at a moment when her authority was still unrivalled.
But in post-war Europe ten years was a very long time and by then the die was cast.
From the start there were people who realized they lacked the proper temperament for the idyll and wished to leave the country.
But since by definition an idyll is one world for all, the people who wished to emigrate were implicitly denying its validity.
Evgenia Ginsburg, Journey into the Whirlwind ‘Stalinism means the killing of the inner man.
And no matter what the sophists say, no matter what lies the communist intellectuals tell, that’s what it all comes down to.
Moliere, Monsieur de Pourceaugnac To Western observers in the years after 1945, the Soviet Union presented a daunting prospect.
But after a halting start, the USSR had out-produced and out-fought the Nazi colossus, ripping the heart from the magnificent German military machine.
Stalin’s policies were vindicated, his pre-war crimes largely forgotten.
Of all the victors in World War Two—indeed of all the participant countries, victors and vanquished alike—the USSR was the only one to suffer permanent economic damage.
The measurable losses in people and resources were immense, and would be felt for decades to come.
Roads, bridges, railways had been deliberately destroyed across much of Byelorussia, Ukraine and western Russia.
The grain harvest in the early fifties was smaller than that of 1929, which in turn had been far less than the last peacetime harvest under the czars.
The war had been fought across some of the Soviet Union’s best arable land, and hundreds of thousands of horses, cows, pigs and other animals had been killed.
Ukraine, which had never recovered from the deliberate, punitive famine of the thirties, faced another—this time unplanned—in the winter and spring of 1946-47.
But the war years had also seen what would prove an enduring semimilitarization of Soviet life.
Centralised direction and a relentless focus upon the production of tanks, guns and planes had turned the wartime USSR into a surprisingly effective war machine, careless of human life and welfare but otherwise well-adapted to fighting a total war.
Longstanding Leninist metaphors of class struggle and confrontation could now be linked with proud memories of a real war.
Thanks to the Nazis’ treatment of the lands and people they overran, the war of 1941-45 in Russia was a great patriotic war.
And that same emphasis upon the Soviet Union’s roots in Russia’s imperial past served Stalin’s purposes in his post-war foray into central Europe.
But he was also interested in the economic benefits to be had from his victories in the West.
What happened after 1945 was that the Soviet Union took over, quite literally, where the Germans had left off, attaching eastern Europe to its own economy as a resource to be exploited at will.
The Soviet Union extracted reparations from Hungary and Romania, as former allies of Hitler.
From countries that had not fought against him Stalin was no less demanding, but on ‘fraternal’ rather than punitive terms.
It is estimated that until the late 1950s the Soviet Union exacted from the GDR, Romania and Hungary considerably more than it spent to control them.
Bulgaria and especially Poland probably cost Moscow rather more in aid, between 1945 and i960, than they furnished in trade and other deliveries.
Where Stalin differed from other empire-builders, even the czars, was in his insistence upon reproducing in the territories under his control forms of government and society identical to those of the Soviet Union.
Just as he had done in eastern Poland between 1939 and 1941, and in the Baltic states in 1940 and again (following their re-conquest from the Nazis) in 1945, Stalin set out to re-mould eastern Europe in the Soviet image; to reproduce Soviet history, institutions and practices in each of the little states now controlled by Communist parties.
Each was to undergo economic ‘reforms’ and adopt Five Year Plans to bring its institutions and practices into line with those of the Soviet Union.
Stalin’s motives for reproducing Soviet society in the satellite states were once again very simple.
The widespread desire in post-war Eastern Europe for peace, ‘Professor Kenneth Jowett of UC Berkeley.
The preference for Communists over Fascists, or for some form of democratic Socialism, could not be counted upon to survive practical experience of Communist rule.
Even the appeal of Soviet guarantees against German revanchism might wane in time.
Stalin needed to secure his satellite neighbours’ unswerving allegiance, and he knew only one way to do this.
In the words of the Hungarian Constitution of August 1949, it was to take and keep a ‘leading role’, extinguishing or absorbing all other political parties.
Some were modern, urban and industrial, with a sizeable workingclass; others were rural and impoverished.
Some, like Poland and Hungary, had quite sizeable state sectors, dating from pre-war strategies of protection against German economic penetration.
In others, like Czechoslovakia, property and business had been mostly in private hands before the war.
Some countries and regions had a thriving commercial sector; others resembled parts of the Soviet Union itself.
Most of the region had suffered seriously from the effects of the Depression and the autarkic protectionist policies adopted to combat it; but, as we have seen, during the war certain industrial sectors—in Hungary and Slovakia especially—had actually benefited from German investment in war production.
Notwithstanding this variety, the Communist seizures of power were followed in short order by the imposition of economic uniformity across the region.
First, in keeping with the Leninist redefinition of ‘socialism’ as a matter of ownership rather than social relations, the state expropriated large-scale firms in service, commerce and industry, where these were not already in public hands.
Next, the state took over, taxed or squeezed out of business all firms employing more than fifty people.
In Czechoslovakia, by December 1948, there were hardly any private businesses left with more than 20 employees.
By that same date 83 percent of Hungarian industry was in state hands, 84 percent of Polish industry, 85 percent of Romanian industry and frilly 98 percent of Bulgarian industry.
One of the means at hand for eliminating the property-owning middle class in eastern Europe was currency reform.
This was an effective device for destroying the cash savings of peasants and businessmen alike, an updating of older exactions like the forced capital levy.
As in the Soviet Union, so in Soviet-run eastern Europe, the peasantry were doomed.
The initial post-war reforms in the countryside had distributed small parcels of land to large numbers of farmers.
Until they were firmly ensconced in power, the Communist parties of eastern Europe actively encouraged inefficient land redistribution.
In the early stages of rural collectivization, small peasant landowners—few large landholders remained by this time—were penalized by punitive taxation (often exceeding their money income), differential prices and quotas that favored the new collective and state farms, the withholding of ration books, and discrimination against their children, who were denied access to post-primary education.
Even under such conditions a surprising number of independent peasants held on, though mostly on economically insignificant ‘microfundia’ of two hectares or less.
In Bulgaria, in the course of the first two Five-Year Plans beginning in 1949, viable agricultural land had been completely removed from private hands.
In the Czech lands, where collectivization began quite late (in 1956 most arable land was still privately farmed), 95 percent of agricultural land would be taken over in the next ten years, rather less in backward and inaccessible regions of Slovakia.
But here, as in Hungary and throughout the region, independent farmers survived only in name.
The measures taken against them and the destruction of markets and distribution networks ensured their impoverishment and ruin.
The irrational, occasionally surreal quality of Soviet economic practice was faithfully reproduced throughout the bloc.
In Slovakia, in the course of 1951, there were even efforts to send urban clerks and government functionaries out into the fields.
As this faithful echo of Soviet rhetoric from the 1930s suggests, antipathy towards the peasant, and successful implementation of rural collectivization, were one of the chief tests of Stalinist orthodoxy.
Collectivisation of land and the destruction of small businesses released an abundant supply of men and women for work in mines and factories; the single-minded Communist emphasis upon investment in heavy goods production at the expense of consumer products and services ensured unprecedented increases in output.
Five Year Plans were everywhere adopted, with wildly ambitious targets.
In terms of gross production figures the growth rates in this first generation of industrialization were impressive, notably in countries like Bulgaria or Romania which started from virtually nothing.
The number of people employed in agriculture even in Czechoslovakia, the most urbanized state in the region, dropped by 18 percent between 1948 and 1952.
In the Soviet Zone of Germany raw steel output rose from 120,000 tons in 1946 to over 2 million tons by 1953.
On an appropriately smaller scale the semi-militarized, monolithic, first-generation industrialization of the interwar Soviet Union was being re-run throughout the Soviet bloc.
Much as they had set out to do in Russia, the Communists in eastern Europe were reproducing a foreshortened and accelerated version of western Europe’s nineteenth-century industrial revolution.
Seen in this light, the economic history of eastern Europe after 1945 bears a passing resemblance to the pattern of West European recovery in the same years.
In western Europe, too, investment in productivity and growth was given priority over the provision of consumer goods and services, though the Marshall Plan soft3 The Baltic states, fully incorporated into the Soviet Union itself, were even worse off than the rest of eastern Europe.
In 1949 kolkhozes in northern Estonia were required to begin grain deliveries even before the harvest had begun, in order to keep in line with Latvia, four hundred kilometers to the south.
By 1953 rural conditions in hitherto prosperous Estonia had deteriorated to the point where cows blown over by the wind were too weak to get back on their feet unaided.
In Western Europe, too, certain industrial sectors and regions took off from low starting points, and a dramatic transition from countryside to town took place in the course of the 1950s in Italy and France in particular.
The distinctive feature of the economic history of Communist eastern Europe is that, in addition to coal, steel, factories and apartment blocks, first-generation Soviet industrialization produced grotesque distortions and contradictions, more so even than in the USSR itself.
Following the establishment in January 1949 of Comecon (the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 4 ), the rules for inter-state Communist trade were laid down.
Each country was to trade bilaterally with the Soviet Union (another echo of Nazi-era requirements, with Moscow once again substituting for Berlin) and was assigned a non-negotiable role in the international Communist economy.
Thus East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Hungary would supply finished industrial products to the USSR , while Poland and Romania were to specialize in producing and exporting food and primary industrial products.
Except for the curious inversion we have already noted—with the imperial power furnishing raw materials and the colonies exporting finished goods—this structure is reminiscent of European overseas colonization.
The Soviet model of the thirties, improvised to address uniquely Soviet circumstances of vast distance, abundant raw materials and endless, cheap, unskilled labor, made no sense at all for tiny countries like Hungary or Czechoslovakia, lacking raw materials but with a skilled industrial labor force and long-established international markets for high-value-added products.
Before World War Two, the Czech regions of Bohemia and Moravia had a higher per capita output than France, specializing in leather goods, motor vehicles, high-tech arms manufacture and a broad range of luxury goods.
Measured by industrial skill levels, productivity, standard of living and share of foreign markets, pre-1938 Czechoslovakia was comparable to Belgium and well ahead of Austria and Italy.
In later years Yugoslavia, Mongolia, China, North Korea and North Vietnam also became members.
In 1938, per capita car ownership in Czechoslovakia and Austria was at similar levels; by i960 the ratio was 1:3.
Even the products in which the country still had a competitive edge—notably small arms manufacture—no longer afforded Czechs any benefit, since they were constrained to direct their exports exclusively to their Soviet masters.
Following the one-time start-up benefits from unprecedented growth in primary industries, the same was true for every other satellite state.
By the midfifties, Soviet Eastern Europe was already beginning its steady decline into ‘planned’ obsolescence.
There are two partial exceptions to this brief account of the economies of the Soviet bloc.
While primitive industrialization was undertaken just as enthusiastically in Poland as elsewhere, land collectivization was not.
Stalin seems to have grasped the impracticality of forcing Polish peasants onto collective farms, but this consideration alone would hardly have caused him to hesitate.
In marked contrast to the other subject peoples of eastern Europe, there were a lot of Poles, their capacity and propensity to rebel against Russian servitude was familiar to generations of Russian officers and bureaucrats, and Soviet rule was more obviously resented in Poland than anywhere else.
From the Soviet point of view, Polish opposition was an annoyance—remnants of the Polish wartime underground carried on a guerilla war against the Communist regime until at least the end of the 1940s—and seemingly undeserved.
If Poland was now more ‘Polish’ than at any time in its complicated history, it had Moscow to thank.
But inter-state relations, above all in the Soviet bloc, did not hinge on gratitude or its absence.
Poland’s use value to Moscow was above all as a buffer against German or Western aggression.
It was desirable that Poland become socialist, but it was imperative that it remain stable and reliable.
In return for Polish domestic calm Stalin was willing to tolerate a class of independent farmers, however inefficient and ideologically untidy, and a publicly active Catholic Church, in ways that would have been unimaginable further south or east.
Until the Stalin-Tito split, Yugoslavia was, as we have seen, the most ‘advanced’ of all the east European states along the path to socialism.
Tito’s first Five Year Plan outdid Stalin by aiming at a higher rate of industrial investment than anywhere else in the Soviet bloc.
Seven thousand collective farms had been set up before collectivization had even begun in the other satellite states; and post-war Yugoslavia was well on the way to outdoing Moscow itself in the efficiency and ubiquity of its apparatus of repression.
Yugoslavia’s per capita income at the time of the break with Stalin was the lowest in Europe save for neighboring Albania; an already impoverished land had been beaten into penury in the course of four years of occupation and civil war.
As for Communism— my dear Theodore a short visit here is enough to make one decide that Capitalism is worth fighting for.
In the initial months following the split with Stalin, Tito actually became more radical, more ‘Bolshevik’, as if to prove the legitimacy of his claim and the mendacity of his Soviet critics.
Without external help, and faced with the very real prospect of Soviet invasion, he turned to the West for aid.
In September 1949 the United States Export-Import Bank loaned Belgrade $20 million.
In 1950 the United States Congress, now convinced of Yugoslavia’s possible significance in the global Cold War, offered a further $50 million in aid under the Yugoslav Emergency Relief Act of 1950, and followed this in November 1951 with an accord that allowed Yugoslavia to receive military aid under the terms of the Mutual Security Act.
By 1953 the Yugoslav national deficit on current account was fully covered by American aid; over the course of the years 1949-55 Tito’s aid from all Western sources amounted to $1. billion, of which just $55 million was repaid.
Western aid allowed the Yugoslav regime to continue favoring heavy industry and defense, as it had been doing before the 1948 split.
But while the League of Yugoslav Communists retained all the reins of authoritarian power, the ultraBolshevism of the post-war years was abandoned.
By the spring of 1951 only the postal service, together with rail, air and river transport, was left under federal (i.e. central government) control.
Other services, and all economic enterprises, were in the hands of the separate republics.
By 1954, 80 percent of agricultural land was back in private hands, following a March 30th 1953 decree permitting peasants to withdraw themselves and their land from the collective.
Stalin had emerged from his victory over Hitler far stronger even than before, basking in the reflected glory of‘his’ Red Army, at home and abroad.
The personality cult around the Soviet dictator, already well advanced before the war, now rose to its apogee.
Popular Soviet documentaries on World War Two showed Stalin winning the war virtually single-handed, planning strategy and directing battles with not a general in sight.
In almost every sphere of life, from dialectics to botany, Stalin was declared the supreme and unchallenged authority.
Soviet biologists were instructed to adopt the theories of the charlatan Lysenko, who promised Stalin undreamed-of agricultural improvements if his theories about the inheritability of acquired characteristics were officially adopted and applied to Soviet farming—as they were, to disastrous effect.
On his 70th birthday in December 1949 Stalin’s 6 It is significant that Stalin left his nuclear physicists alone and never presumed to second guess their calculations.
Like beautiful red yarn into our hearts we wove, Stalin, our brother and father, your name.
This obsequious neo-Byzantine anointing of the despot, the attribution to him of near-magical powers, unfolded against a steadily darkening backdrop of tyranny and terror.
Chechens, Ingush, Karachays, Nalkars, Kalmyks, Crimean Tatars and others, in the wake of the Volga Germans deported in 1941.
This brutal treatment of small nations was hardly new— Poles and Balts had been exiled east by the hundreds of thousands between 1939 and 1941, Ukrainians in the 1930s and others before them, back to 1921.
The initial post-war trials of collaborators and traitors across the region echoed nationalist sentiment as well.
What is striking about the non-Communist victims of these early public trials is that—with the exception of those who really had thrown in their lot with the Germans and whose activities were thus common knowledge—they conspicuously refused to plead guilty or confess to their alleged ‘anti-national’ crimes.
Unlike Stalin, Tito posed no imperial threat ; and by liberating his country and leading it to Communism with no help from Moscow, the Yugoslav leader 7 They were executed nonetheless.
But this was so obviously faked that it rapidly became an embarrassment, even in Communist Bulgaria.
Stalin was notoriously paranoid about threats to his monopoly of power; but that does not mean that he was altogether mistaken to see in Tito and ‘Tito-ism’ a genuine danger.
Henceforward, therefore, nationalism ceased to be a local asset and became instead the main enemy.
The military were firmly under the thumb of the occupying Soviet forces.
Mass popular protest posed the only significant threat to Communist regimes, as it would seriously erode the credentials of the ‘worker and peasant’ state.
But in their early years the Peoples’ Democracies were by no means always unpopular with the proletarians they claimed to represent.
Most of the population of Soviet eastern Europe, especially in the more backward regions, accepted their fate without protest, at least in these years.
Together with the steadily worsening working conditions in what had once been an advanced industrial economy based on well-remunerated skilled labor, this triggered mass demonstrations by 20,000 workers at the §koda plant in Plzen, a major industrial center in western Bohemia, followed by a march on the city hall, on June 1st 1953, by thousands of workers carrying portraits of Benes and pre-war president Tomas Masaryk.
The Plzen demonstrations, confined to one provincial city, fizzled out.
But a few days later a far larger protest was sparked off a few dozen miles to the north by sub8 As late as 1966, four-fifths of Polish state employees had only a primary school education.
The country was run by a strikingly under-educated administrative caste.
These were imposed by an unpopular regime, already (and not for the last time) far more rigid than its Soviet masters in Moscow, whose advice to the East German Communist leadership to accept reforms and compromises to stem the hemorrhage of skilled workers to the West had been ignored.
On June 16th some 400,000 workers went on strike across East Germany, with the biggest demonstrations in Berlin itself.
As with the Plzen protesters, the German workers were easily put down by the Volkspolizei , but not without cost.
Nearly three hundred were killed when Red Army tanks were called in; many thousands more were arrested, of whom 1,400 were given long prison sentences.
Following the June Seventeenth uprising the secretary of the Writers’ League had leaflets distributed on Stalin Allee where one could read that the people had forfeited the confidence of the government and could regain it only through redoubled efforts.
Angry, disaffected workers on the industrialized western edge of the Soviet empire were a poor advertisement for Communism, but they hardly represented a threat to Soviet power—and it is not coincidental that both the Plzen and Berlin uprisings took place after Stalin’s death.
In Stalin’s time the truly threatening challenge came, as it seemed, from within the Communist apparatus itself.
This was the real implication of the Yugoslav schism, and it was in direct response to ‘Titoism’ that Stalin thus reverted to earlier methods, updated and adapted to circumstances.
The chief precedent for the purges and trials of these years was of course the Soviet Terror of the 1930s.
In the 1930s the presumptive ringleader was Leon Trotsky—like Tito, a genuine Communist hero un-beholden to Stalin and with views of his own about Communist strategy and practice.
And they came, after all, at the end of a long string of judicial purges.
In addition to the post-war trials for treason and the political trials of antiCommunist politicians, the Communist regimes of Eastern Europe had used the courts to punish and close down the churches everywhere except Poland, where open confrontation with the Catholic Church was deemed too risky.
The previous year the Uniate Church in Romania was forcibly merged with the more pliable Romanian Orthodox church by the new Communist regime, in keeping with a long tradition of persecution reaching back to the Russian czars of the eighteenth-century.
Selected Catholic priests were tried on two separate occasions in Prague on charges of spying for the Vatican (and the USA), receiving sentences ranging from ten years to life imprisonment; by the early 1950s there were eight thousand monks and nuns in Czechoslovak prisons.
Monsignor Grosz, who succeeded the imprisoned Cardinal Mindszenty as head of the Catholic Church in Hungary in January 1949, was found guilty of working to restore the Habsburgs and of plotting with Titoists to arm Hungarian Fascists.
The first, beginning in 1948 and lasting through 1950, were immediate responses to the TitoStalin rift.
In Albania, Communist Interior Minister Ro$i Xoxe was tried in May-June 1949, found guilty and hanged the following month.
Charged with Titoism, Xoxe had the distinction of really having been a supporter of Tito and his plans for the Balkans, at a time when these had Moscow’s backing.
In this respect his case was a little unusual, as was the fact that it was handled in secret.
But Stalin distrusted him anyway—Rostov had imprudently criticized a SovietBulgarian economic agreement as unfavorable to his country—and he was an ideal candidate for a trial intended to illustrate the crimes of nationalism.
He and his ‘group’ (‘The Treacherous Espionage and Wrecking Group of Trai9 In 1924 the 27-year-old Kostov was arrested and tortured by the Bulgarian police.
Afraid that he might betray the Communists he leaped from a fourth-floor window at police headquarters in Sofia and broke both his legs.
After finally giving in under sustained torture and signing his ‘confession’ of guilt, Rostov refused to speak the pre-agreed text in his courtroom appearance, publicly retracted his statement to his interrogators and was carried out of the courtroom protesting his innocence.
Two days later, on December 16th 1949, Rostov was hanged, and his ‘co-conspirators’ sentenced to long imprisonment in accordance with decisions taken by Stalin and his police chief Lavrenti Beria before the trial had begun.
Rostov’s case was unusual in that he was the only East European Communist who retracted his confession and protested his innocence at a public trial.
This caused some minor international embarrassment for the regime and instructions were given that this must never happen again.
Shortly before Rostov’s execution the Hungarian Communists had staged a show trial of their would-be ‘Tito’, Communist Interior Minister Laszlo Rajk.
The text was the same as in Bulgaria—literally so, with only the names changed.
Accusations, details, confessions were all identical, which is not surprising since both trials were scripted in Moscow.
Rajk himself was no innocent; as Communist Interior Minister he had sent many others to prison and worse.
The proceedings of the Tribunal trying Rajk and his fellow ‘conspirators’, including Rajk’s own confession of September 16th 1949, were broadcast live by Radio Budapest.
The pre-determined verdict was announced on September 24th; Rajk and two others were condemned to death.
The public trials of Rajk and Rostov were only the tip of an iceberg of secret trials and tribunals set off by the hunt for Titoists in the Communist parties and governments of the region.
The persecutions in Poland and East Germany, while they put thousands of men and women in prison, did not result in any major show trials.
Gomulka had openly criticized plans for land collectivization in Poland and was publicly associated with talk of a Polish ‘national path’ to socialism.
Indeed, he had been criticized for this by loyal Stalinists in the Polish party, and in August 1948 he was replaced as General Secretary by Bolesfaw Bierut.
Reduced to the post of administrator for Social Assurance in Warsaw, Gomulka was finally arrested in July 1951 and only released in September 1954.
There were trials in Poland— one of them, in which a group of officers was charged with anti-state plotting, began on the day of Gomufka’s arrest in 1951.
Based in Budapest, Field’s imaginary network of master spies and Titoists had already been invoked in the charges against Rajk and others and was to have been the main evidence against Gomulka.
But the Poles were able to resist Soviet pressure to conduct full-scale public witch-hunts on the Hungarian model.
Finally, some Soviet leaders undoubtedly judged it imprudent in these early years to tear the Polish Communist leadership apart in full public view.
No such inhibitions applied in Czechoslovakia, however, where the biggest show trial of them all was to be staged in Prague in November 1952.
A major Czech show trial had been planned from 1950, in the immediate wake of the Rajk and Rostov purges.
Tito was still the enemy and accusations of espionage for the West still figured prominently in the indictments.
But of the fourteen defendants at the ‘Trial of the Leadership of the Anti-State Conspiracy Centre’, eleven were Jews.
On the very first page of the charge sheet it was made abundantly clear that this was no accident.
But until the Second World War his dislike for Jews was so comfortably embedded in his destruction of other categories of person—Old Bolsheviks, Trotskyites, Leftand Right-deviationists, intellectuals, bourgeois and so on—that their Jewish origin seemed almost incidental to their fate.
In any case, it was a matter of dogma that Communism had no truck with racial or religious prejudice; and once the Soviet cause was attached to the banner of‘anti-Fascism’, as it was from 1935 until August 1939 and again from June 1941, the Jews of Europe had no greater friend than Josef Stalin himself.
The European Communist parties, especially those of central and eastern Europe, counted significant numbers of Jews among their members.
The Jews of inter-war Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Romania were an oppressed and disliked minority.
As the most uncompromisingly anti-national and ambitious of these, Communism had a distinctive appeal.
Whatever its passing defects, the Soviet Union offered a revolutionary alternative at a time when central and eastern Europe appeared to be facing a choice between an authoritarian past and a Fascist future.
The appeal of the USSR was further accentuated by the experience of war.
Jews who found themselves in Soviet-occupied Poland after the Germans attacked in 1939 were frequently deported eastwards and many died of disease and hardship.
The advance of the Red Army through Ukraine and Byelorussia into the Baltic States, Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland and Germany saved the remaining Jews in these lands.
Stalin most certainly did not fight the Second World War for the Jews; but had Hitler won—had the Germans and their collaborators remained in control of the territories they had captured up to the Battle of Stalingrad—millions more Jews would have been exterminated.
When the Communist parties took over in eastern Europe, many of their leading cadres were of Jewish origin.
In the first post-war years Stalin displayed no hostility to his Jewish subordinates.
At the United Nations the Soviet Union was an enthusiastic supporter of the Zionist project, favoring the creation of a Jewish state in the Middle East as an impediment to British imperial ambitions.
At home Stalin had looked favorably on the work of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee, formed during the war to mobilize Jewish opinion in the USSR and abroad behind the Soviet struggle against the Nazis.
Soviet Jews, like many others under Moscow’s rule, fondly supposed that the more ecumenical mood of the war years, when Stalin sought and accepted help from any likely quarter, would translate into easier times after victory.
Before the war had even ended Stalin, as we have seen, was exiling whole nations to the east and doubtless harbored similar plans for the Jews.
The wartime invocation of the banner of Russian nationalism brought Soviet rhetoric a lot closer to the Slavexclusivist language of old-time Russian anti-Semites; this was certainly not to the regime’s disadvantage.
For Stalin himself it represented a return to familiar territory, his own anti-Jewish instincts underscored by his observation of Hitler’s successful exploitation of popular anti-Semitism.
Racism had no place in the Marxist lexicon; dead Jews were posthumously assimilated into the same local communities that had so disliked them when they were alive.
But now the presumptively cosmopolitan qualities of Jews— the international links from which Stalin had hoped to benefit in the dark months following the German attack—began once more to be held against them as the battle lines of the Cold War settled into place and international wartime contacts and communications became in Stalin’s eyes a retroactive liability.
In the eighteen months following the end of World War Two more Jews were killed in Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia than in the ten years preceding the war.
Solomon Mikhoels, its prime mover and a major figure in Russia’s Yiddish Theatre, was murdered on January 12th 1948.
The arrival in Moscow of Israeli Ambassador Golda Meir on September 11th 1948 was the occasion for spontaneous outbursts of Jewish enthusiasm, with street demonstrations on Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur and chants of ‘Next Year in Jerusalem’ outside the Israeli legation.
This would have been provocative and unacceptable to Stalin at any time.
The Berlin blockade had just begun and the Soviet split with Tito was entering its acute phase.
On September 21st 1948 Pravda published an article by Ilya Ehrenburg indicating clearly the change of line on Zionism.
Yiddish schools and theatres were shut down, Yiddish newspapers banned and libraries closed.
The Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee itself had been suppressed on November 20th 1948.
Its remaining leaders, artists, writers and government functionaries were arrested the following month and kept in prison for three years.
Pressured under torture to confess to an ‘anti-Soviet’ conspiracy, they were clearly being prepared for a show trial.
The security forces colonel who conducted the investigation, Vladimir Komarov, sought to broaden the charges out to encompass a large-scale Jewish conspiracy against the USSR directed from Washington and Tel Aviv.
All but one were executed; the sole survivor, Lina Shtern, received ten years in prison.
Meanwhile the anti-Semitic tide was gathering strength in the satellite states.
In Romania, where a substantial part of the Jewish population had survived the war, an anti-Zionist campaign was launched in the autumn of 1948 and sustained with varying degrees of energy for the next six years.
Plans for a show trial in Romania centred on the Romanian Communist leader Lucretius Patra§canu.
Patra§canu’s publicly voiced doubts over rural collectivization made him a natural candidate for a Romanian ‘Rajk trial’ based on charges of pro-Titoism, and he was arrested in April 1948.
But by the time his interrogators were ready to bring him to trial the goalposts had moved and Patra§canu’s case was bundled with that of Ana Pauker.
She was also a notorious hard-liner in doctrinal and policy matters, which made her an exemplary target for a Romanian leadership trying to curry favor with the local population.
Stalin’s death aborted the plans of Romanian Communist leader Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej to stage a show trial of Pauker and others.
Victims ranging from genuine members of the Revisionist Zionists to Jewish Communists tarred with the Zionist brush were accused of illegal relations with Israel and of collaborating with Nazis during the war.
They were sentenced to prison for periods varying from ten years to life.
Finally Patra§canu himself was tried in April 1954, after languishing in prison for six years; charged with spying for the British, he was found guilty and executed.
In January 1953, as the ‘Doctors’ Plot’ was unfolding in Moscow, prominent East German Jews and Jewish Communists fled west.
One member of the East German Central Committee, Hans Jendretsky, demanded that Jews—‘enemies of the state’—be excluded from public life.
But by luck, by timing or out of prudence, all three states avoided a full184 INTO THE WHIRLWIND scale anti-Semitic show trial of the kind planned in Moscow and carried through in Prague.
The Slansky Trial, as it became known, is the classic Communist show trial.
To them were added various mid-level Czech Communists, accused with the Slovaks of having taken part in a Titoist-Trotskyist conspiracy along lines familiar from the Rajk case.
But none of those implicated and held in prison during 1950 and 1951 was senior enough to serve as figurehead and ringleader for the major public trial that Stalin was demanding.
In the spring of 1951 Soviet Police Chief Beria instructed the Czechs to shift the emphasis of their investigations from a Titoist to a Zionist plot.
From now on the whole enterprise was in the hands of the Soviet secret services—Colonel Komarov and another officer were sent to Prague to take the investigations in hand, and the Czech security police and Communist leadership received their orders from them.
At first Gottwald was reluctant to have Slansky arrested—the two of them had worked closely together in purging their colleagues over the past three years and if the General Secretary was implicated, Gottwald himself might be next.
But the Soviets insisted, presenting forged evidence linking Slansky to the CIA, and Gottwald gave way.
On November 23rd 1951 Slansky was arrested; in the days that followed prominent Jewish Communists still at liberty followed him into prison.
The security services now set themselves the task of extracting confessions and ‘evidence’ from their many prisoners in order to construct a major case against Slansky and his collaborators.
Thanks to a certain amount of resistance by their victims (notably the former General Secretary himself) even in the face of barbaric torture, this task took them the best part of a year.
The text of the confessions, the indictment, the predetermined sentences and the script of the trial were then sent to Moscow for Stalin’s personal approval.
Back in Prague a ‘dress rehearsal’ of the full trial was conducted—and tape-recorded.
This was to provide an alternative text for ‘live transmission’ in the unlikely event that one of the defendants retracted his confession in open court, like Rostov.
Eleven of the fourteen accused were sentenced to death and executed, three were condemned to life imprisonment.
But if they were of Jewish origin and Zionist orientation, little attention among us was paid to their class origins.
The Slansky trial was a criminal masquerade, judicial murder as public theatre.
Like the trial of the Anti-Fascist Committee in Moscow which preceded them, the Prague proceedings were also intended as an overture to the arrest of the Soviet Jewish doctors whose ‘plot’ was announced by Pravda on January 13th 1953.
These Jewish physicians—‘a Zionist terrorist gang’ accused of murdering Andrei Zdanov, conspiring with the ‘Anglo-American bourgeoisie’, and advancing the cause of‘Jewish nationalism’ in connivance with the American Jewish Joint Distribution 13 The survivors were all released in later years, though they and their fellow victims would not be fully rehabilitated and exonerated until 1968.
But even Stalin appears to have hesitated (Ilya Ehrenburg warned him of the devastating impact a show trial of the Jewish doctors would have upon Western opinion); in any case, before he could make a decision he died, on March 5th 1953.
Of greater interest are Stalin’s purposes in mounting the whole charade of purges, indictments, confessions and trials.
Trials might seem counter-productive; the obviously false testimonies and confessions, the unembarrassed targeting of selected individuals and social categories, were hardly calculated to convince foreign observers of the bona fides of Soviet judicial procedures.
They were, rather, a form of public pedagogy-by-example; a venerable Communist institution whose purpose was to illustrate and exemplify the structures of authority in the Soviet system.
They told the public who was right, who wrong; they placed blame for policy failures; they assigned credit for loyalty and subservience; they even wrote a script, an approved vocabulary for use in discussion of public affairs.
Following his arrest Rudolf Slansky was only ever referred to as ‘the spy Slansky’, this ritual naming serving as a form of political exorcism.
As the Czechoslovak ‘Court Organisation Act’ of January 1953 baldly summed it up, the function of the courts was ‘to educate the citizens in de14 The script was very precise.
The accused were reduced from presumptive political critics or opponents to a gaggle of unprincipled conspirators, their purposes venal and traitorous.
But the ‘public’ were not being asked to believe what they heard; they were merely being trained to repeat it.
If Communist economic policy was not producing its pre-announced successes, if Soviet foreign policy was blocked or forced to compromise, someone must take the blame.
And precisely because they had carried out unpopular policies now seen to have failed, any and all Communist leaders and ministers were potential victims in waiting.
Just as defeated generals in the French Revolutionary wars were frequently charged with treason, so Communist ministers confessed to sabotage when the policies they had implemented failed—often literally—to deliver the goods.
The advantage of the confession, in addition to its symbolic use as an exercise in guilt-transferal, was that it confirmed Communist doctrine.
There were no disagreements in Stalin’s universe, only heresies; no critics, only enemies; no errors, only crimes.
The trials served both to illustrate Stalin’s virtues and identify his enemies’ crimes.
They also illuminate the extent of Stalin’s paranoia and the culture of suspicion that surrounded him.
One part of this was a deep-rooted anxiety about Russian, and more generally ‘Eastern’ inferiority, a fear of Western influence and the seduction of Western affluence.
The indictment went on to describe the accused as exhibiting ‘a feeling for servile under-valuation’ that Western spies had successfully exploited.
In the early 1950s, following the outbreak of war in Korea, Washington did consider the possibility of destabilizing eastern Europe and United States intelligence made a number of unsuccessful attempts to penetrate the Soviet bloc, lending superficial verisimilitude to the confessions of Communists who had purportedly worked with the CIA or spied for the British Secret Service.
Thus the arrests and purges and trials were a public reminder of the coming confrontation; a justification for Soviet war fears; and a strategy (familiar from earlier decades) for slimming down the Leninist party and preparing it for combat.
The 1949 charge that Rajk had conspired with the United States and Britain to overthrow the Communists seemed believable to many Communists and their sympathizers in the West.
In Stalin’s eyes any Communist who had spent time in the West, out of Soviet reach, was to be regarded with suspicion—whatever he or she was doing there.
Communists who had been active in Spain during the Civil War of the thirties— and there had been many from Eastern Europe and Germany—were the first to fall under suspicion.
Thus Laszlo Rajk had served in Spain (as a political commissar of the ‘Rakosi battalion’); so had Otto Sling, one of SMnsky’s co-defendants.
Following Franco’s victory, many of the Spanish veterans had escaped into France, where they ended up in French internment camps.
From there a significant number of them had joined the French Resistance, where they teamed up with German and other foreign Communists who had taken refuge in France.
Prominent post-war Communists like Artur London (another Slansky trial defendant) made many Western contacts through their wartime work in the MOI and this, too, aroused Stalin’s suspicions and was later held against them.
The wartime Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee in the USSR had been instructed to make Western contacts and document Nazi atrocities—the very activities that later formed the basis of the criminal charges against them.
They usually had a more heroic track record in domestic resistance than their Moscow confreres, who had returned after the war courtesy of the Red Army, and thus a more popular local image.
For these reasons the ‘national’ Communists were almost always the main victims of the post-war show trials.
In Czechoslovakia, the men who had organized the Slovak national uprising against the Nazis were ready-made victims of Soviet suspicion; Stalin did not enjoy sharing the credit for Czechoslovakia’s liberation.
Traicho Rostov had led the Bulgarian Communist partisans during the war, until his arrest; after the war he took second place to Georgii Dimitrov, newly returned from Moscow, until his wartime record was turned against him in 1949.
In Poland Gomulka had organized armed resistance under the Nazis, together with Marian Spychalski; after the war Stalin favored Bierut and other Moscow-based Poles.
Spychalski and Gomufka were both later arrested and, as we have seen, narrowly avoided starring in their own show trial.
In Romania it was one ‘national’ Communist, Dej, who engineered the downfall of another ‘national’ Communist, Patra§canu, as well as the eclipse of the impeccably Muscovite and Stalinist Ana Pauker.
And even Rostov had spent the early thirties in Moscow, at the Comintern’s Balkan desk.
Far from saving him, however, this just exacerbated his crime—Stalin was not interested in agreement or even consent, only unswerving obedience.
Lastly, there was a considerable element of personal score-settling and cynical instrumentalism in the selection of trial victims and the charges against them.
In some instances the latter fabricated cases against people out of coincidence or fantasy; in others they deliberately claimed the opposite of what they knew to be the case.
Thus two of the defendants in the Slansky trial were accused of over190 INTO THE WHIRLWIND billing Moscow for Czech products.
Typically, goods made in the satellite states were deliberately under-priced to Soviet advantage; only Moscow could authorize exceptions.
Later he had secretly re-established the Communist network while maintaining the ban on other parties.
But his actions, impeccably orthodox at the time, were grist to the Soviet mill when the time came to remove him.
Other Communists were purged without public trials or without any judicial process at all.
But the overwhelming majority of Stalin’s victims, in the Soviet Union and the satellite states, were of course not Communists at all.
In Czechoslovakia, in the years 1948-54, Communists represented just one-tenth of 1 percent of those condemned to prison terms or work camps, one in twenty of those condemned to death.
In the GDR the Stasi was created on February 8th 1950, with the task of overseeing and controlling not just Communists but the whole of society.
Stalin was routinely suspicious not only of Communists with contacts or experience in the West, but of anyone who had lived outside the Soviet bloc.
It thus went without saying that virtually the entire population of eastern Europe fell under Kremlin suspicion in those years.
Any Soviet citizen or soldier who survived Nazi occupation or imprisonment was thus an object of suspicion.
When the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet passed a law in 1949, punishing soldiers who committed rape with 10 to 15 years in a labour camp, disapproval of the Red Army’s rampage across eastern Germany and Austria was the least of its concerns.
The real motive was to fashion a device with which to punish returning Soviet soldiers at will.
The scale of the punishment meted out to the citizens of the USSR and Eastern Europe in the decade following World War Two was monumental—and, outside the Soviet Union itself, utterly unprecedented.
In Bulgaria, from an industrial workforce of just under half a million, two persons out of nine were slave laborers.
In Czechoslovakia it is estimated that there were 100,000 political prisoners in a population of 13 million in the early 1950s, a figure that does not include the many tens of thousands working as forced laborers in everything but name in the country’s mines.
Three months later the person was then legally presumed dead, though with no further official acknowledgement or confirmation.
At the height of the terror in Czechoslovakia some thirty to forty such announcements would appear in the local press every day.
Tens of thousands disappeared this way; many hundreds of thousands more were deprived of their privileges, apartments, jobs.
In Hungary, during the years 1948-53, about one million people (of a total population of less than ten million) are estimated to have suffered arrest, prosecution, imprisonment or deportation.
The wives of prisoners and deportees lost their employment, their apartments and their personal effects.
At best, if they were lucky, they were then forgotten, like Josephine Langer, whose husband Oskar Langer, a witness at the Slansky trial, was later sentenced in a secret trial to 22 years in prison.
Romania saw perhaps the worst persecution, certainly the most enduring.
In addition to well over a million detainees in prisons, labor camps and slave labor on the Danube-Black Sea Canal, of whom tens of thousands died and whose numbers don’t include those deported to the Soviet Union, Romania was remarkable for the severity of its prison conditions and various ‘experimental’ prisons; notably the one at Pite§ti where, for three years from December 1949 through late 1952, prisoners were encouraged to ‘re-educate’ one another through physical and psychological torture.
Most of the victims were students, ‘Zionists’ and non-Communist political detainees.
The Communist state was in a permanent condition of undeclared war against its own citizens.
Like Lenin, Stalin understood the need for enemies, and it was in the logic of the Stalinist state that it was constantly mobilizing against its foes—external, but above all domestic.
An inevitable necessity of our period is the ever increasing class struggle.
The martial vocabulary so beloved of Communist rhetoric echoed this conflictbound condition.
But in practice intellectuals were often the easiest target, just as they had been for the Nazis.
Andrei Zdanov’s venomous attack on Anna Akhmatova—‘a nun or a whore, or rather a nun and a whore, who combines harlotry with prayer.
Had Akhmatova been Jewish, like much of the central European intelligentsia, the caricature would have been complete.
The instruments of control and terror through which the Communist state operated after 1947 were perfected by Stalin’s men, but for the most part they did not need to be imported from the East; they were already in place.
This process and its consequences—the ‘Sovietization’ and ‘Russification’ of everything in Eastern Europe from manufacturing processes to academic titles—would sooner or later alienate the allegiance of all but the most inveterate Stalinists.
And it had the ancillary effect of blurring many people’s recollection of their initial ambivalence in the face of the Communist transformation.
In later years it was easy to forget that the anti-Semitic and frequently xenophobic tone of Stalinist public language had found a sympathetic audience in much of eastern Europe, just as it did in the Soviet Union itself.
Economic nationalism had popular local roots too, so that expropriation, nationalization, controls and state regulation of work were by no means unfamiliar.
In its initial phases, then, the Soviet take-over of eastern Europe was not quite as one-sided and brutal a transition as it would appear in retrospect, even if we discount the high hopes vested in the Communist future by a minority of young people in Warsaw or Prague.
But just as the Nazis’ brutality had alienated potentially friendly local sentiment in the territories they‘liberated’ from the USSR in 1941-42, so Stalin soon dispersed illusions and expectations in the satellite states.
The result of imposing an accelerated version of the Soviet Union’s own dismal economic history upon the more developed lands to its west has already been noted.
The only resource upon which Communist managers could consistently rely was labor-intensive production pressed to the breaking point.
The centrally planned economies were actually quite effective at extracting surplus-value from miners and factory workers by force; but this was all they could do.
The trials and purges, and the accompanying chorus of mendacious commentary, helped degrade whatever remained in eastern Europe of the public sphere.
Politics and government became synonymous with corruption and arbitrary repression, practiced by and for the benefit of a venal clique, itself rent by suspicion and fear.
And, once again, it was a form of misrule adapted for the near194 INTO THE WHIRLWIND exclusive benefit of a foreign power, which was what made Soviet rule so resented outside the Soviet Union’s own borders.
The effect of the Sovietization of eastern Europe was to draw it steadily away from the western half of the continent.
It is symptomatic and somehow appropriate that during the very years when the Marshall Plan injected some $14 billion into Western Europe’s recovering economy, Stalin— through reparations, forced deliveries and the imposition of grossly disadvantageous trading distortions—extracted approximately the same amount from eastern Europe.
But the distinction between eastern and western Europe had not been the only one by which the continent understood itself, nor even the most important.
Mediterranean Europe was markedly different from North-West Europe; religion had far greater salience than politics in the historic boundaries within and between states.
In Europe before World War Two, the differences between North and South, rich and poor, urban and rural, counted for more than those between East and West.
The impact of Soviet rule upon the lands east of Vienna was thus in certain respects even more marked than it had been upon Russia itself.
The Russian Empire, after all, had only ever been part-European; and the European identity of postPetrine Russia was itself much contested in the course of the century preceding Lenin’s coup.
In brutally cutting the Soviet Union adrift from its ties to European history and culture the Bolsheviks did great and lasting violence to Russia.
But their suspicion of the West and their fear of Western influence was not unprecedented; it had deep roots in self-consciously Slavophil writings and practices long before 1917.
It was, indeed, part of the insecure small-state nationalism of Poles, Romanians, Croats and others that they saw themselves not as some far-flung outriders at the edge of European civilization; but rather as the under-appreciated defenders of Europe’s core heritage—just as Czechs and Hungarians understood themselves, reasonably enough, as dwelling at the very heart of the continent.
Romanian and Polish intellectuals looked to Paris for fashions in thought and art, much as the Germanspeaking intelligentsia of the late Habsburg Empire, from Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia to Trieste, had always looked to Vienna.
That integrated, cosmopolitan Europe had of course only ever existed for a minority—and it died in 1918.
But the new states hatched at Versailles were fragile and somehow impermanent from the very start.
The inter-war decades had thus been a sort of interregnum, neither peace nor war, in which the fate of post-imperial central and eastern Europe remained somehow undecided.
Instead, the imposition of a Russian rather than a German solution cut Europe’s vulnerable eastern half away from the body of the continent.
At the time this was not a matter of great concern to western Europeans themselves.
With the exception of the Germans, the nation most directly affected by the division of Europe but also ill-placed to voice displeasure at it, western Europeans were largely indifferent to the disappearance of eastern Europe.
Indeed, they soon became so accustomed to it, and were anyway so preoccupied with the remarkable changes taking place in their own countries, that it seemed quite natural that there should be an impermeable armed barrier running from the Baltic to the Adriatic.
But for the peoples to the east of that barrier, thrust back as it seemed into a grimy, forgotten corner of their own continent, at the mercy of a semi-alien Great Power no better off than they and parasitic upon their shrinking resources, history itself ground slowly to a halt.
The staking out of political and intellectual positions for and against the Soviet Union did not begin with the post-World War Two division of Europe.
But it was in these post-war years, between 1947 and 1953, that the line dividing East from West, Left from Right, was carved deep into European cultural and intellectual life.
Between the wars the far Right had been better supported than it suited most people to recall.
From Brussels to Bucharest the polemical journalism and literature of the 1930s abounded in racism, anti-Semitism, ultra-nationalism, clericalism and political reaction.
But although the content of public writing and performance was spectacularly metamorphosed by the fall of Hitler, Mussolini and their followers, the tone stayed much the same.
In their preoccupation with nation, degeneration, sacrifice and death, inter-war Fascist writers had looked to the First World War.
Good versus Evil, Freedom against Enslavement, Resistance against Collaboration.
Liberation from Nazi or Fascist occupation was widely welcomed as an occasion for radical political and social change; an opportunity to turn wartime devastation to revolutionary effect and make a new beginning.
And when, as we have seen, that opportunity was seemingly thwarted and ‘normal’ life was summarily restored, frustrated expectations turned readily enough to cynicism—or else to the far Left, in a world once more polarized into irreconcilable political camps.
Post-war European intellectuals were in a hurry and impatient with compromise.
But after the Second World War it was largely an older, discredited cohort that disappeared from the scene.
In its place emerged writers, artists, journalists and political activists who were too young to have known the war of 1914-18, but who were impatient to make up the years lost in its successor.
Their political education had come in the era of the Popular Fronts and anti-Fascist movements; and when they achieved public acclaim and influence, often as a result of their wartime activities, it was at an unusually early age by traditional European standards.
In France, Jean-Paul Sartre was 40 when the war ended; Simone de Beauvoir was 37; Albert Camus, the most influential of them all, just 32.
Of the older generation only Francois Mauriac could match them in influence, precisely because he was not tainted by any Vichyite past.
In Italy only the Neapolitan philosopher Benedetto Croce remained from an earlier generation of Italian public figures.
In post-Fascist Italy Ignazio Silone, born in 1900, was among the more senior of the influential intellectual figures; the novelist and political commentator Alberto Moravia was 38, the Communist editor and writer Elio Vittorini a year younger.
In eastern Europe, where the intellectual elites of the pre-war years were tainted with ultra-conservatism, mystical nationalism or worse, the social promotion of youth was even more marked.
Czeslaw Milosz, whose influential essay The Captive Mind was published in 1951 when he was just 40 and already in political exile, was not at all atypical.
Jerzy Andrzejewski (who appears in Milosz’s book in a less than flattering light) published Ashes and Diamonds , his acclaimed novel of postwar Poland, while in his thirties.
The leaders of the East European Communist parties were, typically, slightly older men who had survived the inter-war years as political prisoners or else in Moscow exile, or both.
But just below them was a cohort of very young men and women whose idealistic commitment to the Soviet-backed takeovers played an important part in their success.
Heda Kovaly’s husband, Rudolf Margolius, one of the defendants at the Slansky trial in December 1952, was 35 when he was appointed minister in the Communist government of Czechoslovakia; Artur London, another of the accused at that trial, was younger still, 33 years old when the Communists seized power.
London had received his political education in the French resistance; like many in the Communist underground, he learned how to exercise political and military responsibilities at a very young age.
Youthful enthusiasm for a Communist future was widespread among middleclass intellectuals, in East and West alike.
And it was accompanied by a distinctive complex of inferiority towards the proletariat, the blue-collar working class.
In the immediate post-war years, skilled manual workers were at a premium—a marked contrast with the Depression years still fresh in collective memory.
There was coal to be mined; roads, railways, buildings, power lines to be rebuilt or replaced; tools to be manufactured and then applied to the manufacture of other goods.
For all these jobs there was a shortage of trained labor; as we have seen, young, ablebodied men in the Displaced Persons camps had little difficulty finding work and asylum, in contrast to women with families—or ‘intellectuals’ of any sort.
One consequence of this was the universal exaltation of industrial work and workers—a distinct political asset for parties claiming to represent them.
Leftleaning, educated, middle-class men and women embarrassed by their social origin could assuage their discomfort by abandoning themselves to Communism.
Students, teachers, writers and artists from Britain, France, Germany and elsewhere flocked to Yugoslavia to help rebuild railways with their bare hands.
In August 1947 Italo Calvino wrote enthusiastically about young volunteers from Italy similarly engaged in Czechoslovakia.
Devotion to a new beginning, the worship of a real or imagined community of workers, and admiration for the Soviets (and their all-conquering Red Army) separated a young post-war generation from its social roots and the national past.
The decision to become a Communist (or a ‘Marxist’, which in the circumstances of the time usually meant Communist) was typically made at a young age.
Communist parties initially flattered intellectuals, for whom Communism’s ambitions stood in appealing contrast to the small-state parochialism of their homelands as well as the violent anti-intellectualism of the Nazis.
Although it was only ever a minority of East European students, poets, playwrights, novelists, journalist or professors who became active Communists, these were often the most talented men and women of their generation.
Thus Pavel Kohout, who in later decades would achieve international renown as a dissident and post-Communist essayist and playwright, first came to the public eye in his native Czechoslovakia as an ultra-enthusiast for his country’s new regime.
Her youth is marked by young shock workers She has the reason of a million heads And the strength of millions of human hands And her battalion is the words of Stalin and Gottwald.
As Milosz would observe, Communism operated on the principle that writers need not think , they need only understand.
And even understanding required little more than commitment, which was precisely what young intellectuals in the region were looking for.
Mlynar’s generation knew only the years of war and Nazi occupation, during which ‘it was either one side or the other—there was no middle ground.
I am also indebted to Professor Shore for the quotation from Ludek Pachman.
But it helps account for the scale of disenchantment and disillusion that followed.
But younger converts, particularly intellectuals, were stunned to discover the rigors of Communist discipline and the reality of Stalinist power.
Thus the imposition of Zdanov’s ‘two cultures’ dogma after 1948, with its insistence upon the adoption of ‘correct’ positions on everything from botany to poetry, came as a particular shock in the popular democracies of eastern Europe.
Slavish intellectual adherence to a party line, long-established in the Soviet Union where there was in any case a pre-Soviet heritage of repression and orthodoxy, came harder to countries that had only recently emerged from the rather benign regimen of the Habsburgs.
In nineteenth-century central Europe, intellectuals and poets had acquired the habit and responsibility of speaking on behalf of the nation.
Where once they had represented an abstract ‘people’ they were now little more than cultural mouthpieces for tyrants.
Worse, they would soon be the victim of choice—as cosmopolitans, ‘parasites’ or Jews—for those same tyrants in search of scapegoats for their errors.
The division within Communist states was no longer between Communism and its opponents.
In this sense the Cold War fault-line fell not so much between East and West as within Eastern and Western Europe alike.
In Western Europe the same fault-line found many intellectuals on both sides; but enthusiasm for Communism in theory was characteristically present in inverse proportion to direct experience of it in practice.
This widespread ignorance of the fate of contemporary Eastern Europe, coupled with growing Western indifference, was a source of bewilderment and frustration to many in the East.
The problem for East European intellectuals and others was not their peripheral situation—this was a fate to which they had long been resigned.
Stalin’s success in gouging his defensive perimeter deep into the center of Europe had removed Eastern Europe from the equation.
European intellectual and cultural life after the Second World War took place on a drastically reduced stage, from which the Poles, Czechs and others had been summarily removed.
The intellectual condition of post-war Western Europe would have been unrecognizable to a visitor from even the quite recent past.
German-speaking central Europe—the engine room of European culture for the first third of the twentieth century—had ceased to exist.
Vienna, already a shadow of its former self after the overthrow of the Habsburgs in 1918, was divided like Berlin among the four allied powers.
It could hardly feed or clothe its citizens, much less contribute to the intellectual life of the continent.
Austrian philosophers, economists, mathematicians and scientists, like their contemporaries in Hungary and the rest of the former Dual Monarchy, had either escaped into exile (to France, Britain, the British Dominions or the US), collaborated with the authorities or else been killed.
The German intellectual emigration after 1933 had left behind almost no-one of standing not compromised by his dealings with the regime.
Martin Heidegger’s notorious flirtation with the Nazis was atypical only in its controversial implications for his influential philosophical writings; tens of thousands of lesser Heideggers in schools, universities, local and national bureaucracies, newspapers and cultural institutions were similarly compromised by the enthusiasm with which they had adapted their writings and actions to Nazi demands.
Many intellectuals and artists were tempted to throw in their lot with the Soviet Zone and its successor, the German Democratic Republic.
Unlike the Federal Republic of Bonn, incompletely deNazified and reluctant to stare the recent German past in the face, East Germany proudly insisted upon its anti-Nazi credentials.
Some of the best talent that had survived from Weimar Republic days migrated east.
One reason for this was that because Soviet-occupied East Germany was the only state in the eastern bloc with a Western doppelganger, its intellectuals had access to a Western audience in a way not open to Romanian or Polish writers.
And if censorship and pressure became intolerable, there remained the option of returning west, through the Berlin crossing points, at least until 1961 and the building of the Wall.
Thus Berthold Brecht opted to live in the GDR; young writers like Christa Wolf chose to remain there; and younger writers still, like the future dissident Wolf Biermann, actually migrated east to study and write (in Biermann’s case at the age of 17, in 1953)3 What appealed to radical intellectuals from the ‘materialist’West was the GDR’s self-presentation as progressive, egalitarian and anti-Nazi, a lean and sober alternative to the Federal Republic.
The latter seemed at once heavy with a history it preferred not to discuss, and yet at the same time curiously weightless, lacking political roots and culturally dependent on the Western Allies, the United States above all, who had invented it.
Intellectual life in the early Federal Republic lacked political direction.
And yet West Germany was, and would for many years remain, peripheral to the mainstream of European intellectual life.
Raymond Aron was not the only person to recall that in earlier years this had looked to be Germany’s century.
With so much of Germany’s cultural heritage polluted and disqualified by its appropriation for Nazi purposes, it was no longer clear just what Germans could now contribute to Europe.
German writers and thinkers were obsessed, understandably enough, with peculiarly Ger3 Brecht, characteristically, hedged his bets by retaining an Austrian passport.
But it was West German intellectuals’ studious avoidance of ideological politics that did most to marginalize them in the first post-war decade, at a time when public conversation in western Europe was intensely and divisively politicized.
The British, too, were mostly peripheral to European intellectual life in these years, though for very different reasons.
But in inter-war Britain neither Fascists nor Communists had succeeded in translating social dissent into political revolution.
By the election of 1951 the CPGB attracted just 21,000 voters in a population of some 49 million.
This in no way inhibited intellectual sympathy for Marxism, among the London intelligentsia and in the universities.
And the British mandarin Left, like their contemporaries in the Foreign Office, had little time for the travails of the small countries between Germany and Russia, whom they had always regarded as something of a nuisance.
But whereas these matters would stir heated debate across the English Channel, Communism did not mobilize or divide intellectuals in Britain to anything like the same extent.
It is symptomatic of the ambivalent mood of post-war England that the country had just fought and won a six-year war against its mortal enemy and was embarked upon an unprecedented experiment in welfare capitalism—yet cultural commentators were absorbed by intimations of failure and deterioration.
European politics and letters were regularly covered in weekly and periodical magazines, and British readers could be well-informed if they wished.
Nor were the British unaware of the scale of the trauma that Europe had just passed through.
With certain notable exceptions, 4 British intellectuals did not play an influential part in the great debates of continental Europe, but observed them from the sidelines.
Broadly speaking, affairs that were urgently political in Europe aroused only intellectual interest in Britain; while topics of intellectual concern on the Continent were usually confined to academic circles in the UK, if indeed they were noticed at all.
Of all the countries of western Europe, it was Italy that had most directly experienced the plagues of the age.
The country had been governed for twenty years by the world’s first Fascist regime.
It had been occupied by the Germans, then liberated by the Western Allies, in a snail-paced war of attrition and destruction that had lasted nearly two years, covered three quarters of the country, and reduced much of the land and its people to near-destitution.
Moreover, from September 1943 to April 1945 the north of Italy was convulsed in what amounted in all but name to a full-scale civil war.
As a former Axis state Italy was an object of suspicion to West and East alike.
Until Tito’s split with Stalin, Italy’s unresolved border with Yugoslavia was the most 4 The best-known of course was Arthur Koestler—but then he might as readily be described as Hungarian, or Austrian, or French or Jewish.
For all these reasons, intellectual life in post-war Italy was highly politicized and intimately tied to the problem of Communism.
The overwhelming majority of young Italian intellectuals, including even some of those tempted by Fascism, had been formed in the shadow of Benedetto Croce.
Croce’s distinctive blend of Hegelian idealism in philosophy and nineteenth-century liberalism in politics had provided an ethical reference for a generation of intellectual anti-Fascists; but in the post-war circumstances it seemed manifestly insufficient.
The PCI had a special quality that distinguished it from other Communist parties, East and West.
But with the division of Europe, Togliatti’s strategy came under growing pressure.
Meanwhile, with America’s brazen but successful intervention on behalf of the Christian Democrats in the elections of 1948, Togliatti’s post-war policy of working within the institutions of liberal democracy began to seem naive.
Whatever his doubts, then, Togliatti had no option but to exercise tighter control and impose Stalinist norms.
As Vittorini, the editor of the Communist cultural journal II Politechnico , had reminded Togliatti in an Open Letter back in January 1947, ‘culture’ cannot be subordinated to politics, except at its own expense and at the price of truth.
Togliatti, who had spent the 1930s in Moscow and had played a leading role in the Comintern’s Spanish operations in 1937-38, knew otherwise.
Indeed, Togliatti’s critics on the non-Communist Left were consistently wrongfooted by the widespread perception at home and abroad that the PCI was not like other Communist parties.
As Ignazio Silone would later acknowledge, Italian Socialists and others had only themselves to blame.
The close relations between Communists and Socialists in Italy, at least until 1948, and the consequent reluctance of non-Communist Marxists to criticize the Soviet Union, inhibited the emergence in Italian politics of a clear left-leaning alternative to Communism.
But if Italy was unusual in Western Europe for the relatively simpatico quality of its Communists, it was also of course atypical for another reason.
The overthrow of Mussolini in 1943 could not obscure the complicity of many Italian intellectuals in his twenty-year rule.
Elio Vittorini himself had won prizes in Fascist literary competitions.
Vittorio de Sica was a well-known actor in Fascist-era films before becoming the leading exponent of post-war Neo-Realism.
His fellow Neo-Realist director Roberto Rossellini, whose post-war films were distinctly Communist in their political sympathies, had just a few years before made documentaries and feature films in Mussolini’s Italy with help from the authorities, and his was not an isolated case.
By 1943 Mussolini’s rule was the normal order of things for the many millions of Italians who had no adult memory of any other peacetime government.
The moral standing of the vast majority of Italian intellectuals in the post-war years thus mirrored the rather ambivalent international position of the country as a whole, too uncomfortably implicated in its authoritarian past to take center stage in post-war European affairs.
Naples, Florence, Bologna, Milan and Turin each formed little worlds of their own, with their own universities, newspapers, academies and intelligentsias.
Rome was the source of authority, the fount of patronage and locus of power.
Its competitors were imprisoned, had destroyed themselves or else were parochially absorbed.
Ever since the 1920s, as one European state after another fell to the dictators, political refugees and intellectual exiles had headed for France.
Some had remained during the war and joined the Resistance, where many had fallen victim to Vichy and the Nazis.
Others, like Czeslaw Milosz or the Hungarian historian and political journalist Francois Fejto, did not emigrate until the Soviet coups in Eastern Europe forced them to flee—at which point it seemed only natural that they would go straight to Paris.
French intellectuals acquired a special international significance as spokesmen for the age, and the tenor of French political arguments epitomized the ideological rent in the world at large.
It was historical chance that thrust French intellectuals into the limelight in these years, for their own concerns were no less parochial than anyone else’s.
Post-war France was as much taken up with its own problems of score-settling, scarcity and political instability as any other country.
French intellectuals re-interpreted the politics of the rest of the world in the light of their own obsessions, and the narcissistic selfimportance of Paris within France was projected un-self-critically onto the world at large.
The divisions that would characterize the French intellectual community in later years were not immediately in evidence.
When Jean-Paul Sartre founded Les Temps Modernes in 1945 the editorial board included not only Simone de Beauvoir and Maurice Merleau-Ponty but also Raymond Aron, reflecting a broad consensus around left-wing politics and ‘existentialist’ philosophy.
The latter label also encompassed Albert Camus, at the time close friends with Sartre and De Beauvoir and, from his column on the editorial pages of the daily newspaper Combat, the most influential writer in post-war France.
Another lesson that Sartre and his generation claimed to have learnt from the war was the inevitability—and thus in certain measure the desirability—of political violence.
Young people all across the continent were inured to a level of public brutality, in words and actions, that would have shocked their nineteenth-century forebears.
Emmanuel Mounier, editor of the magazine Esprit and an influential presence on the Christian Left, undoubtedly spoke for many in 1949 when he asserted that it was hypocrisy to oppose violence or class-struggle when ‘white violence’ was practiced on the victims of capitalism every day.
But in France the appeal of violent solutions represented more than just a projection forward of recent experience.
Accusations of collaboration, betrayal and treason, demands for punishment and a fresh start did not begin with the Liberation.
No other country had such a long and unbroken experience of bipolar politics, underscored by the conventional historiography of the national Revolutionary myth as inculcated to French schoolchildren for many decades.
Moreover France, more than any other Western nation-state, was a country whose intelligentsia approved and even worshipped violence as a tool of public policy.
French readers and writers had long since been familiarized with the idea that historical change and purgative bloodshed go hand in hand.
This familiarity of revolutionary violence in the French imaginaire, together with sepia-tinted memories of the old Franco-Russian alliance, pre-disposed intellectuals in France to greet Communist apologetics for Soviet brutality with a distinctly sympathetic ear.
Commenting on the Slansky trial for Sartre’s Temps Modernes, Marcel Peju reminded his readers that there is nothing wrong with killing one’s political enemies.
What was amiss in Prague was that ‘the ceremony with which they are killed seems a caricature of what it could be if this violence were justified in a Communist perspective.
French intellectuals visiting the Soviet bloc waxed more lyrically enthusiastic than most at the sight of Communism under construction.
Engaged intellectuals were obliged to take a stand on the side of progress and History, whatever the occasional moral vicissitudes.
Though never as large as the Italian party , the PCF in the immediate post-war years was even more electorally successful, with 28 percent of the vote in 1946.
And so the PCF was both stronger and more isolated than any other Communist party.
As he explained to Claude Roy, ‘Poor things, it would just discourage them.
For Stalin, Thorez’s most important quality was that—like Gottwald in Czechoslovakia—he could be relied on to do what he was told and ask no questions.
It was no coincidence that, having deserted from the French army during the phony war of 1939-40, Thorez spent the next five years in Moscow.
For this reason the affinities of the Parisian intelligentsia are our soundest guide to the fault-lines of faith and opinion in Cold War Europe.
In Paris, as nowhere else, intellectual schisms traced the contours of political ones, at home and abroad.
Laszlo Rajk had been interned in France after the Spanish Civil War; Artur London had worked in the French Resistance, was married to one prominent French Communist and was the future father-in-law of another; ‘Andre Simone’ (Otto Katz, another Slansky trial victim) was widely known in Parisian journalistic circles for his work there during the thirties; Traicho Rostov was well-remembered from his days in Bulgarian foreign service in Paris—his arrest in Sofia actually made the front page of Camus’s Combat.
Paris was even the site for two influential political trials of its own.
In 1946 Victor Kravchenko, a mid-level Soviet bureaucrat who defected to the United States in April 1944, published his memoirs, I Chose Freedom.
When these appeared in France in May of the following year, under the title J’ai choisi la Liberte , they caused a sensation for their account of the Soviet purges, massacres, and in particular the Soviet concentration camp system, the Gulag.
When the paper repeated and amplified these charges in April 1948, Kravchenko sued for libel.
In the judgment Kravchenko was awarded a single franc of insultingly symbolic damages.
But for many critics of the Soviet Union, Kravchenko had been a less than ideal spokesman.
A longtime Soviet apparatchik who had chosen exile in the USA, he held no appeal for those anti-Communist European intellectuals, perhaps the majority, who were as concerned to keep their distance from Washington as they were to deny Moscow a monopoly of progressive credentials.
On November 12th 1949, four weeks after the execution in Budapest of Laszlo Rajk, David Rousset published in Le Figaro litteraire an appeal to former inmates of Nazi camps to assist him in establishing an enquiry into Soviet concentration camps.
Basing himself on the Soviet Union’s own Code of Corrective Labor, he argued that these were not re-education centers as officials asserted, but rather a system of concentration camps integral to the Soviet economy and penal system.
A week later, again in Les Lettres fran^aises, the Communist writers Pierre Daix and Claude Morgan accused him of inventing his sources and caricaturing the USSR in a base calumny.
The dramatis personae in this confrontation were unusually interesting.
He was French; a longtime socialist; a sometime Trotskyist; a Resistance hero and survivor of Buchenwald and Neuengamme; a friend of Sartre and co-founder with him in 1948 of a short-lived political movement, the Rassemblement democratique revolutionnaire.
For such a man to accuse the Soviet Union of operating concentration or labor camps broke sharply with the conventional political alignments of the time.
Daix, too, had been arrested for Resistance activities and deported, in his case to Mauthausen.
Rousset’s witness list included a variety of highly credible first-hand experts on the Soviet prison system, culminating in dramatic testimony from Margarete Buber-Neumann, who testified to experience not only in Soviet camps but also in Ravensbriick, to which she had been sent after Stalin handed her back to the Nazis in 1940, part of the small change of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
He even had some impact upon the conscience and consciousness of his contemporaries.
For many Europeans their first experience of political mobilization was in the anti-Fascist, Popular-Front leagues of the 1930s.
For most people the Second World War was remembered as a victory over Fascism, and celebrated as such in France and Belgium especially in the post-war years.
They (the Fascists, Nazis, Franco-ists, Nationalists) are Right, we are Left.
Since most of the anti-Fascists’ opponents made a point of defining their own politics as above all anti-Communist (this was part of Nazism’s wartime appeal to conservative elites in countries as far apart as Denmark and Romania), this tidy symmetry worked to the Communists’ polemical advantage.
Philo-Communism, or at least anti-anti-Communism, was the logical essence of anti-Fascism.
The Soviet Union, of course, had every interest in directing attention to its antiFascist credentials in the post-war years, especially once the United States replaced Germany as its enemy.
Anti-Fascist rhetoric was now directed against America, accused first of defending revanchist Fascists and then, by extension, described as a proto-Fascist threat in its own right.
Stalingrad, according to Edgar Morin, swept away all doubts, all criticisms.
It helped, too, that Paris had been liberated by the Western Allies, whose sins thus loomed larger in local memory.
It is important to recall what was happening just a few miles to the east.
Writers, professors, artists, teachers and journalists frequently admired Stalin not in spite of his faults, but because of them.
It was when he was murdering people on an industrial scale, when the show trials were displaying Soviet Communism at its most theatrically macabre, that men and women beyond Stalin’s grasp were most seduced by the man and his cult.
It was the absurdly large gap separating rhetoric from reality that made it so irresistible to men and women of goodwill in search of a Cause.
Communism excited intellectuals in a way that neither Hitler nor liberal democracy could hope to match.
Jean-Paul Sartre, for one, was most attracted to the Communists at precisely the moment when the ‘pyramid-builder’ was embarking upon his final, crazed projects.
The idea that the Soviet Union was engaged upon a momentous quest whose very ambition justified and excused its shortcomings was uniquely attractive to rationalist intellectuals.
But Communism was directed towards impeccably universal and transcendent goals.
Its crimes were excused by many non-Communist observers as the cost, so to speak, of doing business with History.
But even so, in the early years of the Cold War there were many in Western Europe who might have been more openly critical of Stalin, of the Soviet Union and of their local Communists had they not been inhibited by the fear of giving aid and comfort to their political opponents.
This, too, was a legacy of‘anti-Fascism’, the insistence that there were ‘no enemies on the Left’ (a rule to which Stalin himself, 10 Likewise, the cult of Mao in the West reached its zenith at the height of the Cultural Revolution, just when and just because Mao was persecuting writers, artists and teachers.
But by the early fifties it was a major calculation in European intellectual debates, above all in France.
Anti-anti-Communism was becoming a political and cultural end in itself.
On the other side, far more numerous but also distinctly heterogeneous, were the anti-Communists.
Since anti-Communists ran the gamut from Trotskyists to neoFascists, critics of the USSR frequently found themselves sharing a platform or a petition with someone whose politics in other respects they abhorred.
Such unholy alliances were a prime target for Soviet polemic and it was sometimes difficult to persuade liberal critics of Communism to voice their opinions in public for fear of being tarred with the brush of reaction.
Genuinely reactionary intellectuals were thin on the ground in the first decade after the war.
Even those, like Jacques Laurent or Roger Nimier in France, who styled themselves as unashamedly of the Right, took a certain pleasure in acknowledging the hopelessness of their cause, fashioning a sort of neo-Bohemian nostalgia for the discredited past and parading their political irrelevance as a badge of honor.
If the Left had the wind in its sails and History on its side, then a new generation of Right-wing literati would take pride in being defiant losers, turning the genuine decadence and death-seeking solipsism of inter-war writers like Drieu la Rochelle and Ernst Junger into a social and sartorial style—thereby anticipating the ‘young fogeys’ of Mrs Thatcher’s Britain.
More representative, in France and Britain at least, were intellectual conservatives whose dislike of Communism had changed little in thirty years.
In both countries, as in Italy, actively Catholic intellectuals played a prominent part in anti-Communist polemics.
But where English conservatives might rage at the vacuity of modern life or else retreat from it altogether, a French Catholic like Francis Mauriac was drawn quite naturally into polemical exchanges with the political Left.
Throughout Mauriac’s long post-war engagement with public affairs (he wrote regularly for Le Figaro into his eighties—he died in 1970 aged 85) his arguments were almost always cast in an ethical vein—first with Albert Camus over the propriety of the post-war purges, later with his fellow conservatives over the war in Algeria—of which he disapproved—and always with the Communists, whom he abominated.
As he explained to the readers of Le Figaro on October 24th 1949, the French Communists’justification for the Budapest show trial—then under way— was ‘une obscenite de Vesprif.
One is in the universe of free countries or else in that of lands placed under harsh Soviet rule.
Liberal intellectuals, then, whether of the continental persuasion like Aron or Luigi Einaudi, or in the British sense like Isaiah Berlin, were always distinctly more comfortable than most conservatives with the American connection that history had imposed upon them.
This was in part because the memory of FDR was still fresh, and many of the American diplomats and policy-makers with whom Europeans dealt in these years were New Dealers, who encouraged an active role for the state in economic and social policy and whose political sympathies fell to the left of center.
Violent clashes between Communist and Socialist workers’ unions, and between Communist-led strikers and troops ordered in by Socialist ministers, together with the news from eastern Europe of Socialists arrested and imprisoned, turned many Western Social Democrats into confirmed foes of the Soviet bloc and ready recipients of covert American cash.
Then, as the arteries of political and intellectual allegiance began to harden from 1947, Camus found himself increasingly prone to doubt the good faith of his political allies—doubts he at first stifled out of habit and for the sake of unity.
He handed over control of the newspaper Combat in June 1947, no longer so politically confident or optimistic as he had been three years before.
In his major novel La Peste , published the same year, it was clear that Camus was not comfortable with the hard-edged political realism of his political bedmates.
Nevertheless, Camus was still reluctant to come out in public and break with his former friends.
In public he still tried to balance honest criticism of Stalinism with balanced,‘objective’ references to American racism and other crimes committed in the capitalist camp.
But the Rousset trial and the East European show trials ended any illusions he might have retained.
Today things are clear and we must call something “concentrationnaire” if that is what it is, even if it is socialism.
Like Silone, who would go on to contribute one of the better essays in Richard Crossman’s 1950 collection, The God That Failed, Camus became thenceforth an ever more acerbic critic of‘progressivist’ illusions, culminating in the condemnation of revolutionary violence in his 1951 essay L’Homme revolte that provoked the final break with his erstwhile friends on the Parisian intellectual Left.
For Sartre, the first duty of a radical intellectual was not to betray the workers.
For Camus, like Silone, the most important thing was not to betray oneself.
It is difficult, looking back across the decades, to recapture in full the stark contrasts and rhetoric of the Cold War in these early years.
As Maurice Thorez expressed it in July 1948, ‘people think they can insult us Communists by throwing the word “Stalinists” at us.
And many gifted non-Communists, as we have seen, were likewise reluctant to condemn the Soviet leader, seeking out ways to minimize his crimes or excuse them altogether.
Hopeful illusions about the Soviet realm were accompanied by widespread misgivings—and worse—about America.
The United States, together with the new Federal Republic of Germany, bore the brunt of Communist rhetorical violence.
The United States was not wildly popular in western Europe, despite and in some places because of its generous help in Europe’s economic reconstruction.
In July 1947 only 38 percent of French adults believed that Marshall Aid did not pose a serious threat to French independence, a suspicion of American motives that was further fuelled by the war scares of 1948 and the fighting in Korea two years later.
Fabricated Communist charges that the United States Army was using biological weapons in Korea found a receptive audience.
In cultural matters, the Communists did not even need to take the initiative.
Fear of American domination, of the loss of national autonomy and initiative, brought into the ‘progressive’ camp men and women of all political stripes and none.
But in Russia everyone is happy, and we in Prague are very happy too, owing to the government of Klement Gottwald.
Meanwhile, an insidious American artifact was spreading across the continent.
Between 1947 and 1949 the Coca-Cola Company opened bottling plants in the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland and Italy.
Within five years of its creation West Germany would have 96 such plants and became the largest market outside the United States itself.
But while some voices had been raised in protest in Belgium and Italy, it was in France that Coca-Cola’s plans unleashed a public storm.
The furor over ‘Coca-Colonisation’ had its light side (there were rumours that the company planned to attach its logo, in neon, to the Eiffel Tower ...), but the sentiments underlying it were serious.
The crassness of American culture, from films to beverages, and the self-interest and imperialist ambitions behind the United States presence in Europe were commonplaces for many Europeans of Left and Right.
The Soviet Union might pose an immediate threat to Europe but it was America that presented the more insidious long-term challenge.
This view gained credence after the outbreak of war in Korea, when the United States began to press for the rearmament of the West Germans.
Nationalist hostility to ‘Anglo-Americans’, encouraged under the wartime occupation but silent since the liberation, was dusted off and drafted into service in Italy, France and Belgium—and also in Germany itself, by Brecht and other East German writers.
Seeking to capitalize on this inchoate but widespread fear of war, and suspicion of things American among European elites, Stalin launched an international Movement for Peace.
From 1949 to Stalin’s death ‘Peace’ was the centerpiece of Soviet cultural strategy.
Indeed, gathering these signatures was the Movements main activity, especially in France, where it had its strongest support.
The Communists’ attitude towards their mass movements was strictly instrumental—the Peace Movement was only ever a vehicle for Soviet policy, which is why it suddenly adopted the theme of ‘peaceful co-existence’ in 1951, taking its cue from a shift in Stalin’s international strategy.
Privately, Communists—especially in the eastern bloc—had little but scorn for the illusions of their fellow-travellers.
The Communists’ success in securing at least the conditional sympathy of many in Western Europe, and the great play that Communist parties in France and Italy especially made with their support among a cultural elite suspicious of America, prompted a belated but determined response from a group of Western intellectuals.
Worried that in the cultural battle Stalin would win by default, they set about establishing a cultural ‘front’ of their own.
The founding meeting of the Congress for Cultural Freedom was held in Berlin in June 1950.
The Congress was planned as a response to Moscow’s Peace Movement initiative of the previous year, but it coincided with the outbreak of war in Korea, which gave it added significance.
The Congress for Cultural Freedom was formed under the official patronage of Bertrand Russell, Benedetto Croce, John Dewey, Karl Jaspers and Jacques Maritain, the French Catholic philosopher.
Ayer, Margarete BuberNeumann, Ignazio Silone, Nicola Chiaromonte and Sidney Hook.
They, in turn, were assisted by a group of younger men, mostly American, who took responsibility for the day to day planning and administration of the CCF’s activities.
The CCF would eventually open up offices in thirty-five countries worldwide, but the focus of its attention was on Europe, and within Europe on France, Italy and Germany.
Encounter in Britain, Preuves in France, Tempo Presente in Italy and Der Monat in Germany.
None of these journals ever reached a large audience— Encounter, the most successful, boasted a circulation of 16,000 copies by 1958; in the same year Preuves had just 3,000 subscribers.
But their contents were of an almost unvaryingly high quality, their contributors were among the best writers of the post-war decades, and they filled a crucial niche—in France especially, where Preuves provided the only liberal, anti-Communist forum in a cultural landscape dominated by neutralist, pacifist, fellow-traveling or straightforwardly Communist periodicals.
The Congress and its many activities were publicly supported by the Ford Foundation and privately underwritten by the CIA—something of which nearly all its activists and contributors were quite unaware until it became public many years later.
The implications—that the United States government was covertly subsidizing antiCommunist cultural outlets in Europe—were perhaps not as serious as they appear in retrospect.
At a time when Communist and ‘front’ journals and all sorts of cultural products were covertly subsidized from Moscow, American backing would certainly not have embarrassed some of the CCF writers.
Arthur Koestler, Raymond Aron or Ignazio Silone did not need official American encouragement to take a hard line against Communism, and there is no evidence that their own critical views about the United States itself were ever toned down or censored to suit the paymasters in Washington.
The Soviet Union established its ‘Society for Cultural Relations with Foreign Nations’ in 1925; French, Germans and Italians had been actively underwriting overseas ‘cultural diplomacy’ since before 1914.
The Americans did not begin to budget for such activities until just before World War Two, and it was only in 1946, with the establishment of the Fulbright Program, that they entered the field seriously.
Until the autumn of 1947 American cultural and educational projects in Europe were directed towards ‘democratic reorientation’; only then did anti-Communism become the primary strategic goal.
By 1950 the United States Information Agency had taken overall charge of American cultural exchange and information programs in Europe.
Together with the Information Services Branch of the United States Occupation authorities in western Germany and Austria (which had full control of all media and cultural outlets in the United States Zone in these countries), the USIA was now in a position to exert huge influence in Western European cultural life.
By 1953, at the height of the Cold War, United States foreign cultural programs employed 13,000 people and cost $129 million, much of it spent on the battle for the hearts and minds of the intellectual elite of Western Europe.
Prominent Communist authors—Elsa Triolet, Louis Aragon—would travel to a variety of provincial cities to give talks, sign books and put on display the literary credentials of the Communist world.
But the point was not so much to sell books as to remind readers and others that Communists stood for culture—French culture.
The American response was to set up ‘America Houses’, with libraries and newspaper-reading rooms, and host lectures, meetings and English-language classes.
The study of English replaced French and the classical languages as the first choice of Austrian highschool students.
Like American-supported radio networks (Radio Free Europe was inaugurated in Munich one month after the outbreak of the Korean War), the America House programs were sometimes undermined by the crude propaganda imperatives emanating from Washington.
At the peak of the McCarthy years the directors of America Houses spent much of their time removing books from their shelves.
Among dozens of authors whose works were deemed inappropriate were not only the obvious suspects—John Dos Passos, Arthur Miller, Dashiell Hammett and Upton Sinclair—but also Albert Einstein, Thomas Mann, Alberto Moravia, Tom Paine and Henry Thoreau.
Fortunately for the West, American popular culture had an appeal that American political ineptitude could do little to tarnish.
Communists were at a severe disadvantage in that their official disapproval of decadent American jazz and American cinema closely echoed the views of Josef Goebbels.
While east European Communist states were banning jazz as decadent and alien, Radio Free Europe was broadcasting into eastern Europe three hours of popular music every weekday afternoon, interspersed with news on the hour for ten minutes.
Cinema, the other universal medium of the time, could be regulated in states under Communist control; but throughout western Europe the appeal of American films was universal.
The French in particular took this line, echoing the early post-war efforts of their diplomats to trace an international policy independent of American control.
Symptomatically, the head of the French Cultural Mission in occupied Berlin, Felix Lusset, got on much better with his Soviet counterpart than he did with the British or American representatives in the city and dreamed, like his masters in Paris, of a restored cultural axis reaching from Paris to Berlin and on to Leningrad.
The United States spent hundreds of millions of dollars trying to win over European sympathies, but many of the resulting publications and products were heavy-handed and counter-productive, merely confirming the European intelligentsia’s innate suspicions.
In Germany, America’s excessive attention to Communist crimes was seen by many as a deliberate ploy to forget or relativise the crimes of the Nazis.
In Italy the lurid anti-Communist campaigns of the Vatican undercut the anti-Stalinist arguments of Silone, Vittorini and others.
Everywhere except Italy the Communist vote fell steadily from the late 1940s, and—if opinion polls are to be believed—even those who did vote Communist often saw their vote either as a symbolic protest or else as an expression of class or communal solidarity.
Well before the cataclysms of 1956, when the sympathies of most European intellectuals would swing sharply away from the Soviet bloc, the Atlantic orientation of most other Western Europeans had been decided.
David Lodge ‘I spent my early years in factory towns and their adjacent suburbs, amid bricks and soot and smokestacks and cobbled streets.
My mother got up every morning in the chill and made a fire in the parlor stove.
My early classrooms featured pot-bellied stoves and double desks with inkwells, into which we dipped our nibs.
We boys wore short pants until the ceremony of communion solennelle, at age twelve.
In the same street the local grocery store—Sainsbury’s—had sawdust on the floor and was staffed by beefy men in striped shirts and sprightly young women in starched aprons and caps.
It looked exactly like the sepia photos on the wall taken when the store was first opened in the 1870s.
In many of its essential features, daily life in the first decade after World War Two would have been thoroughly familiar to men and women of fifty years earlier.
In these years coal still met nine-tenths of Britain’s fuel requirements, 82 percent of the needs of Belgium and the other countries of the new European Coal and Steel 'Luc Sante, The Factory of Facts ,27.
The British Prime Minister at the time, Winston Churchill, used to remind audiences that he had ridden in the last cavalry charge of the British Army—at Omdurman in the Sudan—in September 1898.
Thanks in part to the omnipresence of coal-fires London—a city of trams and docks—was still periodically shrouded in the damp fog so familiar from images of the industrial city of late-Victorian times.
British films from those years have a distinctly Edwardian feel—either in their social setting (e.g.
In The Man in a White Suit contemporary Manchester is depicted as nineteenth-century in all its essentials (hand carts, housing, social relations); bosses and union leaders concur in treating entrepreneurial amateurism as a moral virtue, whatever the price in productive efficiency.
The same sense of suspended time hung over much of continental Europe too.
Like French provincial towns, where men in berets really did collect a baguette on their way home from the corner Cafe de la Paix , or Spain, sealed in aspic by Franco’s authoritarian rule, Belgium and Britain hung in a sort of delayed Edwardian limbo.
Post-war Europe was still warmed by the fading embers of the nineteenth-century economic revolution that had almost run its course, leaving behind sedimentary evidence of cultural habits and social relations increasingly at odds with the new age of airplanes and atomic weapons.
The modernizing fervor of the 1920s and even the 1930s had drained away, leaving behind an older order of life.
In Italy, as in much of rural Europe, children still entered the job market upon completing their primary education; in 1951 only one Italian child in nine attended school past the age of thirteen.
Religion, especially the Catholic religion, basked in a brief Indian summer of restored authority.
In return the ecclesiastical hierarchy maintained and enforced the conservative conflation of religion with national identity.
At the thousands of memorial sites dedicated to victims of anti-clerical Republicanism, the Spanish Church organized countless ceremonies and memorials.
A judicious mix of religion, civic authority and victory commemoration reinforced the spiritual and mnemonic monopoly of the clerical hierarchy.
Because Franco needed Catholicism even more than the Church needed him—how else maintain Spain’s tenuous post-war links to the international community and the ‘West’?—he gave it, in effect, unrestricted scope to re-create in modern Spain the ‘Crusading’ spirit of the ancien regime.
Elsewhere in Western Europe the Catholic Church had to reckon with competing and hostile claims on popular allegiance; but even in Holland the Catholic hierarchy felt confident enough to excommunicate electors who voted for its Labour opponents in the first post-war elections.
As late as 1956, two years before the death of Pius XII marked the end of the old order, seven out of ten Italians regularly attended Sunday Mass.
As in Flanders, the Church in Italy did especially well among Monarchists, women and the elderly—a clear majority of the population as a whole.
In France, the Catholic hierarchy and its political supporters felt sufficiently confident to press for special educational privileges in a ‘guerre scolaire ’ that briefly echoed the church-state struggles of the 1880s.
The main battleground was the old issue of state funding for Catholic schools; a traditional demand but well chosen.
While the energy that had fuelled nineteenth-century anti-clericalism, in France as in Italy or Germany, had mostly dissolved, or else was channeled into updated ideological conflicts, the cost and quality of their children’s education was one of the few issues that could be counted on to mobilize even the most intermittent churchgoers.
Of Europe’s traditional religions, only the Catholics were increasing the number of their active constituents in the forties and fifties.
It was the Catholic Church’s association with the old order, indeed its firm stand against modernity and change, which gave it a special appeal in these transitional years.
The various Protestant churches of north-west Europe had no such allure.
In Germany a significant segment of the non-Catholic population was now under Communist rule; the standing of the German Evangelical churches was in any case somewhat diminished by their compromise with Hitler, as the Stuttgart Confession of Guilt by the Protestant leaders in 1945 half-conceded.
But the main problem, in West Germany as elsewhere, was that Protestant churches did not offer an alternative to the modern world but rather a way to live in harmony with it.
The spiritual authority of the Protestant pastor or the Anglican vicar was by convention offered not as a competitor to the state, but rather as its junior partner—which is one reason why the Protestant churches of central Europe were unable to withstand the pressure of the Communist state in these years.
But at a time when the West European state was embarking on a much enhanced role as the spiritual and material guardian of its citizens, the distinction between church and state as arbiters of public manners and morals became rather blurred.
The late forties and early fifties thus appear as a transitional age, in which conventions of social deference and claims of rank and authority still held sway, but where the modern state was beginning to displace church and even class as the arbiter of collective behavior.
The character of the age is nicely encapsulated in an instruction booklet ( BBC Variety Programmes.
Policy Guide for Writers and Producers , 1948) prepared by the BBC for internal use in 1948.
These terms—‘spivs’ and ‘drones’ for louche types and minor criminals, the ‘black market’ as an all-purpose term for traders and customers circumventing rationing and other restrictions—show how much Britain at least lived for some years in the shadow of the war.
Such strictures, and their accompanying note of high-collared, Edwardian-era reformism, were perhaps distinctive to Britain.
In school, in church, on state-run radio, in the confident, patronizing style of the broadsheet and even the tabloid press, and in the speech and dress of public figures, Europeans were still very much subject to the habits and regulations of an earlier time.
We have already noted how many of the political leaders of the age were men of another time—Britain’s Clement Attlee would not have been out of place in a Victorian mission to the industrial slums, and it was altogether fitting that the prime minister who oversaw Britain’s transition to a modern welfare state should have begun his public career performing good works in the East End of pre-World War One London.
Against this image of an older Europe—moving at the pace of earlier days, at once changed by the war and restrained by pre-war routines and habits —we must set the unmistakably modern form of its primary source of entertainment.
In Britain, cinema attendance peaked quite soon after the end of the war, with 1,700 million seats sold in the country’s five thousand cinemas in 1946.
Even in 1950, when attendance had already started to decline, the average English man or woman went to the cinema twenty-eight times a year, a figure that was nearly 40 percent higher than in the last year before the war.
Whereas the British cinema audience was to slip steadily through the fifties, in continental Europe it continued to grow.
One thousand new picture houses opened in France during the first half of the 1950s, about the same number in West Germany; in Italy three thousand new cinemas appeared, bringing the national total to some 10,000 by 1956.
Nor were those of West 6 But note that France had more publications devoted to cinema than the other two combined.
But by any other measure audiences were large indeed; as they were even in Spain, where cinema attendance per head of the adult population in 1947 was among the highest in Europe.
American domination of post-war European cinema did not come about through the vagaries of popular taste alone, however.
In general, American films were part of America’s appeal, and as such significant assets in the cultural Cold War.
Only intellectuals were likely to be sufficiently moved by Sergei Eisenstein’s depiction of Odessa in the Battleship Potemkin to translate their aesthetic appreciation into political affinity; but everyone—intellectuals included—could appreciate Humphrey Bogart.
However, American cinema’s drive into Europe was above all prompted by economic considerations.
United States films had always been exported to Europe and made money there.
But after World War Two American producers, squeezed between falling domestic cinema attendance and the rising cost of film-making, pressed especially hard for access to European markets.
As early as 1927 the UK Parliament had passed a law instituting a quota system, under which 20 percent of all films released in Britain by 1936 had to be British made.
After World War Two the British Government’s goal was to set this quota at 30 percent for 1948.
But heavy lobbying by Hollywood kept State Department pressure on European negotiators, and agreement to allow entry for United States films was part of every major bipartite trade deal or loan agreement reached by the United States and its European allies in the first post-war decade.
Thus, under the terms of the Blum-Byrnes accords of May 1946, the French government very reluctantly reduced its protectionist quota from 55 percent French-made films per annum to 30 percent—with the result that within a year domestic film production was halved.
The British Labour Government similarly failed to keep out United States imports.
Only Franco succeeded in restricting United States film imports into Spain (despite an attempted ‘boycott’ of the Spanish market by United States producers from 1955 to 1958), in large measure because he had no need to respond to public opinion or anticipate the political fall-out of his decisions.
But even in Spain, as we have seen, American movies vastly outnumbered home-grown products.
In time, then, European governments found themselves indirectly subsidizing Hollywood itself, via local intermediaries.
By 1952,40 percent of the United States film industry’s revenue was generated overseas, most of it in Europe.
As a result of American domination of the European market, the European films of this period are not always the most reliable guide to European filmgoers’ experience or sensibilities.
The British viewer especially was quite likely to form a sense of contemporary Englishness as much from Hollywood’s presentation of England as from his or her own direct experience.
It is a matter of some note that among the films of the forties, Mrs Miniver —a very English tale of domestic fortitude and endurance, of middle-class reticence and perseverance, set symptomatically around the disaster at Dunkirk where all these qualities were taken to be most on display—was a pure product of Hollywood.
Yet for the English generation that first saw it the film would long remain the truest representation of national memory and self-image.
They were well-made, usually on a canvas far beyond the resources of any European producer.
They were not, however, ‘escapist’ in the manner of 1930s ‘screwball’ comedies or romantic fantasies.
Their setting might be a detective story or social drama, but the mood—and cinematographic texture—were darker and more sombre than American films of earlier decades.
Their no-less-forgettable Italian and French equivalents were usually updated costume dramas, with peasants and aristocrats occasionally replaced by mechanics or businessmen.
The best European films of the post-war decade—those that later viewers can most readily appreciate—inevitably dealt in one way or another with the war.
Three of these films, Open City, Paisan and Germania anno zero were by Roberto Rossellini.
Together with Vittorio De Sica, who directed Sciuscia , Bicycle Thieves and Umberto D , Rossellini was responsible for the cycle of neorealist films made in the years 1945-52 that propelled Italian filmmakers to the front rank of international cinema.
Like one or two of the contemporary English comedies made at the Ealing Studios, notably Passport to Pimlico , the neorealist films took the damage and destruction of war, especially in the cities, as the setting and in some measure the subject for post-war cinema.
But even the best of the English films never approached the sombre humanism of the Italian masterpieces.
The simple ‘verities’ of these films reflect not so much the European world as it then was as that same world passed through the grid of wartime memories and myths.
Like other amusements of its era, cinema-going was a collective pleasure.
In small Italian towns the weekly film would be watched and commented on by most of the population, a public entertainment publicly discussed.
In England, at Saturday morning shows for children, songs were flashed on the screen, with the audience encouraged to sing along in harmony with a little white ball that bounced from word to word.
As members of the Odeon we all intend to be Good citizens when we grow up And champions of the Free.
The didactic tone was not representative—at least not in so overt a form—and would disappear within a few years.
Popular workingmen’s recreations like pigeon-raising, speedway and greyhound racing reached their peak in these years before entering upon a steady decline that accelerated from the later 1950s.
Boys still dressed like their grandfathers, except for the ubiquitous short trousers.
Christian Dior’s ‘New Look’ of February 1947—an aggressively indulgent style meant to contrast with wartime shortages of cloth, with ankle-length skirts, stuffed ‘leg of mutton’ shoulders and a plethora of bows and pleats—was favored, where they could afford it, by women of all ages; external appearance was still a function of class rather than age.
During the war, American7 Trevor Grundy, Memoir of a Fascist Childhood , page 19.
Most people of all ages in post-war Europe were chiefly concerned with making do.
At the beginning of the 1950s, one Italian family in four lived in poverty and most of the rest were little better off.
Less than one house in two had an indoor toilet, only one in eight boasted a bathroom.
But in West Germany in 1950 17 million of the country’s 47 million residents were still classed as ‘needy’, chiefly because they had nowhere to live.
The consumption patterns of post-war Europe reflected the continuing penury of the continent and the enduring impact of the Depression and the war.
Rationing continued longest in Britain, where bread rationing was introduced between July 1946 and July 1948, clothes coupons remained in force until 1949, the wartime utility clothing and furniture regime was not abandoned until 1952, and food rationing on meat and many other foods was not finally ended until the summer of 1954— though it was temporarily suspended for the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in June 1953, when everyone was allocated an extra pound of sugar and four ounces of margarine.
But even in France, where rationing (and therefore the black market) disappeared rather sooner, the wartime obsession with food supply did not abate until 1949 at the earliest.
Rationing in Eastern Europe was not abolished until 1953 in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Bulgaria; 1954 in Romania, 1957 in Albania and 1958 in East Germany.
Very few Europeans possessed a car or a fridge—working-class women in the UK, where the standard of living was higher than most countries on the continent, shopped twice a day for food, either on foot or by public transport, much as their mothers and grandmothers had done before them.
In many ways, Europe in the late 1940s and early 1950s was less open, less mobile and more insular than it had been in 1913.
It was certainly more dilapidated, and not just in Berlin, where only one quarter of the rubble of battle had been cleared by 1950.
Whereas in the United States by the end of the 1940s most industrial equipment was under five years old, in post-war France the average age of machinery was twenty years.
A typical French farmer produced food for five fellow Frenchmen; the American farmer was already producing at three times this rate.
Few Europeans in that time, well-informed or otherwise, anticipated the scale of change that was about to break upon them.
The experience of the past half-century had induced in many a skeptical pessimism.
In the years preceding World War One Europe was an optimistic continent whose statesmen and commentators looked to a confident future.
Thirty years on, after World War Two, people had their eyes firmly and nervously fixed upon the terrible past.
The implications of this could be discerned only vaguely at the time—in the failure of Fascist or Communist parties to cash in upon the difficulties of daily existence; in the way in which economics displaced politics as the goal and language of collective action; in the emergence of domestic recreations and domestic consumption in place of participation in public affairs.
For the first time in many years, Europeans were starting to have babies again.
In the UK the birthrate in 1949 was up by 11 percent on 1937; in France it had risen by an unprecedented 33 percent.
The implications of this remarkable burst of fertility, in a continent whose leading demographic marker since 1913 had been premature death, were momentous.
In more ways than most contemporaries could possibly have foreseen, a new Europe was being born.
Max Frisch ‘Because we have had our troops there, the Europeans had not done their share.
From 1945 until early 1953, Europeans lived, as we have seen, in the shadow of the Second World War and in anxious anticipation of a third.
The failed settlement of 1919 was still fresh in the minds of statesmen and public alike.
The imposition of Communism in Eastern Europe was a pointed reminder of the revolutionary instability that had followed World War One.
The Prague coup, the tensions in Berlin and the Korean War in the Far East seemed uncomfortably reminiscent of the serial international crises of the thirties.
In July 1951 the Western Allies had declared their ‘state of war’ with Germany to be over, but in the circumstances of a rapidly intensifying Cold War there was still no Peace Treaty, and little prospect of one to come.
Nor could anyone be confident that Fascism would not once again find fertile soil in the unresolved problem of Germany, or indeed anywhere else.
The expanding web of international alliances, agencies and accords offered little guarantee of international harmony.
With the benefit of hindsight we can now see that between them the Council of Europe, the European Coal and Steel Community, the European Payments Union and above all the North Atlantic Treaty Organization were the germ of a new and stable system of inter-state relations.
But at the time such documents, like the agencies that published them, rather closely resembled the well-meaning but doomed pacts and leagues of the 1920s.
Skeptical contemporaries could be forgiven for paying them little attention.
Nevertheless, with the death of Stalin and the end of the Korean War, Western Europe stumbled half unawares into a remarkable era of political stability.
For the first time in four decades the states of the continent’s western half were neither at war nor under the threat of imminent war, at least among themselves.
Communist parties everywhere except Italy began their slow retreat to the political margins.
And the threat of a Fascist revival no longer carried conviction, except perhaps at Communist political rallies.
Western Europeans owed their newfound well-being to the uncertainties of the Cold War.
The internationalization of political confrontations, and the consequent engagement of the United States, helped draw the sting from domestic political conflicts.
Political issues that in an earlier age would almost certainly have led to violence and war—the unresolved problem of Germany, territorial conflicts between Yugoslavia and Italy, the future of occupied Austria—were all contained, and would in due course be addressed, within the context of Great Power confrontations and negotiations over which Europeans had very little say.
Even after the panic of 1950 had subsided, and Western leaders recognized that Stalin had no immediate plans to ‘do a Korea’ in central Europe, the two sides were no closer to agreement.
But until all Germans were free to choose for themselves the political regime under which they would live, such reunification was not possible.
In the meantime the Federal Republic of Germany would be treated as the representative of all German citizens.
Unofficially , the Americans, like the West Europeans, were not at all unhappy to see Germany divided indefinitely.
In his last years Stalin continued to maintain the official Soviet stance, that Moscow sought a united Germany and would even be willing to accept that such a Germany be neutral, so long as it was unarmed.
In a series of Notes in the spring of 1952 Stalin proposed that the four occupying powers draw up a Peace Treaty aimed at establishing such a united Germany, neutral and demilitarized, with all occupying forces removed and its government chosen by free, all-German elections.
Historians have criticized Washington for its failure to take Stalin up on these proposals—a ‘missed opportunity’ to end the Cold War or at least to draw the sting from its most dangerous point of confrontation.
It is certainly true that Western leaders did not take Stalin’s Notes very seriously and refused to take the Soviet Union up on its offer.
The Soviet leaders themselves attached little importance to their own proposals and didn’t seriously expect the Americans, British and French to withdraw their occupying troops and allow a neutral, unarmed Germany to float loose in the middle of a divided continent.
If anything, Stalin and his successors were not unhappy to see a continuing American military presence on German soil; from the point of view of the Soviet leaders of this generation, the presence of United States troops in West Germany was one of the more reliable guarantees against German revanchism.
It was worth risking that guarantee in exchange for a demilitarized Germany in the Soviet shadow (an objective for which Moscow would happily have abandoned its East German clients and their Democratic Republic), but not for anything short of that.
What the Russians decidedly did not want at any price was a re-militarized West Germany.
The point of the Soviet demarches was not to reach an agreement with the West on German reunification, but to head off the impending prospect of German rearmament.
The Americans had raised the matter, a mere five years after Hitler’s defeat, as a direct consequence of the Korean War.
If Congress were to accede to the Truman Administration’s requests for increased military aid overseas, then America’s allies—Germans included—had to be seen to make their own contribution to their continent’s defense.
When the United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson first initiated discussions about German rearmament with Britain and France, in September 1950, the French vehemently opposed the idea.
In return for a German contribution to Western defense Bonn would insist upon full international recognition of the FRG and an amnesty for German war criminals held in Allied custody.
Anticipating some such deal being cut behind their back, the French pre-empted further discussion of a German military contribution to NATO by making a counter-proposal of their own.
In October 1950, Rene Pleven, the French Prime Minister, suggested that a European Defense Community be established, analogous to the Schuman Plan.
The Americans, like the British, were not happy with the idea but agreed to go along with it as a second-best solution to the problem of defending Europe.
The European Defense Community Treaty was accordingly signed on May 27th 1952, along with contingent documents affirming that once all the signatory countries had ratified the Treaty, the United States and Great Britain would cooperate fully with an EDF and that the military occupation of Germany would come to an end.
It was this accord that the Soviet Union had tried unsuccessfully to derail with its offers of a Peace Treaty demilitarizing Germany.
The West German Bundestag ratified the EDC Treaty in March 1953, and the Benelux countries followed suit.
It only remained for the French National Assembly to ratify the Treaty and Western Europe would have acquired something resembling a European army, with integrated and intermingled national contingents, including a German one.
France’s hesitations frustrated the Americans— at a NATO Council meeting in December 1953 John Foster Dulles, Eisenhower’s new Secretary of State, threatened an ‘agonising reappraisal’ of American policy if the EDC were to fail.
But even though the Pleven Plan was the brainchild of a French prime minister, public debate had revealed the extent of French reluctance to countenance German rearmament under any conditions.
The plan for a European Defense Community, and with it a re-armed Germany in a European army, was finished.
In private conversation with Belgian Foreign Minister Paul-Henri Spaak and Luxembourg Prime Minister Joseph Bech, a frustrated Adenauer attributed Mendes’s behavior to his ‘Jewishness’—for which he was, according to the German Chancellor, overcompensating by aligning himself with French nationalist sentiment.
The Korean War was over, Stalin was dead, NATO was a fixture on the international scene.
The French had successfully postponed the problem of European defense for a while but they could not put it off much longer.
Within a few weeks of the National Assembly vote on the EDC the Western Allied powers—the US, Britain and France—met twice, at hastily convened conferences in London and Paris.
At the initiative of the British foreign secretary Anthony Eden a set of proposals 3 —the so-called London Agreements—was rapidly approved which, when finalized in the subsequent Paris Treaties, were to form the basis of European defense policy for the next half century.
In return, the French would agree to allow the Federal Republic an army of no more than half a million men; and Germany would join NATO as a sovereign state.
When these treaties were ratified and went into effect, the German occupation statute would lapse and in all but name the Western Allies would have made formal peace with their erstwhile enemy.
Allied troops would remain in the Federal Republic to guard against German recidivism, but as part of a European presence and by mutual agreement.
The French were by no means unanimous in welcoming these new plans, but having shot down their own alternative proposals they were ill-placed to protest, even though West Germany achieved more generous terms 3 Based, according to Eden, on an idea dreamed up in his morning bath.
Not for the first time in international disputes over Germany, France was its own worst enemy.
Understandably, French support for the Paris Treaties was more than a little ambivalent.
On May 15th 1955, ten days after the formal incorporation of West Germany into NATO and the abolition of the Allied High Commission in the Federal Republic, the Soviet Union announced the formation of its Warsaw Pact.
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania and the Soviet Union formed an alliance of ‘friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance’ under a unified command.
Moscow abrogated its wartime treaties of alliance with Britain and France and, accepting the inevitable, asserted the full sovereignty of the East German Democratic Republic and incorporated it into the Warsaw Pact.
The German Question had not exactly been answered; but with both parts fully integrated into their respective international alliances it would now be set aside for a while, its place to be taken in due course by the still unresolved dilemma of the divided former capital, Berlin.
Now that the immediate future of Germany had been resolved, both sides hastened to address secondary conflicts and tensions.
The new men in the Kremlin, Nikita Khrushchev in particular, took seriously their own agenda for ‘peaceful coexistence’ in Europe and shared the American desire to minimize the risk of future confrontations.
The day after the Warsaw Pact was announced, the four occupying powers signed the Austrian State Treaty.
Austria was to be independent and neutral, attached neither to NATO nor the Warsaw Pact and free to choose its own path.
All four armies of occupation were to withdraw—though the Soviet Union, which had already extracted about $100 million from its Zone of Occupation in eastern Austria, secured a final pound of flesh in the form of an obligation on Austria to ‘buy out’ Soviet economic interests in the country’s eastern sector for a further $150 million.
Meanwhile, just to the south, Yugoslavia and Italy had agreed to end their standoff over Trieste.
In an agreement brokered by the Americans and the British in October 1954, the city of Trieste would remain with Italy while its surrounding hinterland, overwhelmingly populated by Slovenes, would revert to Yugoslavia.
The accords over Austria, Yugoslavia and Italy were made possible by a new mood of‘detente’ in European affairs, symbolized by the luly 1955 Summit Meet5 Austrian neutrality was not in the original text; it was inserted by the Austrian parliament during the debate over the State Treaty.
Beyond the atmospherics of friendly exchanges between Eisenhower, Khrushchev and Eden, the most important issue resolved at Geneva was the fate of some 10,000 German prisoners of war still in Soviet hands.
Meanwhile Germany’s small western neighbors also achieved some degree of closure with Bonn.
Without anyone actually saying so, the book was closing on the crimes and punishments of the European war and its aftermath.
These reassuring developments were unfolding against the backdrop of a major international arms race.
This paradox—that a peaceful European settlement was taking shape even as the two Great Powers of the day were arming themselves to the hilt and preparing for the eventuality of a thermonuclear war—was not so bizarre as it might appear.
The growing emphasis in United States and Soviet strategic thinking on nuclear weapons, and the intercontinental missiles with which to deliver them, released European states from the need to compete in an arena where they could not hope to match the resources of the superpowers, even though central Europe remained the most likely terrain over which any future war might be fought.
The United States’ nuclear arsenal had grown rapidly through the 1950s.
To deliver these bombs the United States Air Force had a fleet of forward-based B-29 bombers that grew from around 50 at the onset of the 1948 Berlin blockade to well over 1,000 five years later; the first intercontinental B-52 bombers entered service in June 1955.
Given the Soviet Union’s overwhelming advantage in manpower and conventional weapons in Europe, these airborne nuclear weapons were inevitably to become central to Washington’s strategy, especially following President Truman’s secret order of March 10th 1950 to accelerate development of a hydrogen bomb.
Truman’s decision was prompted by the Soviet Union’s successful test in August 1949 of a Soviet atomic bomb.
American battlefield nuclear weapons first began arriving in West Germany the following month; the next January Dulles announced Eisenhower’s ‘New Look’ policy.
In order for the Soviet Union to believe that the West might really fire them, the distinction between nuclear and conventional arms was to be abolished.
The coincidence of NATO’s nuclearization with the stabilization of the Continent was no accident.
From the Soviet point of view as well, conventional warfare in central and Western Europe was of diminishing strategic interest.
Moscow too was stockpiling nuclear weapons—starting with just 5 in 1950 it had built some 1,700 by the end of the decade.
But the chief Soviet emphasis was on developing the means to deliver them not on the European battlefield but across oceans, to compensate for American plans to base nuclear weapons in Germany, just a few hundred miles from Russia itself.
The notorious ‘missile gap’ of which John F Kennedy spoke when campaigning for the United States presidency in i960 was a myth, a successful exercise in Soviet propaganda; the same was true of widespread contemporary accounts of Soviet educational and technical superiority.
But the USSR certainly was expending great efforts on the development of its ballistic capabilities.
The first successful Soviet test of an intercontinental ballistic missile came in August 1957, five months ahead of the Americans.
Ballistic weapons—intercontinental missiles capable of delivering nuclear warheads from the Soviet hinterland to American targets—had considerable appeal for Nikita Khrushchev in particular.
They allowed Khrushchev to maintain good relations with heavy industry and the military while diverting resources to consumer goods production.
And they had the curious consequence, as both sides would come to appreciate, of making a major 6 The Americans were not the only ones panicked by displays of Soviet hardware.
In i960 the British Conservative Prime Minister Harold Macmillan privately concluded that ‘They are no longer frightened of aggression.
Nuclear weapons made both Moscow and Washington more belligerent in form—it was important to seem ready and willing to use them—but far more restrained in practice.
The United States was still trying to find a way to extricate itself from the European entanglement into which it had slipped despite its leaders’ best intentions.
It would no longer be necessary to envisage a huge American military presence indefinitely stationed in the heart of Europe—statesmen and military strategists alike looked forward to the day when Europe would be able to defend itself virtually alone, backed only by the firm promise of massive American nuclear retaliation in the event of a Soviet attack.
There are various reasons why the Americans were never able to realize their plans for quitting Europe.
Towards the end of the 1950s the United States was pressing the case for a European nuclear deterrent, under collective European command.
This was not because their governments were opposed in principle to nuclear weapons.
The British exploded their first plutonium bomb in the Australian desert in August 1952; fourteen months later the first British atomic bomb was delivered to the Royal Air Force.
The French also had an atomic weapons program, approved by Mendes-France in December 1954, although the first independent French bomb was not successfully exploded until February i960.
However, neither the British nor the French were willing to relinquish control of nuclear weapons to a European defense entity; the French especially were suspicious of any hint that the Americans might allow Germans access to a nuclear trigger.
The Americans reluctantly conceded that their presence in Europe was indispensable—which was just what their European allies wanted to hear.
A second issue binding the Americans to Europe was the problem of Berlin.
Thanks to the defeat of the blockade in 1948-49, the former capital of Germany re7 It was left unclear what say, if any, the British would have in their use.
Germans fleeing west could come to East Berlin from anywhere in the German Democratic Republic, make their way from the Russian Zone of occupation into the Western Zones and thence along the road and rail corridor linking West Berlin to the rest of the Federal Republic.
Once there, they were automatically entitled to citizenship in West Germany.
The journey was not entirely risk free, and refugees could bring only what they could carry; but neither consideration inhibited younger East Germans from undertaking it.
Between the spring of 1949 and August 1961 somewhere between 2. and 3 million East Germans went through Berlin to the West, around 16 percent of the country’s population.
Many of them were educated, professional men and women—East Germany’s future; but the numbers also included thousands of farmers who fled rural collectivization in 1952, and workers who abandoned the regime after the violent repression of June 1953.
Berlin’s curious status was thus a standing embarrassment and public-relations disaster for East Germany’s Communist regime.
The situation in Berlin had its uses for Moscow, of course, as for others—the city had become the primary listening post and spy center of the Cold War; some 70 different agencies were operating there by 1961, and it was in Berlin that Soviet espionage agencies scored some of their greatest successes.
However, now that the Soviet leaders had accepted the division of Germany and elevated the eastern zone into a fully fledged sovereign state, they could not continue indefinitely to ignore the steady haemorrhage of its human resources.
Nevertheless, when Moscow did once again direct international attention to Berlin and generate a three-year international crisis over the city’s status, it was not out of consideration for the wounded sensibilities of the East German rulers.
By 1958 the Soviet Union was once again worried that the Americans might be planning to arm their West German clients, this time with nuclear weapons.
This, as we have seen, was not an entirely unreasonable fear—it was, after all, shared by some West Europeans.
And so Khrushchev set out to use Berlin—a city to whose fate the Russians were otherwise indifferent—as a lever to block the nuclearization of Bonn, about which they felt very strongly indeed.
The imperialists have turned the German question into an abiding source of international tension.
The time has obviously arrived for the signatories of the Potsdam Agreement to give up the remnants of the occupation regime in Berlin and thereby make it possible to create a normal situation in the capital of the German Democratic Republic.
The Soviet Union, for its part, would hand over to the sovereign German Democratic Republic the functions in Berlin that are still exercised by Soviet agencies.
If they did so, the credibility of their general commitment to the defense of Western Europe would be seriously dented, and neutralist, anti-nuclear sentiment in West Germany and elsewhere would probably grow.
But even if the Western powers insisted on staying put in Berlin, the USSR might be able to exchange its consent to this for a firm Western commitment to deny Bonn any nuclear weapons.
When Western leaders refused any concessions over Berlin, claiming that the Soviet Union itself had broken its Potsdam undertakings by integrating East Berlin fully into the government and institutions of the East German state before any final Treaty had been agreed, Khrushchev tried again.
Following an unsuccessful series of foreign ministers’ discussions in Geneva in the summer of 1959, he repeated his demands, first in i960 and then again in June 1961.
Otherwise the Soviet Union would unilaterally withdraw from Berlin, conclude a separate Peace Treaty with the GDR and leave the West to negotiate the fate of its zones of occupation with an independent East German state.
From November 1958 through the summer of 1961 the crisis over Berlin simmered, diplomatic nerves frayed and the exodus of East Germans grew to a flood.
Khrushchev’s June 1961 ultimatum was delivered at a summit meeting with John F Kennedy, the new American President, held in Vienna.
In his talks with Kennedy, Khrushchev threatened to ‘liquidate’ Western rights in Berlin if there was no settlement there by the end of the year.
In public Kennedy, like Eisenhower before him, took a hard line, insisting that the West would never abandon its commitments.
The Americans—unlike their West German clients—accepted the reality of an East German state, and understood Soviet anxiety over the aggressive tone of recent speeches by Adenauer and, especially, his Defense Minister Franz Josef Strauss.
Shortly after Kennedy returned to Washington, the East German authorities began imposing travel restrictions on would-be emigrants.
In direct response, the United States President publicly re-asserted the Western commitment to West Berlin—thereby implicitly conceding that the city’s eastern half was in the Soviet sphere of influence.
After the Allied foreign ministers, meeting in Paris on August 6th, rejected yet another Soviet note threatening a separate Peace Treaty with the GDR if a settlement was not reached, Moscow authorized the East Germans to draw a line, literally, separating the two sides once and for all.
On August 19th 1961 the East Berlin authorities set soldiers and workmen to the task of building a partition across the city.
Within three days a rough wall had been erected, sufficient to foreclose casual movement between the two halves of Berlin.
Searchlights, barbed wire and guard posts were added; the doors and windows of buildings abutting the wall were first blocked off, and then bricked up.
Streets and squares were cut in half and all communications across the divided city were subjected to close policing or else broken off altogether.
For three days in October 1961 Soviet and American tanks confronted one another across the checkpoint separating their respective zones—one of the last remaining links between them—as the East German authorities tested the Western powers’ willingness to affirm and assert their continuing right of access to the eastern zone in keeping with the original FourPower Agreement.
Faced with the intransigence of the local American military commander—who refused to recognize any East German right to impede Allied ’Kennedy’s remark was not only confidential at the time, it was even kept out of the documents from the summit meeting when they were first published thirty years later.
Behind the scenes many Western leaders were secretly relieved at the appearance of the Wall.
For three years Berlin had threatened to be the flashpoint for an international confrontation, just as it had been in 1948.
The outcome of the Berlin crisis showed that the two Great Powers had more in common than they sometimes appreciated.
If Moscow undertook not to raise again the question of Allied status in Berlin, Washington would accept the reality of East German government there and would resist West German pressure for nuclear weapons.
Both sides had an interest in stability in central Europe; but more to the point, the United States and the USSR were both tired of responding to the demands and complaints of their respective German clients.
The first decade of the Cold War had given German politicians on either side of the divide unparalleled leverage over their patrons in Washington and Moscow.
Moscow, which as we have seen had never set out to establish a client state in the eastern zone of occupied Germany, but had settled for it as a second best, devoted inordinate effort to shoring up a weak and unloved Communist regime in Berlin.
The East German Communists in their turn were always half-afraid that their Soviet patrons would sell them out.
The Wall thus offered them some reassurance, although they were disappointed by Khrushchev’s refusal to keep pressing for a Peace Treaty once the barrier had gone up.
As for Bonn, the longstanding fear there was that the ‘Amis’ would just get up and walk away.
Washington had always bent over backwards to reassure Bonn that it had America’s unswerving support, but after the Wall went up and the Americans conspicuously acquiesced, West German anxiety only increased.
Hence the reiterated post-Wall promises from Washington that the United States would never quit their zone—the background to Kennedy’s famous ‘Ich bin ein Berliner’ {sic) declaration in June 1963.
With 250,000 troops in Europe by 1963, the Americans like the Russians were clearly there for the duration.
The Wall ended Berlin’s career as the crisis zone of world and European affairs.
When the Cuba crisis broke out the following year, Kennedy and his advisers were convinced that Khrushchev was engaged in a complex, Machiavellian ploy to achieve his longstanding German objectives.
Just as Truman and Acheson had seen the Korean incursion as a possible prelude to a Soviet probe across the divided frontier of Germany, so Kennedy and his colleagues saw in the missile emplacements in Cuba a Soviet device to blackmail a vulnerable America into giving way in Berlin.
Hardly an hour passed during the first ten days of the Cuba crisis without American leaders reverting to the subject of West Berlin, and the need to ‘neutralize’ Khrushchev’s anticipated countermove in the divided city.
The problem was that Kennedy had taken recent Soviet bluster and propaganda all too seriously and built his understanding of US-Soviet relations around the Berlin question.
And when we recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe, and recognize the importance of our allies to us, that’s what has made this thing be a dilemma for these days.
The Soviet Union had indeed maintained a vast superiority of conventional forces in Europe and could have occupied West Berlin any time it wished.
But now that the United States had sworn to defend the freedom of West Berlin by all means , Khrushchev had no intention of risking nuclear war for Germany.
On June 20th 1963 a ‘hotline’ was established between Washington and Moscow; a month later talks in Moscow between the US, the Soviet Union and the UK culminated in a Limited Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty.
This Treaty, which came into force on October 10th, had considerable significance for Europe—less because of its overt objectives than on account of the ‘sub-text’ underlying it.
Both great powers wanted to keep nuclear weapons out of the hands of China and West Germany and this was the real purpose of the Treaty.
The promise of a non-nuclear Germany was the quid pro quo Moscow sought for the Berlin compromise; that is why the Americans were willing to court unpopularity in Bonn in order to achieve it.
The West Germans somewhat resentfully accepted the veto on German nuclear arms, just as they had accepted the division of Berlin, as the price of a continued American presence.
Meanwhile the Treaty confirmed a distinct shift in Soviet strategic concerns, away from Europe and towards other continents.
The stabilization of the Cold War in Europe, the reduced likelihood of it ever becoming ‘hot’, and the fact that these matters lay largely out of their hands, induced among West Europeans the rather comfortable conviction that conventional armed conflict was obsolete.
If war were to come, the huge nuclear arsenals of the Great Powers meant that it must surely entail unimaginably terrible consequences, and could only therefore be the result of a miscalculation on someone’s part.
In that case, there would be very little that Europeans could do to mitigate the consequences.
Among a minority, the same evidence inspired movements calling urgently for nuclear disarmament.
The British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was launched in London on February 17th 1958.
At its peak, in 1962, the CND was able to turn out 150,000 supporters on the annual protest march to the Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston.
But, together with like-minded disarmament movements in West Germany and the Benelux countries, the British campaign shriveled in the course of the sixties.
The anti-nuclear campaigners lost their relevance after the Test Ban Treaty; it was increasingly difficult to claim with any credibility that Europe faced imminent annihilation and new topics had displaced disarmament from the radical agenda.
The French were somewhat less overwhelmingly abolitionist, while Germans and British were divided, though with a clear anti-nuclear majority in each case.
But in contrast with the fraught debates over disarmament of the 1920s and early ’30s, the nuclear question in Europe did not move people much.
Only the British and the French had nuclear arms, and of the others only a minority of the West German political establishment sought them.
Italians, Danes and the Dutch worried on occasion about having United States bases on their soil, which exposed them to danger should a war break out.
But the weapons that caused concern belonged to the superpowers; and most Europeans, reasonably enough, concluded that they could do nothing to influence decisions made in Moscow and Washington.
Indeed, the hard ideological edge of American Cold War rhetoric allowed many in Western Europe, once the immediate threat of nuclear war had passed, to tell themselves that they were in effect doing the United States a favor by allowing it to defend them.
And so, rather than engage one way or the other in debates over disarmament, they cultivated their gardens instead.
The most remarkable aspect of the European political scene in the 1950s was not the changes it saw but the changes it didntsee.
The re-emergence in post-war Europe of self-governing democratic states—with neither the means nor the desire to make war, and led by elderly men whose common if unstated political creed was ‘No experiments’—came as something of a surprise.
Notwithstanding widespread expectations to the contrary, the political temperature of Western Europe retreated from the fevered heights of the past forty years.
With the calamities of the recent past still fresh in public memory, most Europeans turned away with relief from the politics of mass mobilization.
Unlike Europe’s other Mediterranean states—Portugal, Spain and Greece—Italy became a democracy, however imperfect, and remained a democracy throughout the post-war decades.
Indeed, its very existence as a country had long been a controversial issue—and would become so again in later years.
This was especially true of those—the overwhelming majority of the population in those years—who did not have a secondary-school education.
Carlo Levi, a doctor from Piedmont exiled by Mussolini as punishment for his activities in the Resistance, recorded similar observations in Christ Stopped in Eboli , his classic account of life in a remote village in the barren uplands of southern Italy.
A parliamentary enquiry of 1954 revealed that 85 percent of Italy’s poorest families lived south of Rome.
A rural laborer in Apulia, in south-eastern Italy, could expect to earn at best half the wages of his counterpart in the province of Lombardy.
Taking the average Italian per capita income in that year to be 100, the figure for Piedmont, in Italy’s wealthy North-West, was 174; that of Calabria, in the far South, just 52.
In the Mezzogiorno the social and administrative structures inherited from the Fascists thus survived unscathed the bloodless coup that replaced Mussolini by one of his generals.
To the longstanding political and economic contrasts between northern and southern Italy were now added markedly different memories from the war.
In August 1950 the Italian Parliament established a Cassa per il Mezzogiorno , a Southern Fund, to channel national wealth to the impoverished South.
In itself this was not a new idea—efforts by Rome to address the poverty and hopelessness of the South date back at least to the reform-minded early-twentieth-century governments of Giovanni Giolitti.
But previous efforts had achieved little and the only effective solution to the woes of Italy’s southerners was still, as it had been ever since the birth of modern Italy, emigration.
However, the Cassa represented a far greater commitment of resources than any previous plan and had a better prospect of success because it fitted rather well into the core political mechanisms of the new Italian republic.
Whatever the economic arguments against such a strategy (its roots lay partly in the inter-war Fascist drive for economic autarky), its social and political advantages were clear.
At the beginning of the 1950s the IRI employed 216,000 people; other agencies, including the many branches of the national bureaucracy, employed hundreds of thousands more.
The opportunities that these arrangements afforded for corruption and crime were considerable; here too the Republic sat squarely in a tradition dating from the early years of the unified state.
Whoever controlled the Italian state was peculiarly well placed to dispense favors, directly and indirectly.
Politics in post-war Italy, then, whatever their patina of religious or ideological fervor, were primarily a struggle to occupy the state, to gain access to its levers of privilege and patronage.
And when it came to securing and operating these levers, the Christian Democrats under Alcide De Gasperi and his successors demonstrated unmatched skill and enterprise.
In coalition with small parties of the Center they ran the country without interruption until 1963, when they switched to a partnership with the minority parties of the nonCommunist Left.
Here it was not faith but services that drew smalltown voters to the Christian Democrats and kept them loyal for generations.
Christian Democracy in Italy resembled in many respects similar parties in West Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium.
To be sure, De Gasperi and his successors took care to meet regularly with the Vatican authorities and never to propose or support any legislation of which the Vatican dis258 THE POLITICS OF STABILITY approved; post-war Italy was in some respects the Church’s moment of revenge for the aggressively anti-clerical secularism of the new Italian state after 1861.
But the active role of the Catholic Church in Italian politics was smaller than both its defenders and its critics liked to assert.
The main vehicle for social control was the powerful central ministries—it is significant that De Gasperi, like the Communist parties of eastern Europe in the immediate post-war years, took care to keep the Interior Ministry securely under CD direction.
In time, the clientelistic system of patronage and favors put in place by the Christian Democrats came to characterize national Italian politics as a whole.
If there was a difference, it lay in the Communists’ emphasis upon the propriety and honesty of their municipal administration, in contrast with the widely acknowledged corruption and rumored Mafia links of the CD municipalities of the South.
In the 1950s, large-scale corruption was a nearmonopoly of Christian Democrats; in later decades the Socialists who governed the great cities of the North emulated them with considerable success.
Over time whole areas of public and civic activity were carved up de facto into political families.
Control and employment at newspapers and radio—later television—were divided among Christian Democrats, Socialists and Communists; occasional allowance was made for the somewhat shrunken constituency of old-school anti-clerical liberals.
Jobs and favors were created and delivered proportional to local, regional and national political clout.
Every social organism from trade unions to sporting clubs was split among Christian Democrat, Socialist, Communist, Republican and Liberal variants.
From the point of view of Economic Man the system was grossly wasteful, and inimical to private initiative and fiscal efficiency.
The Italian ‘economic miracle’ (as we shall see) happened in spite of it rather than because of it.
Italy’s post-war stability was the crucial permissive condition for the country’s economic performance and subsequent social transformation.
And that stability rested, paradoxical as it may appear, upon the rather peculiar institutional arrangements just described.
This distinctly un-democratic outcome has led historians to treat the Italian political system with some disdain.
The opportunities for graft, bribery, corruption, political favoritism and plain robbery were extensive and they worked above all to the advantage of the virtual one-party monopoly of the Christian Democrats.
Yet under the umbrella of these arrangements, state and society in Italy proved remarkably resilient in the face of inherited challenges and new ones ahead.
When measured by the standards of Canada or Denmark, Italy in the 1950s might appear wanting in public probity and institutional transparency.
But by the standards of Italy’s strife-ridden national past, or by those prevailing in the other states of Mediterranean Europe with which the country was traditionally compared, Italy had taken a remarkable leap forward.
In important respects Italy’s condition after the war stood comparison with that of Austria.
Like Italy, Austria was a poor and unstable country whose post-war renaissance could hardly have been predicted from her recent past.
The country’s two dominant political groupings had spent the inter-war years in bitter conflict.
Most Austrian Social Democrats had regarded the emergence in 1918 of a truncated Austrian state out of the ruins of the Habsburg Empire as an economic and political nonsense.
In their view the German-speaking remnant of the old Dual Monarchy ought logically to have joined its fellow Germans in an Anschluss , and would have done so had the selfdetermination clauses of the Versailles agreements been applied consistently.
The Austrian Left had always received its strongest backing from working-class Vienna and the urban centers of eastern Austria.
During the inter-war years of the First Austrian Republic, most of the rest of the country—rural, Alpine and deeply Catholic—voted for the Christian Socials, a provincial and conservative party suspicious of change and outsiders.
Unlike the Social Democrats, the Christian Socials had no pan-German urge to be absorbed into an urban and mostly Protestant Germany.
But nor did they have any sympathy for the Social Democratic policies of the Viennese workers’ movement; in 1934 a coup engineered by the Right destroyed the Social Democrats’ bastion in ‘Red Vienna’ and with it Austrian democracy.
From 1934 until the Nazi invasion Austria was ruled by an authoritarian clericalist regime in which the Catholic party exercised a monopoly of power.
The legacy of Austria’s first, unhappy experience with democracy lay heavily on ,3 Though in the light of Italy’s earlier history it is not entirely fair to lay the blame for the country’s institutional corruption on American foreign policy.
What this obscured, however, was their erstwhile enthusiasm for the Anschluss.
Dr Karl Renner, the Socialist leader and first president of the independent Republic established by the Austrian State Treaty of 1955, had maintained his principled enthusiasm for a union of Austria and Germany as late as 1938.
Both parties thus had an interest in putting the past behind them—we have seen what became of initial attempts at de-Nazification in post-war Austria.
These uniquely narrow margins recalled the similarly close elections of the inter-war Republic.
Catholic Austria and Socialist Austria thus faced the renewed prospect of parliamentary politics degenerating into a cultural civil war.
Even with the help of a third party—the Liberals, who depended to an embarrassing extent on the vote of ex-Nazis, and whose vote in any case fell steadily at each election— neither Austrian party could hope to form a stable government, and any controversial legislation would risk resurrecting bitter memories.
In part this was due to the uncomfortable proximity of the Red Army, occupying Lower Austria until 1955 and thence withdrawn just a few kilometers to the east—a reminder that Austria’s neighbors now included three Communist states and that the country’s vulnerable location made it prudent to pursue conciliatory and uncontentious policies at home and abroad.
In addition, the Cold War assigned Austria an identity by association—as Western, free, democratic—that it might have been hard put to generate from within.
But the main source of Austria’s successful post-war political settlement lay in the widely acknowledged need to avoid ideological confrontations of the sort that had torn the country apart before the war.
The solution on which the country’s leaders settled was to eliminate the very possibility of confrontation by running the country in permanent tandem.
In public administration—which in post-war Austria comprised all public services, most of the media and much of the economy, from banking to logging—a similar division of responsibilities was reached, known as Proporz.
At almost every level jobs were filled, by agreement, with candidates proposed by one of the two dominant parties.
Over time this system of ‘jobs for the boys’ reached deep into Austrian life, forming a chain of interlocking patrons and clients who settled virtually every argument either by negotiation or else through the exchange of favors and appointments.
Labor disputes were handled by arbitration rather than confrontation, as the bi-cephalous state sought to head off dissent by incorporating contending parties into its shared system of benefits and rewards.
The unprecedented prosperity of these years allowed the Grand Coalition to paper over disagreements or conflicts of interest and, in effect, purchase the consensus on which the country’s equilibrium rested.
Some groups in Austrian society were inevitably left out—small shopkeepers, independent artisans, isolated farmers, anyone whose work or awkward opinions placed them outside the grid of allocated benefits and positions.
And in districts where one or other side had an overwhelming advantage, proportionality would sometimes be ignored in favor of a monopoly of posts and favors for members of that party.
But the pressure to avoid confrontation usually triumphed over local self-interest.
Just as Austria’s newfound neutrality was enthusiastically adopted as the country’s identity tag, displacing awkward memories of more contentious identities from the past—‘Habsburg’, ‘German’, ‘Socialist’, ‘Christian’—so the postideological implications of government-by-coalition and administration-by -Proporz came to define Austrian public life.
And Italy, too, was administered through a system of favors and jobs that bore a certain resemblance to Proporz, albeit skewed heavily to the advantage of one side.
If Italy paid a price for political stability in an ultimately intolerable level of public corruption, the cost to Austrians was less tangible but just as pernicious.
A Western diplomat once described post-war Austria as ‘an opera sung by the understudies’, and the point is well taken.
As a result of the First World War Vienna lost its raison d’etre as an imperial capital; in the course of Nazi occupation and the Second World War the city lost its Jews, a significant proportion of its most educated and cosmopolitan citizens.
Once the Russians left in 1955, Vienna lacked even the louche appeal of divided Berlin.
Indeed, the measure of Austria’s remarkable success in overcoming its troubled past was that to many visitors its most distinctive feature was its reassuringly humdrum quality.
Behind the tranquil appeal of an increasingly prosperous ‘Alpine Republic’, however, Austria too was corrupt in its own way.
Like Italy, it won its newfound security at the price of a measure of national forgetting.
But whereas most other European countries—Italy especially—could boast at least a myth of national resistance to the occupying Germans, Austrians could not plausibly put their wartime experience to any such service.
And unlike the West Germans, they had not been constrained to acknowledge, at least in public, the crimes they had committed or allowed.
In a curious way Austria resembled East Germany, and not only in the rather monotonously bureaucratic quality of its civic facilities.
Both countries were arbitrary geographical expressions whose post-war public life rested on a tacit agreement to fabricate for common consumption a flattering new identity—except that the exercise proved considerably more successful in the Austrian case.
A reform-minded Christian Democrat party, a parliamentary Left, a broad consensus not to press inherited ideological or cultural divisions to the point of political polarization and destabilization, and a de-politicized citizenry; these were the distinctive traits of the post-World War Two settlement in Western Europe.
In various configurations the Italian or Austrian pattern can be traced almost everywhere.
In the Benelux countries the various constitutive communities (Catholics and Protestants in Holland, Walloons and Flemings in Belgium) had long been organized into separate community-based structures —zuilen or pillars —that encompassed most human activities.
Catholics in predominantly Protestant Holland not only prayed differently and attended a different church from their Protestant fel15 On the eve of the 1938 Anschluss there were 189,000 Jews in Vienna.
Of Dutch Catholic children in 1959,90 percent attended Catholic elementary schools; 95 percent of Dutch Catholic farmers in that same year belonged to Catholic farmers’ unions.
Catholics traveled, swam, cycled and played football in Catholic organizations; they were insured by Catholic societies, and when the time came they were of course buried separately as well.
Similar lifelong distinctions shaped the routines of Dutch-speakers in northern Belgium and marked them off absolutely from the French-speakers of Wallonia, even though in this case both communities were overwhelmingly Catholic.
Appropriately enough, the smaller Liberal tendency in both countries was less emphatically communitarian.
The experience of war and occupation, and the memory of contentious civic divisions in earlier decades, encouraged a greater tendency towards cooperation across these communitarian divides.
The more extreme movements, notably the Flemish nationalists, were discredited by their opportunistic collaboration with the Nazis; and in general the war served to diminish people’s identification with the established political parties, though not with the community services associated with them.
The Catholic parties of the Benelux countries were moderately reformist in rhetoric and functioned very much like Christian Democrat parties elsewhere— to protect the interests of the Catholic community, colonize government at every level from state to municipality, and make provision through the state for the needs of their broad social constituency.
Both of these approximated more closely to the northern European model of a trade union-based labor movement than to the Mediterranean socialist parties with their more radicalised heritage and frequently anti-clerical rhetoric, and they evinced only limited discomfort in competing for power with the Catholics.
Belgium especially had seen serious political violence in the 1930s when the Flemish separatists and Leon Degrelle’s Fascist Rexistes had between them threatened the parliamentary regime, and the country would experience a new and even more disruptive bout of intercommunity strife beginning in the 1960s.
But the old political and administrative elites , whose rule had been briefly threatened in 1945, regained their power while allowing considerable latitude for welfare and other reforms.
The pillars thus survived into the 1960s—anachronistic echoes of a pre-political age that lasted just long enough to serve as cultural and institutional stabilizers during a period of hectic economic transformation.
The most dramatic instance of political stabilization in post-war Europe, and certainly the most important, is also in retrospect the least surprising.
By the time it joined NATO in 1955, the Federal Republic of Germany was already well on the way to the Wirtschaftswunder for which it liked to be known.
But the Bonn Republic was even more noteworthy for its success in wrongfooting the many observers in both camps who had anticipated the worst.
Under Konrad Adenauer’s direction West Germany had navigated safely between the Scylla of neo-Nazism and the Charybdis of philo-Soviet neutralism, and was anchored securely within the Western alliance, despite the misgivings of critics at home and abroad.
The institutions of post-war Germany were deliberately shaped so as to minimize the risk of a re-run of Weimar.
Some of these, like Bavaria or Schleswig-Holstein, corresponded to once-independent German states that had been absorbed into Imperial Germany in the course of the nineteenth century.
Others, like Rhineland-Westphalia in the north-west, were administrative conveniences that combined or bisected older territorial units.
The powers of the central government were on the one hand considerably restricted when compared to those of its predecessors—the Western Allies blamed the rise of Hitler upon the Prussian tradition of authoritarian government and set out to prevent any recurrence.
On the other hand, the Bundestag could not casually unseat a Chancellor and his government once elected; to do so they were obliged to have ready in advance a candidate for the succession with sufficient parliamentary votes to assure his success.
This concern to deflect or contain conflict shaped the whole public culture of the Bonn Republic.
Under a CoDetermination Law of 1951, large firms in the heavy industries of coal, steel and iron were obliged to include employee representatives on their supervisory boards, a practice that was later extended to other sectors and smaller businesses.
The Federal Government and the Lander were active in many economic sectors; and, despite objecting in principle to nationalized monopolies, the Christian Democratic-run state of the fifties owned or controlled 40 percent of all coal and iron production, two-thirds of electricity-generating plants, three quarters of aluminium manufacturing and, crucially, a majority of German banks.
The decentralization of power, in other words, did not mean hands-off government.
By maintaining an active economic presence either directly or indirectly , West German regional and national governments were in a position to encourage policies and practices conducive to social peace as well as private profit.
Banks, acting as intermediaries between government and the businesses on whose boards bankers typically sat, played a crucial role.
Older German economic practices returned, notably price-setting and consensual marketsharing.
At the local level especially there had been very little stripping out of Nazi-era bureaucrats, businessmen or bankers, and by the later 1950s much of the West German economy was run in a manner that would have been familiar to the giant trusts and cartels of earlier decades.
This de facto corporatism was not perhaps what its American overseers had in mind for the new German republic—trusts and their powers were widely believed to have contributed to the rise of Hitler and were anyway inimical to the free market.
Had the economist Ludwig Erhard—leader of the Free Democrats, Germany’s third political party—got his way, the West German economy and with it West German social relations might have looked quite different.
But regulated markets and close government-business relations sat comfortably in the Christian Democratic schema, both on general social principles and from pragmatic calculation.
Trade unions and business groups cooperated for the most part—the economic cake grew fast enough in these years for most demands to be accommodated without conflict.
The Christian Democrat Union ruled without interruption from the first FRG elections in 1949 until 1966; until Konrad Adenauer resigned in 1963 at the age of 87, he had unbroken charge of the affairs of the Bonn Republic.
There were various reasons why the CDU, with Adenauer as Chancellor, enjoyed such a long period of continuous power.
In Bavaria, where conservative Catholics constituted the overwhelming majority of the voters, the local Christian Social Union had an impregnable power base and used it to secure for itself a permanent place as junior coalition partner in the Adenauer governments.
Adenauer himself was old enough to remember the early years of the Wilhelminian Empire when the Catholic Church had been the target of Bismarck’s Kulturkampfi he was wary of profiting excessively from the new balance of forces and thereby risking renewed conflict around the relations of church and state, especially in the aftermath of the German churches’ distinctly un-heroic record under the Nazis.
From the outset, therefore, he sought to make of his party a nationwide Christian electoral vehicle rather than an exclusively Catholic one, emphasizing the socially ecumenical appeal of Christian Democracy.
A related reason for the success of the CDU/CSU alliance (between them the two parties would always henceforth secure 44 percent or more of the national vote) was that, like the Christian Democrats in Italy, it appealed to a broad electorate.
The Bavarian Christian Socials, like their homologues in the Low Countries, had a restricted appeal, attracting votes from a conservative, church-going community in a single region.
In this way, Germany’s Christian Democrats established a trans-regional, crossdenominational base in German politics.
They could count on votes from the countryside and the towns, from employers and from workers.
Whereas the Italian Christian Democrats colonized the state, in Germany the CDU colonized the issues.
On economic policy, on social services and welfare, and especially on the still sensitive topics of the East-West divide and the fate of Germany’s many expellees, the CDU under Adenauer was firmly entrenched as an umbrella party of the majority center—a new departure in German political culture.
On the face of things, the SPD ought to have been better placed, even allowing for the loss of traditionally Socialist voters in northern and eastern Germany.
The Socialist leader Kurt Schumacher, on the other hand, had been a resolute anti-Nazi from the outset.
Arrested in July 1933 he spent most of the next twelve years in concentration camps, which permanently damaged his health and shortened his life.
Gaunt and stooped, Schumacher, with his personal heroism and his unswerving insistence after the war on Germany’s obligation to acknowledge its crimes, was not just the natural leader of the Socialists but the only national politician in postwar Germany who might have provided his fellow Germans with a clear moral compass.
But Schumacher, for all his many qualities, was curiously slow to grasp the new international regime in Europe.
Born in Kreisstadt, in Prussia, he was reluctant to abandon the prospect of a united, neutral Germany.
He disliked and distrusted Communists and had no illusions about them; but he seems seriously to have believed that a demilitarized Germany would be left in peace to determine its fate, and that such circumstances would be propitious for the Socialists.
He was thus virulently opposed to Adenauer’s Western orientation and his apparent willingness to countenance an indefinite division of Germany.
For the Socialists, the restoration of a sovereign, unified and politically neutral Germany must take precedence over all international entanglements.
Schumacher was particularly aroused by Adenauer’s enthusiasm for the project of West European integration.
The trouble was that Schumacher’s Social Democrats had nothing practical to offer instead.
But by the mid-fifties, with West Germany firmly tied into the Western Alliance and the incipient project of European union, and with the Socialists’ doom-laden economic prophecies demonstrably falsified, the SPD was stymied.
In the elections of 1953 and 1957 the Socialist vote increased only slightly and their share of the electorate stagnated.
Only in 1959, seven years after Schumacher’s premature death, did a new generation of German Socialists formally abandon the party’s seventy-year-old commitment to Marxism and make a virtue of the necessity of compromise with West German reality.
The function of Marxism in post-war German socialism had only ever been rhetorical—the SPD had ceased to harbor genuinely revolutionary am268 THE POLITICS OF STABILITY bitions by 1914 at the latest, if indeed it ever really had any.
But the decision to relinquish the ageing formulas of Socialist maximalism also released Germany’s Socialists to adapt the substance of their thinking.
Although many remained unhappy with Germany’s role in the new European Economic Community, they did reconcile themselves both to Germany’s participation in the Western Alliance and to the need to become a cross-class Volkspartei —rather than rely on their working-class core—if they were ever seriously to challenge Adenauer’s monopoly of power.
But they would pay an ironic price for this improvement in their prospects.
So long as Germany’s Social Democrats maintained their principled opposition to most of Adenauer’s policies, they contributed inadvertently to the political stability of the West German Republic.
The SPD thus had a monopoly on the political Left and absorbed within itself whatever youthful and radical dissent there was at the time.
But once it joined the Christian Democrats in office and adopted a moderate and reformist agenda, the SPD lost the allegiance of the far Left.
A space would now open up outside parliament for a new and destabilizing generation of political radicals.
West Germany’s political leaders did not need to worry about the rise of a direct successor to the Nazis, since any such party was explicitly banned under the Basic Law of the Republic.
There were, however, many millions of former Nazi voters, most of them divided among the various parties of the mainstream.
Of the approximately thirteen million German expellees, nearly nine million had initially settled in the western zones; by the mid-1960s, with the steady flow of refugees west through Berlin, a further 1. million Germans expelled from the eastern lands had arrived in West Germany.
Predominantly small farmers, shopkeepers and businessmen, the Vertriebene were too numerous to ignore—as ‘ethnic Germans’ their rights as citizens and refugees were enshrined in the 1949 Basic Law.
In addition to the Vertriebene there were the many millions of war veterans— even more after Khrushchev agreed to return the remaining POWs in 1955.
Any suggestion that Germany, and especially the German armed forces, had behaved in ways that precipitated or justified their suffering was angrily dismissed.
In the early years of the Federal Republic there were some indications that these sentiments might translate into a significant political backlash.
Already at the 1949 elections 48 parliamentary seats—three times as many as the Communists and almost as many as the Free Democrats—went to various populist parties of the nationalist Right.
The following year, in nearby Lower Saxony, a Sozialistische Reichspartei — appealing to a similar constituency—scored 11 percent.
It was with this by no means insignificant constituency in mind that Konrad Adenauer took great care to avoid direct criticisms of the recent German past, and explicitly blamed the Soviet Union and the Western Allies for Germany’s continuing problems, especially those resulting from the Potsdam accords.
To assuage the demands of refugees and their supporters, Adenauer and the CDU kept a hard fine towards the East.
In international relations Bonn insisted that Germany’s 1937 frontiers remain legally in force until a final Peace Conference.
Bonn’s rigidity was demonstrated in 1957 when Adenauer broke off diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia after Tito recognized East Germany.
For the next ten years Germany’s relations with eastern Europe were effectively frozen.
In domestic affairs, in addition to devoting considerable resources to helping the refugees, returning prisoners and their families integrate into West German society, the governments of the nineteen-fifties encouraged a distinctly uncritical approach to Germany’s recent past.
In 1955 the Foreign Ministry formally protested against the showing at that year’s Cannes Film Festival of Alain Resnais’s documentary Night and Fog.
Until 1957 the West German Ministry of the Interior banned any screenings of Wolfgang Staudte’s film of Heinrich Mann’s Der Untertan —objecting to its suggestion that authoritarianism in Germany had deep historical roots.
This might seem to confirm the view that post-war Germany was suffering from a massive dose of collective amnesia; but the reality was more complex.
Throughout the fifties West German officialdom encouraged a comfortable view of the German past in which the Wehrmacht was heroic, while Nazis were in a minority and had been properly punished.
In the course of a series of amnesties, hitherto-imprisoned war criminals were steadily released back into civilian life.
Meanwhile, most of the worst German war crimes—those committed in the East and in the camps—were never investigated.
Although a Central Office of Land Justice Departments was set up in Stuttgart in 1956, local prosecutors studiously failed to pursue any investigations until 1963, when Bonn began to pressure them to do so—and to greater effect after 1965, when the Federal Government extended the twenty-year statute of limitations on murder.
On the one hand he clearly felt that a prudent silence was better than a provocative public recital of the truth—Germans of that generation were too morally compromised for democracy to work, except at this price.
Unlike Schumacher, who spoke publicly and movingly of the sufferings of the Jews at German hands, or the German President Theodor Heuss, who declared at Bergen-Belsen in November 1952 that ‘Diese Scham nimmt uns niemand ab,’ lS Adenauer said very little on the subject.
Indeed, he only ever spoke of Jewish victims, never of German perpetrators.
On the other hand, he acknowledged the irresistible pressure to make restitution.
In September 1952 Adenauer reached agreement with Israeli Prime Minister Moshe Sharett to pay to Jewish survivors what would amount, through the years, to over DM100 billion.
A further 29 percent acknowledged that Germany owed some restitution to the Jewish people.
The rest were divided between those who thought that only people ‘who really committed something’ were responsible and should pay, and those who 17 To which Resnais responded, ‘Naturally I hadn’t realized that the National Socialist regime would be represented at Cannes.
In order to get the agreement approved Adenauer depended on the votes of his Social Democratic opponents.
On more than one occasion Adenauer exploited widespread international nervousness over a possible Nazi revival in Germany to nudge West Germany’s allies in the direction he wanted them to move.
If the Western Allies wanted German cooperation in European defense, he suggested, then they had better abstain from criticizing German behaviour or evoking troubled pasts.
If they wanted to head off domestic backlash, then they should stand firm with Adenauer in rejecting Soviet plans for East Germany.
And so they allowed him considerable leeway, accepting his insistence that only he stood between them and a far less amenable alternative, and his claim to need foreign concessions if he was to head off trouble at home.
In a similar vein General Ridgeway, Eisenhower’s successor as Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, asked Allied High Commissioners in 1953 to pardon all German officers previously convicted of war crimes on the Eastern Front.
Adenauer’s behaviour did not endear him to his interlocutors—Dean Acheson in particular rather resented Bonn’s insistence on setting conditions before agreeing to join the community of civilized nations, as though West Germany were doing the victorious Western Allies a favor.
But on those rare occasions when Washington or London displayed their frustration in public, or whenever there was any suggestion that they might be talking to Moscow behind Bonn’s back, Adenauer was quick to turn the situation to political advantage—reminding German voters of the fickleness of Germany’s allies and of how he alone could be counted upon to look after the national interest.
Domestic support for German rearmament was not especially strong in the 1950s, and the creation of a new West German army, the Bundeswehr, in 1956—a mere eleven years after the defeat—did not arouse widespread enthusiasm.
Even Adenauer himself had been ambivalent, insisting—with what was by his lights a modicum of sincerity—that he was responding to international pressure.
Given that the most likely trigger for a Third World War in Europe was the German situation itself, these aspirations may seem curious.
But it was one of the oddities of post-war West Germany that their country’s privileged position as a de facto American protectorate was for some of its citizens as much a source of resentment as of security.
And such sentiments were only strengthened when it became clear from the later fifties that a war in Germany might see the use of battlefield nuclear weapons—under the exclusive control of others.
Back in 1956 Adenauer had warned that the Federal Republic could not remain a nuclear protectorate’ forever.
When it became clear in the early 1960s that the Western Allies had come to terms with Moscow on this sensitive subject, and that between them they would never allow Germany access to nuclear weapons, he was furious.
For a brief period it seemed as though the Bonn Republic’s allegiance to Washington might be transferred to De Gaulle’s Paris, with whom it was bound by a common resentment at high-handed Anglo-American treatment and a shared suspicion that the United States was wriggling free of obligations to its European clients.
Certainly, the French desire for an independent nuclear deterrent offered a tempting precedent to West Germany, one that De Gaulle skillfully exploited in his efforts to wean Bonn away from its American friends.
And the following week he translated that ‘sympathy’ into a Treaty of Franco-German friendship.
As for De Gaulle, he of all people harbored no illusions about the Germans.
In any event, however cool their relations, no West German leader dared break with Washington for the sake of an illusory French alternative.
But after the initial relief at having been ‘liberated’ by the West had worn off, other feelings surfaced.
The hard post-war years of the Allied occupation contrasted unfavorably with life under the Nazis.
During the Cold War some blamed America for putting Germany at the center of ‘its’ conflict with the Soviet Union and exposing the country to risk.
And West Germany’s growing prominence on the eastern edge of the Western alliance subliminally recalled Nazi Germany’s selfassigned role as Europe’s cultural bulwark facing down the Asiatic Soviet hordes.
Moreover the Americanising of West Germany—and the omnipresence of foreign occupiers—contrasted revealingly with the sanitized Germany of popular desires, nourished in the early fifties especially on a diet of nostalgic domestic films.
These, the so-called ‘ Heimat ’ cinema, were typically set in the mountain landscapes of southern Germany and featured tales of love, loyalty and community, in period or regional costume.
Shamelessly kitschy, these hugely popular entertainments were often close copies of Nazi-era films, sometimes with identical titles (e.g.
And their very timelessness carried comforting intimations of a country and people free not just of occupiers from East and West but clean, too, of guilt and undefiled by Germany’s recent past.
The Heimat films reflected the provinciality and conservatism of the early Federal Republic, a heartfelt desire to be left alone.
This demobilization of Germans was perhaps facilitated by the disproportionate presence of women among the adult population.
In the first post-war census of 1950, one-third of all West German households were headed by a divorced woman or a widow.
As in Britain or France, only more so, family and domestic concerns were uppermost in the public mind.
The adoption of substitute public goals to replace the discredited ambitions of the past was quite deliberate.
West Germany was distinctive in that it alone stood to recover its sovereignty by joining international organizations; and the idea of Europe could itself substitute for the void opened up in German public life by the evisceration of German nationalism— as Schuman explicitly hoped that it would.
For the intellectual and political elites, this diversion of energies proved effective.
But for the woman in the street, the real substitute for the old politics was not the new‘Europe’ but the business of surviving—and prospering.
And so it did, faster and to greater effect than Churchill could have dared to hope.
Making, saving, getting and spending became not just the primary activity of most West Germans, but also the publicly affirmed and approved purpose of national life.
Reflecting many years later on this curious collective transformation, and on the concentrated zeal with which the citizens of the Federal Republic went about their work, the writer Hans Magnus Enzensberger observed that ‘one cannot understand the puzzling energy of the Germans if one resists the idea that they have turned their defects into virtues.
Internationally condemned after Hitler’s fall for blindly obeying immoral orders, Germans thus turned the defect of their industrious obedience into a national virtue.
The shattering impact of their country’s total defeat and subsequent occupation made West Germans amenable to the imposition of democracy in a way that few could have imagined a decade earlier.
In place of the ‘devotion for its rulers’ that Heine had first observed in the German people a century before, Germans in the nineteen-fifties attracted international respect for their similarly wholehearted devotion to efficiency, detail, and quality in the manufacture of finished products.
Well into the nineteen-sixties, many Germans over sixty years old—which included almost everyone in a position of authority—still thought that life had been better under the Kaiser.
But in view of what had followed, the security and tranquility afforded them by the passive routines of daily life in the Federal Republic were more than acceptable as a substitute.
The ‘skeptical generation’—men and women born in the last days of the Weimar Republic, and thus old enough to have experienced Nazism but young enough to bear no responsibility for its crimes—were particularly mistrustful of the newfound German order.
For men like the writer Gunther Grass, or the social theorist Jurgen Habermas, both born in 1927, West Germany was a democracy without democrats.
Its citizens had vaulted with shocking ease from Hitler to consumerism; they had salved their guilty memories by growing prosperous.
In the German turn away from politics towards private accumulation, Grass and others saw a denial of civic responsibilities past and present.
Habermas would later be closely identified with the search for Verfassungspatriotism , the only sort of national sentiment that he felt it appropriate—and prudent—to encourage in his countrymen.
But as early as 1953 he came to public attention for an article in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung attacking Martin Heidegger for allowing his Heidelberg lectures to be republished with the original allusions to the ‘inner greatness’ of Nazism.
At the time the incident was isolated—it aroused little international attention.
But it put down a marker all the same, foreshadowing the bitter interrogations of a later decade.
In his 1978 film The Marriage of Maria Braun , Rainer Werner Fassbinder (born in 1945) acidly dissects the serial defects of the Federal Republic as they appeared to its youthful critics.
Maria then devotes herself with unflinching single-mindedness to the national preoccupation with making money, at which she proves strikingly adept.
Along the way the heroine, her initial vulnerability now encrusted with cynicism, exploits the resources, affections and credulity of men—including a American soldier—while remaining ‘loyal’ to Hermann, her German soldier-husband incarcerated in the Soviet Union and whose wartime exploits are left studiously vague.
All Maria’s relations, achievements and comforts are measured in cash, culminating in a new, gadget-filled house into which she plans to welcome her restored husband.
Meanwhile the radio acclaims hysterically West Germany’s victory in the 1954 football World Cup.
For Fassbinder and a coming generation of angrily dissenting West Germans, the newfound qualities of the new Germany in its new Europe—prosperity, compromise, political demobilization and a tacit agreement not to arouse the sleeping dogs of national memory—did not deflect attention from the old defects.
Dean Acheson, speech at West Point, December5th 1962 ‘This is Imre Nagy, chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Hungarian People’s Republic, speaking.
In the early hours of this morning, the Soviet troops launched an attack against our capital city with the obvious intention of overthrowing the lawful, democratic, Hungarian Government.
Josip Broz Tito, November 11th 1956 At the close of the Second World War, the peoples of Western Europe—who were hard put to govern or even feed themselves—continued to rule much of the nonEuropean world.
This unseemly paradox, whose implications were not lost on indigenous elites in the European colonies, had perverse consequences.
To many in Britain, France or the Netherlands, their countries’ colonies and imperial holdings in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Americas were balm for the suffering and humiliations of the war in Europe; they had demonstrated their material value in that war as vital national resources.
Without access to the far-flung territory, supplies and men that came with colonies, the British and French especially would have been at an even greater disadvantage in their struggle with Germany and Japan than they already were.
The names of colonial and dominion cities, rivers and political figures were as familiar as those of Great Britain itself.
The British had lost their ‘first’ empire in North America; its successor, if not exactly acquired in ‘a fit of absent-mindedness’, was anything but the product of design.
It cost a lot to police, service and administer; and—like the French imperium in North Africa—it was most fervently appreciated and defended by a small settler class of farmers and ranchers, in places like Kenya or Rhodesia.
The ‘white’ dominions—Canada, Australia, New Zealand—and South Africa were independent; but their formal allegiance to the Crown, their affective ties to Britain, the food and raw materials they could supply and their armed forces were regarded as national assets in all but name.
British holdings in East Africa— like the various British-controlled territories and ports in the Middle East and around the Arabian peninsula and the Indian Ocean—were esteemed above all as adjuncts to Britain’s main imperial asset: India, which at the time included what would later become Pakistan and Bangladesh, as well as Sri Lanka and Burma.
All the European empires had been acquired sporadically, episodically and (with the exception of the land and sea routes servicing British India) with little sustained attention to logistic consistency or economic gain.
The Spanish had already lost most of their empire, first to the British, later to demands for independence from their own settlers, most recently to the rising power of the United States—a source of lingering anti-American sentiment in Spain, then and now.
What remained were mere enclaves in Morocco and Equatorial Guinea, to be abandoned by Franco between 1956 and 1968.
Thus neither the British, nor any of the other remaining European colonial powers, anticipated the imminent collapse of their holdings or influence overseas.
As the British historian Eric Hobsbawm has attested, the end of the European colonial empires seemed very far off in 1939 even to students at a seminar for young Communists from Britain and her colonies.
Even in i960, well after the worldwide movement towards independence had gathered steam, 70 percent of the world’s gross output and 80 percent of the economic value added in manufacturing industry came from Western Europe and North America.
Tiny Portugal—smallest and poorest of the European colonial powers— extracted raw materials at highly favorable prices from its colonies in Angola and Mozambique; these also offered a captive market for Portuguese exports, otherwise internationally uncompetitive.
Thus Mozambique grew cotton for the Portuguese commodity market rather than food for its people, a distortion that issued in sizeable profits and regular local famines.
In these circumstances and despite unsuccessful revolts in the colonies and military coups at home, Portugese decolonization was postponed as long as possible.
Even if the European states could manage without their empires, few at the time could conceive of the colonies themselves surviving alone, unsupported by foreign rule.
Even liberals and socialists who favored autonomy and eventual independence for Europe’s overseas subjects expected it to be many years before such goals would be realized.
The world war, however, had wrought greater changes in the colonies than most Europeans yet understood.
Britain had lost its East Asian territories to Japanese occupation during the war, and although these territories were recovered after the defeat of Japan the standing of the old colonial power had been radically undermined.
The British surrender in Singapore in February 1942 was a humiliation from which the British Empire in Asia never recovered.
Even though British forces were able to prevent Burma and thence India falling to the Japanese, the myth of European invincibility was shattered for good.
After 1945 the colonial powers in Asia would face growing pressure to relinquish their traditional claims.
For the Netherlands, the oldest colonial power in the region, the consequences were particularly traumatic.
The Dutch East Indies, and the trading company that had developed them, were part of the national myth, a direct link to the Golden Age and a symbol of Dutch commercial and seafaring glory.
The ensuing guerilla war lasted for four years and cost the Netherlands more than 3,000 military and civilian casualties.
Indonesian independence, unilaterally asserted by the nationalist leader Sukarno on November 17th 1945, was finally conceded by the Dutch authorities at a conference in The Hague, in December 1949.
By the end of 1957, when President Sukarno closed Indonesia to Dutch businessmen, Dutch ‘repatriates’ numbered many tens of thousands.
The experience of decolonization had an embittering effect on Dutch public life, already hard hit by the war and its sufferings.
Many ex-colonials and their friends pressed what became known as ‘the Myth of Good Rule’, blaming the Left for the Dutch failure to reassert colonial authority following the interregnum of Japanese occupation.
On the other hand conscripted soldiers were just glad to be home in one piece, after a colonial war of which no-one was proud, in which many felt that military success had been impeded by UN insistence on a negotiated transfer of power, and that was very quickly consigned to a national memory hole.
World War Two had demonstrated that the Netherlands could not stand aside from international affairs, particularly those of its large neighbors, and the loss of Indonesia was a timely reminder of the country’s real standing as a small and vulnerable European state.
Making a virtue of necessity, the Dutch retooled as ultra-enthusiastic proponents of European economic and later political integration.
But the process did not just happen painlessly, nor was it an overnight switch in the collective sensibilities of the nation.
Until the spring of 1951, the military calculations and expenditures of post-war Dutch governments were targeted not for European defense (despite Dutch participation in the Brussels Pact and NATO) but to hold on to the colonies.
Only slowly, and with some suppressed regret, did Dutch politicians pay undivided attention to European affairs and abandon their ancient priorities.
The same was true, in varying degrees, of all the colonial and ex-colonial powers of Western Europe.
American scholars, projecting the experience and preoccupations of Washington onto the rest of the West, sometimes miss this distinctive feature of post-World War Two Europe.
In the United States, the Cold War was what mattered and foreign and domestic priorities and rhetoric reflected this.
National independence movements were the strategic headache for much of the 1950s, not Moscow and its ambitions—though in some cases the two overlapped.
The French Empire, like the British, had benefited from the re-distribution after 1919 of Asian and African holdings seized from the defeated Central Powers.
Thus in 1945 liberated France ruled once again over Syria and Lebanon, as well as substantial swaths of sub-Saharan Africa and some island holdings in the Caribbean and the Pacific.
In French history texts, however, the place of colonies was perhaps more ambiguous than across the English Channel—in part because France was a Republic in which imperial dominion had no natural place, in part because so many of France’s early conquests had long since been taken over by English-speaking rulers.
In 1950 there were still millions of French men and women who remembered the ‘Fashoda Incident’ of 1898, when France backed down from a confrontation with Britain over control of Egypt, Sudan and the Upper Nile.
To speak of Empire in France was to be reminded of defeat as well as victory.
On the other hand French schoolchildren were insistently presented with the image of‘France’ itself as a trans-oceanic continuum, a place in which the civic and cultural attributes of Frenchness were open to all; where elementary schools from Saigon to Dakar taught about ‘nos ancetres les Gallois ’ and proclaimed—if only in principle—the virtues of a seamless cultural assimilation that would have been quite unthinkable to the administrators of British, Dutch, Belgian, Spanish or Portugese colonies.
Only in France could the metropolitan authorities seriously treat their most valued colonial possessions not as foreign soil but as administrative extensions of France itself.
During the war, the French, like the British and Dutch, had lost their prized South-East Asian colonies to the Japanese.
But in the French case the Japanese occupation came late—until March 1945 French Indo-China remained under the tutelage of the Vichy authorities—and was anyway incomparably less traumatic than France’s own defeat at home in 1940.
In Africa, De Gaulle had re-established France’s presence at the Brazzaville Conference of early February 1944.
What exactly De Gaulle meant is—as so often—unclear, perhaps deliberately so.
But he was certainly understood to be referring to colonial emancipation and eventual autonomy.
French public opinion was not inhospitable to colonial reforms—Andre Gide’s excoriation of forced labor practices in his Voyage au Congo had raised pre-war public awareness of European crimes in central Africa—while the Americans were making ominously anti-colonial noises.
United States Secretary of State Cordell Hull had recently spoken approvingly of the prospect of international control for the less advanced European colonies and early self-government for the rest.
Reformist talk in impoverished, isolated francophone Africa was cheap, especially before metropolitan France itself was even liberated.
Within two weeks British forces began to arrive in the southern city of Saigon, followed a month later by the French.
Meanwhile the northern districts of Vietnam, hitherto under Chinese control, were restored to the French in February 1946.
At this point there was a serious prospect of negotiated autonomy or independence, as the authorities in Paris opened talks with nationalist representatives.
But on June 1st 1946 the French admiral and local plenipotentiary Thierry d’Argenlieu unilaterally proclaimed the separation of Cochin China (the southern part of the country) from the nationalist-dominated north, sabotaging his own government’s tentative efforts to reach a compromise and breaking off government conversations with Ho.
By the autumn of that same year the French had bombed Haiphong harbor, the nationalist Vietminh had attacked the French in Hanoi and the first Vietnam War had begun.
France’s post-war struggle to re-establish its authority in Indo-China was a po3 According to some sources, De Gaulle discouraged open talk of colonial self-government lest European settlers, notably in Algeria, seize the occasion to secede from France and establish a segregationist state, on the South African model.
Ho Chi Minh received double credit among the French domestic Left, as a fighter for national independence and as a Communist revolutionary—two identities as inextricably intertwined in his own thinking as they were in his burnished international image.
Sending young men to fight and die in a ‘dirty war’ in Indo-China made little sense to most French voters; and letting Hanoi take over was not obviously more ill-advised than supporting the palpably inadequate Bao Dai, whom the French established as the country’s new ‘emperor’ in March 1949.
The French officer corps, on the other hand, was certainly keen to pursue the struggle in Vietnam; there, as later in Algeria, France’s martial heritage (or what remained of it) seemed at stake and the French High Command had a point to prove.
But the French economy could never have sustained a long drawn out war in a farflung colony without significant external aid.
In effect, the USA underwrote post-war French economic modernization while France dedicated its own scarce resources to the war.
Starting in July of that year the United States sharply increased its military assistance to French forces in South-East Asia.
Of all the European states France, by 1953, was by far the most dependent on United States support, in cash and kind alike.
Only in 1954 did Washington call a halt, rejecting increasingly desperate French pleas for airborne help to save the doomed French garrison at Dien Bien Phu.
After nearly eight years of fruitless and bloody struggle, it was clear to Washington not merely that the French could not re-establish their former authority in Indo-China, but that they were no match for Ho Chi Minh’s regular and guerilla forces.
In America’s view the French had frittered their money away and were an increasingly risky investment.
When Dien Bien Phu surrendered on May 7th 1954 and the French requested a cease-fire, no-one was surprised.
The fall of French Indo-China precipitated the collapse of the last of the French coalition governments that had tried to hold it, and the succession to the premiership of Pierre Mend£s-France.
Led by ‘PMF’ the French negotiated an agreement, signed at Geneva on July 21st 1954, under whose terms France withdrew 4 For friend and foe alike, Ho Chi Minh’s incarnation as an international Communist icon was confirmed on January 14th 1950, when Mao and Stalin were the first to recognize his newly declared Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
Those elections were never held, and the burden of sustaining the southern half of France’s former colony now fell to the Americans alone.
Unlike the Dutch, the French had not been in the region very long; and even though America paid for the first Vietnam War , it was French soldiers who fought and died there.
French politicians of the Right in particular castigated Mendes-France and his predecessors for their failure to prosecute the war more effectively, but no-one had anything better to propose and almost all were secretly pleased to put Vietnam behind them.
Only the French Army—or more precisely the professional officer corps—harbored continuing grievances.
Some younger officers, notably those who had first served in the Resistance or with the Free French and acquired there the habit of independent political judgment, began to nourish inchoate but dangerous resentments.
Once again, they murmured, French troops in the field had been ill served by their political masters in Paris.
In one respect this was almost literally true—the Algerian insurrection began on November ist 1954, just fourteen weeks after the signing of the Geneva accords.
But North Africa had been at the center of Parisian concerns long since.
Ever since the French first arrived in present-day Algeria in 1830, the colony there had been part of a larger French ambition, dating back further still, to dominate Saharan Africa from the Atlantic to Suez.
Thwarted in the east by the British, the French had settled instead for primacy in the western Mediterranean and across the Sahara into westcentral Africa.
Outside of the far older settlement in Quebec, and some islands of the Caribbean, Northern Africa was the only French colony in which Europeans had established themselves permanently in large numbers.
But many of the Europeans were not French in origin but rather Spanish, Italian, Greek or something else.
Even an emblematically French Algerian like Albert Camus was part-Spanish, part-French; and his French forebears were very recent arrivals.
It was a long time since France had had an excess of people; and unlike Russia, Poland, Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scandinavia, Germany, Ireland, Scotland (and even England), France had not been a land of emigrants for many generations.
Nevertheless, if there was a France-outside-France it was in Algeria—confirmed, as we have seen, by Algeria’s technical presence inside France as part of the metropolitan administrative structure.
The closest analogy elsewhere was Ulster, another overseas enclave in a former colony, institutionally incorporated into the ‘mainland’ and with a long-established settler community for whom the attachment to the imperial heartland mattered far more than it did to the metropolitan majority.
No French government except Leon Blum’s short-lived Popular Front of 1936 paid serious attention to the grievous mis-rule practiced by colonial administrators in French North Africa.
Moderate Algerian nationalists like Ferhat Abbas were well known to French politicians and intellectuals before and after World War Two, but no-one really expected Paris to concede their modest goals of self-government or ‘home rule’ any time soon.
The government of liberated France showed little concern for Arab sentiment, and when this indifference resulted in an uprising in the Kabylia region east of Algiers in May 1945, the insurgents were uncompromisingly crushed.
By the time these years of pent-up anger and thwarted expectations culminated in the outbreak of organized insurrection, on November 1st 1954, compromise was no longer on the agenda.
The Algerian FLN —Front de Liberation Nationale —was led by a younger generation of Arab nationalists who scorned the moderate, Francophile strategies of their elders.
Their objective was not ‘home rule’ or reform but independence, a goal that successive French governments could not contemplate.
The new Socialist government of Guy Mollet granted independence in March 1956 to the neighboring French colonies of Tunisia and Morocco—the first surrender of colonial power on the African continent.
But when Mollet visited Algiers, a crowd of European settlers pelted him with rotten fruit.
Paris was caught between the implacable demands of the clandestine FLN and the refusal of Algeria’s European residents, now led by a Committee for the Defense of French Algeria , to accept any compromise with their Arab neighbors.
The French strategy, if it merits the name, was now to defeat the FLN by force before putting pressure on the settlers to accept political reforms and some power-sharing measures.
Both sides regularly resorted to intimidation, torture, murder and outright terrorism.
After a particularly gruesome series of Arab assassinations and European reprisals in December 1956, Mollet’s political representative Robert Lacoste gave French paratroop colonel Jacques Massu a free hand to destroy the nationalist insurgents in Algiers by whatever means necessary.
The Arab population paid a terrible price, but the reputation of France was irrevocably sullied.
And the European settlers remained as suspicious as ever of Paris’s long-term intentions.
In February 1958 the newly installed government of Felix Gaillard was embarrassed by the French air force’s bombing of Sakhiet, a town across the border in Tunisia suspected of serving as a base for Algerian nationalists.
The resulting international outcry, and offers of Anglo-American ‘good offices’ to help solve the Algerian imbroglio, led to growing fears among the Europeans of Algeria that Paris was planning to abandon them.
Policemen and soldiers in Paris and Algiers began openly to demonstrate their sympathy for the settlers’ cause.
The Gaillard government, France’s third in eleven months, resigned on April 15th.
Ten days later there was a huge demonstration in Algiers demanding the preservation in perpetuity of French Algeria and the return to power of De Gaulle; the organizers of the gathering formed themselves into a Committee of Public Safety, provocatively echoing the French Revolutionary institution of the same name.
On May 15th, forty-eight hours after yet another French government, led by Pierre Pfimlin, had been inaugurated in Paris, General Raoul Salan—the French military commander in Algeria—shouted out De Gaulle’s name to a cheering crowd in the Forum in Algiers.
De Gaulle himself, who had been conspicuously silent since retreating from public life to his home village of Colombey in eastern France, reappeared in public to address a press conference on May 19th.
Armed rebels seized control of the island of Corsica and Paris was gripped by rumours of imminent paratroop landings.
On May 28th Pfimlin resigned and President Rene Coty called upon De Gaulle to form a government.
Without even pretending to demur, De Gaulle took office on June 1st and was voted full powers by the National Assembly the following day.
The new French Prime Minister had indeed understood his Algerian supporters, better than they knew.
But among De Gaulle’s many distinctive traits was an unwavering appreciation for order and legitimacy.
The hero of the Free French, the implacable critic of Vichy, the man who had restored the credibility of the French state after August 1944 was no friend of the Algerian rebels , much less the free-thinking insurrectionary young officers who had taken their part.
His second and related objective was to resolve the Algerian conflict that had so dramatically undermined it.
Within a year it was clear that Paris and Algiers were on a collision course.
International opinion was increasingly favorable to the FLN and its demand for independence.
He had already established a ‘Communaute Fran^aise’ as the first step towards a ‘commonwealth’ of France’s former colonies.
South of the Sahara, formal independence would be granted rapidly to French-educated elites of countries that were far too weak to stand alone and would thus be utterly dependent on France for decades to come.
In September 1959, just one year after coming to power, the French President proposed ‘self-determination’ for Algeria.
Infuriated by what they regarded as evidence of a coming sell-out, officers and settlers in Algeria began planning a full-scale revolt.
In January i960 barricades went up in Algiers and ‘ultra-patriots’ shot at French gendarmes.
But the revolt collapsed in the face of De Gaulle’s intransigence and unreliable senior officers (including Massu and his superior, General Maurice Challe) were carefully re-assigned away from Algeria.
The chief victim of the coup was the morale and the international image of the French Army.
An overwhelming majority of Frenchmen and women, many of them with sons serving in Algeria, drew the conclusion that Algerian independence was not just inevitable but desirable—and for the sake of France, the sooner the better.
De Gaulle, ever the realist, began negotiations with the FLN at the spa town of Evian on Lake Geneva.
Initial talks, conducted in June i960 and again during June and July 1961, had failed to find common ground.
A renewed attempt, in March 1962, was more successful, after just ten days of discussion the two sides reached agreement and on March 19th, after nearly eight years of unbroken fighting, the FLN declared a cease-fire.
On the basis of the terms agreed at Evian De Gaulle called a referendum on Sunday July 1st and the French people voted overwhelmingly to free themselves of the Algerian shackle.
The OAS grew into a fully fledged underground organization, committed first to preserving French Algeria and then, after that failed, to punishing those who had ‘betrayed’ their cause.
Spectacular assassination attempts on French Culture Minister Andre Malraux and on De Gaulle himself were unsuccessful, though at least one plan to ambush the President’s car as he drove through the Parisian suburb of Petit Clamart came perilously close to succeeding.
For a few years in the early sixties France was in the grip of a determined and increasingly desperate terrorist threat.
The French intelligence services ultimately broke the OAS, but the memory lingered.
Meanwhile, millions of Algerians were forced into French exile against their will.
The European pieds-noirs settled for the most part in southern France; the first generation harbored longstanding grievances against the French authorities for betraying their cause and forcing them off their property and out of their jobs.
Algeria’s Jews also abandoned the country, some for Israel, many—like the Moroccan Jews before them—for France, where they would come in time to constitute the largest Jewish community in Western Europe.
Others, notably those who had worked with the French or served as auxiliaries with French police and military authorities—the socalled harkis —fled the predictable wrath of the victorious nationalists.
Many were caught and suffered horrible retribution; but even those who made it safely to France got no thanks from the French and scant acknowledgement or recompense for their sacrifices.
The Evian Agreements of 1962 put an end to nearly five decades of war or fear of war in French life.
The population was weary—weary of crises, weary of fighting, weary of threats and rumours and plots.
Unloved and unlamented, it was cruelly weakened from the outset by the absence of an effective executive—a legacy of the Vichy experience, which had made post-war legislators reluctant to establish a strong presidency.
It was handicapped by its parliamentary and electoral systems, which favored multiple parties and produced unstable coalition governments.
It oversaw unprecedented social changes but these generated a divisive political backlash.
Fifty-two anti-system, ‘poujadist’ deputies won parliamentary seats in the national elections of 1956.
But above all, the first post-war French republic was brought low by its colonial struggles.
Like the Ancien Regime, the Fourth Republic was crippled by the costs of war.
Between December 1955 and December 1957 France lost two-thirds of its currency reserves, despite the steady growth of the economy.
Governments of every hue divided and fell when faced with these hurdles.
Even without a disaffected army, the Fourth Republic would have been hard pressed to face down such challenges just a decade after the worst military defeat in the nation’s history and a humiliating four-year occupation.
The institutions of Charles de Gaulle’s Fifth French Republic were designed to avoid precisely the defects of its predecessor.
In the aftermath of his success in ending the Algerian conflict, De Gaulle proposed that the President of the Republic be henceforth elected by direct universal suffrage ; this amendment to the constitution was duly approved in a referendum of October 28th 1962.
Sustained by his institutions, his record and his personality—and French memories of the alternative—the French President now had more power than any other freely elected head of state or government in the world.
In domestic affairs, De Gaulle was for the most part content to leave daily business to his prime ministers.
The radical economic reform program that began with the issuing of a new franc on December 27th 1958 was in line with earlier recommendations from the International Monetary Fund, and it contributed directly to the stabilization of France’s troubled finances.
It is thus not surprising that many of the most significant transformations in French transportation infrastructure, town planning and state-directed industrial investment were conceived and begun under his authority.
Like Spain’s General Franco (with whom he otherwise had nothing in common), De Gaulle understood economic stabilization and modernization largely as weapons in the struggle to restore national glory.
France had been in steady decline at least since 1871, a grim trajectory marked by military defeat, diplomatic humiliation, colonial retreat, economic deterioration and domestic instability.
De Gaulle had long been sensitive to France’s serial humiliation —less by its German foe in 1940 than at the hands of its Anglo-American allies ever since.
De Gaulle never forgot his own embarrassing isolation as France’s impoverished and largely ignored spokesman in wartime London.
His grasp of military reality kept him from expressing the pain that he shared with other Frenchmen at the British sinking of France’s proud Mediterranean fleet at Mers-el-Kebir in July 1940; but the symbolism of the act rankled nonetheless.
De Gaulle had particular cause to feel ambivalent towards Washington, where Franklin Roosevelt never took him seriously.
The United States maintained good relations with the wartime Vichy regime far longer than was decent or prudent.
France was absent from the wartime Allied negotiations; and even though this allowed De Gaulle in later years cynically to disclaim responsibility for a Yalta agreement of which he privately approved, the memory rankled.
The nuclear ‘club’ did not include France, reduced thereby to unprecedented irrelevance in international military calculations.
Worse still, France had been utterly dependent on the USA in its colonial war in Asia.
In October 1956, when Britain, France and Israel conspired to attack Nasser’s Egypt, it was President Eisenhower who pressured the British into withdrawing, to France’s impotent fury.
A year later, in November 1957, French diplomats fumed helplessly when British and American arms were delivered to Tunisia, despite French fears that these would end up in Algerian rebel hands.
Shortly after taking office in 1958, De Gaulle himself was bluntly informed by General Norstad, the American commander of NATO, that he was not entitled to learn details of the American deployment of nuclear weapons on French soil.
This is the background to De Gaulle’s foreign policy once he assumed full presidential powers.
From nuclear weapons to the dollar’s privileged international status as a reserve currency, the United States was in a position to impose its interests on the rest of the Western alliance and could be expected to do so.
The United States could not be trusted, but it was at least predictable; the important thing was not to be dependent on Washington, as French policy had been in Indo-China and again at Suez.
France must stand its ground as best it could—for example, by acquiring its own nuclear weapon.
Like most observers, the French President reasonably and correctly assumed that Great Britain would strive to maintain its position halfway between Europe and America—and that, if forced to chose, London would opt for its Atlantic ally over its European neighbors.
Before traveling to Nassau, Macmillan had held talks with De Gaulle at Rambouillet; but he had given the French President no indication of what was to come.
Nassau, then, was yet another ‘Anglo-American’ arrangement cooked up behind France’s back.
To this injury was added further insult when Paris was itself offered the same Polaris missiles, on similar conditions, without even having been party to the discussions.
It was against this background that President De Gaulle announced, at his press conference on January 14th 1963 that France was vetoing Britain’s application to join the European Economic Community.
Meanwhile—as we have seen—De Gaulle turned towards Bonn and signed the highly symbolic if utterly insubstantial Treaty with the Federal Republic.
The idea that France could compensate for its vulnerability to Anglo-American pressure by aligning with its old enemy across the Rhine was hardly new.
But in the circumstances of 1963 the Treaty with Germany made little practical difference.
The French had no plans to leave the Western alliance, and De Gaulle had not the least intention of being dragged into any German schemes to revise the post-war settlement in the East.
What the Treaty of 1963 and the new Franco-German condominium really confirmed was France’s decisive turn towards Europe.
For Charles de Gaulle, the lesson of the twentieth century was that France could only hope to recover its lost glories by investing in the European project and shaping it into the service of French goals.
With one important exception, the British retreat from empire was very different from that of the French.
The British Empire, like the Soviet one, survived the war intact, if battered.
Great Britain depended heavily on imperial growers for basic foodstuffs (unlike France, which was self-sufficient in foodstuffs and whose overwhelmingly tropical imperial territories produced very different commodities); and in certain theatres of the war—North Africa in particular—Commonwealth troops had outnumbered British soldiers.
The residents of Britain itself were, as we have seen, far more conscious of Empire than their French counterparts—one reason why London was so much bigger than Paris was that it had thrived on its imperial role as port, commercial entrepot, manufacturing center and financial capital.
But the British after 1945 had no realistic hope of holding on to their imperial heritage.
In any case it was obvious to almost everyone that the pressure for independence was now irresistible.
The Commonwealth, created by the 1931 Statute of Westminster, had been intended by its framers to obviate the need for rapid moves to colonial independence, offering instead a framework for autonomous and semiautonomous territories to remain bound by allegiance and obedience to the British Crown, while relieving them of the objectionable trappings of Imperial domination.
But it was now to become instead a holding club for former colonies, independent states whose membership in the British Commonwealth constrained them only to the extent of their own interests and sentiments.
India, Pakistan and Burma were granted independence in 1947, Ceylon the following year.
The process was hardly bloodless—millions of Hindus and Muslims were massacred in ethnic cleansing and population exchanges that followed—but the colonial power itself withdrew relatively unscathed.
A Communist insurgency in neighboring Malaya, however, led the British government in June 1948 to declare a Stafe of Emergency that would only be lifted twelve years later with the rebels’ decisive defeat.
But on the whole, and in spite of the accompanying retreat from India and its neighbors of thousands of colonial residents and administrators, Britain’s departure from South Asia was both more orderly and less traumatic than might have been expected.
In the British Mandate territory of Palestine, Great Britain abandoned its responsibilities in 1948 under humiliating but relatively bloodless circumstances—it was only after the British had quit the scene that Arabs and Jews set upon one another in force.
But it was in Egypt, paradoxically a country that had never been a British colony in the conventional sense, that Britain experienced the ironies and drama of de-colonization and suffered a defeat of historic proportions.
In the Suez Crisis of 1956 Britain underwent for the first time the sort of international humiliation— illustrating and accelerating the country’s decline—that had become so familiar to the French.
The British interest in Egypt stemmed directly from the importance of India, to which was added in later years the need for oil.
British troops first seized Cairo in 1882, thirteen years after the opening of the Suez Canal, administered from Paris by the Suez Canal Company.
From 1914 to 1922 Egypt was a British Protectorate, after which it became independent.
Relations between the two countries remained stable for a while, formalized in a 1936 Treaty.
But in October 1952 the new government in Cairo, led by army officers who had overthrown the Egyptian King Farouk, abrogated the Treaty.
In response the British, fearful for the loss of their privileged access to a strategically crucial waterway, re-occupied the Canal Zone.
Within two years one of the revolutionary officers, Gamal Abdul Nasser, had become head of the government and was pressing for the departure of British soldiers from Egyptian soil.
The British were disposed to compromise—they needed Egyptian cooperation.
The UK was increasingly reliant on cheap oil, imported via the Suez Canal and paid for in sterling.
If this supply was disrupted, or the Arabs rejected payment in sterling, Britain would have to use her precious currency reserves to buy dollars and get the oil elsewhere.
Accordingly, London signed an agreement in October 1954 to evacuate the Suez base by 1956—but on the understanding that the British military presence in Egypt could be ‘re-activated’ if British interests were threatened by attacks on or by states in the region.
The agreement held and the last British soldiers were duly evacuated from Suez on June 13th 1956.
But by then Colonel Nasser—who had declared himself President of Egypt in November 1954—was becoming a problem in his own right.
Eden and his advisers regularly compared him to Hitler; a threat to be addressed, not appeased.
Paris shared this view, though French dislike of Nasser had to do less with his threat to Suez or even his growing friendship with the Soviet bloc, than with his disruptive influence on France’s North African subjects.
At a meeting with Tito in Yugoslavia on July 18th 1956, Nasser—together with India’s Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru—issued a joint statement of‘NonAlignment’, explicitly disassociating Egypt from any dependence on the West.
A week later, on July 26th, Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal Company.
Britain, the United States and France convened a conference in London to decide on their response.
The conference duly met, and on August 23rd drew up a ‘plan’ that the Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies was to present to Nasser.
The London conferees then met again, from September 19th to the 21st, this time agreeing to form a Suez Canal Users Association.
Meanwhile the British and French announced that they would refer the dispute over Suez to the United Nations.
Up to this point the British especially had taken care to align their own response to Nasser’s acts with that of Washington.
Britain was still heavily indebted to the US, paying interest on outstanding loans; pressure on sterling in 1955 had even led London to consider seeking a temporary waiver of these payments.
Washington, it was believed, harbored plans to supplant Britain in the Middle East, which was why American spokesmen indulged in occasional anti-colonialist rhetoric, the better to seduce local elites.
Korea—and the dynamic of the Cold War—had papered over the mutual resentments of the 1940s, and the British felt they could rely on American sympathy for Britain’s international interests and commitments.
And so, even though they had been told by Eisenhower himself that they were worrying altogether too much about Nasser and the threat he posed, British leaders took it for granted that the United States would always support them if matters came to a head.
It was in this context that the British Prime Minister Anthony Eden (who had succeeded the ageing Churchill the previous year) set out to deal once and for all with the troublesome Egyptian.
Whatever their public posture, the British and French were impatient with the UN and its cumbersome procedures.
Even as the various conferences and international plans provoked by Nasser’s actions were being convened and discussed, the British gov10 The Canal itself had always been within Egyptian territory and indisputably a part of Egypt.
On October 21st these plans were extended to include the Israelis, who joined the French and British in top-secret negotiations at Sevres.
The Egyptians had blockaded the Gulf of Aqaba as early as July 1951, a restriction on Israeli trade and freedom of movement that Jerusalem was determined to remove.
Israel was out to reduce Nasser and secure its territorial and security interests in and around Sinai.
Israel would attack the Egyptian army in Sinai, pressing forward to occupy the whole peninsula, including the Suez Canal on its western edge.
They would seize control of the Canal, assert that Egypt was incompetent to run so important a resource fairly and efficiently, restore the status quo ante and fatally undermine Nasser.
The plan was kept very secret indeed—in Britain only Eden and four senior cabinet ministers were aware of the protocol signed at Sevres after three days of discussion, October 2ist-24th.
On October 29th, two weeks after the UN Security Council failed to agree on a solution for Suez (thanks to a Soviet veto), and just one week after the Sevres meeting, Israeli forces crossed into Sinai.
The following day, October 30th, Britain and France vetoed a UN motion calling for Israel to withdraw, and issued an ultimatum to Israel and Egypt, disingenuously calling on both sides to cease fighting and accept an Anglo-French military occupation of the Canal Zone.
Within forty-eight hours the Israelis completed their occupation of Sinai and Gaza, ignoring a UN General Assembly call for a cease-fire; the Egyptians for their part sank boats in the Suez Canal, effectively closing it to shipping.
Two days later, on November 5th, the first Anglo-French ground troops landed in Egypt.
On November 6th Dwight Eisenhower was re-elected President of the United States.
London and Paris had patently ignored both the letter and the spirit of the 1950 Tripartite Declaration, which committed Britain, France and the United States to acting against the aggressor in the event of any Israel-Arab conflict.
The United States began to place considerable public and private pressure on Britain in particular to put a stop to its invasion of Egypt, even threatening to ‘pull the plug’ on the British pound.
Shocked at such direct American opposition, but unable to withstand the accelerating run on sterling, Eden hesitated briefly but then capitulated.
That same day the UN authorized the dispatch to Egypt of a Peacekeeping Force, which Nasser accepted on November 12th, provided that Egyptian sovereignty was not infringed.
Three days later the UN Peacekeeping Force arrived in Egypt and on December 4th it moved into Sinai.
Meanwhile the British and French announced their own withdrawal from Suez, a retreat that was completed on December 22nd.
Britain, whose sterling and dollar reserves had fallen by $279 million in the course of the crisis, was promised American financial aid (and received it in the form of a $500 million line of credit from the United States Export-Import Bank); on December 10th the IMF announced that it had approved a $561.47 million loan for Britain, and a stand-by commitment for a further $738 million.
Israel, having secured a public United States commitment to its right of passage through the Gulf of Aqaba and the Straits of Tiran, withdrew its own troops from Gaza in the first week of March 1957.
Clearance of the Suez Canal began a week after the completion of the Anglo-French withdrawal and the Canal was reopened on April 10th 1957.
The Israelis, despite their dependence on French military hardware, saw very clearly that their future lay in aligning their interests as closely as possible with those of Washington—the more so following the United States President’s announcement of the ‘Eisenhower Doctrine’ in January 1957, stating that the United States would use armed force in the event of‘International Communist’ aggression in the Middle East.
Nasser’s standing in the non-aligned world was greatly enhanced by his apparent success in facing down the old colonial powers—as the French had feared, his moral influence and example upon Arab nationalists and their supporters now reached new heights.
For the United States, the Suez adventure was a reminder of its own responsibilities, as well as an opportunity to flex its muscles.
Eisenhower and Dulles resented the way Mollet and Eden had taken American support for granted.
The Suez crisis coincided almost to the hour with the Soviet occupation of Hungary.
By indulging in so patently imperialist a plot against a single Arab state, ostensibly in retribution for the exercise of its territorial sovereignty, London and Paris had drawn the world’s attention away from the Soviet Union’s invasion of an independent state and destruction of its government.
They had placed their own—as it seemed to Washington, anachronistic—interests above those of the Western alliance as a whole.
But by allowing Moscow to perform, even if only symbolically, the role of protector to the injured party, France and Britain had initiated the Soviet Union into a role that it would improvise with gusto in the coming decades.
Thanks to the Suez crisis, the divisions and rhetoric of the Cold War were to be imported deep into the Middle East and Africa.
It was on Britain that the impact of the Suez miscalculation was felt most acutely.
It would be many years before the full extent of the conspiracy against Nasser was made public, though many suspected it.
But within weeks, Anthony Eden was forced to resign, humiliated by the incompetence of the military strategy he had approved and by the very public American refusal to back it.
The first lesson of Suez was that Britain could no longer maintain a global colonial presence.
The country lacked the military and economic resources, as Suez had only too plainly shown, and in the wake of so palpable a demonstration of British limitations the country was likely now to be facing increased demands for independence.
After a pause of nearly a decade, during which only the Sudan and Malaya had severed their ties with Britain, the country thus entered upon an accelerated phase of de-colonization, in Africa above all.
The Gold Coast was granted its freedom in 1957 as the independent state of Ghana, the first of many.
Between i960 and 1964, seventeen more British colonies held ceremonies of independence as British dignitaries traveled the world, hauling down the Union Jack and setting up new governments.
The Commonwealth, which had just eight members in 1950, would have twenty-one by 1965, with more to come.
When compared to the trauma of Algeria or the catastrophic consequences of Belgium’s abandonment of the Congo in i960, the dismantling of the British Empire was relatively peaceful.
In eastern and, especially, southern Africa, the unraveling of empire proved more controversial than it had in West Africa.
When Harold Macmillan informed South Africans, in a famous speech at Cape Town in i960, that ‘the wind of change is blowing through this continent, and, whether we like it or not, this growth of consciousness is a political fact,’ he did not expect a friendly reception and he did not get one.
To preserve the system of apartheid rule in force since 1948, the white settlers of South Africa declared themselves a republic in 1961 and left the Commonwealth.
Four years later, in neighboring Southern Rhodesia, the white colonists unilaterally pronounced themselves independent and self-governing.
In both countries the ruling minority succeeded for a few years longer in ruthlessly suppressing opposition to their rule.
Once it became clear that London had neither the resources nor the appetite for enforcing colonial rule against majority opposition—something that had not been selfevident as recently as the early fifties, when British forces conducted a brutal and secretive dirty war of their own against the Mau-Mau revolts in Kenya—the European colonists accepted the inevitable and went quietly.
In 1968 the Labour government of Harold Wilson drew the final, ineluctable conclusion from the events of November 1956 and announced that British forces would henceforth be withdrawn permanently from the various bases, harbors, entrepots, fuelling ports and other imperial-era establishments that the country had maintained ‘East of Suez’—notably at the fabulous natural harbor of Aden on the Arabian peninsula.
The country could no longer afford to pretend to power and influence across the oceans.
The second lesson of Suez, as it seemed to the overwhelming majority of the British establishment, was that the UK must never again find itself on the wrong side of an argument with Washington.
This didn’t mean that the two countries would always agree—over Berlin and Germany, for example, London was far more disposed to make concessions to Moscow, and this produced some coolness in Anglo-American relations between 1957 and 1961.
But the demonstration that Washington could not be counted on to back its friends in all circumstances led Harold Macmillan to precisely the opposite conclusion to that drawn by his French contemporary De Gaulle.
Whatever their hesitations, however ambivalent they might feel about particular United States actions, British governments would henceforth cleave loyally to United States positions.
Only that way could they hope to influence American choices and guarantee American support for British concerns when it mattered.
This strategic re-alignment was to have momentous implications, for Britain and for Europe.
The lasting consequences of the Suez crisis were felt in British society.
Great Britain, and England especially, was distinctly optimistic in the early 1950s.
The election of a Conservative government in 1951, and the first intimations of an economic boom, had dispersed the egalitarian gloom of the early post-war years.
In the first years of the reign of the new Queen, the English basked in a cozy Indian summer of self-satisfied well-being.
Moreover it was Britons, the country was frequently reminded, who had split the atom, invented radar, discovered penicillin, designed the turbo-jet engine and more besides.
The most popular British films of the first half of the Fifties—comedies like Genevieve or Doctor in the House —depict a rather perky, youthful, affluent and self-confident southern England.
This was an England in which debutantes were still received at Court (an anachronistic and increasingly absurd ritual that the Queen finally abandoned in 1958); where one in five Conservative parliamentarians had gone to Eton; and where the percentage of students of working-class origin attending university in 1955 was no higher than it had been in 1925.
All based more or less faithfully on episodes of British heroism from World War Two , these films were a comforting reminder of the reasons the British had for feeling proud of themselves—and self-sufficient.
Without glorifying combat, they cultivated the myth of Britain’s war, paying special attention to the importance of comradeship across class and occupation.
When social tensions or class distinctions were hinted at, the tone was usually one of street-wise wit and skepticism rather than conflict or anger.
War films like The Bridge on the River Kwai or Dunkirk carried undertones of questioning and doubt, as though the confident heritage of 1940 was starting to crack.
By i960, Sink the Bismarck , a war film firmly set in the older mould, appeared curiously anachronistic and quite at odds with the prevailing temper.
The new mood was set by John Osborne’s path-breaking play Look Back in Anger , first produced in London in 1956 and made into an impressively faithful film two years later.
In this drama of frustration and disillusion the protagonist, Jimmy Porter, stifles in a society and marriage that he can neither abandon nor change.
She, in turn, is trapped between her angry working-class husband and her aging ex-colonial father, confused and wounded by a world he no longer understands.
This diagnosis of Britain’s unstable mood at the moment of Suez was not perhaps terribly nuanced, but it rang true.
The later films, dubbed ‘kitchen-sink dramas’ for their gritty depiction of everyday life, starred a new cohort of younger actors—Tom Courtenay, Albert Finney, Richard Harris and Alan Bates.
They were typically set in northern working-class communities, with accents and language to match.
And they represented England as a divided, embittered, cynical, jaundiced and hard-faced world, its illusions shattered.
About the only thing that the cinema of the early fifties and early sixties had in common was that women almost always played a secondary role, and everyone was white.
If the illusions of Empire died at Suez, the insular confidence of middle England had been under siege for some time.
The symbolism of the English national cricket team’s first defeat by a team from the West Indies (in 1950 and on the ‘hallowed soil’ of the home of the game at the Lord’s cricket ground in London) was driven home three years later when England’s soccer team was thrashed in 1953 at its national stadium—by a team from lowly Hungary and by the unprecedented margin of six goals to three.
In the two international games that Englishmen had spread across the world, England itself was no longer supreme.
These non-political measures of national decline had all the more impact because Britain in these years was a largely apolitical society.
Like the rest of Western Europe, the British were increasingly interested in consuming and being entertained.
Their interest in religion was waning, and with it their taste for collective mobilization of any kind.
Harold Macmillan, a conservative politician with liberal instincts—a middle-class political trimmer masquerading as an Edwardian country gentleman—was very much the appropriate leader for this transitional moment, selling colonial retreat abroad and prosperous tranquility at home.
Older voters were well enough pleased with this outcome; only the young were increasingly disenchanted.
The retreat from Empire contributed directly to a growing British anxiety about the loss of national direction.
Absent imperial glory, the Commonwealth served Britain largely as a source of food.
Thanks to Commonwealth preferences (i.e. tariffs favoring imports from Commonwealth member states), food from the Commonwealth was cheap, and constituted nearly one-third by value of all imports to the UK at the start of the 1960s.
America might be the indispensable ally, but it could hardly furnish the British with a renewed sense of purpose, much less an updated national identity.
On the contrary, Britain’s very dependence on America illustrated the nation’s fundamental weakness and isolation.
And so, even though little in their instincts, their culture or their education pointed them toward continental Europe, it was becoming obvious to many British politicians and others—not least Macmillan himself—that one way or another, the country’s future lay across the Channel.
The ‘European project’, in so far as it ever existed outside the heads of a few idealists, had stalled by the mid-nineteen-fifties.
The French National Assembly had vetoed the proposed European army, and with it any talk of enhanced European coordination.
Various regional accords on the Benelux model had been reached— notably the Scandinavian ‘Common Nordic Labor Market’ in 1954—but nothing more ambitious was on the agenda.
Advocates of European cooperation could point only to the new European Atomic Energy Community, announced in the spring of 1955; but this—like the Coal and Steel Community—was a French initiative and its success lay, symptomatically, in its narrow and largely technical mandate.
If the British were still as skeptical as ever about the prospects for European unity, theirs was not an altogether unreasonable view.
The push for a fresh start came, appropriately enough, from the Benelux countries, who had the most experience of cross-border union and the least to lose from diluted national identities.
It was now clear to leading European statesmen— notably Paul-Henri Spaak, foreign minister of Belgium—that political or military integration was not feasible, at least for the present.
In any event, by the mid-fifties European concerns had shifted markedly away from the military preoccupations of the previous decade.
The emphasis, it seemed clear, should be placed on European economic integration, an arena in which national self-interest and cooperation could be pursued in concert without offending traditional sensibilities.
Spaak, together with his Dutch counterpart, convened a meeting at Messina, in June 1955, to consider this strategy.
The French were cautiously enthusiastic; the British decidedly doubtful.
But by November 1955 the British had dropped out, alarmed at the prospect of just the sort of pre-federal Europe they had always suspected.
When the Spaak Committee reported back in March 1956 with a formal recommendation in favor of a Common Market, Paris concurred.
When the Treaty establishing a European Economic Community was signed at Rome on March 25th 1957, and became effective on January 1st 1958, the new EEC— its headquarters in Brussels—comprised the same six countries that had joined the Coal and Steel Community seven years before.
It represented for the most part a declaration of future good intentions.
Its signatories laid out a schedule for tariff reductions and harmonization, offered up the prospect of eventual currency alignments, and agreed to work towards the free movement of goods, currencies and labor.
Most of the text constituted a framework for instituting procedures designed to establish and enforce future regulations.
Not everyone even in the member states was entirely pleased with the new proposals.
In France many conservative deputies voted against ratification of the Rome Treaty on ‘national’ grounds’, while some socialists and left radicals opposed the formation of a ‘little Europe’ without the reassuring presence of Great Britain.
In Germany, Adenauer’s own Economics Minister, the enthusiastic free-trader Ludwig Erhard, remained critical of a neo-mercantilist ‘customs union’ that might damage Germany’s links with Britain, restrict trade flows and distort prices.
In the course of the 1950s the countries of continental Western Europe traded increasingly with one another.
And they each traded above all with West Germany, on whose markets and products the European economic recovery had thus come increasingly to depend.
This trend towards mutually advantageous coordination was thus driven by national self-interest, not the objectives of Schuman’s Coal and Steel Authority, which was irrelevant to economic policy making in these years.
The same concern to protect and nourish local interests that had turned Europe’s states inwards before 1939 now brought them closer together.
The removal of impediments and the lessons of the recent past were perhaps the most important factors in facilitating this change.
The Dutch, for example, were not altogether happy at the prospect of high EEC external tariffs that would inflate local prices, and like their Belgian neighbors they worried about the absence of the British.
But they could not risk being cut off from their major trading partners.
As Europe’s main exporting nation Germany had a growing interest in free trade within Western Europe—the more so because German manufacturers had lost their important markets in eastern Europe and had 12 Andrew Moravscik, The Choice for Europe.
But a tariff-protected European customs union confined to six countries was not necessarily a rational German policy objective, as Erhard understood.
Like the British, he and many other Germans might have preferred a broader, looser European free trade area.
But as a principle of foreign policy, Adenauer would never break with France, however divergent their interests.
In the first half of the twentieth century, too many inefficient European peasants produced only just sufficient food for a market that could not pay them enough to live on.
In the hungry years immediately after World War Two all sorts of programs were put in place to encourage and assist arable farmers in particular to produce more.
To reduce dependence on dollar-denominated food imports from Canada and the US, the emphasis was placed upon encouraging output rather than efficiency.
In a manner of speaking, the Forties were thus a golden age for Europe’s farmers.
But they continued to benefit from what amounted to permanent public welfare.
But in the years that followed the country’s agricultural output soared.
Meanwhile the French government, always conscious of the symbolic significance of the land in French public life—and the very real importance of the rural vote—sought to maintain price supports and find export markets for all this food.
France’s chief economic interest in a European common market was the preferential access it would afford to foreign—especially German —markets for meat, dairy and grain products.
This, together with the promise of continued price supports and a commitment by its European partners to buy up superfluous French farm output, was what convinced the National Assembly to vote for the Rome Treaty.
This is the background to the EEC’s notorious Common Agricultural Policy , inaugurated in 1962 and formalized in 1970 after a decade of negotiations.
As fixed European prices rose, all of Europe’s food production became too expensive to compete on the world market.
Efficient Dutch dairy combines were no better off than small and unproductive German farms, since all were now subject to a common pricing structure.
In the course of the 1960s the EEC devoted its energies to forging a set of practices and regulations designed to address this problem.
EEC external tariffs would then bring the cost of imported agricultural products up to these levels—which were typically keyed to the highest priced and least efficient producers in the Community.
Each year, the EEC would henceforth buy up all its members’ surplus agricultural output, at figures 5-7 percent below the ‘target’ prices.
It would then clear the surplus by subsidizing its re-sale outside the Common Market at below-EU prices.
This manifestly inefficient proceeding was the result of some very old-fashioned horse-trading.
French and Italian farmers were not especially high-priced, but no-one dared instruct them to restrict production, much less require that they take a market price for their goods.
Instead each country gave its farmers what they wanted, passing the cost along in part to urban consumers but above all to taxpayers.
The grain tariffs of late-nineteenthcentury Europe, directed against cheap imports from North America, were partly analogous.
There were various attempts at the depths of the Slump of the early 1930s to shore up farm prices by buying surpluses or paying farmers to produce less.
Modern agriculture has never been free of politically motivated protections of one kind or another.
Even the US, whose external tariffs fell by 90 percent between 1947 and 1967, took care to exclude agriculture from this liberalization of trade.
But the perverse consequences of the Common Agricultural Policy were perhaps distinctive all the same.
As world food prices fell in the late 1960s, EEC prices were thus stranded at absurdly high levels.
By 1970 the CAP employed four out of five of the Common Market’s administrators, and agriculture was costing 70 percent of the budget, a bizarre situation for some of the world’s most industrialized states.
No single country could have sustained so absurd a set of policies, but by transferring the burden to the Community at large, and tying it to the broader objectives of the Common Market, each national government stood to gain, at least in the short run.
Only the urban poor lost out from the CAP, and the former at least were typically compensated in other ways.
A year after the Common Market was inaugurated, the British—still trying to head off the emergence of a super-national European bloc—suggested that the EEC be expanded into an industrial free-trade zone including the EEC memberstates, other European countries and the British Commonwealth.
The member states—Austria, Switzerland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Portugal and the UK, later joined by Ireland, Iceland and Finland—were mostly prosperous, peripheral, and enthusiastic proponents of free trade.
Their agriculture, with the exception of Portugal, was small-scale but highly efficient and oriented to the world market.
But EFTA was a minimalist organization, a reaction to the defects of Brussels rather than a genuine alternative.
It was only ever a free-trade zone for manufactured goods; farm products were left to find their own price level.
Some of the smaller member-states, like Austria, Switzerland or Sweden, could thrive in a niche market for their high-value-added industrial goods and their attraction for tourists.
Others, like Denmark, depended heavily on Britain as a market for their meat and dairy products.
But Britain itself needed a vastly larger industrial export market than its tiny Scandinavian and Alpine allies could provide.
Recognizing the inevitable—though still hoping to influence the shape of EEC policy—Harold Macmillan’s government formally applied to join the European Economic Community in July 1961, six years after London’s disdainful disengagement from the Messina talks.
Ireland and Denmark, their economies umbilically linked to that of the UK, applied alongside it.
But the issue was moot—De Gaulle, as we have seen, publicly vetoed Britain’s entry in January 1963.
The British had little recourse but to try again, which they did in May 1967— only to be vetoed once more, six months later, by a calmly vengeful French President.
But by the time Britain, Denmark and Ireland finally joined, in 1973, the European Economic Community had taken shape and they were in no position to influence it as British leaders had once fondly hoped.
The EEC was a Franco-German condominium, in which Bonn underwrote the Community’s finances and Paris dictated its policies.
The West German desire to be part of the European Community was thus bought at a high price, but for many decades Adenauer and his successors would pay that price without complaining, cleaving closely to the French alliance—rather to British surprise.
The French, meanwhile, ‘Europeanized’ their farm subsidies and transfers, without paying the price of a loss of sovereignty.
It was with this goal in mind that De Gaulle browbeat the other member-states of the European Economic Community in the course of its first decade.
Under the original Rome Treaty all major decisions (except for the admission of new members) were to be taken by majority vote in the inter-governmental Council of Ministers.
But by withdrawing from inter-governmental talks in June 1965 until his fellow leaders agreed to adapt its agricultural funding to French demands, the French President hobbled the workings of the Community.
After holding out for six months the other countries gave in; in January 1966 they reluctantly conceded that in future the Council of Ministers would no longer be able to pass measures by a majority vote.
It was the first breach of the original Treaty and a remarkable demonstration of raw French power.
By the end of its first decade, and notwithstanding the shadow of De Gaulle, the European Economic Community had acquired an aura of inevitability, which is why other European states began lining up to join it.
A high-priced, self-serving customs union, directed from Brussels by a centralized administration and an unelected executive, was not an unalloyed gain for Europe or the rest of the world.
Indeed, the network of protective agreements and indirect subsidies put into place at France’s bidding was altogether out of keeping with the spirit and institutions of the international trading system that had emerged in the decades following Bretton Woods.
To the extent that the EEC’s system of governance was modeled on that of France, its Napoleonic heritage was not a good omen.
In certain respects it was actually a lot smaller than the world that the French, or Dutch, had known when their nation-states opened on to people and places flung far across the seas.
In the circumstances of the time this hardly mattered to most West Europeans, who in any case had little option.
But it would lead in time to a distinctly parochial vision of‘Europe’, with troubling implications for the future.
Josef Stalin’s death in March 1953 had precipitated a power struggle among his nervous heirs.
At first the head of the secret police, Lavrenti Beria, appeared likely to emerge as the dictator’s sole heir.
The new leadership, collective in name but with Khrushchev increasingly primus inter pares, had little choice but to follow the path that Beria had advocated.
Stalin’s death, following many years of repression and impoverishment, had precipitated widespread protests and demand for change.
But once order’ had been restored, Khrushchev reverted to Beria’s strategy.
In the course of the years 1953-56 some five million prisoners were released from the Gulag.
In the people’s democracies the post-Stalin era was marked not just by the 1953 Berlin revolt but by opposition even in such obscure and typically cowed imperial outposts as provincial Bulgaria, where workers in tobacco factories rioted in May and June of that same year.
Nowhere was Soviet rule seriously threatened, but the authorities in Moscow took very seriously the scale of public discontent.
Khrushchev’s strategy, as it emerged in the following years, was fourfold.
First, as we have seen, he needed to stabilize relations with the West, following the rearmament of West Germany, its incorporation into NATO and the establishment of the Warsaw Pact.
At the same time Moscow began building bridges to the ‘nonAligned’ world—starting with Yugoslavia, which Khrushchev and Marshal Bulganin visited in May 1955 (just one month after the signing of the Austrian State Treaty) in order to rekindle Soviet-Yugoslav relations after seven years of very cold storage.
In retrospect this speech has taken on a mythical aura, but its epochal significance should not be overstated.
He had set himself the tricky objective of acknowledging and detailing Stalin’s deeds, while confining responsibility for them to the man himself.
His task, as he saw it, was to confirm the legitimacy of the Communist project by heaping obloquy and responsibility upon the corpse of Uncle Joe.
The speech, delivered on February 25th, was entirely conventional in length and language.
Khrushchev took the calculated risk of detailing the scale of Stalin’s personal failings (and thus shocking and offending the sensibilities of the obedient cadres in his audience), in order to preserve and even enhance the unsullied standing of Lenin, the Leninist system of government and Stalin’s own successors.
It drew a firm line under the Stalinist era, acknowledging its monstrosities and disasters while preserving the fiction that the present Communist leadership bore no responsibility.
Khrushchev was thus secure in power and had won a relatively free hand to reform the Soviet economy and liberalize the apparatus of terror.
Old Stalinists were now marginalized—Molotov was removed from the post of foreign minister on the eve of Tito’s return visit to Moscow in June.
As for Khrushchev’s contemporaries, and younger apparatchiks like Leonid Brezhnev, these men were just as guilty as Khrushchev of collaborating in Stalin’s crimes and they were thus in no position either to deny his assertions or attack his credibility.
But Khrushchev’s attack on Stalin could not be kept a secret, and therein lay the seeds of its failure.
The speech would not be officially published in the Soviet Union until 1988, but Western intelligence agencies had wind of it within days.
So did Western Communist parties, even though they had not been made privy to Khrushchev’s intentions.
As a consequence, within a few weeks rumours of Khrushchev’s denunciations of Stalin were everywhere.
For Communists, the denunciation of Stalin and his works was confusing and troubling; but it was also a relief.
Henceforth, as it seemed to many, Communists would no longer have to excuse or deny the more outrageous charges of their critics.
In Eastern Europe, the impact of Khrushchev’s reported abjuration of Stalin was even more dramatic.
Read in the context of the Soviet leader’s recent reconciliation with Tito, and his dissolution of the moribund Cominform on April 18th, Khrushchev’s repudiation of Stalin seemed to suggest that Moscow would now look favorably upon different ‘roads to socialism’, and had rejected terror and repression as a tool of Communist control.
Now, or so it was believed, it would be possible to speak openly for the first time.
As the Czech author Jaroslav Seifert explained to a Writers’ Congress in Prague in April 1956, ‘Again and again, we hear it said at this Congress that it is necessary for writers to tell the truth.
The impact of the shock wave of de-Stalinization in neighboring Poland was very different.
In June the Polish army was called out to put down demonstrations in the western city of Poznan, sparked by disputes over wages and work-rates.
Gomulka had been in prison just a few years before and narrowly escaped trial.
Khrushchev, Mikoyan, Molotov and three other senior figures flew to Warsaw on October 19th, intending to block Gomulka’s appointment, forbid the ouster of Rokossowski and restore order in Poland.
To ensure that their intentions were clear, Khrushchev simultaneously instructed a brigade of Soviet tanks to move towards Warsaw.
Gomulka, in return, assured the Russians that he could restore control and had no intention of abandoning power, taking Poland out of the Warsaw Pact, or demanding that Soviet troops leave his country.
Considering the disproportion in power between Khrushchev and Gomulka, the new Polish leader’s success in averting a catastrophe for his country was remarkable.
He was also 13 The Stalinist leadership remained firmly in place, trials continued in camera for two more years and on May 1st 1955 a grotesque, over-sized statue of Stalin was erected on a hill overlooking Prague.
DeStalinization would not reach Czechoslovakia until a decade later, with dramatic consequences.
De-Stalinization, as Gomulka appreciated, did not mean that Khrushchev planned to relinquish any of the Soviet Unions territorial influence or political monopoly.
The ‘Polish October’, then, had a fortuitously benign outcome—few at the time knew just how close Warsaw had come to a second Soviet occupation.
As early as July 1953 the Hungarian Stalinist leadership had been replaced (at Moscow’s initiative) with a reform-minded Communist, Imre Nagy.
Internment and labor camps were to be closed, peasants were to be permitted to leave kolkhozes if they wished.
Nagy was certainly not a conventional option, from Moscow’s point of view.
In September 1949 he had been critical of the ultra-Stalinist line of Matyas Rakosi and was one of only two Hungarian Politburo members who had opposed the execution of Laszlb Rajk.
But he was nonetheless a logical choice, once the time came to make changes in a country whose political elite, like its economy, had been ravaged by Stalinist excesses.
Meanwhile, it was Rakosi’s turn to attract the unfavorable attention of Moscow.
Khrushchev, as we have seen, was keen to rebuild Soviet links to Yugoslavia.
But in the course of the anti-Tito hysteria of earlier days Rakosi had played a particularly prominent role.
Rakosi, then, was becoming an embarrassment, an anachronistic impediment to Soviet projects.
With high-level Soviet-Yugoslav negotiations taking place in Moscow in June 1956, it seemed unnecessarily provocative to maintain in power in Budapest an unreconstructed Stalinist so closely associated with the bad old days— the more so as his past record and present intransigence were beginning to provoke public protests in Hungary.
Despite Rakosi’s best efforts—in March 1956 he contributed to the Hungarian newspaper Szabad Nep an enthusiastic denunciation of Beria and his Hungarian police lieutenant Gabor Peter, closely echoing Khrushchev’s denunciation of the ‘personality cult’ and celebrating the ‘unmasking’ of such men for their criminal persecution of the innocent—his time was past.
On July 17th 1956 Anastas Mikoyan flew into Budapest and unceremoniously removed Rakosi from office, for the last time.
In Rakosi’s place the Soviets promoted Ernd Gero, another Hungarian of impeccably Stalinist pedigree.
On October 6th, as a gesture to Belgrade especially, the authorities in Budapest permitted the public reburial of Laszlb Rajk and his fellow show-trial victims.
Executed as a result of trumped up charges, Laszlo Rajk’s remains rested for seven years in an unmarked grave.
Yet his death has become a warning signal for the Hungarian people and for the whole world.
For the hundreds of thouands who pass by this coffin desire to honor not only the dead man; it is their passionate hope and their firm resolve to bury an entire epoch.
The lawlessness, arbitrariness and moral decay of those shameless years must be buried forever; and the danger posed by Hungarian practitioners of rule by force and of the personality cult must be banned forever.
There was a certain irony in the sympathy now aroused by the fate of Rajk, a man who had himself sent so many innocent victims to the gallows.
But ironic or not, the reburial of Rajk provided the spark that was to ignite the Hungarian revolution.
On October 16th 1956, university students in the provincial city of Szeged organized themselves into a ‘League of Hungarian Students’, independent of the of3i4 LOST ILLUSIONS ficial Communist student organizations.
The student demands encompassed industrial and agrarian reforms, greater democracy and the right to free speech, and an end to the manifold petty restrictions and regulations of life under Communist rule.
But they also included, more ominously, the desire to see Imre Nagy installed as prime minister, Rakosi and his colleagues tried for their crimes, and Soviet troops withdrawn from their country.
The following day, October 23rd, students began to assemble in Budapest’s Parliament Square to demonstrate in support of their demands.
After it went ahead that same afternoon, Gero proceeded to denounce the meeting and its organizers in a speech broadcast by Hungarian radio that evening.
An hour later enraged demonstrators tore down the statue of Stalin in the center of the city, Soviet troops entered Budapest to attack the crowds, and the Hungarian Central Committee met through the night.
The following morning, at 8.13m., it was announced that Imre Nagy had been installed as Prime Minister of Hungary.
In talks with Suslov and Mikoyan , he and the other members of the new Hungarian leadership insisted on the need to negotiate with the demonstrators.
Kadar’s distinction may have convinced some of the Soviet leaders, but it did not reflect Hungarian reality.
Student organizations, workers’ councils and revolutionary ‘national committees’ were spontaneously forming all over the country.
Clashes between police and demonstrators provoked counter-attacks and lynchings.
He replaced Gero, whose security forces had fired on unarmed demonstrators in Parliament Square that same morning.
The Soviet leadership, whatever their doubts, had decided to endorse the new approach of the Hungarian leader.
Far from confronting the opposition, Nagy was now basing his authority increasingly on the popular movement itself.
And he appealed publicly to Moscow ‘to begin the withdrawal of Soviet troops’, from Budapest and the rest of Hungary as well.
Nagy’s gamble—his sincere belief that he could restore order in Hungary, and thus stave off the unspoken threat of Soviet intervention—was supported by the other Communists in his Cabinet.
Popular insurrectionary committees, political parties and newspapers had sprung up all over the country.
Anti-Russian sentiment was everywhere, with frequent references to the Imperial Russian suppression of the Hungarian revolt of 1848-49.
And, most important of all, the Soviet leaders were losing confidence in him.
By the time Nagy announced, on the afternoon of October 31st, that he was beginning negotiations to secure Hungary’s withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact, his fate was probably sealed.
Khrushchev and his colleagues had always taken the view that, in Hungary—as earlier in Poland—they would have to intervene if the ‘counterrevolution’ got out of control.
But they appear to have been initially reluctant to pursue this option.
As late as October 31st the Presidium of the Central Committee put out a statement declaring its willingness ‘to enter into the appropriate negotiations’ with the Hungarian leadership regarding the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungarian territory.
But even as they made this concession they were getting reports of student demonstrations in Timisoara and of ‘hostile sentiments’ among Bulgarian intellectuals sympathetic to the Hungarian revolutionaries.
This was beginning to sound like the start of the contamination effect that the Soviet leaders had long feared, and it prompted them to adopt a new approach.
Accordingly, the day after it had promised to negotiate troop withdrawals, the Soviet Presidium was advised by Khrushchev that this was now out of the question.
Soviet army divisions in Romania and Ukraine were duly ordered to move towards the Hungarian border.
On learning of this, the Hungarian Prime Minister summoned the Soviet Ambassador and informed him that in protest against the renewed Soviet troop movements, Hungary was unilaterally renouncing its membership in the Warsaw Pact.
That evening, at 7.50m. on November 1st, Nagy announced on the radio that Hungary was henceforth a neutral country and asked that the UN recognize its new status.
This declaration was widely approved in the country; the Workers’ Councils of Budapest, who had been on strike since the revolt began, responded by calling for a return to work.
Nagy had finally won over most of those in Hungary who had been suspicious of his intentions.
The same evening that Nagy made his historic announcement, Janos Kadar was secretly spirited away to Moscow, where Khrushchev convinced him of the need to form a new government in Budapest, with Soviet backing.
The Red Army would come in and restore order in any case; the only question was which Hungarians would have the honour of collaborating with them.
Any reluctance that Kadar may have felt about betraying Nagy and his fellow Hungarians was overcome by Khrushchev’s insistence that the Soviets now knew they had made a mistake when they installed Gero in July.
Meanwhile Nagy continued to protest against the increased Soviet military activity; and on November 2nd he asked UN Secretary-General Dag Hammerskjold to mediate between Hungary and the USSR, and seek Western recognition of Hungary’s neutrality.
The following day, November 3rd, the Nagy government opened (or thought it was opening) negotiations with the Soviet military authorities about the withdrawal of troops.
But when the Hungarian negotiating team returned that evening to Soviet army headquarters at Tokol, in Hungary, they were immediately arrested.
Shortly afterwards, at 4m. on the morning of November 4th, Soviet tanks attacked Budapest, followed an hour later by a broadcast from Soviet-occupied eastern Hungary announcing the replacement of Imre Nagy by a new government.
In response, Nagy himself made a final radio address to the Hungarian people, calling for resistance against the invader.
Then he and his closest colleagues took refuge in the Yugoslav embassy in Budapest, where they were granted asylum.
But within a month the new authorities felt confident enough to take the initiative.
On January 5th, the death penalty was established for ‘provocation to strike’ and repression began in earnest.
A further 13,000 were sent to internment camps and many more were dismissed from their jobs or placed under close surveillance until a general amnesty was declared in March 1963.
An estimated 200,000 people—over 2 percent of the population—fled Hungary in the aftermath of the Soviet occupation, most of them young and many from the educated professional elite of Budapest and the urbanized west of the country.
They settled in the United States , Austria, Britain, West Germany, Switzerland, France and many other places.
After spending nearly three weeks in the Yugoslav Embassy in Budapest they were tricked into leaving on November 22nd, immediately arrested by the Soviet authorities, and abducted to prison in Romania.
It took Kadar many months to decide what to do with his erstwhile friends and comrades.
Most of the reprisals against young workers and soldiers who had taken part in street fighting were kept as quiet as possible, to avoid arousing international protest; even so there were international demands for clemency in the case of a number of prominent figures, such as the writers J6zsef Gali and Gyula Obersovszky.
In April 1957 Kadar and his colleagues decided to return Nagy and his ‘accomplices’ to Hungary to face trial, but the proceedings themselves were delayed until June 1958, and even then they were held in strict secrecy.
On June 15th 1958, the accused were all found guilty of fomenting counter-revolution, and variously sentenced to death or long prison terms.
The writers Istvan Bibo and Arpad Goncz (future president of postCommunist Hungary) received life sentences.
Two others—Jozsef Szilagyi and Geza Lozonczy—were killed in prison before their trial began.
Imre Nagy, Pal Maleter and Miklos Gimes were executed at dawn on June 16th 1958.
The Hungarian uprising, a brief and hopeless revolt in a small outpost of the Soviet empire, had a shattering impact on the shape of world affairs.
Until then the United States, while officially acknowledging the impossibility of detaching Eastern European satellites from Soviet control, continued to encourage the ‘spirit of resistance’ there.
Many of them sincerely hoped for Western assistance, encouraged by the uncompromising tone of American public rhetoric and by emissions from Radio Free Europe, whose emigre broadcasters encouraged Hungarians to take up arms and promised imminent foreign support.
When no such backing was forthcoming, the defeated rebels were understandably embittered and disillusioned.
Even if Western governments had wished to do more, the circumstances of the moment were highly unpropitious.
On the very day that the Hungarian revolt broke out, representatives of France and Britain were at Sevres, in secret talks with the Israelis.
And when Hungary did appear on the NSC agenda, at a meeting on November 8th, the general consensus—from Eisenhower down—was that it was all the fault of the French and British.
In Communist eyes the real threat posed by Nagy was neither his liberalization of the economy nor the relaxation of censorship.
Even the Hungarian declaration of neutrality, though it was regarded in Moscow as ‘provocative’, was not the occasion for Nagy’s downfall.
Such a departure from Soviet practice was the thin edge of a democratic wedge that would spell doom for Communist parties everywhere.
That is why the Communist leaders in every other satellite state went along so readily with Khrushchev’s decision to depose Nagy.
The Yugoslav leader had initially welcomed the changes in Hungary as further evidence of de-Stalinization.
But by the end of October the course of events in Budapest was changing his mind—Hungary’s proximity to Yugoslavia, the presence of a large Hungarian minority in the Vojvodina region of his country, and the consequent risks of contagion were very much on his mind.
When Khrushchev and Malenkov took the trouble, on November 2nd, to fly to Tito’s Adriatic island retreat and brief him on the coming invasion, Tito proved anxious but understanding.
His main concern was that the puppet government to be installed in Hungary not include Rakosi and other unreconstructed Stalinists.
Khrushchev was distinctly less pleased when, just two days later, Tito granted asylum to Nagy, fifteen members of his government, and their families.
The Yugoslav decision appears to have been made in the heat of the Hungarian crisis, and on the assumption that the Russians had no interest in making martyrs.
But when the Soviet leaders expressed their displeasure, and especially following the abduction of Nagy and the others upon their departure from the Yugoslav Embassy with a promise of safe conduct from Kadar himself, Tito was placed in an uncomfortable position.
In public the Yugoslav leader continued to express approval of Kadar s new government; but unofficially he made no effort to hide his displeasure at the course of events. l6 Even Gomulka, in Poland, acceded readily enough to Soviet arguments.
In Poland, Nagy’s departure from the Warsaw Pact was a source of anxiety—the Poles’ fear of German territorial revisionism gave them a special interest in the security arrangements guaranteed by Soviet arms.
It should be noted, though, that in a meeting with Khrushchev in May 1957 Gomulka tried hard, albeit without success, to dissuade the Soviet leader from putting Nagy on trial.
Relations between Moscow and Belgrade deteriorated once more, and the Yugoslav regime initiated overtures to the West and the non-aligned countries of Asia.
Like the Soviet leaders he was relieved at the restoration of Communist order; but the way in which it had been accomplished set a dangerous precedent and left a bad taste.
Khrushchev’s secret speech, once it leaked out in the West, had marked the end of a certain Communist faith.
But the desperate street fighting in Budapest dispelled any illusions about this new, ‘reformed’ Soviet model.
Once again, Communist authority had been unambiguously revealed to rest on nothing more than the barrel of a tank.
Hannah Arendt, for one, thought it was the rise of the councils (rather than Nagy’s restoration of political parties) that signified a genuine upsurge of democracy against dictatorship, of freedom against tyranny.
Finally, as it seemed, it might be possible to speak of Communism and freedom in the same breath.
But whatever the motives of the insurgents in Budapest and elsewhere—and these were far more varied than was clear at the time—it was not the Hungarians’ revolt but rather the Soviet repression which made the greater impression on foreign observers.
Communism was now forever to be associated with oppression, not revolution.
For forty years the Western Left had looked to Russia, forgiving and even admiring Bolshevik violence as the price of revolutionary self-confidence and the march of History.
Shorn of the curious magnetism of Stalinist terror, and revealed in Budapest in all its armored mediocrity, Soviet Communism lost its charm for most Western sympathizers and admirers.
After 1956, the secrets of History were no longer to be found in the grim factories and dysfunctional kolkhozes of the People’s Democracies but in other, more exotic realms.
But it was not only the Hungarians who would take to heart the message of the Soviet tanks.
Romanian students demonstrated in support of their Hungarian neighbors; East German intellectuals were arrested and put on trial for criticizing Soviet actions; in the USSR it was the events of 1956 that tore the veil from the eyes of hitherto committed Communists like the young Leonid Pliushch.
A new generation of intellectual dissidents, men like Paul Goma in Romania or Wolfgang Harich in the GDR, was born in the rubble of Budapest.
The difference in Eastern Europe, of course, was that the disillusioned subjects of a discredited regime could hardly turn their faces to distant lands, or rekindle their revolutionary faith in the glow of far-off peasant revolts.
They were perforce obliged to live in and with the Communist regimes whose promises they no longer believed.
East Europeans experienced the events of 1956 as a distillation of cumulative disappointments.
Their expectations of Communism, briefly renewed with the promise of de-Stalinization, were extinguished; but so were their hopes of Western succor.
Precisely because the populations of Communist Eastern Europe were now quiescent, and the order of things restored, the Khrushchev-era Soviet leadership came in time to allow a limited degree of local liberalization—ironically enough, in Hungary above all.
There, in the wake of his punitive retaliation against the insurgents of 1956 and their sympathizers, Kadar established the model ‘post-political’ Communist state.
The resulting ‘goulash Communism’ secured the stability of Hungary; and the memory of Hungary ensured the stability of the rest of the Bloc, at least for the next decade.
For most people living under Communism, the ‘Socialist’ system had lost whatever radical, forward-looking, utopian promise once attached to it, and which had been part of its appeal—especially to the young—as recently as the early fifties.
That did not mean it could not last a very long time—few after 1956 anticipated an early end to the Soviet system of rule.
Indeed, there had been rather more optimism on that score before the events of that year.
But after November 1956 the Communist states of Eastern Europe, like the Soviet Union itself, began their descent into a decadeslong twilight of stagnation, corruption and cynicism.
The Soviets too would pay a price for this—in many ways, 1956 represented the defeat and collapse of the revolutionary myth so successfully cultivated by Lenin and his heirs.
As Boris Yeltsin was to acknowledge many years later, in a speech to the Hungarian Parliament on November 11th 1992, ‘The tragedy of 1956 ... will forever remain an indelible spot on the Soviet regime.
One of the speakers over Nagy’s grave was the young Viktor Orban, future Prime Minister of his country.
Harold Macmillan, July 20th 1957 ‘Admass is my name for the whole system of an increasing productivity, plus inflation, plus a rising standard of living, plus high-pressure advertising and salesmanship, plus mass communications, plus cultural democracy and the creation of the mass mind, the mass man.
Luchino Visconti ‘We’re going where the sun shines brightly, We’re going where the sea is blue.
Jimmy Porter, in Look Back in Anger In 1979, the French writer Jean Fourastie published a study of the social and economic transformation of France in the thirty years following World War Two.
The remarkable acceleration of economic growth was accompanied by the onset of an era of unprecedented prosperity.
Less than a decade after staggering uncertainly out of the rubble, Europeans entered, to their amazement and with some consternation, upon the age of affluence.
The 1930s Malthusian emphasis on protection and retrenchment was abandoned in favor of liberalized trade.
Instead of cutting their expenditure and budgets, governments increased them.
Almost everywhere there was a sustained commitment to long-term public and private investment in infrastructure and machinery; older factories and equipment were updated or replaced, with attendant gains in efficiency and productivity; there was a marked increase in international trade; and an employed and youthful population demanded and could afford an expanding range of goods.
The post-war economic ‘boom’ differed slightly in its timing from place to place, coming first to Germany and Britain and only a little later to France and Italy; and it was experienced differently according to national variations in taxation, public expenditure or investment emphasis.
The initial outlays of most post-war governments went above all on infrastructure modernization—the building or upgrading of roads, railways, houses and factories.
Consumer spending in some countries was deliberately held back, with the result—as we have seen—that many people experienced the first post-war years as a time of continuing, if modified, penury.
Nevertheless, every European country saw steadily growing rates of per capita GDP and GNP—Gross Domestic Product and Gross National Product—the newly sanctified measures of national strength and well-being.
In the course of the 1950s, the average annual rate at which per capita national output grew in West Germany was 6. percent; in Italy 5. percent; in France 3. percent.
Even in the prosperous decades of the Wilhelminian Empire after 1870, the German economy had only managed an annual average of 1. percent.
By the 1960s the rate of increase began to slow down, but the western European economies still grew at historically unusual levels.
Overall, between 1950 and 1973, German GDP per head of the population more than tripled in real terms.
The Dutch economy grew by 3. percent each year from 1950-1970 —seven times the average annual growth rate for the preceding forty years.
A major contributory factor in this story was the sustained increase in overseas trade, which grew much faster than overall national output in most European countries.
The chief beneficiary was West Germany, whose share of the worlds export of manufactured goods rose from 7. percent in 1950 to 19. percent just ten years later, bringing the German economy back to the place it had occupied in international exchange before the Crash of 1929.
In the forty-five years after 1950 worldwide exports by volume increased sixteenfold.
Even a country like France, whose share of world trade remained steady at around 10 percent throughout these years, benefited greatly from this huge overall increase in international commerce.
Indeed, all industrialized countries gained in these years—the terms of trade moved markedly in their favor after World War Two, as the cost of raw materials and food imported from the non-Western world fell steadily, while the price of manufactured goods kept rising.
In three decades of privileged, unequal exchange with the ‘Third World’, the West had something of a license to print money.
What distinguished the western European economic boom, however, was the degree of de facto European integration in which it resulted.
On the eve of the signing of the Rome Treaty, 44 percent of Belgian exports were already going to its future EEC partners.
The European Community did not lay the basis for an economically integrated Europe; rather, it represented an institutional expression of a process already under way.
Another crucial element in the post-war economic revolution was the increased productivity of the European worker.
GDP per hour worked grew even faster than GDP per head of the population.
Considering how many more people were in work, this points to a marked increase in efficiency and, almost everywhere, much improved labour relations.
In 1956,74 percent of the UK’s exports went outside of Europe, mostly to its colonies and to the Commonwealth.
Even in 1973, when the UK finally entered the EEC, only one-third of its export trade was directed at the twelve countries that would form the European Union in 1992.
Even without the contemporary interest in modernization and improved techniques, economic performance would probably have seen some improvement.
Behind the steady increase in productivity, however, lay a deeper, permanent shift in the nature of work.
The Mediterranean countries, Scandinavia, Ireland and Eastern Europe were still primarily rural and, by any measure, backward.
In 1950, three out of four working adults in Yugoslavia and Romania were peasants.
One working person in two was employed in agriculture in Spain, Portugal, Greece, Hungary and Poland; in Italy, two people in every five.
One out of every three employed Austrians worked on farms; in France, nearly three out of every ten employed persons was a farmer of one kind or another.
Even in West Germany, 23 percent of the working population was in agriculture.
Only in the UK, where the figure was just 5 percent, and to a lesser extent in Belgium , had the industrial revolution of the nineteenth century truly ushered in a post-agrarian society.
In the course of the next thirty years vast numbers of Europeans abandoned the land and took up work in towns and cities, with the greatest changes taking place during the 1960s.
By 1977, just 16 percent of employed Italians worked on the land; in the Emilia-Romagna region of the northeast, the share of the active population engaged in agriculture dropped precipitately, from 52 percent in 1951 to just 20 percent in 1971.
In Austria the national figure had fallen to 12 percent, in France to 9. percent, in West Germany to 6. percent.
In Belgium and the UK (at 2. percent) farmers were becoming statistically insignificant.
Farming and dairy production became more efficient and less labor-intensive—especially in countries like Denmark or the Netherlands, where butter, cheese and pork products were now profitable exports and mainstays of the domestic economy.
The chief beneficiary was the tertiary sector , where many of the former peasants—or their children—ended up.
Some places—Italy, Ireland, parts of Scandinavia and France—moved directly from an agricultural to a service-based economy in a single generation, virtually bypassing the industrial stage in which Britain or Belgium had been caught for nearly a century.
By the end of the 1970s, a clear majority of the employed population of Britain, Germany, 4 By way of comparison it might be noted that the figure for the USA in 1950 was 12 percent employed in agriculture.
But the Swedes had access to a pool of cheap and readily available immigrant workers, as well as a hydroelectric power industry that cushioned the country from oil-price shocks.
In Communist Eastern Europe, by contrast, the overwhelming majority of former peasants were directed into labour-intensive and technologically retarded mining and industrial manufacture; in Czechoslovakia, employment in the tertiary, service sector actually declined during the course of the 1950s.
The decline of agriculture alone would have accounted for much of Europe’s growth, just as the shift from country to town, and farming to industry, had accompanied Britain’s rise to pre-eminence a century before.
For the same reason, the Netherlands outperformed its industrialized Belgian neighbor in these decades, benefiting from the ‘one-time’ transfer of a surplus rural workforce into hitherto undeveloped industrial and service sectors.
The role of government and planning in the European economic miracle is harder to gauge.
The ‘new’ economy of northern Italy, for example, drew much of its energy from thousands of small firms—composed of family employees who often doubled as seasonal agricultural workers—with low overheads and investment costs, and paying little or no tax.
Beyond turning a blind eye to fiscal, zoning, construction and other infractions, the part played by the Italian central authorities in sustaining the economic efforts of these firms is unclear.
Like large-scale state projects elsewhere, the Cassa was inefficient, and more than a little corrupt.
Most of its benefits went to the favored coastal regions; much of the new industry that it brought in was capital-intensive and thus created few jobs.
Many of the smaller, ‘independent’ farms formed in the wake of agrarian reform in the region remained dependent on the state, making of Italy’s Mezzogiorno a sort of semi-permanent welfare region.
Nevertheless, by the mid-1970s per capita consumption in the South had doubled, local incomes had risen by an average of 4 percent per annum, infant mortality had halved and electrification was well on the way to completion—in what had been, within the memory of a generation, one of the most forlorn and backward regions of Europe.
Given the speed at which the industrial North was taking off—in some measure, as we shall see, thanks to Southern workers—what is striking is not the failure of the Cassa to work an economic miracle south of Rome, but the fact that the region was able to keep up at all.
In France, the state confined itself to what became known as ‘indicative planning’—using the levers of power to direct resources into selected regions, industries and even products, and consciously compensating for the crippling Malthusian under-investment of the pre-war decades.
Government officials were able to exercise fairly effective control over domestic investment especially because, throughout these initial postwar decades, currency laws and the limited mobility of international capital held back foreign competition.
Restricted in their freedom to seek out more profitable short-term returns abroad, bankers and private lenders in France and elsewhere invested at home.
In West Germany, where the abiding inter-war memory was of conflict and instability , the authorities in Bonn were much less active than their French or Italian counterparts in designing or directing economic behavior, but paid far closer attention to arrangements aimed at preventing or mitigating social conflict, notably between employers and workers.
In particular, they encouraged and underwrote negotiations and ‘social contracts’ designed to reduce the risk of strikes or wage inflation.
As a consequence, private industries (and the banks with whom they worked or who owned them) were more disposed to 6 The contrast with past practice is revealing.
In earlier stages of French industrialization even the great Parisian investment banks had lacked the resources to support the modernization of the country’s industrial infrastructure, and had received no help or encouragement from the government.
Shop-floor workers in West Germany, as in Scandinavia, were compensated for this comparative docility by the assurance of employment, low inflation and, above all, comprehensive public welfare services and benefits financed out of sharply progressive rates of taxation.
Most of the nationalizations undertaken by the Labour government of 1945-51 were left in place by the Conservative governments that succeeded it.
But both parties foreswore long-term economic planning or aggressive intervention in labour-management relations.
Such active involvement as there was took the form of demandmanagement—manipulating interest rates and marginal tax bands to encourage saving or spending.
The main strategic objective of British governments of all colors in these years was to prevent a return to the traumatic levels of unemployment of the 1930s.
They were thus the product of government policies and collective intention.
But the facilitating condition for their unprecedented success lay beyond the direct reach of government action.
The trigger for the European economic miracle, and the social and cultural upheaval that followed in its wake, was the rapid and sustained increase in Europe’s population.
Europe had seen demographic growth spurts in the past—most recently in the mid-nineteenth century.
And in the twentieth century, war and emigration had kept population growth in Europe well below what might have been expected from the increased birth rate of earlier decades.
By the eve of World War Two, the knock-on effects of the loss of a generation of young men in World War One, together with the economic Depression and the civil wars and political uncertainty of the 1930s, had reduced the birth rate in parts of Western Europe to historic lows.
In the UK there were just 15. live births per thousand people; in Belgium 15.4; in Austria 12.8.
In France, where the birth rate in 1939 stood at 14. per thousand, deaths exceeded births not only during World War One and in 1919 and again in 1929, but also for every year from 1935 to 1944.
There, as in civil war-era Spain, the national population was steadily falling.
In the rest of Mediterranean Europe and east of Vienna the birth rate was higher, some330 THE AGE OF AFFLUENCE times double the rate of the West.
But elevated levels of infant mortality and higher death rates in all age groups meant that even there population growth was unremarkable.
It is against this background, and that of the additional demographic calamity of the Second World War itself, that the post-war baby boom has to be understood.
Between 1950 and 1970 the population of the UK rose by 13 percent; that of Italy by 17 percent.
In West Germany the population grew in these years by 28 percent; in Sweden by 29 percent; in the Netherlands by 35 percent.
The striking feature of Europe in the nineteen fifties and sixties—it can immediately be gleaned from any contemporary street scene—was thus the number of children and youths.
The peak years for post-war births in most countries were 1947-1949—in 1949 869,000 babies were born in France, compared to just 612,000 in 1939.
By i960, in the Netherlands, Ireland and Finland, 30 percent of the population was under fifteen years old.
Thanks to improved nutrition, housing and medical care, the infant mortality rate—the number of children per thousand live births who died before reaching their first birthday—fell sharply in Western Europe in these decades.
In Belgium it dropped from 53. in 1950 to 21. in 1970, with most of the change coming in the first decade.
Old people lived longer too—at least in Western Europe, where the death rate fell steadily over the same period.
In the Soviet Union itself, rates fell from 81 per thousand in 1950 to 25 in 1970, though with wide variations among the different republics.
There are many explanations for the recovery of European fertility after World War Two, but most of them reduce to a combination of optimism plus free milk.
During the long demographic trough of 1913-1945, governments had sought in 7 By 1950, Yugoslavia, Poland, Romania and Albania were the only European countries where more than one child in ten died before the age of one.
Now—even before post-war growth had translated into secure employment and a consumer economy—the coincidence of peace, security and a measure of state encouragement sufficed to achieve what no amount of pro-natal propaganda before 1940 had been able to bring about.
Demobilized soldiers, returning prisoners of war and political deportees, encouraged by rationing and allocation schemes that favored married couples with children, as well as cash allowances for each child, took the first opportunity to marry and start a family.
For the first time since records were kept, western Europe was experiencing full employment.
In spite of the leverage this afforded to organized labor, trade unions (with the distinctive exception of Britain) were either weak or else reluctant to exercise their power.
In return for their newfound respectability as national negotiating partners, union representatives through the fifties and early sixties often preferred to collaborate with employers rather than exploit labour shortages to their immediate advantage.
In 1955, when the first ever productivity agreement in France was struck between the car workers’ representatives and the nationalized car manufacturer Renault, it was symptomatic of the shift in perspective that the workers’ major gain came not in wages but in the innovatory concession of a third week of paid holiday.
Another reason why the old blue-collar unions were no longer so significant in Western Europe is that their constituency—skilled male manual workers—was in decline.
Employment in coal, steel, textiles and other nineteenth-century industries was shrinking, though this did not become obvious until the sixties.
More and more jobs were opening up in the tertiary sector, and many of those taking them were women.
Some occupations—textile manufacture, domestic labor—had been heavily feminized for many decades.
But after the war employment opportunities in both of these diminished sharply.
The female labor force no longer consisted of single women working as servants or mill girls.
Instead it was increasingly composed of older women working in shops, offices, and certain low8 The following year, in March 1956, this right was extended to all French workers.
Renault workers obtained a fourth week of paid vacation in 1962, but on this occasion it took seven years before the rest of the country followed suit.
By 1961, one-third of the employed labour force in the UK was female; and two out of every three employed women worked in clerical or secretarial jobs.
Even in Italy, where older women had traditionally not joined the ranks of the employed, 27 percent of the labour force was female by the end of the 1960s.
The insatiable demand for labour in Europe’s prosperous northwest quadrant accounts for the remarkable mass migrations in the 1950s and early 1960s.
In the first place, men (and to a lesser extent women and children) abandoned the countryside for the city and moved to more developed regions of their own country.
In Portugal a substantial percentage of the residents of the impoverished Alentejo region departed for Lisbon.
In Italy, between 1955 and 1971, an estimated nine million people moved from one region of their country to another.
This pattern of population movement was not confined to the Mediterranean.
The millions of young people who abandoned the German Democratic Republic for West Germany between 1950 and 1961 may have been opting for political freedom, but in heading west they were also seeking well-paid jobs and a better life.
In this respect they differed little from their Spanish or Italian contemporaries—or the quarter of a million Swedes from the rural centre and north of their country who moved to the cities in the decade after 1945.
Much of this movement was driven by income disparities; but the desire to escape hardship, isolation, the bleakness of village life and the hold of traditional rural hierarchies also played a part, especially for young people.
One incidental benefit was that the wages of those who remained behind, and the amount of land available to them, increased as a consequence.
A second route taken by migrants involved moving from one European country to another.
The same was true of the millions of Greeks, Poles, Jews and others who emigrated in the same years, or the Scandinavians, Germans and Irish of an earlier generation.
After World War One, to be sure, there had been a steady trickle of miners and farm workers from Italy and Poland into France, for example; and the 1930s saw political refugees fleeing west from Nazism and Fascism.
But intra-European migration, especially in search of work, remained the exception.
Cross-border labor movement had begun shortly after the end of the war—following an agreement of June 1946, tens of thousands of young Italian workers traveled in organized convoys to work in the mines of Wallonia, in return for a Belgian undertaking to supply coal to Italy.
As the German economy in particular began to accelerate, the Bonn government was forced to seek out cheap labour from abroad.
By 1956 Chancellor Adenauer was in Rome, offering free transport to any Italian laborer who would make the journey to Germany and seeking official Italian cooperation to funnel unemployed southerners across the Alps.
Like Finnish migrant workers in Sweden, or Irish laborers in Britain, these men—most of them under 25—came in almost every case from poor, rural or mountainous regions.
Their earnings in Germany and other northern countries played an important part in sustaining the economies of the regions they had left behind, even as their departure alleviated local competition for jobs and housing.
In 1973, the remittances of workers abroad represented 90 percent of Turkish export earnings, 50 percent of export earnings in Greece, Portugal and Yugoslavia.
Although the migrants were officially ‘temporary’ they had in practice left their homes for good.
It is estimated that between 1961 and 1974, one and a half million Portugese workers found jobs abroad—the greatest population movement in Portugal’s history, leaving behind in Portugal itself a workforce of just 3. million.
These were dramatic figures for a country whose total population in 1950 had been only eight and one third million.
The emigration of young women in search of domestic employment in Paris and elsewhere had a particularly marked effect on the countryside, where the shortfall of young adults was only partly made good by the arrival of immigrants from Portugal’s colonies in the Cape Verde Islands and Africa.
In one Portuguese municipality, Sabugal in the rural north, emigration reduced the local population from 43,513 in 1950 to just 19,174 thirty years later.
By 1964, foreign workers were one quarter of the work force of Switzerland, 9 With the result that as tourism began to develop towards the end of the Sixties there was actually a shortage of workers in Greece itself, for the most menial jobs.
In West Germany, in the peak year of 1973, there were 2. million foreign workers, mostly in the building trades and in metalworking and car manufacture.
In France the 2. million foreign workers recorded that year were 11 percent of the total working population.
Many of them were women in domestic work, employed as cooks, cleaners, concierges and babysitters—overwhelmingly of Portuguese origin.
Most of these men and women had no permanent rights of residence, and they were not included in the agreements signed by unions and employers providing for the security, welfare and retirement of local employees.
They thus represented very little commitment or long-term cost to the employer and country to which they had come.
Well into the 1980s, guest-workers’ in Germany were held back at entrylevel positions and wages.
By 1973 in West Germany alone there were nearly half a million Italians, 535,000 Yugoslavs and 605,000 Turks.
The Germans—like the Swiss, French, Belgians or British—did not especially welcome the sudden eruption of so many foreigners on their soil.
The experience of living among so many people from unknown foreign lands was unfamiliar to most Europeans.
If it was tolerated reasonably well, with only occasional outbreaks of prejudice and violence against communities of foreign workers, this was in some measure because the latter lived apart from the local population, in the drearier outer suburbs of the larger cities; because they posed no economic threat in an era of full employment; because at least in the case of Christians from Portugal, Italy and Yugoslavia they were physically and culturally assimilable’—i.e. not dark or Muslim; and because it was widely understood that they would one day be gone.
Many of the people who had returned to the Netherlands, Belgium and France from former imperial holdings in Asia, Africa, South America and the Pacific were white professionals, or else retired farmers.
Even the Algerian nationals living in France by 1969 numbered just 600,000, less than the local population of Italians or Spaniards.
Even in Britain, where the governments of the 1950s had actively encouraged immigration from the Caribbean to staff the country’s trains, buses and municipal services, the figures were not especially striking.
By 1959 West Indian immigration to the UK was running at around 16,000 people per year.
Immigration from other parts of the Commonwealth was even smaller—in 1959 there were just 3,000 immigrant arrivals from India and Pakistan.
The numbers would increase in later years—notably when the British government reluctantly agreed to admit the East African Asians expelled by the Ugandan dictator Idi Amin—but as late as 1976 there were still only 1.85 million ‘non-whites’ in the UK population, 3 percent of the total.
What made the difference, of course, was that these people were brown or black—and, being Commonwealth citizens, had a presumptive right of permanent residence and eventually citizenship in the imperial metropole.
Already in 1958, race riots in west London alerted the government to the perceived risk of permitting ‘too many’ immigrants to enter a historically white society.
And so, even though the economic case for unskilled immigrants remained strong and the overall totals insignificant, the UK brought in the first of many controls on non-European immigration.
A successor Act of 1968 tightened these still further, restricting UK citizenship to persons with at least one British parent; and in 1971 a further Act, overtly directed at non-whites, severely restricted the admission of the dependents of immigrants already in Britain.
The net effect of these laws was to end non-European immigration into Britain less than twenty years after it had begun.
On the other hand, these drastic restrictions on the right of blacks and Asians to enter the UK were accompanied, in due course, by a considerable improvement in their life chances once there.
A Race Relations Act of 1965 banned discrimination in public places, introduced remedies for job discrimination, and set out penalties for incitement to race hatred.
A successor Act eleven years later finally outlawed all discrimination based on race and established a Commission for Racial Equality.
In certain respects, the new, non-European populations of the UK were more fortunate than the second-class Europeans who found work north of the Alps.
English landladies could no longer display signs announcing ‘No Blacks, Irish or Dogs’; but notices forbidding entry to ‘dogs and Italians’ were not unknown in Swiss parks for some years to come.
The Dutch government encouraged workers from Spain, Yugoslavia, Italy , to come and take up jobs in textiles, mines and shipbuilding.
But when the old industries shut down, it was these workers who lost their jobs, often without any insurance or social safety net to cushion the impact on them and their families.
In West Germany a Foreigners’ Law of 1965 incorporated within its text ‘Police Regulations for Foreigners’ first promulgated by the Nazis in 1938.
Foreign workers were described and treated as a temporary presence, at the mercy of the authorities.
By 1974, however, when the European economy had slowed to a crawl and many of the immigrant workers were no longer required, they had become permanent residents.
Taken all in all, they amounted to some forty million people in transit, moving within countries, between countries and into Europe from overseas.
Without cheap and abundant labour in this vulnerable and mostly unorganized form, the European boom would not have been possible.
The post-war European states—and private employers—benefited greatly from a steady flow of docile, low-paid workers for whom they frequently avoided paying the full social cost.
When the boom ended and it came time to lay off excess labour, the immigrant and migrant workforce was the first to suffer.
Like everyone else, the new workers not only made things; they bought them.
Industrialization in the course of the nineteenth century had transformed the world of townand city-dwellers; but in many parts of rural Europe the traditional economy operated largely unchanged up to and even beyond the Second World War.
By far the largest expense in a traditional household budget was food and clothing, which together with housing took up much of a family’s earnings.
Most people did not shop or ‘consume’ in the modern sense; they subsisted.
For the overwhelming majority of the European population up to the middle of the twentieth century, ‘disposable income’ was a contradiction in terms.
In the two decades after 1953, real wages almost tripled in West Germany and the Benelux countries.
Even in Britain the purchasing power of the average citizen nearly doubled in these years.
By 1965, food and clothing absorbed just 31 percent of consumer spending in Britain; by 1980 the average for northern and western Europe as a whole was less than one quarter.
In more traditional commodities the major impact of this revolution in spending came in the way goods were packaged and the scale on which they were sold.
Supermarkets began to appear, notably in the 1960s, the decade when the impact of the increase in purchasing power was felt most dramatically.
The rationale for supermarkets was that shoppers (housewives for the most part) would spend more in any one shopping trip if most of what they wanted— or could be tempted into wanting—was conveniently available in one place.
But this in turn presumed that women had somewhere to put their food when they got it home; and that implied, increasingly, the presence of a fridge.
Most remarkable of all, 94 percent of Italian households now owned a fridge, the highest ratio in Europe.
Like the domestic fridge, the washing machine made its appearance in these years.
It too was aimed at easing the work of the newly affluent housewife and encouraging her to extend her range of purchases.
The washing machine, however, took longer to catch on than the fridge—partly because in the mid-1950s running water had still not arrived in more than half of all households in Belgium, Italy, Austria, Spain and many parts of France and Scandinavia, partly because the electricity grid in many places could not support two large appliances in a single residence.
Even in 1972, by which time most west Europeans lived in homes equipped with indoor toilets and full plumbing, only two households in three owned a washing machine, a ratio that increased steadily but slowly with each decade.
Washing machines remained for many years beyond the reach of the poor, especially large families that had greatest need of them.
But the virtuous circle of millions of newly employed commodity-consumers had its most significant impact not in the home but outside.
The greatest single measure of European prosperity was the revolution wrought by the family car.
Until the 1950s, the motor car was a luxury for most Europeans and in many parts was scarcely to be seen.
And even so, many Londoners didn’t own a car and there were thousands of market traders, costermongers and others who still depended in their work upon a horse and cart.
In Britain, where an initial take-off in the 1930s had been stalled by war and post-war shortages, it doubled in each decade from 1950 to 1980.
Italians, who owned just 270,000 private cars at the outbreak of the war and 342,000 in 1950 (less than the number of cars in Greater London alone), had two million vehicles by i960, five and a half million by 1965, over ten million in 1970 and an estimated 15 million five years later—two cars for every seven residents of the country.
In France, car ownership rose from less than two million to nearly six million vehicles in the course of the 1950s, then doubled again in the next ten years.
Symptomatically, parking meters were introduced at the end of the 1950s—beginning in Britain, then spreading through France and elsewhere in the course of the Sixties.
If Europeans could buy cars for their personal use in such unprecedented numbers it was not merely because they had more money to spend.
There were many more cars available to meet the pent-up demand of decades of Depression and war.
The war delayed the appearance of these models, but by the early 1950s they were rolling off newly installed production lines in ever-increasing number.
In each Western European country there was a dominant local make and model of car, but in essence they were all remarkably alike.
They had thin, tinny frames; small, under-powered engines (designed to consume as little fuel as possible); and were equipped with the minimum of accessories and fixtures.
The Volkswagens, Renaults and Fiats were rear-engined and had rear-wheel drive, leaving the compartment in front of the driver to accommodate a small amount of luggage, as well as the battery, spare wheel, crank handle and tools.
The front-engined Morris, like its contemporary and competitor the Ford Popular (American-owned but made at Ford’s UK plant in Dagenham, near London, for the domestic market), aspired to a slightly higher level of comfort—and would later spawn a four-door model, as befitted the rather greater prosperity of Britain in the years of its first appearance.
English motorists, regarding meter charges as a form of unauthorized taxation, withheld payment.
The French registered their disapproval by decapitating Parisian meters.
Thus bikes, motorcycles and motorcycle-sidecar combinations flourished for a while—the latter as a makeshift family vehicle for those who could not afford a car or could not yet get hold of one.
Motor scooters appeared on the scene—in France and especially Italy, where the first national motor-scooter rally, held in Rome on November 13th 1949, was followed by an explosive growth in the market for these convenient and reasonably priced symbols of urban freedom and mobility, popular with young people and duly celebrated— the Vespa model in particular—in every contemporary film from or about Italy.
But by the beginning of the sixties the car was firmly in command in Western Europe, displacing traffic from rails to roads and from public to private means of transport.
Railway networks had peaked in length and user-volume in the years following World War One; now, unprofitable services were cut back and thousands of miles of track pulled up.
Elsewhere in Western Europe, train traffic held up rather better; in small, crowded countries with efficient networks—like Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark— it actually grew; but far slower than road traffic.
The number of people using buses also began to decline for the first time ever, as more and more people went to work by car.
Between 1948 and 1962, in Britain’s congested capital, the overall passenger traffic on London Transport’s buses, trams, trolleys and underground network fell from 3,955 million people a year to 2,485, as commuters took to their cars instead.
Recreational travel in Europe was not new, though it had hitherto been confined first to the aristocracy and latterly to the better-heeled and more culturally ambitious middle classes.
But like every other economic sector, ‘tourism’ had suffered through war and economic recession.
The Swiss tourist industry in 1913 boasted 21. million nights of lodging; it would not recover such numbers until the mid17 The first European hypermarkets, defined as stores with at least 25,000 square feet of space on a single level and typically located at least two miles from a town center, began to appear at the end of the 1960s.
Coach companies blossomed, extending the tradition of factory and farm workers’ annual char-a-banc seaside trips into commercial services within and between countries.
Fledgling airline entrepreneurs like Britain’s Freddie Laker, who had bought up war-surplus Dakota turbo-prop planes, developed charter services to newly opened summer vacation resorts in Italy, France and Spain.
Camping—already popular before the war among less affluent vacationers and outdoor enthusiasts—became a major industry in the later Fifties, spawning coastal and pastoral camp-sites, camping equipment emporia, printed guides and specialized clothing outlets.
Older holiday resorts—along the coasts and in the countryside of northern and western Europe—thrived.
Freshly discovered locations emerged, gaining prominence in glossy brochures and popular mythology.
Not everyone could afford St Tropez or Switzerland—though the French and Italian coasts and mountains were still inexpensive for travelers from Britain or Germany, exchanging sterling and Deutschmarks for the undervalued francs and lire of the day.
But domestic seaside holidays, still much sought-after by British, Dutch and Germans in particular, were now truly cheap.
For the slightly more adventurous there were also the newly opened resorts of Spain’s Mediterranean coast, where visitors could choose between bed-andbreakfast establishments, pensions or modest seaside hotels block-booked by a new breed of package-tour operators.
Dressed in summer leisure clothing (itself a new product—and evidence of the new affluence), millions of families would squeeze into their Fiats, Renaults, Volkswagens and Morrises—often on the same day, since official vacation dates tended to cluster around a block of weeks in August—and make their way to dis342 THE AGE OF AFFLUENCE tant coasts, along narrow, inadequately serviced roads designed for an earlier age of travel.
The result was unprecedented and quite awful traffic jams that grew worse every year from the late 1950s.
Mass tourism, it has been well observed, may be environmentally insensitive but it has distinct re-distributive benefits.
As prosperous northerners flocked to hitherto impoverished Mediterranean lands, jobs opened up for building workers, cooks, waiters, chambermaids, taxi-drivers, prostitutes, porters, airport maintenance crews and others.
For the first time, unskilled young men and women in Greece, Yugoslavia, Italy and Spain could find low-paying, seasonal work at home instead of seeking it abroad.
Rather than migrate to the expanding economies of the north, they now serviced those same economies in their own lands.
Indeed, the success of large-scale tourism in the 1960s and after depended upon making Brits, Germans, Dutch, French and other neophyte travelers feel as comfortable as possible, surrounded by fellow-countrymen and insulated from the exotic, the unfamiliar and the unexpected.
But the mere fact of going somewhere distant on a regular basis, and the novel means of transport used to get there—private car, charter flight—offered millions of hitherto insular men and women a window onto a far bigger world.
Until the 1960s, the chief source of information, opinion and entertainment available to the overwhelming majority of Europeans was the radio.
It was from the radio that people got the news, and if there was a common national culture it was shaped far more by what people heard than from what they saw or read.
In every European country at this time radio was regulated by the state (in France the nal8 Between 1959 and 1973, the number of visitors to Spain rose from 3 million to 34 million.
Already in 1966 the number of annual tourists in Spain—17. million—far surpassed the totals for France or Italy.
In parts of the north-east and Spain’s Mediterranean littoral, the transition from a pre-industrial economy to the age of the credit card was accomplished in half a generation.
Most domestic radio sets had evolved little from the large, unwieldy, valve-driven wireless units of the inter-war decades.
It occupied a prime site in the parlor or kitchen and the family had perforce to listen to it while gathered in one place.
Even car radios altered little in this respect—the family that traveled together, listened together, and parents chose the programs.
Wireless radio was thus a naturally conservative medium, both in its content and in the social patterns that it encouraged and sustained.
The transistor radio was still rare in 1958—in all of France, for example, there were just 260,000.
But three years later, in 1961, the French owned two and a quarter million transistor radios.
By 1968, when nine out of every ten people in France owned a radio, two thirds of those radios were portable models.
Teenagers no longer needed to sit around with their families, listening to news and drama directed at the taste of adults and scheduled for ‘family listening hours’, usually following the evening meal.
They now had their own programmes —‘Salut les Copains' on French national radio, ‘Pick of the Pops’ on the BBC, etc.
Individualized radios bred targetted programming; and when the state radio systems proved slow to adapt, ‘peripheral’ radio stations—Radio Luxemburg, Radio Monte Carlo, Radio Andorra, transmitting legally but from across state frontiers and financed by commercial advertising—seized the opportunity.
Battery-driven transistor radios were light and portable, and thus well adapted to an age of increasing mobility—their natural habitat was the tourist beach or public park.
But radio was still an aural medium, and thus restricted in its capacity to adapt to what was an increasingly visual age.
For older people radio remained a primary source of information, enlightenment and entertainment.
In Communist states the radio set was also the only means of access, however inadequate, to uncensored news and opinion, from Radio Free Europe, the Voice of America and, above all, the BBC World Service.
But young people everywhere now listened to radio above all for popular music.
In Britain, regular transmitting began in the 1940s and many people watched Queen Elizabeth’s June 1953 coronation live on television.
France, by contrast, boasted just 60,000 television sets in June 1953 (at a time when there were already 200,000 in West Germany and fifteen million in the USA); even in i960 only one French family in eight owned a television, one-fifth the UK figure for a comparable population.
In the course of the Sixties, however, television caught on almost everywhere— small black-and-white television sets had become an affordable and increasingly essential item of domestic furniture in even the most modest household.
By 1970 there was on average one television set for every four people in western Europe— more in the UK, rather less in Ireland.
Two East German households in three possessed a television ; Czechs, Hungarians and Estonians (who could watch Finnish television broadcasting from as early as 1954) were close behind.
Its subject matter was not, at first, especially innovative—state-owned television channels ensured that the political and moral content of programs for children and adults alike was strictly regulated.
Commercial television began in Britain in 1955, but it did not come elsewhere until much later and in most European countries there was no question of allowing private television channels until well into the 1970s.
Most television programming in the early decades of the medium was conventional, stuffy and more than a little patronizing—confirming rather than undermining traditional norms and values.
It contributed hugely to ending the isolation and ignorance of far-flung communities, by providing everyone with the same experience and a common visual culture.
Being ‘French’, or ‘German’ or ‘Dutch’ was now something shaped less by primary education or public festivities “Paul Ginsborg, A History of Contemporary Italy.
Until television, politics in Paris or Bonn, Rome or London were an elite affair, conducted by distant leaders known only from their disembodied voices on radio, lifeless newspaper photographs or brief, stylized appearances on formulaic cinema newsreels.
Many older politicians failed miserably when faced with television cameras.
Not only did it offer alternative screen entertainment, but it could also bring feature films into people’s homes, obviating the need to go out to see anything but the latest releases.
In the UK, cinemas lost 56 percent of their customers between 1946 and 1958.
Numbers fell more slowly elsewhere in Europe, but sooner or later they fell everywhere.
Cinema attendance held up longest in Mediterranean Europe—especially in Italy, where audience levels remained fairly constant until the mid-1970s.
Eventually, even the Italian film industry, and Italian cinema attendance, languished.
European film producers, lacking the resources of Hollywood, could not hope to compete with American films in scale or ‘production values’ and confined themselves increasingly to ‘ordinary life’ cinema, whether ‘new wave’, kitchen sink or domestic comedy.
Whereas audiences in the 1940s and 1950s had automatically gone to see whatever happened to be showing at the local cinema, they now went only if they were attracted by a particular film.
For random entertainment, to see whatever was ‘on’, they turned instead to television.
Despite being a ‘young’ medium, television had a particular attraction for older audiences, especially in its early, state-regulated, culturally cautious years.
By the end of the 1950s, the European economy was beginning to feel the full commercial impact of the baby boom.
Around 1957, for the first time in European history, young people started buying things themselves.
Until this time, young people had not even existed as a distinct group of consumers.
In traditional families and communities, children remained children until they left school and went to work, at which point they were young adults.
The new, intermediate category of‘teenager’, in which a generation was defined not by its status but by its age—neither child nor adult—had no precedent.
And the notion that such persons—teenagers—might represent a distinct group of consumers would have been quite unthinkable a few years before.
For most people the family had always been a unit of production, not consumption.
To the extent that any young person within the family had independent cash earnings, these were part of the family income and used to help defray collective expenses.
But with real wages rising rapidly, most families could subsist—and better—on the income of the primary wage-earner; all the more so if both parents were employed.
A son or daughter who had left school at fourteen (the typical schoolleaving age for most young west Europeans in these years), who was living at home, and who had a steady or just a part-time job, was no longer automatically expected to hand over all his or her earnings every Friday.
In France, by 1965, 62 percent of all 16to 24-year-olds still living with their parents were retaining all their own earnings to spend as they wished.
The most immediately obvious symptom of this new adolescent spending power was sartorial.
Well before the baby-boom generation itself discovered miniskirts and long hair, its immediate predecessor—the generation born during the war rather than just after it—asserted its presence and its appearance in the gang cults of the late Fifties.
But despite occasional bursts of violence—most seriously in Britain, where gangs of leatherclad youths attacked Caribbean immigrants—the chief threat that these young people and their clothes posed was to their elders’ sense of propriety.
Age-specific clothing was important, as a statement of independence and even revolt.
It was also new—in the past, young adults had had little option but to wear the same clothes as their fathers and mothers.
The association of‘teenager’ and ‘pop music’ that became so automatic by the early Sixties had a commercial as well as a cultural basis.
In Europe as in America, when the family budget could dispense with a teenager’s contribution, the first thing the liberated adolescent did was to go out and buy a gramophone record.
The first 45rpm ‘single’, with one song on each side, was marketed by RCA the following year.
Sales in Europe did not take off as fast as in America—where turnover from record sales rose from $277 million in 1955 to $600 million four years later.
In Britain, where young people were initially more exposed to American popular music than their continental contemporaries, observers dated the pop music explosion from the showing of the 1956 film Rock Around the Clock , starring Bill Haley and the Comets and the Platters.
The film itself was mediocre even by the undemanding standards of rock music movie vehicles; but its eponymous title song (performed by Haley) galvanized a generation of British teenagers.
But there was nothing very angry about it, much less violent, and even the sex was kept firmly under wraps by record company producers, marketing managers and radio broadcasting executives.
Disapproving local council watch committees banned Rock Around the Clock —as they did Elvis Presley’s decidedly superior rock musical, Jailhouse Rock.
The city fathers of Swansea in Wales thought the British skiffle player Lonnie 21 It is perhaps worth emphasizing the marginality of jazz.
There jazz was American , therefore both exotic and subversive, Western yet radical—and carried a charge quite lacking further West.
Tommy Steele, a moderately energetic British rock singer of the late Fifties, was not allowed to perform in Portsmouth on the Sabbath.
Johnny Hallyday, a half-successful French attempt to clone United States rockers of the Gene Vincent or Eddie Cochran mould, inspired outrage among a generation of French conservative intellectuals when his first record appeared in i960.
In retrospect, the horrified response of parents, teachers, clerics, pundits and politicians across Western Europe appears quaintly disproportionate.
Within less than a decade Haley, Donegan, Steele, Hallyday and their like would seem hopelessly outdated, relics of an innocent prehistory.
European teenagers of the late fifties and early sixties did not aspire to change the world.
Most of them just wanted to look different, travel more, play pop music and buy stuff.
In this they reflected the behavior and tastes of their favorite singers, and the disc-jockeys whose radio programs they listened to on their transistors.
More even than their parents, they were the target of the advertising industry that followed, accompanied and prophesied the consumer boom.
More and more goods were being made and purchased, and they came in unprecedented variety.
Cars, clothes, baby carriages, packaged foods and washing powder all now came to market in a bewildering variety of shapes and sizes and colors.
Newspapers, especially the popular newspapers that flourished from the 1890s, had always carried advertisements.
Roadside hoardings and placards were a longstanding blight in Italy well before the nineteen fifties, and any traveler in mid-century France would have been familiar with the exhortations painted high up on the side of rural farmhouses and urban terraces to drink St Raphael or Dubonnet.
Commercial jingles as well as still photographs had long accompanied newsreels and the second feature in cinemas across Europe.
But such traditional advertising took little account of targeted product placement, or markets segmented by age or taste.
From the mid-1950s, by contrast, consumer choice became a major marketing consideration; and advertising, still a relatively small business expense in pre-war Europe, took on a prominent role.
Moreover, whereas the cleaning products and breakfast cereals advertised on early commercial television in Britain were directed towards housewives and children, commercial breaks on Radio Monte Carlo and elsewhere were aimed above all at the ‘young adult’ market.
Expenditure on retail advertising in Great Britain rose from £102 million a year in 1951 to £2. billion in 1978.
But it is symptomatic that those polled already regarded these goods and services as rights of which they were deprived, rather than fantasies to which they could never aspire.
Across the English Channel, in that same year, a group of middle-class activists, perturbed at the unmediated impact of commercial advertising and the efflorescence of commodities it was selling, published the first-ever consumer guide in Europe.
A radical departure though it seemed to many, this was not in fact a new experience.
Europeans had been ‘Americanizing’—and dreading the thought—for at least thirty years.
The vogue for US-style production lines and ‘Taylorized’ work rates, like the fascination with American films and fashions, was an old story even before World War Two.
And yet, for all its presence in the European imagination—and the very physical reality of American soldiers based all over western Europe—the United States was still a great unknown for most Europeans.
Americans spoke English—not a language with which most continental Europeans had any acquaintance in these years.
The history and geography of the USA were not studied in European schools; its writers were unknown even to an educated minority; its political system was a mystery to all but a privileged few.
East Europeans often had more links to the United States than westerners, since many Poles or Hungarians knew a friend or relative who had gone to America, and many more would have gone if they could.
But it is important to emphasize that this sort of American influence and example depended curiously little on direct American economic involvement.
America in 1950 had three fifths of the capital stock of the West and about the same share of output, but very little of the proceeds flowed across the Atlantic.
In 1956, United States private investment in Europe amounted to just $4.15 billion.
The American economic presence in Europe was felt less in direct economic investment or leverage than in the consumer revolution that was affecting America and Europe alike.
For young people the appeal of‘America’ was its aggressive contemporaneity.
As an abstraction, it stood for the opposite of the past; it was large, open, prosperous—and youthful.
French taste in particular was influenced by black performing artists who made their way to Paris to escape prejudice at home—one reason why the idea of ‘America’ in French culture was markedly infused with the image of racism.
By the 1950s, the impact of American example on a European audience came overwhelmingly through the medium of film.
And partly for this reason audiences above a certain age continued to prefer the domestic product.
Contemporary critics worried that the smug conformism of American popular culture, combined with the manifest or subliminal political messages conveyed in films aimed at mass audiences, would corrupt or tranquilize the sensibilities of European youth.
Young European audiences filtered out the propaganda content of mainstream American movies—envying the ‘good life’ as depicted on screen, much as their parents had done twenty years before, but laughing out loud at the bathos and naivete of American romance and domestic routine.
Meanwhile, however, they paid very close attention to the often-subversive style of the performers.
The music that was played in American films would re-surface on radio, in cafes, bars and dance halls.
The body language of rebellious American youth—as seen on film—became a fashion statement for their European contemporaries.
Young Europeans began to dress ‘American’—when ‘genuine Levi’ jeans first appeared on sale in Paris, at the Marche aux Puces in May 1963, demand far outran supply.
The American youth uniform of jeans and tee-shirts carried very little connotation of class (at least until both were appropriated by expensive high-end fashion designers, and even then the distinction that emerged was not of social rank but material resources); indeed, worn by middle class and working class alike, jeans were a revealing inversion of the traditional ‘trickle down’ development of dress style, having trickled up from a genuine item of work clothing.
Stock American film themes—science-fiction, detective stories, Westerns—were domesticated in stylized European versions.
Millions of West Germans learned about cowboys from paperback novels written by local authors who had never been to America; by i960 German-language ‘Western’ novels were selling at the rate of ninety-one million a year in the Federal Republic alone.
Lucky Luke , a hapless and appealing cowpoke featured weekly in Frenchand Dutch-language comics.
America, real or imagined, was becoming the natural setting for light entertainment of all genres.
Their elders observed and regretted the propensity of young Europeans everywhere to pepper their conversations with real or imagined Americanisms.
Anti-Americanism—the principled distrust and dislike of American civilization and all its manifestations—was typically confined to cultural elites whose influence made it appear more widespread than it was.
America was a land of hysterical puritans, given over to technology, standardization and conformism, bereft of originality of thought.
Such cultural insecurities had more to do with the pace of change in Europe itself than with the challenge or threat posed by America.
Just as European teenagers identified the future with an America they hardly knew, so their parents blamed America for the loss of a Europe that had never really been, a continent secure in its identity, its authority and its values, and impervious to the sirens of modernity and mass society.
These sentiments were not yet widely encountered in Germany or Austria, or even Italy, where many older people still regarded Americans as liberators.
Conversely, anti-Americanism was more frequently espoused in England and France, the two former colonial powers directly displaced by the rise of the United States.
But notwithstanding the haughty disdain of Parisian intellectuals, a civilization of bathtubs and ffigidaires—and indoor plumbing and central heating and television and cars—was what most Europeans now wanted.
And they wanted these commodities not because they were American but because they represented comfort and a degree of ease.
Butler celebrated in several speeches in 1953 and 1954 was but the last wash of prosperity breaking on British shores from the wake of the German economy as it surged ahead, pulling its attendant European flotilla with it.
Alan Milward A striking feature of the history of post-war western Europe was the contrast between the economic performance of West Germany and Great Britain.
For the second time in one generation, Germany was the defeated power—its cities shattered, its currency destroyed, its male workforce dead or in prison camps, its transportation and service infrastructure pulverized.
Britain was the only European state to emerge unambiguously victorious from World War Two.
Bomb damage and human losses aside, the fabric of the country—roads, railways, shipyards, factories and mines—had survived the war intact.
Yet by the early 1960s, the Federal Republic was the booming, prosperous powerhouse of Europe, while Great Britain was an underperforming laggard, its growth rate far behind that of the rest of Western Europe.
Already by 1958 the West German economy was larger than that of Britain.
In the eyes of many observers the UK was well on its way to becoming the sick man of Europe.
The background to the German economic ‘miracle’ of the fifties was the recovery of the thirties.
The investments of the Nazis—in communications, armaments and vehicle manufacture, optics, chemical and light engineering industries and non-ferrous metals—were undertaken for an economy geared to war; but their pay-off came twenty years later.
The social market economy of Ludwig Erhard had its roots in the policies of Albert Speer—indeed, many of the young managers and planners who went on to high position in post-war West German business and government got their start under Hitler; they brought to the committees, planning authorities and firms of the Federal Republic policies and practices favored by Nazi bureaucrats.
The essential infrastructure of German business survived the war undamaged.
Manufacturing firms, banks, insurance companies, distributors were all back in business by the early ’50s, supplying a voracious foreign market with their products and services.
Even the increasingly high-valued Deutschmark did not impede German progress.
It made imported raw materials cheap, without restricting foreign demand for German products—these were typically high-value and technically advanced, and they sold on quality, not price.
German business costs were kept down by sustained investment in new and efficient production methods—and by a compliant workforce.
The Federal Republic benefited from a virtually inexhaustible supply of cheap labor—skilled young engineers fleeing East Germany, semi-skilled machine minders and assembly workers from the Balkans, unskilled laborers from Turkey, Italy and elsewhere.
All of these were grateful for stable hard-currency wages in return for steady employment, and—like an un-protesting older generation of German workers inherited from the Thirties—they were not disposed to make trouble.
By the 1960s German car manufacturers had successfully established a reputation for engineering quality and manufacturing reliability, such that companies like Mercedes-Benz in Stuttgart and BMW in Munich could sell increasingly expensive cars to a nearcaptive market, first at home and increasingly overseas.
The Bonn government unashamedly supported such ‘national champions’, just as the Nazis had done before it, nurturing them in early years with favorable loans and encouraging the banking-business nexus that provided German companies with ready cash for investment.
In the case of Volkswagen, the groundwork had already been laid by 1945.
Like so much of post-war West German industry, Volkswagen benefited from all the advantages of a free-market economy—notably growing demand for its products— without suffering any of the drawbacks of competition or the costs of research, development and tooling.
Nazism, war and military occupation had all done well by it—the Allied Military Government looked kindly on Volkswagen precisely because its productive capacity had been built up before the war and could be put to work without further ado.
There was no serious domestic competition for the VW Beetle when demand for mass-produced small family cars took off, and even at a fixed and low price the cars turned a profit—thanks to the Nazis, the company had no old debt to pay off.
And like the German manufacturers, British carmakers laid increasing emphasis on the overseas market.
The company duly and deliberately neglected quality control in favor of rapid output.
But once the reputation for low quality and poor service was established, it proved impossible to shake.
European buyers abandoned British cars in droves as soon as better home-produced alternatives became available When they did decide to update their fleets and modernize their production lines, British car firms had no affiliated banks to turn to for investment cash and loans, in the German manner.
Yet under heavy political pressure from London, they built plants and distribution centers in uneconomic parts of the country—to conform to official regional policies and to appease local politicians and unions.
After the war, the authorities distributed scarce supplies of steel to manufacturers on the basis of their pre-war market share, thus freezing a major sector of the economy in the mould of the past and decisively penalizing new, and potentially more efficient producers.
By 1970 European and Japanese producers were taking over their markets and beating them on quality and price.
The oil crisis of the early 1970s, entry into the EEC and the end of the UK’s last protected markets in the dominions and colonies finally destroyed the independent British car industry.
In 1975 British Leyland, the country’s only independent mass automobile maker, collapsed and had to be bailed out via nationalization.
The decline and eventual disappearance of an autonomous British automobile sector can stand for British economic experience at large.
It provided full employment and it did grow, albeit more slowly than everywhere else.
It suffered, however, from two crippling disadvantages, one a product of historical misfortune, the other self-imposed.
The pound—still a major unit of international transactions in the 1950s—was overvalued, which made it hard for Britain to sell enough abroad to compensate for sterling’s chronic deficit against the dollar.
An island country, utterly dependent on imports of food and vital raw materials, Britain had historically compensated for this structural vulnerability by its privileged access to protected markets in the Empire and Commonwealth.
But this dependence on far-flung markets and resources, an advantage in the initial post-war years as the rest of Europe struggled to recover, became a serious liability once Europe—and especially the EEC zone—took off.
The British could not compete with the US, and later Germany, in any unprotected overseas market, while British exports to Europe itself lagged ever further behind those of other European producers.
British manufactured exports represented 25 percent by value of the world’s total in 1950; twenty years later they constituted just 10. percent.
The British had lost their share of the world market, and their traditional suppliers— in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the African colonies—were now turning to other markets as well.
In some measure the relative economic decline of Britain was thus inevitable.
Even before World War Two, Britain’s manufacturing industry had gained a well-deserved reputation for inefficiency, for coasting on past success.
Indeed, the maintenance of full employment was the cardinal social objective of every British government in these years.
The determination to avoid a return to the horrors of the thirties, when men and machines decayed in idleness, thus trumped any consideration of growth, productivity or efficiency.
Trade unions—and especially their local representatives, the factory shop stewards—were more powerful than ever before or since.
Strikes—a symptom of labour militancy and incompetent management alike—were endemic to post-war British industrial life.
Even if Britain’s trade union leadership had followed the German example and offered amicable shop-floor relations and wage restraint in return for investment, security and growth, it is unlikely that most of their employers would have taken the bait.
Back in the 1930s the future Labour Prime Minister Clement Attlee had accurately identified the British economic malaise as a problem of underinvestment, lack of innovation, labour immobility and managerial mediocrity.
But, once in office, there seemed little that he or his successors could do to stop the rot.
Whereas German industry inherited all the advantages of the changes wrought by Nazism and war, Britain’s old-established, uncompetitive industries inherited stagnation and a deep fear of change.
Textiles, mines, shipbuilding, steel and light engineering plants would all need restructuring and retooling in the post-war decades; but just as they chose to accommodate trade unions rather than attack inefficient labour practices, so British factory managers preferred to operate in a cycle of under-investment, limited research and development, low wages and a shrinking pool of clients, rather than risk a fresh start with new products in new markets.
In France, a similar heritage of managerial incompetence and inertia was over2 Quoted in Peter Hennessy, Never Again.
British governments, however, confined themselves to collective bargaining, demand management and exhortation.
For a state that had nationalized such sweeping tracts of the economy after 1945, and that was by 1970 responsible for spending 47 percent of the country’s GNP, this caution seems a curious paradox.
But the British state, although it owned or operated most of the transport, medical, educational and communications sectors, never boasted any overall national strategic ambition; and the economy was for practical purposes left to its own devices.
It fell to a later generation of ffee-market reformers—and a radically state-averse Conservative prime minister—to apply the full force of central government to the problem of Britain’s economic stagnation.
But by then some of the strictures levelled at Britain’s maladapted‘old’ economy were being levelled, for different reasons, at the faltering German economy too.
But since 1945 that relationship had come increasingly to be characterised by a dense tissue of social benefits and economic strategies in which it was the state that served its subjects, rather than the other way around.
In the peak years of the modern European welfare state, when the administrative apparatus still exercised broad-ranging authority and its credibility remained unassailed, a remarkable consensus was achieved.
Between 1950 and 1973, government spending rose from 27. percent to 38. percent of the gross domestic product in France, from 30. percent to 42 percent in West Germany, from 34. percent to 41. percent in the UK and from 26. percent to 45. percent in the Netherlands—at a time when that domestic product was itself growing faster than ever before or since.
The overwhelming bulk of the increase in spending went on insurance, pensions, health, education and housing.
Only in Switzerland was the share of post-war GNP spent by the state kept comparatively low (it did not reach 30 percent until 1980), but even there it stood in dramatic contrast to the 1938 figure of just 6. percent.
The success story of post-war European capitalism was everywhere accompanied by an enhanced role for the public sector.
Conglomerates such as IRI serviced not just their employees and consumers, but also a variety of political parties, trade unions, social service agencies and even churches whose patronage they dispensed and whose influence they enhanced.
The Italian National Institute for War Orphans employed 12 people for every 70 orphans and spent 80 percent of its annual budgetary allocation on salaries and administration.
In a similar way, control of public-sector companies in Belgium allowed the national government in Brussels to buffer local resentments and bribe contending regional and linguistic interests with services, jobs and costly infrastructure investment.
In France the post-war nationalizations established long-lasting networks of influence and patronage.
The state thus lubricated the wheels of commerce, politics and society in numerous ways.
And it was responsible, directly or indirectly, for the employment and remuneration of millions of men and women who thus had a vested interest in it, whether as professionals or bureaucrats.
Graduates from Britain’s leading universities, like their contemporaries in French grandes ecoles , typically sought employment not in private-sector professions, much less industry and commerce, but in education, medicine, the social services, public law, state monopolies or government service.
By the end of the 1970s, 60 percent of all university graduates in Belgium took up employment in the public services or publicly subsidized social sector.
The European state had forged a unique market for the goods and services it could provide.
It formed a virtuous circle of employment and influence that attracted near-universal appreciation.
Doctrinal differences over the ostensible goals of the state might noisily oppose Left and Right, Christian Democrats and Communists, Socialists and Conservatives, but almost everyone had something to gain from the opportunities the state afforded them for income and influence.
Faith in the state—as planner, coordinator, facilitator, arbiter, provider, caretaker and guardian—was widespread and crossed almost all political divides.
In that sense welfare capitalism, as it unfolded in Western Europe, was truly post-ideological.
But at the time—and in part for this reason—they wielded little influence.
Social Democracy had always been a hybrid; indeed, this was just what was held against it by enemies to the Right and Left alike.
As a solution to the injustice and inefficiency of industrial capitalism, the nineteenth-century paradigm of violent urban upheaval was not only undesirable and unlikely to meet its goals; it was also redundant.
Genuine improvements in the condition of all classes could be obtained in incremental and peaceful ways.
It did not follow from this that the fundamental nineteenth-century socialist tenets were discarded.
The overwhelming majority of mid-twentieth-century European Social Democrats, even if they kept their distance from Marx and his avowed heirs, maintained as an article of faith that capitalism was inherently dysfunctional and that socialism was both morally and economically superior.
Where they differed from Communists was in their unwillingness to commit to the inevitability of capitalism’s imminent demise or to the wisdom of hastening that demise by their own political actions.
The politics of social democracy were not always seductive to impatient young people, as later events were to show.
But they were intuitively appealing to men and women who had lived through the terrible decades since 1914, and in certain parts of Western Europe social democracy by the mid-Sixties was no longer so much a politics as a way of life.
Between 1945 and 1968, eight out of ten Danish governments were led by Social Democrats; in the same years there were five Norwegian governments, three of them Social Democratic, and four Swedish governments, all Social Democratic.
Norway’s Einar Gerhardsen led two Social Democratic governments for a total of fourteen years; in Sweden, Tage Erlander ruled both his party and his country for twenty-three years, from 1946-1969.
Small and socially homogenous, with no overseas colonies or imperial ambitions, they had been constitutional states for many years.
The Danish constitution of 1849 had introduced limited parliamentary government but extensive press and religious freedom.
The Swedish constitution of 1809 established modern political institutions, including proportional representation and the exemplary system of the ombudsman —the latter adopted throughout Scandinavia in later years—and provided the stable framework within which the party political system could develop.
But Scandinavia was historically poor—a region of forests, farms, fisheries and a handful of primary industries, most of them in Sweden.
Labour relations in Sweden and Norway especially were chronically troubled by conflict—the strike rate in both countries was among the highest in the world during the first decades of the twentieth century.
During the Depression of the 1930s unemployment in the region was chronic.
If Scandinavia—and Sweden in particular—did not follow the path of other economically depressed societies on the European margin between the wars, much of the credit belongs to the Social Democrats.
After World War One the Scandinavian socialist parties largely abandoned the radical dogma and revolutionary ambitions they had shared with the German and other Socialist movements of the Second International; and in the course of the 1930s they moved towards a historic compromise between capital and labour.
At Saltsjobaden in 1938, representatives of Swedish employers and labour signed a Pact that was to form the basis of the country’s future social relations—a foretaste of the neo-corporatist social partnerships 2 Contrast Italy, which had 13 different governments and 11 different prime ministers in the same period— or France, which had 23 governments and 17 prime ministers between 1945 and 1968.
Scandinavian Social Democrats were open to such compromises because they had no illusions about the putative ‘proletarian’ constituency on whom other socialist parties relied for their core support.
Had they depended upon urban working-class votes alone, or even working-class votes allied to middle-class reformers, the Socialist parties of Scandinavia would forever have remained in the minority.
Their political prospects rested upon extending their appeal to the overwhelmingly rural populations of the region.
And thus, unlike almost every other socialist or social-democratic party of Europe, Scandinavian social democrats were not scarred by the instinctive antipathy to the countryside that characterized much of the European Left, from Marx’s remarks about the ‘idiocy of rural life’ to Lenin’s distaste for ‘kulaks’ The embittered and destitute peasants of inter-war central and southern Europe formed a ready constituency for Nazis, Fascists or single-issue Agrarian populists.
But the equally troubled farmers, loggers, crofters and fisherman of Europe’s far north turned in growing numbers to the Social Democrats, who actively supported agrarian cooperatives—especially important in Denmark, where commercial farming was widespread and efficient, but very small-scale—-and thereby blurred the longstanding socialist distinctions between private production and collectivist goals, ‘backward’ country and ‘modern’ town that were so electorally disastrous in other countries.
This alliance of labour and farming—facilitated by the unusual independence of Scandinavian peasants, conjoined in fervently Protestant communities unconstrained by traditional rural subservience to priest or landlord—was to form the long-term platform on which Europe’s most successful social democracies were built.
The social services and other public provisions that came to 3 The Saltsjobaden Pact resembled in certain respects the Arbeitsfrieden reached in Switzerland the previous year, in which employers and workers agreed to establish a system of nonconffontational collective bargaining that was to prove an enduring cornerstone of the country’s future stability and prosperity.
But except for education, which was already universal and comprehensive before 1914, the Scandinavian system of welfare was not conceived and implemented all at once.
Moreover, what looked from the outside like a single Nordic system was in reality quite varied by country.
Not only was it critically dependent upon an overseas market for farm produce (dairy and pork products especially) and thus more sensitive to policies and political developments elsewhere in Europe; but its skilled work force was much more divided by traditional craft-based loyalties and organisations.
In this respect it resembled Britain more than, say, Norway; indeed, Denmark’s Social Democrats were constrained on more than one occasion in the Sixties to emulate British governments and seek to impose price and wage controls on an unstable labour market.
By British standards the policy was a success; but by more demanding Scandinavian measures, Danish social relations and Denmark’s economic performance were always somewhat troubled.
Moreover, even before oil was discovered off the coast, Norway’s situation was distinctive.
A front-line state in the Cold War and therefore committed to much greater defense outlays than tiny Denmark or neutral Sweden, it was also the most elongated of the northern countries, its tiny population of less than four million people strung along a 1,752 kilometre coastline, the longest in Europe.
Many of the farther-flung towns and villages were and are utterly dependent on fishing for their livelihood.
Sweden, too, was distinctive—though its peculiarities came over time to be thought of as the Scandinavian norm.
With a population almost the size of Norway and Denmark combined (greater Stockholm alone was home to the equivalent of 45 percent of Norway’s inhabitants), Sweden was by far the richest and most industrialized of the Scandinavian societies.
Where Norwegian social democracy consisted for many years in marshalling, rationing and distributing scarce resources in a poor society, Sweden was by the 1960s already one of the world’s wealthiest countries.
Social democracy there was about allocating and equalizing wealth and services for the common good.
Throughout Scandinavia, but in Sweden especially, the private ownership and exploitation of the means of production were never put into question.
Unlike the British Labour movement, whose core doctrine and program ever since 1918 rested on an ineradicable faith in the virtues of state ownership, Swedish Social Democrats were content to leave capital and initiative in private hands.
The example of the UK’s British Motor Corporation, a helpless guinea pig for government experiments in centralized resource allocation, was never followed in Sweden.
Volvo, Saab and other private businesses were left free to flourish or fail.
Indeed, industrial capital in ‘socialist’ Sweden was concentrated into fewer private hands than anywhere else in western Europe.
The government never interfered either with private wealth accumulation or with the marketplace for goods and capital.
Even in Norway, after fifteen years of Social Democratic government, the directly state-owned or state-run sector of the economy was actually smaller than that of Christian Democratic West Germany.
But in both countries, as in Denmark and Finland, what the state did do was ruthlessly and progressively tax and redistribute private profits for public ends.
To many foreign observers and most Scandinavians the results appeared to speak for themselves.
The provision of educational, welfare, medical, insurance, retirement and leisure services and facilities was unequalled , as were the economic and physical security in which the citizens of Nordic Europe pursued their contented lives.
In the 1960s and at times since, it pleased conservative critics of Scandinavian politics to blame these shortcomings on the moral paralysis induced by too much economic security and centralised direction.
If this was the worst that could be said against the Scandinavian ‘model’ then the Social Democrats of Sweden and elsewhere could be forgiven for laughing (or, as it were, complaining) all the way to the bank.
Scandinavian Social Democracy—like the Fabian reformism of Britain’s welfare state—was born of a widespread fascination with social engineering of all kinds.
And just a little beyond the use of the state to adjust incomes, expenditures, employment and information there lurked the temptation to tinker with individuals themselves.
Taken up by thinkers of all political shades, it dovetailed especially well with the ambitions of well-meaning social reformers.
In the early decades of the twentieth century the appeal of scientifically manipulated social or genetic planning was widespread and thoroughly respectable; it was only thanks to the Nazis, whose ‘hygienic’ ambitions began with ersatz anthropometries and ended in the gas chamber, that it was comprehensively discredited in post-war Europe.
Between 1934 and 1976 sterilization programmes were pursued in Norway, Sweden and Denmark, in each case under the auspices and with the knowledge of Social Democratic governments.
What this suggests about the depressant effect of prosperity, climate, latitude, diet, religion, family structures or the welfare state was obscure to contemporaries and remains unclear today.
The legitimacy of the state in post-war Scandinavia, the authority and initiative accorded it by a mostly unquestioning citizenry, left government free to act in what it took to be the common interest with remarkably little oversight.
It does not seem ever to have occurred to an ombudsman to investigate abuse of those who stood outside the rights-bearing community of tax-paying citizens.
The line separating progressive taxation and paternity-leave from forcible interference in the reproductive capacities of ‘defective’ citizens seems not to have been altogether clear to some post-war governments in Social Democratic Scandinavia.
If nothing else this suggests that the moral lessons of World War Two were not as clear as was once supposed—precisely in countries like Sweden whose collective conscience was widely presumed clear.
In Austria as in Sweden or Norway, an overwhelmingly rural, historically poor country had been transformed, as we have seen, into a prosperous, stable, politically tranquil oasis of state-furnished well-being.
Austria was indeed ‘social’ (and had, after Finland, the largest nationalized sector of any Western European democracy), but it was not particularly Social Democratic.
It was only in 1970 that the country got its first post-war Socialist head of government, when Bruno Kreisky became Chancellor.
Although Austria over time instituted many of the social services and public policies associated with Scandinavian Social Democratic society—child care, generous unemployment insurance and public pensions, family support, universal medical and educational provision, exemplary state-subsidized transportation—what distinguished Austria from Sweden, for example, was the near-universal allocation of employment, influence, favours and funds according to political affiliation.
This appropriation of the Austrian state and its resources to stabilize the market in political preferences had less to do with social ideals than with the memory of past traumas.
In the wake of their inter-war experience, Austria’s socialists were more interested in stabilizing their country’s fragile democracy than in revolutionizing its social policies.
Like the rest of Austrian society, the country’s Social Democrats proved remarkably adept at putting their past behind them.
Social Democratic parties else5 Ironically, it was the Swedish Social Democrats who for a long time showed more interest in Vienna’s early-twentieth-century ‘Austro-Marxist’ theorists Otto Bauer and Rudolf Hilferding.
In West Germany the SPD waited until 1959 and its Congress at Bad Godesberg to recast its goals and purposes.
It was also, like its Belgian counterparts in this respect, from its origins a labour movement rather than a socialist party, motivated above all by the concerns of its trade union affiliates.
Instead, the British compromise was characterized by demand-manipulating fiscal policy and costly universal social provisions, supported by sharply progressive taxation and a large nationalized sector, and set against a background of unstable and historically adversarial industrial relations.
If there was any sense in which British politics, too, were shaped by past shocks it came in the widespread, cross-party acknowledgement that a return to mass unemployment must be avoided at almost any cost.
Wilson’s narrow margin of victory in the election of 1964 hardly disposed him to take political risks, and even though Labour did better in elections called two years later there was to be no radical departure in economic or social policy.
Wilson himself was heir to the Attlee-Beveridge tradition of Fabian theory and Keynesian practice and showed little interest in economic innovation.
Nevertheless, there was a certain distinctiveness about the British Social Democratic state, beyond the insular refusal of all parties concerned to describe it thus.
What the British Left (and, at the time, much of the Centre and Centre-Right of the political spectrum) were taken up with above all was the goal of fairness.
It was the manifest injustice, the unfairness of life before the war that drove both the Beveridge reforms and the overwhelming vote for Labour in 1945.
It was their promise that they could liberalize the economy while maintaining a fair distribution of rewards and services that brought the Conservatives to power in 1951 and kept them there for so long.
The British accepted progressive taxation and welcomed universal health provision not because these were presented as ‘socialist’, but because they were more intuitively just.
In the same way, the curiously regressive workings of the British flat-rate systems of benefits and services—which disproportionately favoured the better-heeled professional middle class—were broadly acceptable because they were egalitarian, if only in appearance.
That is why the educational reform was even pursued by Conservative governments after Wilson’s departure in 1970, despite warnings from all sides of the perverse consequences such changes might have.
British industrial relations remained mired in adversarial shopfloor confrontations and craft-based piece-rate and wage disputes of a kind virtually unknown in Scandinavia, Germany, Austria or the Netherlands.
Labour ministers made half-hearted attempts to break clear of this encumbering inheritance, but without much success; and partly for this reason the achievements of continental social democracy were never quite emulated in Britain.
The net effect of the re-distributive policies of the first three post-war decades was to shift income and assets from the top 10 percent to the next 40 percent; the bottom 50 percent gained very little, for all the general improvement in security and welfare.
Any overall audit of the era of the welfare state in Western Europe will inevitably be side-shadowed by our knowledge of the problems it would face in later decades.
Thus today it is easy to see that initiatives like the West German Social Security Reform Act of 1957, which guaranteed workers a pension keyed to their wage at the point of retirement and linked to a cost-of-living index, would prove an intolerable budgetary burden in changed demographic and economic circumstances.
And with hindsight it is clear that radical income-levelling in Social Democratic Sweden reduced private savings and thus inhibited future investment.
But the achievements of Europe’s ‘nanny states’ were real all the same, whether introduced by Social Democrats, paternalist Catholics, or prudentially disposed conservatives and liberals.
Beginning with core programmes of social and economic protection, the welfare states moved on to systems of entitlement, benefits, social justice and income redistribution—and managed this substantial transformation at almost no political cost.
This was good for Social Democrats and Christian Democrats alike, as such parties duly noted.
But it was also bad for Fascists and Communists, which mattered rather more.
These changes reflected the demographic transformations already noted, but also unprecedented levels of personal security and a new intensity of educational and social mobility.
As west Europeans were now less likely to remain in the place, the occupation, the income bracket and the social class into which they had been born, so they were less disposed to identify automatically with the political movements and social affiliations of their parents’ world.
The rise in the influence of the state upon the employment and welfare of its citizens was accompanied by a steady reduction in its authority over their morals and opinions.
Liberal and Social Democratic advocates for the European welfare state saw no reason in principle why government should not pay close attention to the economic or medical welfare of the population, guaranteeing citizens’ well-being from cradle to grave, while keeping its nose firmly out of their views and practices on strictly personal matters like religion and sex, or artistic taste and judgement.
The Christian Democrats of Germany or Italy, for whom the state still had a legitimate interest in the manners and mores of its subjects, could not so readily make this distinction.
Until the early 1960s, public authorities throughout Western Europe (with the partial exception of Scandinavia) had exercised firm and mostly repressive control over the private affairs and opinions of the citizenry.
Homosexual intercourse was illegal almost everywhere, and punishable by long prison terms.
Even contraception was technically against the law in some Catholic states, albeit often condoned in practice.
Even in the UK, where commercial television was introduced in 1955, it too was strictly regulated and carried a publicly mandated obligation to provide ‘enlightenment and information’ as well as entertainment and advertisements.
In Britain and France some of the most stringent constraints on behaviour and the expression of opinion had been introduced during the First or Second World Wars and never repealed.
Elsewhere—in Italy, West Germany and some of the countries they had occupied—post-war regulations were a legacy of Fascist laws that democratic legislators had preferred to maintain in place.
Precisely because it was being steadily squeezed out of the realm of political power by the modern state, the Vatican made uncompromising demands upon its followers in other ways.
Indeed, the long and—in retrospect— controversial papacy of Eugenio Pacelli, Pope Pius XII not only maintained its spiritual claims, but actually brought the official Church back into politics.
Avowedly on the side of political reaction, from the Vatican’s close ties to Mussolini and ambivalent response to Nazism to its enthusiasm for Catholic dictators in Spain and Portugal, Pacelli’s papacy also took an uncompromising line in the domestic politics of the democracies.
Catholics in Italy especially were left in no doubt as to the spiritual impropriety, and worse, of voting against the Christian Democrats; but even in relatively liberal Belgium or Holland the local Catholic hierarchy was under strict instructions to turn out the Catholic vote for the Catholic parties and only them.
Not until 1967, nine years after the death of Pius XII, did a Dutch bishop dare suggest in public that Dutch Catholics might vote for a nonCatholic party without risking excommunication.
In such circumstances, it is hardly surprising that the post-war Catholic hierarchy also took an uncompromising line in questions having to do with the family, or moral behavior or inappropriate books and films.
But younger Catholic laymen, and a new generation of priests, were uncomfortably aware that by the end of the 1950s the Vatican’s authoritarian rigidity in public and private matters alike was both anachronistic and imprudent.
Back in 1900, most marriages in Italy had lasted around twenty years, before being dissolved by the death of a spouse.
By the end of the third quarter of the century marriages lasted in excess of thirty-five years, and demand for the right to divorce was steadily growing.
Meanwhile, the post-war baby boom had undercut the demographic case against contraception, isolating the ecclesiastical authorities in their uncompromising opposition.
Whatever the reasons—the geographical and social mobility of hitherto acquiescent villagers, the political emancipation of women, the declining importance of Catholic charities and parochial schools in the age of the welfare state—the problem was real and, as it seemed to the more perceptive Catholic leaders, could not be addressed by appeals to tradition and authority, or suppressed by invoking anti-Communism in the style of the late 1940s.
Upon Pacelli’s death, his successor Pope John XXIII called a new Vatican Council, to attend to these difficulties and bring up to date the attitudes and practices of the Church.
The pronouncements of the Second Vatican Council made it clear that the Church was no longer frightened by change and challenge, was not an opponent of liberal democracy, mixed economies, modern science, rational thought and even secular politics.
The first—very tentative—steps were taken towards reconciliation with other Christian denominations and there was some (not much) acknowledgement of the Church’s responsibility to discourage antiSemitism by re-casting its longstanding account of Jewish responsibility for the death of Jesus.
These changes were not universally welcomed even among the Catholic Church’s own reformers—one delegate to Vatican II, a young priest from Crakow, would later rise to the papacy and see it as his task to restore the full weight of moral authority and influence of an uncompromising Catholic hierarchy.
But since the decline of religion in Europe has by no means been confined to the Catholic faith, this was probably beyond their powers.
What Vatican II did achieve—or at least facilitate and authorize—was the final divorce between politics and religion in continental Europe.
After the death of Pius XII, no pope and almost no bishop again presumed to threaten Catholics with serious consequences should they fail to vote the correct way; and the once-close link between Church hierarchy and Catholic or Christian Democratic parties in the Netherlands, Belgium, West Germany, Austria and Italy was prised open.
Even in Franco’s Spain, where the local Catholic hierarchy had enjoyed unusual privileges and powers, Vatican II wrought dramatic changes.
Until the mid-sixties the Spanish leader forbade all outward manifestations of nonCatholic religious belief or practice.
But in 1966 he felt constrained to pass a law allowing other Christian churches to subsist, though still privileging Catholicism, and within four years full freedom of worship was authorized.
When the rights to abortion and the liberalization of divorce were put to the vote a few years later, in predominantly Catholic countries like Italy, France or West Germany, the ecclesiastical authorities vigorously if unsuccessfully opposed them.
But even on these sensitive issues the Church did not go to the wall, and its opposition no longer risked fragmenting the community.
In a society well on the way to being ‘postreligious’, the Church accepted its reduced place and made the best of it.
In non-Catholic societies—which meant Scandinavia, the UK, parts of the Netherlands and a minority of German-speaking western Europe—the liberation of the citizen from traditional moral authority was necessarily more diffuse, but even more dramatic when it came.
Until the end of the 1950s, British citizens were still forbidden to gamble; to read or to see anything that their betters judged ‘obscene’ or politically sensitive; to advocate homosexual acts; to practice abortions on themselves or others; or to get divorced without great difficulty and public humiliation.
And if they committed murder or certain other major offences, they could be hanged.
Henceforward, publishers and authors could defend themselves in court by invoking the worth of the work as a whole, and could invoke ‘expert’ opinion in their defense.
The Chatterley case was of particular interest to the British not just because of the hitherto illicit passages to which they were now exposed, but also thanks to the inter-class eroticism on which its notoriety rested.
Four years later the death penalty was abolished by the incoming Labour Government, and under the leadership of Roy Jenkins, a remarkable reforming Home Secretary, Labour oversaw the introduction of state-financed family planning clinics, reform of the law on homosexuality and the legalization of abortion in 1967, and the abolition of theatre censorship in the following year.
In 1969 9 In Ireland, however, the authority of the Church and its involvement in daily politics was sustained rather longer—well into the nineties.
The liberal and liberalizing reforms of 1960s Britain were emulated across northwest Europe, albeit with varying delays.
The Social Democratic-led coalition governments of West Germany, under Willy Brandt, introduced similar changes there in the course of the later Sixties and Seventies, constrained in their case less by law or precedent than by the reluctance of their coalition partners—notably the economically liberal but socially conservative Free Democrats.
In France, abolition of the death penalty had to await the arrival in power of Francois Mitterrand’s Socialists in 1981, but there—as in Italy—the laws on abortion and divorce were rewritten in the course of the early Seventies.
In general, with the exception of Britain and Scandinavia, the liberated ‘Sixties’ did not actually arrive in Europe until the Seventies.
The diminishing standing of public authorities in matters of morality and personal relationships in no way supposed a decline in the role of the state in the cultural affairs of the nation.
It was the responsibility of a well-run public authority to deliver cultural nourishment no less than food, lodging and employment.
In such matters Social and Christian Democrats thought alike, and both were heir to the great Victorian-era improvers, though with far greater resources to hand.
The financially strapped French Fourth Republic was less forthcoming, except to traditional, prestige venues for high culture—museums, the Paris Opera, the Comedie Fran^aise—and the state-monopolized radio and television stations.
But after De Gaulle returned to power and installed Andre Malraux as his Minister for Culture, the situation there was transformed.
Now the government would spend money to place performers and performances in the provinces.
Museums, galleries, festivals and theatres began to sprout across provincial France.
The best known of these, the Avignon summer festival under the direction of Jean Vilar, began in 1947; but it took flight in the course of the fifties and sixties when Vilar’s productions played a major part in the transformation and renewal of French theatre.
Many of France’s best known actors—Jeanne Moreau, Maria Casar£s, Gerard Philipe—worked in Avignon.
It was there, as well as in such unlikely venues as Saint-fitienne, Toulouse, Rennes or Colmar, that the French artistic renaissance began.
Malraux’s encouragement of provincial cultural life depended of course on centralized initiative.
In a genuinely decentralized country like the Federal Republic of Germany, on the other hand, culture and the arts were a direct outgrowth of local policy and regional self-interest.
In Germany, as elsewhere in Western Europe, public spending on the arts expanded quite dramatically in the post-war decades.
But because cultural and educational matters in West Germany fell under the authority of the Lander, there was considerable duplication of effort.
Every Land and most significant towns and cities had an opera company, orchestra and concert halls, a dance company, subsidized theatre and arts groups.
As in France, this system had its roots in the past—in Germany’s case the pre-modern micro-principalities, duchies and ecclesiastical fiefs, many of which had maintained full-time court musicians and artists, and regularly commissioned new works.
Despite the cultural self-doubt of post-Nazi West Germany, the country’s generously financed cultural institutions became a Mecca for artists of all kinds.
The Stuttgart Ballet, the Berlin Symphony Orchestra, the Cologne Opera and dozens of smaller institutions—the Mannheim National Theatre, the Staatstheater of Wiesbaden and so on—offered steady work (as well as unemployment benefits, medical coverage and pensions) to thousands of dancers, musicians, actors, choreographers, theatre technicians and office staff.
Many of the dancers and musicians especially came from abroad, the United States included.
They, no less than the local audiences who paid subsidized rates to watch and hear them perform, benefited hugely from the flourishing European cultural scene.
In Look Back in Anger, John Osborne has Jimmy Porter revile the phoniness of postwar prosperity and self-satisfaction; and there is no doubt that the veneer of polite conformity that was not swept away until the end of the decade was intensely frustrating to many observers and especially the young.
But in fact the 1950s saw much original work—a lot of it, in theatre, literature and cinema especially, of more enduring interest than what was to follow.
What Western Europe had lost in power and political prestige it was now making up for in the arts.
Indeed, the late fifties were something of an Indian summer for the ‘high’ arts in Europe.
With the premiere in Paris’s Theatre de Babylone of Samuel Beckett’s En Attendant Godot, in March 1953, European theatre entered a golden age of modernism.
Across the Channel, the English Stage Company at London’s Royal Court Theatre adopted Beckett and East Germany’s Berthold Brecht, as well as performing works by John Osborne, Harold Pinter and Arnold Wesker, all of whose plays married stylistic minimalism to aesthetic disdain in a technique that was often hard to place on the conventional political spectrum.
In the late fifties an unparalleled generation of English theatrical knights—Olivier, Gielgud, Richardson, Redgrave, Guinness—was joined by younger performers fresh from the universities and a remarkable pool of innovative directors and producers including Peter Brook, Peter Hall and Jonathan Miller.
First proposed in 1946, Britain’s National Theatre was formally established in 1962 with Lawrence Olivier as its founding director and the theatre critic Kenneth Tynan as his adviser and assistant, though its permanent home on London’s South Bank was not opened until 1976.
Together with the Royal Shakespeare Company, the National Theatre—which was to become the leading sponsor and venue for new British drama—was a prime beneficiary of Arts Council munificence.
That did not mean, it should be noted, that theatre became a more popular form of entertainment.
Playwrights might write about working-class life, but it was the middle class that came to watch.
By the early 1960s it was becoming possible to speak of a ‘European 5 theatre, or at least a theatre that took as its material controversial, contemporary European themes.
It was in the 1950s, too, that the European arts were swept by a ‘new wave 5 of writers and film directors whose break with narrative convention and attention to sex, youth, politics and alienation anticipated much of what the generation of the Sixties came to think of as its own achievement.
The most influential west European novels of the Fifties—Alberto Moravia’s II Conformista , Albert Camus’s La Chute , published in 1956, or Gunter Grass’s Die Blechtrommel (The Tin Drum, 1959)—were all in various ways more original and certainly more courageous than anything that came later.
Even Fran^oise Sagan’s Bonjour Tristesse or Colin Wilson’s The Outsider , narcissistic accounts of post-adolescent selfabsorption (coloured in Wilson’s case with more than a hint of authoritarian misanthropy), were original in their day.
Written when their authors were respectively eighteen and twenty-four years of age, their subject matter—and their success— anticipated the ‘youth revolution’ of the sixties by a full decade.
Notwithstanding the decline in cinema attendance already noted, it was in the course of the second half of the 1950s and early 1960s that European films acquired a lasting reputation for artistry and originality.
Indeed, there was probably a connection, as cinema in Western Europe graduated from popular entertainment into high culture.
Certainly the renaissance of European cinema was not driven by audience demand—had it been left to viewers, French cinema would have remained confined to the ‘quality’ costume dramas of the early fifties, German cinemas would have continued to show romantic ‘Heimat’ films set in the Black Forest, and British audiences would have thrived on a diet of war films and increasingly suggestive light comedy.
In any case, European mass audiences continued to show a marked preference for American popular films.
Ironically, it was their own admiration for American films, particularly the sombre, unadorned film noir style of the late 1940s, which stimulated a revolution among a new cohort of French cineastes.
For the same reason they championed—then neglected—the films of an earlier generation of French directors, notably Jean Vigo and Jean Renoir.
While all this suggested intuitive good taste, the theoretical penumbra in which it was packaged was of little interest—indeed often incomprehensible—beyond a very restricted circle.
But the practice, at the hands of Louis Malle, Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol, Jacques Rivette, Eric Rohmer, Agnes Varda and above all Francis Truffaut, changed the face of film.
Between 1958 and 1965, French studios turned out an astonishing body of work.
Like Varda, best known in these years for Cleo des dj and Le Bonheur , he often lapsed into selfindulgence; but this was never true of Eric Rohmer, the oldest of the group, later to become internationally famous for his elegiac ‘moral tales’, of which the first two, La Boulangere de Monceau and La Carriere de Suzanne , were both made in 1963.
But it was the incomparable Francois Truffaut who would come to incarnate the style and impact of the New Wave.
Renowned above all for a series of films starring JeanPierre Leaud as Antoine Doinel —notably Les Quatre cents coups , VAmour a vingt ans , and Baisers voles — Truffaut was not only the main theorist behind the revolution in French cinema, he was also by far its most consistently successful practitioner.
And it was this combination of intellectual seriousness and visual accessibility that was so important for foreign emulators.
As the response to Alain Resnais’s Hiroshima mon amour suggests, French film had become the preferred vehicle for international moral debate.
Thus, when a group of 26 young German film directors gathered at Oberhausen in 1962 to proclaim ‘the collapse of the conventional German film’ and declared their intention to ‘create the new German feature film ... free from the conventions of the established industry, from the control of special interest groups’, they openly acknowledged the influence of the French.
In Eric Rohmer’s Ma Nuit Chez Maud Jean-Louis—a provincial philosophy professor played by Jean-Louis Trintignant—spends a snow-bound night on the sofa at the home of Maud , the seductively intelligent girlfriend of an acquaintance.
A Catholic, Jean-Louis agonises over the ethical implications of the situation and whether or not he should/should not have slept with his host, occasionally pausing to swap moral reflections with a Communist colleague.
It is hard to imagine an American or even a British film director making such a film, much less getting it distributed.
But to a new generation of Euro-American intellectuals, Rohmer’s film captured everything that was sophisticated, worldweary, witty, allusive, mature and European about French cinema.
Contemporary Italian films, though quite widely distributed abroad, did not have the same impact.
An older generation of gifted Italian directors had not yet left the scene—Vittorio De Sica directed I Sequestrati di Altona , from Sartre’s play, co-directed Boccaccio ’70 with Fellini and would go on to direct II Giardino dei Finzi-Contini at the end of the decade—but their work never recaptured the political and aesthetic impact of the great neo-realist films of the 1940s with which De Sica above all was forever linked.
In VAwentura , VEclisse and II Desserto rosso , all starring Monica Vitti, Antonioni’s hard-edged cinematography and unappealing, cynical, disabused characters anticipated the disaf""Godard in particular had decidedly eclectic tastes.
He is reported to have been ‘mesmerized’ by Nicholas Ray’s Johnny Guitar starring Joan Crawford.
Italian cinema lacked the seductive intellectuality of French films, but what they shared in abundance was style.
It was this European style—a variable balance of artistic self-confidence, intellectual pretension and cultivated wit— that distinguished the continental European scene for foreign observers.
By the end of the 1950s western Europe had not merely recovered from depression and war; it was once again a magnet for aspiring sophisticates.
But America was still, as it seemed even to many Americans, a little raw.
And Camelot, in turn, owed much to the European background and continental self-presentation of the President’s wife.
If Jacqueline Kennedy imported European style to the White House, this was hardly surprising.
European ‘design’ in the later Fifties and Sixties flourished as never before, the imprimatur of status and quality.
A European label—attached to a commodity, an idea or a person—ensured distinction, and thus a price premium.
To be sure, ‘articles de Paris’ had a longstanding place in the luxury goods trade, dating at least to the late eighteenth century; and Swiss watches had been well regarded for many decades.
If anything, it was English manufacture that had until quite recently carried this reputation, a legacy of Britain’s nineteenth-century industrial supremacy.
Britishmade domestic goods, vehicles, tools or weapons had for long been highly prized on foreign markets.
But in the course of the 1930s and 1940s British producers had so successfully undermined their own standing in almost every commodity save men’s clothing that the only niche left to Britain’s retail merchants by the 1960s was high profile, low quality ‘trendy’ fads—a market they were to exploit ruthlessly in the following decade.
What was remarkable about European commercial style was its segmentation by product as well as country.
Italian cars—FIAT, Alfa Romeo, Lancia—were notoriously shoddy and unreliable; yet their embarrassing reputation did no discernible harm to Italy’s elevated standing in other markets, such as leather goods, haute couture and even, in a less exalted sector, domestic white goods.
International demand for Ger12 Italians could certainly design cars, as any motor racing enthusiast would confirm.
It was Italian coachbuilders who first removed mudguards, running boards and other redundant excrescences from small family cars—much as Milanese tailors in the same years were eliminating trouser turn-ups and inventing the sharp, clean lines and cut of the modern Italian suit.
But by 1965, anything turned on a German lathe or conceived by German-speaking engineers could walk out of a British or American showroom at a price of its own asking.
Only Scandinavia had acquired a general reputation for quality across an eclectic range of products, but even there the market had distinctive variations.
But the same consumer would be attracted to Sweden’s Volvo cars, despite their resolute lack of style, precisely because they appeared indestructible.
But Italy, with lower labour costs and unconstrained by textile rationing (unlike France or Britain), was already a serious competitor as early as 1952, when the first international Men’s Fashion Festival was staged in San Remo.
So long as middle-class women took their clothing cues from a handful of Parisian designers and fashion houses, the latter’s status remained secure.
But by the early sixties European women—like men—were no longer wearing formal hats, styled outer garments or evening wear as a matter of routine.
The mass market in clothing was taking its cues as much from below as from above.
Europe’s reputation as the capital of style and chic was secure, but the future lay with more eclectic vogues, many of them European adaptations of American and even Asian prototypes, something at which Italians proved especially adept.
In clothing as in ideas, Paris dominated the European scene and would do so for a little while to come.
At the time some of his audience found the suggestion a touch premature—after all, across the Iron Curtain, and not only there, ideology appeared all too alive and well.
The western European state, as it emerged in those years, was increasingly detached from any doctrinal project; and, as we have seen, the rise of the welfare state had defused the old political animosities.
More people than ever before had a direct interest in the policies and expenditures of the state, but they no longer came to blows over who should control it.
The apparent routinization of public affairs in the hands of a benevolent caste of overseers was no guarantee of public apathy.
Thus it was that the very generation which came of age in the Social Democratic paradise of its parents’ longings was most irritated and resentful at its shortcomings.
A pregnant symptom of this paradox can be seen—quite literally— in an area of public planning and works in which the progressive state on both sides of the Cold War divide was unusually active.
The post-World War Two combination of demographic growth and rapid urbanization placed unprecedented demands upon urban planners.
In Eastern Europe, where many urban centers had been destroyed or half abandoned by the end of the war, twenty million people moved from the countryside into towns and cities in the first two post-war decades.
In Lithuania by 1970 half the population lived in towns; twenty years before the figure had been just 28 percent.
In the USSR, where the urban population overtook the rural one in 1961, Minsk—the capital of the Belorussian Republic—went from 509,000 in 1959 to 907,000 just twelve years later.
Where the inner city had survived undamaged , or had been carefully rebuilt from old plans , most of the new building took place on the edge of the city, forming a long string of suburban dormitories reaching into the countryside.
Elsewhere—in the Slovak capital Bratislava, for example— the new slums were erected in the very heart of the town.
As for smaller towns and rural villages, constrained to absorb the tens of thousands of former peasants now recycled as miners or steelworkers, they had nothing to preserve and were transformed, virtually overnight, into industrial dormitories, lacking even the grace of a remnant of an old town.
Collective farm workers were forced into agro-towns, pioneered in the 1950s by Nikita Khrushchev and later perfected by Nicolae Ceau§escu.
In Mediterranean Europe especially, the mass migration from countryside to cities placed comparable strains on urban resources.
Greater Athens grew from 1,389,000 people in 1951 to 2,540,000 in 1971.
Milan’s population rose from 1,260,000 to 1,724,000 in the same period; Barcelona’s from 1,280,000 to 1,785,000.
In all these places, as in smaller towns across northern Italy and in the rapidly expanding outer suburbs of London, Paris, Madrid and elsewhere, planners could not keep up with demand.
Like their contemporaries in Communist city offices, their instinct was to construct large blocks of homogenous housing—either on space cleared by war and urban renewal, or else on green-field sites at the edges of cities.
In Milan and Barcelona in particular, where the first generation of migrants from the south began moving from shanty towns into highrise apartments in the course of the 1960s, the result was depressingly reminiscent of the Soviet bloc—but with the additional handicap that many would-be tenants could not afford to rent anywhere near their place of work.
They were thus forced into long daily journeys on inadequate public transport—or else in their newlyacquired cars, further straining the urban infrastructure.
But the distinctive ugliness of urban architecture in Western Europe in these years cannot be attributed to demographic pressures alone.
In West Germany, where many of the country’s major cities were rebuilt with a breathtaking lack of imagination and vision; or in London—where the Architect’s Department of the London County Council authorized mass housing projects like the aggressively linear, windswept, Le Corbusier-inspired Alton estate in Roehampton—ugliness appeared almost deliberate, the product of careful design.
Milan’s awful Torre Velasco, a reinforced concrete skyscraper built between 1957 and i960 by a private Anglo-Italian consortium, was typical of the aggressive hyper-modernism of the age, in which the point was to break all attachments to the past.
The earliest and therefore best known of these, at Sarcelles, north of Paris, grew from a population of just 8,000 in 1954 to 35,000 seven years later.
Sociologically and aesthetically it was rootless, resembling contemporary worker-dormitory suburbs in other countries (like the remarkably similar settle386 THE SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC MOMENT ment of Lazdynai at the edge of Vilnius, in Lithuania) far more than anything in indigenous French housing design or urban tradition.
The European ‘style’ so much admired in other spheres of life was here nowhere in evidence.
One of the most egregious, ‘Ronan Point’ in London’s East End, actually had the good taste to fall down of its own accord in 1968.
The Pompidou Center (a 1960s design, though not opened until January 1977)—like the Halles complex to its west—may have brought an assortment of popular cultural resources to central Paris but it failed miserably in the longer run to integrate with the surrounding district or complement the older architecture around it.
Just why post-war European politicians and planners should have made so very many mistakes remains unclear, even if we allow that in the wake of two world wars and an extended economic depression there was a craving for anything fresh, new and unlinked to the past.
See Pierre Agard, ‘L’Unite de residence’ in Esprit, October-November 1953 . am grateful to Dr Nicole Rudolph for the reference.
Architects and sociologists may not have understood that their projects would, within one generation, breed social outcasts and violent gangs, but that prospect was clear enough to the residents.
Even European cinema—which only a few years before had paid loving, nostalgic attention to old cities and city life—now focused instead on the cold, hard impersonality of the modern metropolis.
A particular victim of post-war architectural iconoclasm was the railway station, the lapidary incarnation of Victorian achievement and often a significant architectural monument in its own right.
But in the overcrowded circumstances of a small continent, the future of train travel was never seriously in question.
The stations that were torn down in Europe were replaced by insipid, unappealing buildings performing the identical function.
The destruction of Euston Station in London, or Paris’s Gare Montparnasse, or the elegant Anhalter Bahnhof in Berlin had no practical purpose and was aesthetically indefensible.
As early as 1958, even before the paroxysm of city renovation had peaked, a group of preservationists in Britain founded the Victorian Society.
This was a typically British volunteer organization, devoted to identifying and saving the country’s threatened architectural heritage; but similarly inspired networks emerged all across Western Europe in the following decade, pressing residents, academics and politicians to act in concert to avert further loss.
In the physical history of the European city, the 1950s and 1960s were truly terrible decades.
The damage that was done to the material fabric of urban life in those years is the dark, still half-unacknowledged underside of the ‘thirty glorious years’ of economic development—analogous in its way to the price paid for the industrial urbanization of the previous century.
Major cities—Frankfurt, Brussels, London above all—discovered too late that they had sold their urban birthright for a mess of brutalist pottage.
It is one of the ironies of the 1960s that the ruthlessly ‘renewed’ and rebuilt cityscapes of the age were deeply resented above all by the young people who lived there.
It is altogether appropriate that when the well-fed, well-housed, well-educated children of Europe’s benevolent service states grew up and revolted against ‘the system’, the first intimations of the coming explosion would be felt in the pre-fabricated cement dormitories of a soulless university ‘extension campus’, heedlessly parked among the tower blocks and traffic jams of an overspill Parisian suburb.
Sir Isaiah Berlin ‘Now all the journalists of the world are licking your arses ... but not me, my dears.
Moments of great cultural significance are often appreciated only in retrospect.
As we shall see, this was not a wholly unreasonable preoccupation; but it led, predictably, to some distortions of perspective.
The 1960s were indeed a decade of extraordinary consequence for modern Europe, but not everything that seemed important at the time has left its mark upon History.
The selfcongratulatory, iconoclastic impulse—in clothing or ideas—dated very fast; conversely, it would be some years before the truly revolutionary shift in politics and public affairs that began in the late 1960s could take full effect.
And the political geography of the Sixties can be misleading—the most important developments were not always in the best-known places.
By the middle of the 1960s, the social impact of the post-war demographic ex390 THE SPECTRE OF REVOLUTION plosion was being felt everywhere.
Europe, as it seemed, was full of young people— in France, by 1968, the student-age cohort, of persons aged 16 to 24, was eight million strong, constituting 16. percent of the national total.
In earlier times such a population explosion would have placed huge strains upon a country’s food supply; and even if people could be fed, their job prospects would have been grim.
But in a time of economic growth and prosperity, the chief problem facing European states was not how to feed, clothe, house and eventually employ the growing number of young people, but how to educate them.
Until the 1950s, most children in Europe left school after completing their primary education, usually between the ages of 12 and 14.
In many places compulsory primary education itself, introduced at the end of the nineteenth century, was only weakly enforced—the children of peasants in Spain, Italy, Ireland and preCommunist eastern Europe typically dropped out of school during the spring, summer and early fall.
Secondary education was still a privilege confined to the middle and upper classes.
In post-war Italy, less than 5 percent of the population had completed secondary school.
In anticipation of future numbers, and as part of the broader cycle of social reforms, governments in post-war Europe introduced a series of major educational changes.
In Italy, where in practice most children in the early-post war years still left school at 11, it was raised to 14 in 1962.
The number of children in full-time schooling in Italy doubled in the course of the decade 1959-1969.
Hitherto, the cultural fault-line in most European societies had fallen between those—the overwhelming majority—who had left school after learning to read, write, do basic arithmetic and recite the outlines of national history; and a privileged minority who had remained in school until 17 or 18, been awarded the highly-valued secondary-school leaving certificate, and gone on to professional training or employment.
The grammar schools, lycees and Gymnasiums of Europe had been the preserve of a ruling elite.
Heirs to a classical curriculum once closed to the children of the rural and urban poor, they were now opened to an ever-expanding pool of young people from every social milieu.
As more and more children entered and passed through the secondary school systems, a breach opened up between their world and the one their parents had known.
This new and wholly unprecedented generation gap constituted a de facto social revolution in its own right—albeit one whose implications were still confined to the realm of the family.
If most Europeans before i960 never saw the inside of a secondary school, fewer still could even have dreamed of attending university.
There had been some expansion of traditional universities in the course of the nineteenth century, and an increase in the number of other establishments of tertiary education, mostly for technical training.
But higher education in Europe in the 1950s was still closed to all but a privileged few, whose families could forgo the earnings of their children to keep them in school until 18, and who could afford the fees charged by secondary schools and universities alike.
Despite the best intentions of an earlier generation of reformers, Oxford, Cambridge, the £cole Normale Superieure , the Universities of Bologna or Heidelberg and the rest of Europe’s ancient establishments of learning remained off-limits to almost everyone.
In 1949 there were 15,000 university students in Sweden, in Belgium 20,000.
But with Europe now on the cusp of mass secondary education there would soon be irresistible pressure to expand higher education too.
They had no space for expansion and their lecture halls, laboratories, libraries and residential buildings were quite incapable of accommodating thousands more young people.
Above all, and despite being hundreds of years old in many cases, the universities of Europe had al392 THE SPECTRE OF REVOLUTION most no material resources of their own.
If higher education in Europe was to respond in time to the ominous demographic bulge pushing up through the primary and secondary schools, the initiative would thus have to come from the center.
By the time the first post-secondary cohort began to arrive, these new universities, however architecturally soulless, were at least in place to meet the increased demand for places—and create job openings for an expanding pool of post-graduate students seeking teaching posts.
Rather than open these new universities to a mass constituency, British educational planners chose to integrate them into the older, elite system.
Students in the UK remained something of a privileged minority and the long-term implications were unquestionably socially regressive.
But for the fortunate few, the system worked very smoothly—and insulated them from almost all the problems faced by their peers elsewhere in Europe.
For on the Continent, higher education moved in a very different direction.
In any case, academic study in most continental universities was by ancient convention more than a little detached and unstructured.
Haughty and unapproachable professors offered formal lectures to halls full of anonymous students who felt little pressure to complete their degrees by a deadline, and for whom being a student was as much a social rite of passage as a means to an education.
Rather than construct new universities, most central planners in Europe simply decreed the expansion of existing ones.
At the same time they imposed no additional impediments or system of pre-selection.
On the contrary, and for the best of reasons, they frequently set about removing those that remained—in 1965 the 'Obviously this did not apply to small, elite academies like France’s £cole Polytechnique, or £cole Normale Superieure, which admitted their few students by a rigorous selective exam and then taught them very well indeed.
Those three universities alone were enrolling between them more than the total student population of Italy a mere eighteen years earlier; many of their students would never graduate.
In West Germany, where there had been 108,000 students in 1950, and where the traditional universities were already beginning to suffer from overcrowding, there were nearly 400,000 by the end of the Sixties.
In France, by 1967, there were as many university students as there had been lyceens in 1956.
All over Europe there were vastly more students than ever before—and the quality of their academic experience was deteriorating fast.
Post-war government spending on education, which had everywhere risen very steeply, had concentrated upon the provision of primary and secondary schools, equipment and teachers.
This was surely the right choice, and in any case one dictated by electoral politics.
At this juncture it is worth recalling that even by 1968 most young people in every European country were not students (a detail that tends to be overlooked in accounts of this period), especially if their parents were peasants, workers, unskilled or immigrants, whether from peripheral provinces or abroad.
Their opinions, and especially their politics, should not be inferred from those of their student contemporaries.
In other respects, however, young people shared what was already a distinctive—and common—culture.
Most young people in history have entered a world full of older people, where it is their seniors who occupy positions of influence and example.
The gap separating a large, prosperous, pampered, self-confident and culturally autonomous generation from the unusually small, insecure, Depression-scarred and war-ravaged generation of its parents was greater than the conventional distance between age groups.
At the very least, it seemed to many young people as though they had been born into a 2 In the mid-1960s only 44 percent of Italian university students graduated; these figures were to deteriorate still further in the course of the 1970s.
Popular music, cinema and television were full of young people and increasingly appealed to them as its audience and market.
By 1965 there were radio and television programs, magazines, shops, products and whole industries that existed exclusively for the young and depended upon their patronage.
Although each national youth culture had its distinctive icons and institutions, its exclusively local reference points (the June 22nd 1963 Fete des Copains in Paris’s Place de la Nation was the founding event of Sixties youth culture in France, yet it passed virtually unnoticed elsewhere), many of the popular cultural forms of the age flowed with unprecedented ease across national boundaries.
But the presentation of these wares cut ostentatiously athwart conventional lines.
The most successful musicians of the time—the Beatles and their imitators—took the rhythms of American blues guitarists and paired them with material drawn directly from the language and experience of the British working class.
This highly original combination then became the indigenous, trans-national culture of European youth.
The content of popular music mattered quite a lot, but its form counted for more.
But it was perhaps a peculiarity of the age that style could substitute so directly for substance.
The popular music of the 1960s was insubordinate in tone , in the manner of its performance—whereas its lyrics were frequently anodyne and anyway at best half-understood by foreign audiences.
In Austria, to perform or listen to British or American pop music was to cock a snoot at one’s shocked parents, the generation of Hitler; the same applied, mutatis mutandis, just 3 In the Communist bloc ‘the Sixties’ as pop culture were of necessity experienced at second-hand.
The other iconic rock band of the Sixties, the Rolling Stones, was more conventionally bohemian in its subject matter, as befitted its members’ middle-class London background.
If much of the mainstream musical culture of the Sixties seemed to be about sex—at least until it shifted, briefly, into drugs and politics—this, too, was largely a matter of style.
More young people lived away from their parents, and at a younger age than hitherto.
Public displays of flesh and representations of unconstrained sexual abandon on film and in literature became more common, at least in north-west Europe.
For all these reasons, the older generation was convinced that sexual restraints had completely collapsed—and it pleased their children to nourish the nightmare.
In fact, the ‘sexual revolution’ of the Sixties was almost certainly a mirage for the overwhelming majority of people, young and old alike.
So far as we can know, the sexual interests and practices of most young Europeans did not change nearly as rapidly or as radically as contemporaries liked to claim.
On the evidence of contemporary surveys, even the sex lives of students were not very different from those of earlier generations.
The liberated sexual style of the Sixties was typically contrasted with the Fifties, depicted as an age of moral rectitude and constipated emotional restraint.
But when compared with the 1920s, or the European fin-de-siecle, or the demi-monde of 1860s Paris, the ‘Swinging Sixties’ were quite tame.
In keeping with the emphasis upon style, the generation of the Sixties placed unusual insistence upon looking different.
Clothing, hair, make-up and what were still called ‘fashion accessories’ became vital generational and political identification tags.
European taste in clothing, music, photography, modeling, advertising and even mass-market magazines all took their cues from there.
In view of the already-established British reputation for drab design and shoddy construction this was an unlikely development, a youthful inversion of the traditional order of such things, and it proved short-lived.
But the false dawn of‘Swinging London’—as Time magazine dubbed it in April 1966—cast a distinctive light upon the age.
Most of them were shameless imitations of the clothing stores that had sprung up along Carnaby Street, a long-time haunt of male homosexuals now recycled as the epicentre of‘mod’ fashion for homosexuals and heterosexuals alike.
In Paris the clothing boutique ‘New Man’, the first French intimation of the sartorial revolution, opened in the rue de l’Ancienne Comedie on April 13th 1965.
Within 5 Note, though, that for most of the Sixties it was still forbidden in many parts of Western and Eastern Europe alike to dispense information about contraception.
The Carnaby Street style—cloned all across Western Europe (though less markedly in Italy than elsewhere)—emphasized colorful, contoured outfits tending to the androgynous and deliberately mal-adapted to anyone over thirty.
Tight red corduroy pants and fitted black shirts from ‘New Man’ became the staple uniform of Parisian street demonstrators for the next three years and were widely copied everywhere.
Like everything else about the Sixties they were made by men, for men; but young women could wear them too and increasingly did so.
In a second stage of the sartorial transition, the cheerful, primary colors of‘mod gear’ were displaced by more ‘serious’ outer garments, reflecting a similar shift in music.
This more self-consciously political fashion never really caught on in Britain, but by the end of the decade it was quasi-official uniform for German and Italian radicals and their student followers.
Overlapping with both sets of fashions were the gypsy-like drapes of the hippies.
In contrast to the ‘Carnaby Street’ and ‘Street-fighting Man’ looks, which were indigenously European in origin, the hippie look—obscurely ‘utopian’ in its nonwestern,‘counter-cultural’, asexual ethic of conspicuous under-consumption—was an American import.
Its commercial utility was obvious, and many of the outlets that had sprung up to service the demand for skin-tight, sharply cut fashions in the mid-sixties were soon working hard to adapt their stock accordingly.
For a little while longer, headgear remained a reliable traditional indicator of regional origin and social class.
At most it washed up on the shores of Great Britain and Holland, leaving behind some sedimentary evidence in the form of a more developed drug culture than elsewhere—and one spectacularly original long-playing record.
The frivolous side of the Sixties—fashion, pop culture, sex—should not be dismissed as mere froth and show.
It was a new generation’s way of breaking with the age of the grandpas—the gerontocracy (Adenauer, De Gaulle, Macmillan—and Khrushchev) still running the continent’s affairs.
To be sure, the attention-catching, poseur aspects of the Sixties—the narcissistic self-indulgence that will forever be associated with the era—ring false when taken all at once.
But in their day, and to their constituency, they seemed new and fresh.
Even the cold, harsh sheen of contemporary art, or the cynical films of the later Sixties, appeared refreshing and authentic after the cozy bourgeois artifice of the recent past.
The solipsistic conceit of the age—that the young would change the world by‘doing their own thing’, ‘letting it all hang out’ and ‘making love, not war’—was always an illusion, and it has not worn well.
But it was not the only illusion of the time, and by no means the most foolish.
In its newly fashionable usage, ‘Theory’ meant something quite different.
In an age of vastly expanded universities, with periodicals, journals and lecturers urgently seeking copy’, there emerged a market for ‘theories’ of every kind—fuelled not by improved intellectual supply but rather by insatiable consumer demand.
At the forefront of the theory revolution were the academic disciplines of History and the softer social sciences.
But it was selfconsciously interpretive , typically from a non-dogmatic but unmistakably leftleaning position.
Here was history informed by social theory, and by an insistence upon the importance of class, particularly the lower classes.
The point was not just to narrate or even explain a given historical moment; the point was to reveal its deeper meaning.
Historical writing in this vein seemed to bridge the gap between past and present, between scholarly speculation and contemporary engagement, and a new generation of students read it in this light.
Other disciplines fared better—or worse, depending on one’s point of view.
Borrowing from an earlier vein of speculation in the field of linguistics, cultural anthropologists—led by Claude LeviStrauss—proposed a comprehensive new explanation for variations and differences across societies.
What counted was not surface social practices or cultural symptoms but the inner essences, the deep structures of human affairs.
As a way of sorting human experience it bore a family resemblance to the Annales school of history—whose best-known contemporary exponent, Fernand Braudel, had built his reputation on the study of the longue duree , a bird’s-eye view of history describing slowly shifting geographical and social structures across long periods— and thus fitted comfortably into the academic style of the time.
It was thus not subject to empirical testing or disproof—there was no sense in which structuralism could ever be demonstrated to be wrong —and the iconoclastic ambition of its assertions, allied to this impermeability to contradiction, guaranteed it a wide audience.
The best-known practitioners—usually those who combined in the right doses scholarly audacity with a natural talent for self-promotion—became international celebrities, having had the good fortune to enter the intellectual limelight just as television was becoming a mass medium.
In an earlier age Michel Foucault might have been a drawing-room favourite, a star of the Parisian lecture circuit, like Henri Bergson fifty years earlier.
Foucault himself foreswore the label ‘structuralist’, much as Albert Camus always insisted he had never been an ‘existentialist’ and didn’t really know what that was.
But as Foucault at least would have been constrained to concede, it didn’t really matter what he thought.
More importantly, ‘structuralists’ were people who minimized or even denied the role of individuals and individual initiative in human affairs.
But for all its protean applications, the idea that everything is ‘structured’ left something vital unexplained.
For Fernand Braudel, or Claude Levi-Strauss, or even Michel Foucault, the goal was to uncover the deep workings of a cultural system.
This might or might not be a subversive scholarly impulse—it certainly was not in Braudel’s case—but it does gloss over or minimize change and transition.
Even by the lax standards of Sixties-era Paris he remained quite remarkably ignorant of contemporary developments in medicine, biology and neurology, with no discernible harm to his practice or reputation.
The intellectual affinities and political obsessions of the Sixties in Europe only make sense in the light of this continuing fascination with Marx and Marxism.
Sartre’s unshaken faith was not universally shared, but there was general agreement across the political spectrum that anyone wishing to understand the world must take Marxism and its political legacy very seriously.
Raymond Aron—Sartre’s contemporary, erstwhile friend and intellectual nemesis—was a lifelong anti-Communist.
Between 1956 and 1968 Marxism in Europe lived—and, as it were, thrived—in a state of suspended animation.
Stalinist Communism was in disgrace, thanks to the revelations and events of 1956.
The Communist parties of the West were either politically irrelevant (in Scandinavia, Britain, West Germany and the Low Countries); in slow but unmistakable decline ; or else, as in the Italian case, striving to distance themselves from their Muscovite inheritance.
Official Marxism, as incarnated in the history and teachings of Leninist parties, was largely discredited—especially in the territories over which it continued to rule.
Even those in the West who chose to vote Communist evinced little interest in the subject.
At the same time there was widespread intellectual and academic interest in those parts of the Marxist inheritance that could be distinguished from the Soviet version and salvaged from its moral shipwreck.
Ever since the Founder’s death, there had always been Marxist and marxisant sects and splinter groups—well before 1914 there were already tiny political parties claiming the True Inheritance.
But most late-nineteenth-century Socialist move10 The SPGB continues to the time of writing.
Modern Marxist disputes have their roots in the Leninist schism that was to follow.
It was the factional struggles of the early Soviet years that gave rise to the most enduring Marxist ‘heresy’, that of Trotsky and his followers.
A quarter century after Trotsky’s death in Mexico at the hands of a Stalinist assassin (and in no small measure because of it), Trotskyist parties could be found in every European state that did not explicitly ban them.
They were typically small and led, in the image of their eponymous founder, by a charismatic, authoritarian chief who dictated doctrine and tactics.
To the outsider, Trotskyist parties—and the evanescent Fourth International to which they were affiliated—appeared curiously indistinguishable from Communists, sharing a similar allegiance to Lenin and separated only by the bloody history of the power struggle between Trotsky and Stalin.
There was a crucial distinguishing point of dogma—Trotskyists continued to speak of‘permanent revolution’ and to accuse official Communists of having aborted the workers’ revolution by confining it to a single country—but in other respects the only obvious difference was that Stalinism had been a political success, whereas the Trotskyist record was one of unblemished failure.
It was that very failure, of course, which Trotsky’s latter-day followers found so appealing.
The past might look grim, but their analysis of what had gone wrong— the Soviet revolution had been hi-jacked by a bureaucratic reaction analogous to the Thermidorian coup that put paid to the Jacobins in 1794—would, they felt, assure them success in the years ahead.
Yet even Trotsky carried the whiff of power— he had, after all, played a crucial role in the first years of the Soviet regime and bore some responsibility for its deviations.
To a new and politically innocent generation, the truly appealing failures were European Communism’s lost leaders, the men and women who never had a chance to exercise any political responsibilities at all.
In the course of the 1960s all three were copiously re-published, or published for the first time, in many languages.
The exhumation of the writings of Luxemburg, Lukacs, Gramsci and other forgotten early-twentieth century Marxists 11 was accompanied by the rediscovery of Marx himself.
Indeed, the unearthing of a new and ostensibly very different Marx was crucial to the attraction of Marxism in these years.
Even if this Marx could not be held directly responsible for the uses to which his mature writings had been put, he was irrevocably associated with them.
Whether in the service of Communism or Social Democracy, they were of the old Left.
The new Left, as it was starting to call itself by 1965, sought out new texts—and found them in the writings of the young Karl Marx, in the metaphysical essays and notes written in the early 1840s when Marx was barely out of his teens, a young German philosopher steeped in Hegelian historicism and the Romantic dream of ultimate Freedom.
Marx himself had chosen not to publish some of these writings; indeed, in the aftermath of the failed revolutions of 1848 he had turned decisively away from them and towards the study of political economy and contemporary politics with which he was henceforth to be associated.
Accordingly, many of the writings of the early Marx were not widely known even to scholars.
When they were first published in full, under the auspices of the MarxEngels Institute in Moscow in 1932, they attracted little attention.
The revival of interest in them—notably the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts and The German Ideology —came thirty years later.
Suddenly it was possible to be a Marxist while jettisoning the heavy, soiled baggage of the traditional Western Left.
To an older generation of Marx scholars, and to the established Marxist parties, this perverse insistence upon the very writings that Marx himself had chosen not to publish seemed deeply unserious.
Only the later writings, he insisted, were scientific and thus properly Marxist.
What Communists and other conservative Marxists rightly foresaw was how easily this new, humanist Marx could be adapted to contemporary tastes and fashions.
The complaints of an early-nineteenth-century Romantic like Marx against capitalist modernity and the dehumanizing impact of industrial society were well adapted to contemporary protests against the ‘repressive tolerance’ of postindustrial Western Europe.
The prosperous, liberal West’s apparently infinite flexibility, its sponge-like capacity to absorb passions and differences, infuriated its critics.
The repression that was missing on the streets must perforce have gone somewhere, it had moved into people’s very souls—and, above all, their bodies.
Herbert Marcuse, a Weimar-era intellectual who had ended up in Southern California—where he handily adapted his old epistemology to his new environment—offered a helpful conflation of all these strands of thought.
Western consumer society, he explained, no longer rested upon the straightforwardly economic exploitation of a class of property-less proletarians.
Instead it diverted human energy away from the search for fulfillment and into the consumption of goods and illusions.
Real needs—sexual, social, civic—are displaced by false ones, whose fulfillment is the purpose of a consumer-centered culture.
The emphasis upon sexual fulfillment as a radical goal was quite offensive to an older generation of Left-wingers.
Free love in a free society was not a new idea— some early nineteenth-century Socialist sects had espoused it, and the first years of the Soviet Union had been distinctly morally relaxed—but the mainstream tradition of European radicalism was one of moral and domestic rectitude.
But however discomfiting, the conflation of sex and politics presented no real threat—indeed, as more than one Communist intellectual took pains to point out, the new emphasis on private desires over collective struggles was objectively reactionary.
The truly subversive implications of the New Left’s adaptation of Marx lay elsewhere.
They were not even bothered by the anti-authoritarian aesthetic of a younger generation, with its demands for self-government in the bedroom, the lecture hall and the shop floor; all that they perhaps imprudently dismissed as a passing disturbance in the natural order of things.
What caused far deeper offence was the emerging tendency of young radicals to identify Marxist theory with revolutionary practices in exotic lands, where none of the established categories and authorities seemed to apply.
This close identification of Socialism with urban labor was more than just an elective affinity.
It was the distinguishing mark of the ideological Left, separating it from well-intentioned liberal or Catholic social reformers.
Except in Scandinavia, the majority of the working population had never been Socialist or Communist—its allegiances were spread right across the political spectrum.
Traditional Left-wing parties were nonetheless heavily dependent on the votes of the working class and thus identified closely with it.
In the developed countries of Western Europe miners, steelworkers, shipbuilders, metalworkers, textile hands, railway men and manual workers of every sort were retiring in large numbers.
In the coming age of the service industry their place was being taken by a very different sort of working population.
It is hard to be sure, in retrospect, whether such slogans were witty, innocent or merely cynical.
But for anyone not wedded to this version of European history, the proletariat was no longer the only available vehicle of radical social transformation.
Together with ‘students’ and even simply the young, these constituted a far larger and more readily mobilized constituency for revolutionary hopes than the staid and satisfied working masses of the prosperous West.
In the wake of 1956, young west European radicals turned away from the dispiriting Communist record in Europe’s east and looked further afield for inspiration.
This new taste for the exotic was fuelled in part by contemporary decolonization and the aspirations of national liberation movements, in part by the projection on to others of Europe’s own lost illusions.
The revolutions in Cuba and China especially were invested with all the qualities and achievements so disappointingly lacking in Europe.
There was, of course, no shortage of violence just a few hours to the east, in the Soviet Union and its satellites.
This self-abnegating admiration for alien models was not new in Europe— Tocqueville had long ago remarked upon its attractions for the pre-revolutionary intelligentsia of eighteenth-century France, and it had once played a part in the appeal of the Soviet Revolution itself.
For their conservative elders, this casual invocation of extraneous models illustrated the undisciplined ease with which the venerable revolutionary syntax of old Europe was unraveling into an ideological Babel.
When Italian students proposed that, in the new service economy, universities constituted the epicenters of knowledge production and students were thus the new working class, they were stretching the terms of Marxist exchange to the limit.
But at least they had dialectical precedent on their side and were playing within the accepted rules.
As their critics had insisted from the outset, the boys and girls of the Sixties just weren’t serious.
The ‘Second 5 world of Soviet Communism was stable only in appearance, and even then not for long, as we shall see.
And the leading power of the West, shaken by assassinations and race riots, was embarking on a full-scale war in Vietnam.
American defense expenditure rose steadily through the mid-sixties, peaking in 1968.
It says something about the peculiar circumstances of the Sixties, and the social background of the most prominent public activists, that so many of the disputes and demands of the time were constructed around a political agenda and not an economic one.
But there was an economic dimension to the discontents of the hour, even if many of the participants were still oblivious to it.
Though the prosperity of the post-war decades had not yet run its course and unemployment in Western Europe was at a historic low, a cycle of labor disputes throughout Western Europe in the early sixties hinted at troubles ahead.
France’s national Radio and Television organization, the ORTF , and the Commissariat a VEnergie Atomique, to take just two prominent cases, seethed with resentful technical staff, from journalists to engineers.
Traditional styles of authority, discipline and address had failed to keep pace with the rapid social and cultural transformations of the past decade.
Factories and offices were run from the top down with no input from below.
These were issues that had not featured prominently in European industrial conflicts since the Popular Front occupations of 1936.
But they overlapped readily enough with the rhetoric of the student radicals (with whom shop-floor militants had little else in common) who voiced similar complaints about their overcrowded, poorly managed universities.
The sense of exclusion, from decision-making and thus from power, reflected another dimension of the Sixties whose implications were not fully appreciated at the time.
Communist and Socialists on the Left, centrists and Gaullists on the Right.
By tacit agreement across the spectrum, smaller parties and fringe groups were forced either to merge with one of the four big units or else be squeezed out of mainstream politics.
For different reasons, the same thing was happening in Italy and Germany.
From 1963, a broad Center-Left coalition in Italy occupied most of the national political space, with only Communist and ex-Fascist parties excluded.
The Federal Republic of Germany was governed from 1966 by a ‘Grand Coalition’ of Christian Democrats and Social Democrats who, together with the Free Democrats, monopolized the Bundestag.
These arrangements ensured political stability and continuity; but as a consequence, in the three major democracies of western Europe, radical opposition was pushed not just to the fringes but out of parliament altogether.
The best-known instance of this, in France during the spring of 1968, was also the shortest-lived.
It owes its prominence more to shock value, and to the special symbolism of insurgency in the streets of Paris , than to any enduring effects.
The student dormitories at Nanterre had for some time been home to a floating population of legitimate students, ‘clandestine’ radicals and a small number of drug-sellers and users.
There was also considerable nocturnal movement to and fro between the male and female dormitories, in spite of strict official prohibitions.
The academic administration at Nanterre had been reluctant to provoke trouble by enforcing the rules, but in January 1968 they expelled one ‘squatter’ and threatened disciplinary measures against a legitimate student, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, for insulting a visiting government minister.
Further demonstrations followed, and on March 22nd, following the arrest of student radicals who attacked the American Express building in central Paris, a Movement was formed, with Cohn-Bendit among its leaders.
Two weeks later the Nanterre campus was closed down following further student clashes with police, and the Movement—and the action— shifted to the venerable university buildings in and around the Sorbonne, in central Paris.
It is worth insisting upon the parochial and distinctly self-regarding issues that sparked the May Events, lest the ideologically charged language and ambitious programs of the following weeks mislead us.
The student occupation of the Sorbonne and subsequent street barricades and clashes with the police, notably on the nights of May loth-nth and May 24th-25th, were led by representatives of the (Trotskyist) Jeunesse Communiste Revolutionnaire , as well as officials from established student and junior lecturer unions.
But the accompanying Marxist rhetoric, while familiar enough, masked an essentially anarchist spirit whose immediate objective was the removal and humiliation of authority.
It had all the symbolism of a traditional M This was a longstanding source of friction.
In January 1966, after months of dispute at a student dormitory complex in Antony, in southern Paris, a newly appointed director had introduced what was then a radical regime.
Girls and boys over twenty one could henceforth entertain members of the opposite sex in their dormitory rooms.
Those under twenty one could do so with written permission from their parents.
The Minister, rising to the provocation, suggested that if Cohn-Bendit had sexual problems he should jump in the splendid new swimming pool.
It was their own parents, aunts and grandmothers who looked down upon them from the windows of comfortable bourgeois apartment buildings as they lined up in the streets to challenge the armed power of the French state.
Georges Pompidou, the Gaullist Prime Minister, rapidly took the measure of the troubles.
After the initial confrontations he withdrew the police, despite criticism from within his own party and government, leaving the students of Paris in de facto control of their university and the surrounding quartier.
Pompidou—and his President, De Gaulle—were embarrassed by the well-publicized activities of the students.
But, except very briefly at the outset when they were taken by surprise, they did not feel threatened by them.
When the time came the police, especially the riot police—recruited from the sons of poor provincial peasants and never reluctant to crack the heads of privileged Parisian youth—could be counted on to restore order.
The student riots and occupations had set the spark to a nationwide series of strikes and workplace occupations that brought France to a near-standstill by the end of May.
Some of the first protests—by reporters at French Television and Radio, for example—were directed at their political chiefs for censoring coverage of the student movement and, in particular, the excessive brutality of some riot policemen.
But as the general strike spread, through the aircraft manufacturing plants of Toulouse and the electricity and petro-chemical industries and, most ominously, to the huge Renault factories on the edge of Paris itself, it became clear that something more than a few thousand agitated students was at stake.
The strikes, sit-ins, office occupations and accompanying demonstrations and marches were the greatest movement of social protest in modern France, far more extensive than those of June 1936.
Even in retrospect it is difficult to say with confidence exactly what they were about.
The millions of men and women who had stopped work had one thing at least in common with the students.
Whatever their particular local grievances, they were above all frustrated with their conditions of existence.
They did not so much want to get a better deal at work as to change something about their way of life; pamphlets and manifestos and speeches explicitly said as much.
France was prosperous and secure and some conservative commentators concluded that the wave of protest was thus driven not by discontent but by simple boredom.
But there was genuine frustration, not only in factories like those of Renault where working conditions had long been unsatisfactory, but everywhere.
The Fifth Republic had accentuated the longstanding French habit of concentrating power in one place and a handful of institutions.
Even some of its own members (and especially their children) found it stifling.
The ageing De Gaulle himself failed, for the first time since 1958, to understand the drift of events.
His initial response had been to make an ineffective televised speech and then to disappear from sight.
When he did try to turn what he took to be the anti-authoritarian national mood to his advantage in a referendum the following year, and proposed a series of measures designed to decentralize government and decision-making in France, he was decisively and humiliatingly defeated; whereupon he resigned, retired and retreated to his country home, to die there a few months later.
Pompidou, meanwhile, had proven right to wait out the student demonstrations.
De Gaulle and Pompidou were quick to take advantage of the Left’s mistakes.
At the end of May De Gaulle announced a snap election, calling upon the French to choose between legitimate government and revolutionary anarchy.
To kick off its election campaign the Right staged a huge counterdemonstration.
Far larger even than the student manifestations of two weeks before, the massed crowds marching down the Champs Elysees on May 30th gave the lie to the Left’s assertion that the authorities had lost control.
The police were given instructions to re-occupy university buildings, factories and offices.
In the ensuing parliamentary elections, the ruling Gaullist parties won a crushing victory, l6 To visit the French Army in Germany, as it transpired, and assure himself of its loyalty and availability were it to be called upon.
The May Events in France had a psychological impact out of all proportion to their true significance.
Here was a revolution apparently unfolding in real time and before an international television audience.
Its leaders were marvelously telegenic; attractive and articulate young men leading the youth of France through the historical boulevards of Left Bank Paris.
Their demands—whether for a more democratic academic environment, an end to moral censorship, or simply a nicer world—were accessible and, despite the clenched fists and revolutionary rhetoric, quite unthreatening.
Above all, the May Events in France were curiously peaceful by the standards of revolutionary turbulence elsewhere, or in France’s own past.
There was quite a lot of violence to property, and a number of students and policemen had to be hospitalized following the ‘Night of the Barricades’ on May 24th.
The radicals of 1968 mimicked to the point of caricature the style and the props of past revolutions—they were, after all, performing on the same stage.
As a consequence, the French ‘psychodrama’ of 1968 entered popular mythology almost immediately as an object of nostalgia, a stylized struggle in which the forces of Life and Energy and Freedom were ranged against the numbing, gray dullness of the men of the past.
Alain Krivine, the charismatic graduate leader of the Trotskyist students is today, forty years on, the sexagenarian leader of France’s oldest Trotskyist party.
But it is symptomatic of the fundamentally apolitical mood of May 1968 that the best-selling French books on the subject a generation later are not serious works of historical analysis, much less the earnest doctrinal tracts of the time, but collections of contemporary graffiti and slogans.
Culled from the walls, noticel8 There were no women among the student leaders.
In contemporary photographs and newsreels girls can be seen prominently perched on the shoulders of their boyfriends, but they were at best the auxiliary foot soldiers of the student army.
The youth revolt of 1968 talked a lot about sex, but was quite unconcerned with inequalities of gender.
What the slogan writers of May 1968 never do is invite their readers to do anyone serious harm.
Even the attacks on De Gaulle treat him as a superannuated impediment rather than as a political foe.
This was to be a victimless revolution, which in the end meant that it was no sort of revolution at all.
The situation was very different in Italy, despite superficial similarities in the rhetoric of the student movements.
In the first place, the social background to Italy’s conflicts was quite distinctive.
The extensive migration from south to north in the course of the first half of the decade had generated, in Milan, Turin and other industrial towns of the north, a demand for transport, services, education and above all housing that the governments of the country had never managed to address.
The Italian ‘economic miracle’ arrived later than elsewhere, and the transition out of an agrarian society had been more abrupt.
As a consequence, the disruptions of first-generation industrialization overlapped and collided with the discontents of modernity.
Unskilled and semi-skilled workers—typically from the south, many of them women—were never absorbed into the established unions of skilled male workers in the industrialized north.
Traditional worker/employer tensions were now multiplied by disputes between skilled and unskilled, unionized and unorganized workers.
The better-paid, betterprotected, skilled employees in the factories of FIAT, or the Pirelli Rubber Company, demanded a greater say in management decisions—over shift hours, wage differentials and disciplinary measures.
Their main objection was to exhausting piece rates, the unrelenting pace of mechanized mass production lines, and unsafe working conditions.
Italy’s post-war economy was transformed by hundreds of small engineering, textile and chemical firms, most of whose employees had no legal or institutional recourse against their bosses’ demands.
These were not issues that the traditional parties and unions of the Left were equipped to address.
On the contrary, their main concern at the time was the dilution of the old labor institutions by this new and undisciplined workforce.
Their leaders—dissident Communists, academic theoreticians of worker autonomy, and spokesmen for student organizations— were quicker to identify the new sources of discontent at the industrial workplace and absorb them into their projects.
There, too, a new and unorganized workforce (the massive influx of first-generation students) faced conditions of life and work that were deeply unsatisfactory.
There, too, an old elite exercised untrammeled decisionmaking power over the student masses, imposing workload, tests, grades and penalties at will.
From this perspective, administrators and established unions and other professional organizations in schools and universities—no less than in factories and workshops—shared a vested, ‘objective’ interest in the status quo.
The fact that Italy’s student population was drawn overwhelmingly from the urban middle class was no impediment to such reasoning—as producers and consumers of knowledge, they represented an even greater threat to power and authority than the traditional forces of the proletariat.
In the thinking of the New Left it was not the social origin of a group that counted, but rather its capacity to disrupt the institutions and structures of authority.
But unlike the French student movements, the Italian student organizers’ interest in the reform of academic institutions was always secondary to their identification with the workers’ movement, as the names of their organizations —Avanguardia Operaia or Potere Operaio (‘Workers’ Vanguard’, ‘Workers’ Power’)—suggest.
The strike movement of 1969 was the largest in Italian history, and had a mobilizing and politicizing impact upon young Italian radicals out of all proportion to France’s brief, month-long protests of the previous year.
The ‘hot autumn’ of that year, with its wildcat strikes and spontaneous occupations by small groups of workers demanding a say in the way factories were run, led a generation of Italian student theorists and their followers to conclude that their root and branch rejection of the ‘bourgeois state’ was the right tactic.
Workers’ autonomy—as tactic and as objective—was the path of the future.
Not only were reforms—in schools and factories alike—unattainable, they were undesirable.
Just why‘unofficial’ Italian Marxists should have taken this turn remains a matter of debate.
But while this might account for the disaffection of the extraparliamentary Left, it cannot fully explain their turn to violence.
The putatively Maoist combination of revolutionary romanticism and workerist dogma was incarnated in the journal Lotta Continua (‘Continuous Struggle’)—whose name, as was often the case, encapsulates its project.
Lotta Continua first appeared in the autumn of 1969, by which time the turn to violence was well under way.
For anyone with an adult memory of the recent Italian past, this turn to violence could only end badly.
Whereas French students had played with the idea that public authority might prove vulnerable to disruption from below, a caprice that Gaullism’s firmly-grounded institutions allowed them to indulge with impunity, Italy’s radicals had good reason to believe that they might actually succeed in rending the fabric of the post-Fascist Republic—and they were keen to try.
On April 24th 1969, bombs were planted at the Milan Trade Fair and the central railway station.
Eight months later, after the Pirelli conflicts had been settled and the strike movement ended, the Agricultural Bank on the Piazza Fontana in Milan was blown up.
The ‘strategy of tension’ that underlay the lead years of the Seventies had begun.
Italian radicals in the Sixties could be accused of having forgotten their country’s recent past.
Until 1961, a post-war generation had been raised to see Nazism as responsible for war and defeat; but its truly awful aspects were consistently downplayed.
The trial that year in lerusalem of Adolf Eichmann, followed from 1963 to 1965 by the so-called ‘Auschwitz trials’ in Frankfurt, belatedly brought to German public attention the evils of the Nazi regime.
In 1967, Alexander and Margarete Mitscherlich published their hugely influential study of Die Unfdhigkeit zu trauen , arguing that the official West German recognition of Nazi evil had never been accompanied by genuine individual recognition of responsibility.
Established writers, playwrights and film-makers—Gunter Grass, Martin Walser, Hans-Magnus Enzensberger, Jurgen Habermas, Rolf Hochhuth, Edgar Reitz, all born between 1927 and 1932—now focused their work increasingly upon Nazism and the failure to come to terms with it.
But a younger cohort of intellectuals, born during or just after World War Two, took a harsher stance.
Lacking direct knowledge of what had gone before, they saw all Germany’s faults through the prism of the failings not so much of Nazism as of the Bonn Republic.
Thus for Rudi Dutschke , Peter Schneider , Gudrun Ensslin or the slightly younger Andreas Baader and Rainer Werner Fassbinder , West Germany’s postwar democracy was not the solution; it was the problem.
The apolitical, consumerist, American-protected cocoon of the Bundesrepublik was not just imperfect and amnesiac; it had actively conspired with its Western masters to deny the German past, to bury it in material goods and anti-Communist propaganda.
The youthful radical intelligentsia of the German Sixties accused the Bonn Republic of covering up the crimes of its founding generation.
Their parents, the cohort of Germans born between 1910 and 1930, did not just refuse to discuss the past.
Skeptical of political promises and grand ideas, their attention was relentlessly and a trifle uneasily focused on material well-being, stability and respectability.
As a result, in the eyes of their sons and daughters they stood for nothing.
In their eyes the Federal Republic exuded self-satisfaction and hypocrisy.
In 1962 Germany’s leading weekly news magazine had published a series of articles investigating West German defense policy that hinted at shady dealings by Adenauer’s Bavarian defense minister, Franz-Josef Strauss.
With Adenauer’s authorization and at Strauss’s behest, the government harassed the paper, arrested its publisher and ransacked its offices.
Then, four years later in December 1966, the ruling Christian Democrats selected as Chancellor in succession to Ludwig Erhard the former Nazi Kurt-Georg Kiesinger.
In those years the German Extra-Parliamentary Left moved into the universities with dramatic success.
Anti-militarism had a special place in German student protest as a tidy way to condemn both the Federal Republic and its Nazi predecessor.
With the growth of opposition to the Vietnam War this conflation between past and present extended to West Germany’s military mentor.
America, always ‘fascist’ in the rhetoric of a minority of radicals, now became the enemy for a far broader constituency.
Indeed, attacking ‘Amerika’ for its criminal war in Vietnam served almost as a surrogate for discussion of Germany’s own war crimes.
In Peter Weiss’s 1968 play VietnamDiscourse the parallel between the United States and the Nazis is explicitly drawn.
This way of talking allowed West German radicals to despise the Bonn Republic both for its present imperialist-capitalist associations and for its past fascist ones.
More ominously, it authorized the radical Left to recycle the claim that it was Germans themselves who were the true victims—an assertion hitherto identified with the far Right.
We should not, then, be surprised to learn that for all their anger at the ‘Auschwitz generation’, young Germans of the Sixties were not really much concerned with the Jewish Holocaust.
They preferred to subsume it in academic demands for classes on ‘ Faschismustheorie\ obscuring the racist dimension of Nazism and emphasizing instead its links to capitalist production and imperial “West Berlin itself had taken on something of a counter-cultural tone in these years.
Fossilized by its peculiar isolation at the heart of international political tensions, dependant on handouts from Bonn and Washington, its future lastingly impermanent, the city was suspended in time and space.
This made it rather appealing to dissidents, radicals and others who sought out the political and cultural fringe.
The irony of West Berlin’s situation—that its survival as a bohemian outpost of the West depended entirely on the presence of American soldiers—was lost on many of its youthful residents.
The truly ‘repressive state apparatus’ was the imperial lackeys in Bonn; their victims were those who opposed America’s war in Vietnam.
In this peculiar logic the populist, down-market tabloid Bild Zeitung, with its withering criticisms of student politics, was a revived Der Sturmer, students were the new ‘Jews’; and Nazi concentration camps were just a serviceable metaphor for the crimes of imperialism.
The German extra-parliamentary Left thus lost touch with its roots in the antiNazi mainstream.
This anti-Western emphasis in turn nourished a counter-culture that was selfconsciously exotic and more than a little bizarre, even by the standards of the time.
One distinctively German variant of Sixties cultural confusion saw sex and politics more closely entangled than elsewhere.
Following Marcuse, Erich Fromm, Wilhelm Reich and other twentieth-century German theorists of sexual and political repression, radical circles in Germany sung the praises of nudity, free love and anti-authoritarian childrearing.
Hitler’s much advertised sexual neuroses were freely adduced to account for Nazism.
And once again, a bizarre, chilling analogy was drawn in certain quarters between Hitler’s Jewish victims and the youth of the 1960s, martyrs to the sexually repressive regime of their parents.
The emphasis on nudity was explicitly designed to recall pictures of helpless, naked concentration camp bodies.
If Germans can look at the truth about our bodies, they will be able to face other truths as well.
Dutschke declared Ohnesorg’s death a ‘political murder’ and called for a mass response; within days, 100,000 students demonstrated across West Germany.
Jurgen Habermas, hitherto a prominent critic of the Bonn authorities, warned Dutschke and his friends a few days later of the risk of playing with fire.
Those who talked loosely of the ‘hidden violence’ and ‘repressive tolerance’ of the peaceful Bonn regime—and who set out deliberately to provoke the authorities into repression by voluntaristic acts of real violence—did not know what they were doing.
In March of the following year, as radical student leaders called repeatedly for confrontation with the Bonn ‘regime’ and the government threatened to retaliate against violent provocation in West Berlin and elsewhere, Habermas—joined by Grass, Walser, Enzensberger and Hochhuth—again appealed for democratic reason to prevail, calling upon students and government alike to respect republican legality.
The following month Dutschke himself would pay the price of the violent polarization he had encouraged, when he was shot in Berlin by a neo-Nazi sympathizer, on April 11th 1968.
In the angry weeks that followed, two people were killed and four hundred wounded in Berlin alone.
Many of them were quietly financed from East Germany or Moscow, though this was not common knowledge at the time.
Indeed, in Germany as elsewhere, the New Left kept its distance from official Communism— which in West Germany was in any case a political irrelevance.
But like much of the West German Left , the radicals had an ambiguous relationship with the German Democratic Republic to their East.
Perhaps not surprisingly, their parents’ nostalgia for a lost German past was unconsciously echoed in their own dreams of an alternative, better Germany to the East.
Thus the radicals’ hatred for the ‘hypocrisies’ of the Federal Republic made them uniquely susceptible to the claims of East Germany’s Communists to have faced up to German history and purged their Germany of its fascist past.
Emphasis upon the crimes of Communism was just a diversion from the crimes of capitalism.
Communists, as Daniel Cohn-Bendit had expressed it in Paris, might be ‘Stalinist scoundrels’; but liberal democrats were no better.
Thus the German Left turned a deaf ear to rumblings of discontent in Warsaw or Prague.
The face of the Sixties in West Germany, as in Western Europe at large, was turned resolutely inwards.
When Rudi Dutschke paid a fraternal visit to Prague, at the height of the Czech reform movement in the spring of 1968, local students were taken aback at his insistence that pluralist democracy was the real enemy.
It is accompanied by a crisis of political power and by a weakening of the apparatus of coercion.
Paul McCartney The Sixties in the Soviet bloc were of necessity experienced very differently from the West.
This in turn served as a reminder that the mainspring of Communism was the authority of Moscow; it was the mood and policies of the Soviet leadership that counted.
Until his overthrow in 1964, it was Nikita Khrushchev who determined the history of Europe’s eastern half.
Khrushchev’s generation of Soviet leaders still believed in the international class struggle.
Indeed, it was Khrushchev’s romanticized projection of Soviet revolutionary memories onto Latin American uprisings that led him to make the missteps that produced the Cuba crisis of 1962 and his own downfall.
In this guise, the competition with Beijing placed Moscow’s post-Stalinist rulers in a contradictory position.
On the other hand the Kremlin continued to favour co-existence with the Western powers—and with its own citizens.
From 1959, Stalin’s ‘Short Course’ was no longer the authoritative source of Soviet history and Marxist theory.
In short, the Soviet Union—and its more advanced satellite states—became embryonic welfare states, at least in form.
In a tragic-comic blend of centralized planning and local corruption, Communist bosses in Kyrgyzstan urged collective farmers to meet official farm delivery quotas by buying up supplies in local shops.
By January 1964, following the disastrous 1963 harvest, the USSR was reduced to importing grain from the West.
By 1965, two thirds of the potatoes consumed in the USSR and three quarters of the eggs came from private farmers.
In the Soviet Union as in Poland or Hungary, ‘Socialism’ depended for its survival upon the illicit ‘capitalist’ economy within, to whose existence it turned a blind eye.
The economic reforms of the fifties and sixties were from the start a fitful attempt to patch up a structurally dysfunctional system.
To the extent that they implied a half-hearted willingness to decentralize economic decisions or authorize de Though it was replaced by a newly mythologized version in which Stalin himself—and his crimes— passed half unacknowledged.
The credibility of the Soviet system rested to a quite extraordinary extent upon its capacity to get results from the land.
For most of its eighty-year life, agriculture was on an emergency footing in one way or another.
But otherwise the liberalizations undertaken by Khrushchev, and after him Brezhnev, presented no immediate threat to the network of power and patronage on which the Soviet system depended.
Indeed, it was just because economic improvements in the Soviet bloc were always subordinate to political priorities that they achieved so very little.
Lenin had always worried more about his critics than his principles; his heirs were no different.
Intellectual opposition, whether or not it was likely to find a wider echo in the party or outside, was something to which Communist leaders, Khrushchev included, were intensely sensitive.
At the same time, in 1959, the authorities clamped down on Orthodox priests and Baptists, a form of cultural dissidence that had been allowed a certain freedom since Stalin’s fall.
However, Khrushchev himself, if not his colleagues, was reliably unpredictable.
The 22nd Congress of the CPSU, in October 1961, revealed the extent of the schism between China and the USSR (the following month the Soviets closed their embassy in Albania, Beijing’s European locum), and in the competition for global influence Moscow set out to present a new face to its confused and vacillating foreign constituency.
In 1962 an obscure provincial schoolteacher, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, was allowed to publish his pessimistic and implicitly subversive novel One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovitch in Novy Mir —the same journal that had rejected Pasternak not six years before.
Solzhenitsyn’s later work would certainly never have been allowed into print even at the height of the ‘thaw’ But in comparison with what had gone before, the early Sixties were a time of literary freedom and cautious cultural experimentation.
The plotters against Khrushchev were irritated at his policy failures and his autocratic style; but above all it was his inconsistencies that made them uneasy.
The First Secretary himself might know exactly what was permissible and what was not, but others could be tempted to misunderstand his apparent tolerance.
Within months of taking control, the new Kremlin leadership began to press down upon the intelligentsia.
Under the pseudonyms Abram Tertz and Nikolay Arzhak they had smuggled out for publication in the West various works of fiction.
Tertz-Sinyavsky had also published—abroad—a short, critical essay on modern Soviet literature, On Socialist Realism.
Since no law in the Soviet Union prohibited the publication of works abroad, the authorities claimed that the content of their works was itself evidence of the crime of anti-Soviet activity.
The Sinyavsky-Daniel trial was held in camera , although a press campaign vilifying the two writers had drawn public attention to their fate.
But the trial proceedings were secretly recorded and transcribed by several people admitted to the courtroom and they were published both in Russian and English a year later, generating international petitions and demands for the men’s release.
The unusual aspect of the affair was that for all the brutality of the Stalin decades, no-one had hitherto been arrested and imprisoned solely on the basis of the content of their writings.
Even if material evidence had been freely invented for the purpose, intellectuals in the past had always been accused of deeds, not merely words.
Contrasting as it did with the comparative laxity of the Khrushchev years, the treatment of Sinyavsky and Daniel aroused unprecedented protests within the Soviet Union itself.
Vladimir Bukovsky, then a 25-year-old student, was arrested in 1967 for organizing a demonstration in Pushkin Square in defense of civil rights and freedom of expression.
Already in 1963 he had been arrested by the KGB, charged with possession of anti-Soviet literature and committed to a psychiatric hospital for compulsory treatment.
By any standards save those of its own history, the regime was immovable, repressive and inflexible.
The prospects for truth telling about the past, and reform in the future, seemed to have receded.
Whatever face it presented to the Western powers, the Soviet regime at home was settling in for an indefinite twilight of economic stagnation and moral decay.
In the satellite states of the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe, however, the prospects 3 A year after his release, Sinyavsky emigrated to France and took up a post teaching Russian literature at the Sorbonne.
The principles of the Soviet imperium had been handily illustrated in Budapest in November 1956.
Moreover, in Czechoslovakia and Romania some of the surviving victims of the show trials of earlier years were still languishing in prison a decade later.
And yet, Eastern Europe was different—in part, of course, just because it was a recent colonial extension of Communist rule.
By the 1960s, Communism was the only form of rule most inhabitants of the Soviet Union had ever known; in the shadow of the Great Patriotic War it had even acquired a certain legitimacy.
But further West the memory of Soviet occupation and the enforced Soviet take-over was still fresh.
Responding to Sartre’s assertion in 1956 that Hungary’s revolution had been marked by a ‘rightist spirit’, the Hungarian refugee scholar Francois Fejto had replied that it was the Stalinists who stood on the Right.
Fejto’s insistence on the credibility of an anti-Stalinist Left catches the tone of east European intellectual opposition for the following twelve years.
The point was not to condemn Communism, much less overthrow it; the goal, rather, was to think through what had gone so horribly wrong and propose an alternative within the terms of Communism itself.
These ‘revisionists’—in Poland the best known was the young Marxist philosopher Leszek Kofakowski—had in many cases been orthodox Marxists until 1956.
Like most contemporary Western Marxists they were wedded to the notion that it was possible to distinguish clearly between the credibility of Marxism and the crimes of Stalin.
For many Eastern European Marxists, Stalinism was a tragic parody of Marxist doctrine and the Soviet Union a permanent challenge to the credibility of the project of Socialist transformation.
This was partly from necessity, of course; but partly too from sincere conviction.
In the longer run this affiliation would isolate and even discredit the reform Communists of these years, notably in the eyes of a rising generation increasingly attuned to the mood of their Western peers and whose point of reference was not the Stalinist past but the capitalist present.
But from 1956 to 1968, the revisionist moment in Eastern Europe afforded writers, filmmakers, economists, journalists and others a brief window of optimism about an alternative Socialist future.
It was a peculiarity of Poland in the Gomulka years that Marxist philosophers and Catholic theologians could find some common ground in their defense of free speech and civil liberties—an embryonic anticipation of the alliances that would be forged in the Seventies.
The most propitious terrain for ‘helpful’ criticism was the Communist management of the economy.
One reason for this was that conventional Marxism was purportedly grounded in political economy, so that economic policy (once liberated from the dead hand of Stalin) was a permissible arena of intellectual dissent.
Another reason was that many east European intellectuals of the time still took Marxism very seriously and treated the problem of Communist economics as a vital theoretical starting point for serious reforms.
But the main explanation was simply that, by the early Sixties, the economies of Europe’s Communist states were showing the first intimations of serious disrepair.
They were committed to the mass production of redundant primary industrial goods.
The commodities—consumer goods above all—for which there was a growing demand were not produced, or else not in sufficient quantity, or of the necessary quality.
The peculiar inefficiencies of Communism had been partly camouflaged in the first post-war decade by the demands of post-war reconstruction.
The problems, it was increasingly conceded, must lie in the Communist economic system itself.
Self-styled ‘reform economists’ were thickest on the ground in Hungary.
Reform economists acknowledged that the land collectivization of the forties and fifties had been a mistake.
They also recognized, though more cautiously, that the Soviet obsession with the large-scale extraction and production of primary industrial goods was an impediment to growth.
In short, they conceded—though not in so many words—that the blanket application to eastern Europe of the Soviet Union’s own forced industrialization and destruction of private property had been a disaster.
And even more radically, they began to seek ways in which Communist economies might incorporate price signals and other market incentives into a collectivist system of property and production.
The Sixties debates on economic reform in eastern Europe had to walk a fine line.
But admitting the failure of central planning or collective property was another matter.
Collective farms were granted substantial autonomy and not just permitted but actively encouraged to support private plots on the side.
Certain commodity prices were tied to the world market and allowed to fluctuate via multiple exchange rates.
The point of the 4 Although the best-known reform economist of the Sixties was a Czech, Ota Sik, it was the Hungarian school that had the broadest influence and the most practical impact.
In retrospect it is clear that the reformers were deluding themselves if they supposed that a ‘third way’ between Communism and capitalism was ever realistic.
But this was not because of any formal shortcoming in their economic analysis.
Their true error lay in a curiously naive misreading of the system under which they lived.
What mattered to the Communist leadership was not economics but politics.
In the meantime, however, the regimes were interested above all in stability.
The first, ‘Kadarism’, was not readily exportable—and it was very much part of the Hungarian leader’s own strategy to assure the Kremlin authorities that there was no Hungarian ‘model’, merely a limited practical solution to local difficulties.
Hungary’s situation was indeed unique, with Kadar cynically dangling access to the prosperous West before his travelstarved fellow Hungarians as a sort of reward for good behaviour—a tacit confession of Communism’s own failure.
Genuine liberation was unthinkable, but a reversion to repression highly unlikely.
Kadar’s Hungary—‘the best barracks in the laager } —was much envied, though only fitfully emulated.
The second model, Tito’s Yugoslavia, was even more obviously sui generis.
This was not because Yugoslavia had managed to avoid the problems of its neighbors.
Many of the economic dysfunctions of the Soviet satellites were just as familiar to Yugoslavs, a reminder that their country’s suspended animation between East and West was a product of historical chance rather than ideological choice.
These innovations were born of ethnic and geographical divisions as well as economic necessity.
In a federal state whose constituent republics and peoples shared little beyond unhappy and mutually antagonistic memories, the imposition of uniform instructions from Belgrade looked a lot like a return to pre-war practices.
It was these considerations—rather than the creative, alternative Socialist blueprint with which his Western admirers wishfully credited Tito in these years—that shaped the Yugoslav model.
Such a checklist of cheap consumer goods would have been much less to the fore in Bulgarian or Romanian memory, for example—and the ‘first trip to Trieste’ would have been quite out of the question.
Yugoslavs were not prosperous and they were not free; but nor were they imprisoned in a hermetic system.
Nikita Khrushchev, who actively disliked Romania (a sentiment widespread in his generation of Russians), had sought to assign it a uniquely agricultural role in the international Communist distribution of labor.
Having played an accommodating role in the imprisonment and suppression of the Hungarian revolt, the Romanians secured the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Romanian territory in 1958 and took an increasingly independent path.
Under Dej and Ceau§escu, Romania declined to get involved in Moscow’s quarrels with China and even refused to allow Warsaw Pact maneuvers on its territory.
The Romanian leaders made overtures to Tito (whose own relations with the Warsaw Pact were formal rather than friendly), Dej even addressing the Yugoslav National Assembly in 1963; and they underwrote Romania’s neo-Stalinist industrialization with money and machinery obtained from Western Europe.
Romania’s dealings with the West steadily increased; while trade with Comecon countries fell—from 70 percent of Romania’s overall foreign trade at the start of the 1960s to 45 percent ten years later.
But the strategy was even 5 Djilas was imprisoned for four years when The New Class appeared in the West, and re-incarcerated for a further four years shortly after his release.
Whereas Albania, China’s European surrogate, held no attraction for anyone save nostalgic Stalinists and ultra-besotted Maoists, the international image of Communist Romania was curiously positive.
Simply by distancing themselves from Moscow, the men in Bucharest gleaned a host of unlikely Western admirers.
De Gaulle was doubtless right that Romanian Communism would not have been appropriate for the West.
In contrast to other satellite states Romania allowed no space for any internal opposition—Bucharest intellectuals in the Sixties, cut off from their own society, played no part in domestic debates and had to be satisfied with reading the latest nouveaux romans from Paris and participating vicariously in a cosmopolitan French culture for which educated Romanians had always claimed a special affinity.
Richard Nixon became the first United States President to visit a Communist state when he went to Bucharest in August 1969.
Tito and Ceau§escu, like Kadar and the neo-Stalinist leadership in the GDR, successfully negotiated the shoals of the Sixties.
Each in his own way, they assured their authority and control at home while maintaining at least a modus vivendi with Moscow.
The result was deep frustration among ‘revisionist’ intellectuals, not just at the regime in general but at the lost opportunity for a new direction, the unfinished business of the Polish October.
In the Letter the authors depicted a bureaucratic, autocratic regime, deaf to the interests of all but the ruling elite that it served, ruling incompetently over an impoverished working population and censoring all commentary and criticism.
Poland’s only hope, Kuroii and Modzelewski concluded, was a genuine revolution, based on workers’ councils, freedom of the press and the abolition of the political police.
The day after presenting their Letter the two men were arrested and charged with advocating the overthrow of the state.
On July 19th 1965 they were sentenced to prison terms of three and three and a half years respectively.
The Kurori-Modzelewski Affair sparked a heartfelt response in the university.
The secret trial of the two students came as a shock, and there were demands not merely for their release but for their Letter and earlier research paper to be made public.
Ten years later Poland was a land of privilege, inefficiency and censorship.
Written in 1832 but dangerously contemporary in its portrayal of nineteenthcentury rebels struggling against oppression, the play had attracted lively and distinctly engaged audiences.
In late January the Communist authorities announced that the play would have to be cancelled.
The response was a wave of student-organized petitions to the Polish Parliament, sympathetic resolutions at the Warsaw branch of the Polish Writers’ Association and speeches by KoZakowski and other prominent professors and writers in defense of the students.
The strike and ensuing protests were crushed with considerable violence—enough to provoke one Politburo member and two senior cabinet ministers to resign in protest.
In a long series of trials held between September 1968 and May 1969, students and other intellectuals from Warsaw, Wrodaw, Cracow and Zodz were sentenced to terms ranging from six months to three years for ‘participation in secret organizations’, ‘distribution of anti-State publications’ and other crimes.
The harshest sentences were handed out to those like Adam Michnik, Jan Litynski and Barbara Toruriczyk who had also been active in the initial student protests.
A disproportionate number of the students and professors arrested, expelled and imprisoned in Poland in the years 1967-69 were of Jewish origin, and this was not a coincidence.
Under the direction of Mieczyslaw Moczar, the Interior Minister, this inner-party opposition had coalesced around the cause of anti-Semitism.
From Stalin’s death until 1967, anti-Semitism—though endemic in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union itself—was kept out of official Communist rhetoric.
After the war most of Eastern Europe’s surviving Jews had gone west, or to Israel.
Of those who remained, many fled, if they could, in the course of the persecutions of Stalin’s last years.
There were still substantial communities of Jews remaining, in Poland and Hungary; but most of these were not practicing Jews and typically did not think of themselves as Jewish at all.
In the case of those born after the war, they often did not even know that they were—their parents had thought it prudent to keep quiet.
In Poland especially, the still considerable numbers of Jewish Communists— some of them holding political office, others in universities and the professions— were mostly indifferent to their Jewish background, some of them naive enough to suppose that their indifference was shared by Poles at large.
All that was lacking was the opportunity, and the Six Day War between Israel and its Arab neighbors duly afforded this in June 1967.
Soviet support for the Arab cause legitimized vocal criticism of Israel, Zionism—and Jews.
Let those who feel that these words are addressed to them, irrespective of their nationality, draw the proper conclusion.
The reference to lews as Poland’s Fifth Column was carried on radio and television and heard by millions of Poles.
Whether Gomulka was expressing his own views; was seeking scapegoats for the policy failures of the past decade; or was merely anticipating Moczar’s efforts to unseat him and had decided to outflank his Stalinist opponents, was never clear.
Distinctions were openly drawn between good’ Communists, with national Polish interests at heart, and others whose true affiliation lay elsewhere.
In 1968, the parents and other relatives of Jewish students arrested or expelled were themselves sacked from official positions and academic posts.
Prosecutors paid special attention to the names and origins of students and professors who appeared in court—familiar from the Slansky and other trials of the Fifties but a first for Communist Poland.
Of Poland’s remaining 30,000 Jews some 20,000 departed in the course of 1968-69, leaving only a few thousand behind, mostly the elderly and the young—including Michnik and his fellow students, now serving terms in prison.
The losers, beyond Poland’s Jews, were the country’s educational institutions (which lost many of their finest scholars and teachers, including Kolakowski—not himself a Jew but married to one); Gomulka, who realized too late what he had unleashed and was himself removed two years later; and Poland itself, its international reputation once again—and for many years to come— inextricably associated with the victimization of its Jewish minority.
The relative ease with which Poland’s rulers were able to isolate and destroy the student protesters derived from their success in separating the intellectuals and their discontents from the rest of the nation—a strategy in which anti-Semitism naturally played a useful role.
As their neo-Stalinist enemies were quick to point out, Warsaw’s dissident intelligentsia paid little attention to the bread and butter concerns of the working population.
In return, the mass of the Polish people was studiously indifferent to the persecution of Jews and students alike, and Jewish students especially.
In this respect, at least, 1968 in Poland had one positive outcome, albeit deferred.
Czechoslovakia in the early Sixties was a hybrid, caught in an uncomfortable transition from national Stalinism to reform Communism.
The show trials and purges of the 1950s had come late to Prague and their impact had been both greater and more enduring than elsewhere.
There was no rotation of the old Stalinist elite, no Czech Gomulka or Kadar.
The purpose behind both commissions was somehow to acknowledge the regime’s recent criminal past without loosening any control of the present.
Victims of the Stalinist trials were released and rehabilitated—in many instances at the behest of the same politicians, judges, prosecutors and interrogators who had condemned them in the first place.
Like the French Communist leader Maurice Thorez, First Secretary Antonin Novotny waited many years to be sure which way the wind was blowing before following Khrushchev’s example and denouncing the Soviet dictator.
De-Stalinization in Czechoslovakia was thus deliberately delayed as long as possible—even the mon436 THE END OF THE AFFAIR umental statue of Stalin on the heights overlooking Prague, like the rather smaller copy in the Slovak capital Bratislava, was left untouched until October 1962.
The leading victims of Stalinist terror in Czechoslovakia had all been intellectuals, usually of middle-class origin, many of them Jews.
Upward social mobility for workers—or, more precisely, downward social mobility for everyone else—was a distinguishing feature of the 1950s in the Czech and Slovak lands.
The percentage of working-class children in non-vocational higher education in Czechoslovakia rose from under 10 percent in 1938 to 31 percent by 1956, nearly 40 percent in 1963.
Income distribution in Czechoslovakia by the early Sixties was the most egalitarian in Soviet Europe.
The Communist leadership had thus indeed advanced Czechoslovakia to ‘full Socialism’, as the new Constitution of i960 proclaimed.
However, this achievement had been accomplished at the price of a level of stagnation that was unacceptable even by Soviet standards.
The economic reforms begun in 1963 might not be universally welcomed by shop-floor employees; but among writers, teachers, filmmakers and philosophers the prospect of a loosening of the Stalinist shackles released an avalanche of criticisms, hopes and expectations.
Thus a writers’ conference in Liblice in 1963 was devoted to Franz Kafka.
On April 5th 1963, the Italian Communist leader Palmiro Togliatti secretly wrote to ask Novotny and his colleagues to delay news of the rehabilitation of Slansky and other trial victims until after the forthcoming Italian elections.
In April 1963, Ladislav Novomesky, a rehabilitated Slovak writer, made open and admiring mention at the Slovak Writers’ Congress of his comrade and friend’ Clementis, a Slansky trial victim.
The relatively liberal mood of these years was a belated Czech echo of the Khrushchev thaw.
Despite the changed tone in Moscow following Brezhnev’s coup, the artistic renaissance in Czechoslovakia continued to unfold, impeded only by sporadic censorship and pressure.
But playwrights, poets and novelists—many of whom, Kundera included, doubled as screenwriters in these years—played an even more important role.
In 1966 Ludvlk Vaculik published The Axe, a fictional account drawing on his own father’s Communist ideals—and the son’s subsequent disillusionment.
In the same year Kundera himself published The Joke, a neoexistentialist and avowedly autobiographical novel of the Stalinist generation in Czechoslovakia.
Those years, ‘the era of building socialism’ as they were officially known, were now fair game for intellectual condemnation, and at the Fourth Czechoslovak Writers’ Congress in the summer of 1967 Kundera, Vaculik, the poet and playwright Pavel Kohout and the young playwright Vaclav Havel attacked the Communist leadership of the time for the material and moral devastation it had wrought.
They called for a return to the literary and cultural heritage of Czechoslovakia and for the country to take up once again its ‘normal’ place in the center of a free Europe.
Brezhnev had long regarded Czechoslovakia as the least ideologically reliable element in the Warsaw Pact.
It was because they knew this that the aging Stalinists in Prague Castle had tried for so long to hold the line.
If they did not clamp down firmly on the intellectual opposition emerging in 1967 it was not for want of trying.
The Slovak minority in the south and east of the country was poorer and more rural than the Czechs to the northwest.
Released from Hungarian rule in 1918, Slovaks were the poor relations in multi-ethnic inter-war Czechoslovakia and were not always treated well by Prague.
Many Slovak political leaders had thus welcomed the breakup of the country in 1939 and the Nazi-sponsored appearance of an ‘independent’ puppet state with its capital in Bratislava.
Conversely it was the urban and heavily Social Democratic Czechs of Bohemia and Moravia who had backed Communist candidates in the post-war elections, while the Catholic Slovaks remained indifferent or opposed.
And the small number of surviving Slovak Jews suffered along with their Czech confreres.
But ‘bourgeois nationalists’, Communists, Jews and intellectuals were fewer in number in Slovakia and much more isolated from the rest of society.
For them the rapid urbanization and industrialization of the first post-war decade carried real benefits.
In contrast to Czechs, they were by no means displeased with their lot.
The mood in the Slovak region of the country changed sharply after i960, however.
The new‘Socialist’ Constitution made even fewer concessions to local initiative or opinion than its predecessor and such autonomy as had been accorded Slovakia in the post-war reconstruction of the country was now taken back.
Of more immediate consequence for most Slovaks, however, was the stagnation of the economy , which hit the heavy industry of central Slovakia harder than anywhere else.
The reform economists’ proposals for decentralization of decision-making and increased local autonomy had been welcomed in Bratislava—though some of the reforms, such as profitrelated wage incentives, were hardly calculated to appeal to the unskilled workers in Slovakia’s inefficient industrial plants.
Slovak Communists themselves now began to talk of the need for federalization and of the difficulties of collaborating with the aging Communist apparatchiks in Prague.
There was talk of long-forgotten pre-war indignities, as well as the Stalinist purges of Slovak Communists.
Meanwhile, and for the first time in years, there was a hint of troubles of yet another order.
The ‘Strahov Events’, as they were later dubbed, were efficiently and violently suppressed by the police; but they added to the charged atmosphere of the moment, all the more so because they seemed to suggest that a Communist state might not be immune to the student mood in the West.
Novotny, like Gomulka in Poland, was uncertain how to respond to such challenges.
Lacking the anti-Semitic option, he turned to Brezhnev for help in dealing with his local critics.
If Dubcek’s intentions were obscure to observers, this is probably because he himself was far from sure just where to go.
At first this ambiguity worked in his favor, as different factions competed for his support and offered to strengthen his hand.
On March 22nd Novotny reluctandy resigned the presidency and was replaced a week later by General Ludvik Svoboda.
Five days after that, the Central Committee adopted an ‘Action Program’ calling for equal status and autonomy for Slovakia, the rehabilitation of past victims and ‘democratization’ of the political and eco440 THE END OF THE AFFAIR nomic system.
The events of the spring and summer of 1968 in Czechoslovakia hinged on three contemporary illusions.
The first, widespread in the country after Dubcek’s rise and especially following publication of the Action Program, was that the freedoms and reforms now being discussed could be folded into the ‘Socialist’ project.
A new government headed by Oldrich Cernik was installed on April 18th and, encouraged by huge public demonstrations of affection and support (notably in the traditional May Day celebrations), it relaxed virtually all formal controls on public expressions of opinion.
The people needed to strengthen the arm of the Communists’ own reformers by pressing them to move forward even faster.
Dubcek rejected Vaculik’s manifesto and its implication that the Communists should abandon their monopoly of power.
As a lifelong Communist he would not countenance this crucial qualitative shift and anyway saw no need to do so.
The fault line between a Communist state and an open society was now fully exposed.
If Dubcek made this mortal miscalculation it was above all because the Czech reformers had crucially misinterpreted the lesson of 1956.
Imre Nagy’s mistake, they thought, had been his departure from the Warsaw Pact and declaration of Hungarian neutrality.
So long as Czechoslovakia stayed firmly in the Pact and unambiguously allied to Moscow, Leonid Brezhnev and his colleagues would surely leave them alone.
Unbeknownst to Prague, the KGB chief Yuri Andropov was already speaking of a possi442 THE END OF THE AFFAIR ble need for concrete military measures’; and in April Soviet Defense Minister Andrei Grechko was quietly authorized to draw up a contingent plan for military operations in Czechoslovakia—a first draft of what would become ‘Operation Danube’ With every liberalizing step in Prague, Moscow grew ever more uneasy.
Russian students visiting Prague could now read and hear people and opinions long since banned at home.
The Soviet leader was not merely unconvinced; he came away increasingly skeptical of Dubcek’s prospects.
This pronouncement, a lightly veiled assertion of the Kremlin’s right to act preventively to head off a threat to socialism in any socialist country, may well have given Dubcek pause.
But there was little he could do, and so he continued to insist that his domestic reforms posed no threat to the socialist system.
The Soviet decision to invade Czechoslovakia was not formally taken until August 18th.
Brezhnev seems to have been reluctant—intuitively sensing that however easy the victory, its aftershocks might prove troublesome—but it had become all but inevitable well before then.
But the Soviet leaders knew perfectly well that there was no such risk, and not just because Washington had its hands full in Vietnam.
Just five weeks earlier, Washington and Moscow had co-signed a Treaty of Nuclear Non-proliferation; the United States was not about to jeopardize such gains for the sake of a few million misguided Czechs.
And so, on August 21st 1968, 500,000 Warsaw Pact troops from Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, the DDR and the Soviet Union marched into Czechoslovakia.
The invasion met some passive resistance and quite a lot of street protests, especially in Prague; but at the urgent behest of the Czech government it was otherwise unopposed.
The unfriendly reception was a source of some surprise to the Soviet leadership, who had been led to expect that their tanks would encounter widespread support.
Having at first arrested Dubdek and his leading colleagues, flown them to Moscow and obliged them to sign a paper renouncing parts of their program and agreeing to the Soviet occupation of their country, the Kremlin was now perforce obliged to accept that the reformers had the support of the Czech and Slovak people and allow them to retain formal charge of their country, at least for the moment.
Nevertheless, the repression of the Prague reforms—‘normalization’, as it became known—began almost immediately.
Among the Soviet leaders there was considerable support for the imposition on Prague of a military dictatorship.
This was the preference not only 13 The request was hardly spontaneous.
Their presence hardly justified the trouble; but the importance of spreading responsibility for the attack across the largest possible number of fraternal states overrode other considerations.
But Brezhnev chose instead to let Dubcek stay in office a few months longer, pursue the federalization of the country (with the aim of splitting Slovaks, their chief demand now conceded, from the more radical Czechs) and see how events unfolded—while retaining a Warsaw Pact presence just in case.
Palach lived for three days before dying of his burns on January 19th 1969.
The next time pro-democracy demonstrators took to the streets (following Czechoslovakia’s victory over the USSR in a game of ice hockey), the Kremlin exploited the occasion to remove Dubcek and replace him, on April 17th 1969, with one of his erstwhile colleagues, Gustav Husdk.
As a Slovak and former trial victim , Husak was the ideal candidate to purge the land of the reformist heresy without prompting accusations of a return to Stalinism.
The repression that followed was less obtrusive than in the past, but highly effective.
Men and women who had been active or prominent in the Prague Spring were ‘interviewed’ and asked to sign statements renouncing their actions and rejecting the Dubcek reforms.
Those who refused lost their jobs and, along with their relatives and children, became social pariahs.
The ‘screening’ and purging of these intellectuals was carried out by lower ranking bureaucrats, policemen and party officials—more often than not the victims’ own colleagues.
It had not escaped the authorities’ notice that only one of Dubcek’s leading colleagues had refused to sign the Moscow document renouncing his actions.
The threat of violence was of course always implicit, but the fact that it was rarely invoked merely added to the collective humiliation.
Once again, as in 1938 and again in 1948, Czechoslovakia was being made complicit in its own defeat.
East European army units engaged in the invasion of Czechoslovakia had been led to believe that they were defending the country against West German or American invaders, and some of them had later to be quietly withdrawn, their reliability—notably that of Hungarian units occupying Slovakia—seriously in question.
In Poland, as we have seen, the repression in Prague both stimulated student protests and strengthened the hand of the authorities in stamping them down.
In April 1969 in the Latvian capital Riga, a Jewish student, Ilia Rips, set herself on fire to draw attention to the Soviet treatment of Dubcek.
The attitude of Czechs and Slovaks themselves, hitherto among the most pro-Russian nations in the Soviet bloc, now shifted irrevocably to a stance of sullen acquiescence.
Unpopularity at home or abroad was a small price to pay for the stability that this would henceforth ensure.
After 1968, the security of the Soviet zone was firmly underwritten by a renewed appreciation of Moscow’s willingness to resort to force if necessary.
In Prague, the evisceration of the reform movement left an especially bitter taste.
Eighty thousand Czechs and Slovaks fled into exile following the Soviet invasion.
Reflecting in later years upon his memories of August 21st 1968, when Red Army troops burst into a meeting of Czech party leaders and a soldier lined up behind each Politburo member, Mlynar recalled that ‘at such a moment one’s concept of socialism moves to last place.
It is that connection which marked the definitive turning point in the history of Communism, more even than the Hungarian tragedy of 1956.
Alexander Dubcek and his Action Program were not a beginning but an end.
The closing of the long post-war cycle of growth and prosperity dispelled the rhetoric and the projects of the New Left; the optimistic emphasis on post-industrial alienation and the soulless quality of modern life would soon be displaced by a renewed attention to jobs and wages.
In the East the message of the Sixties was that you could no longer work within ‘the system’; in the West there appeared no better choice.
Only the truly radical stuck with their determination to remain outside the political consensus—a commitment which in Germany and Italy, as in the United States and Latin America, led them into clandestinity, violence and crime.
In the short run, the practical achievements of the Sixties seemed rather thin.
Universities tried, I7 The baby-boom generation itself never wanted for employment.
It was its immediate successor, the cohort born after 1953, which entered the employment market just as jobs were getting harder to find.
In the course of the next decade access to divorce, abortion and contraception was facilitated almost everywhere, and restrictions upon sexual behavior—whether as depicted or practiced—largely disappeared.
In the Statuto dei Lavoratori of May 1970, Italian workers won the right to protection against unfair dismissal.
Taken all in all, such changes constitute an underlying cultural transformation of European society; but they were hardly the ‘revolution’ envisaged in the slogans and actions of the generation of 1968.
The same movements that purported to despise and abhor ‘consumer culture’ were from the outset an object of cultural consumption, reflecting a widespread disjunction between rhetoric and practice.
Those in Paris or Berlin who aggressively declared their intention to ‘change the world’ were often the people most devoted to parochial and even bodily obsessions—anticipating the solipsistic ‘me’ politics of the decade to follow—and absorbed in the contemplation of their own impact.
But if the Sixties seemed at last to pass un-mourned and with few enduring monuments, this was perhaps because the changes that they did bring about were so all-embracing as to seem natural and, by the early Seventies, wholly normal.
At the start of the decade Europe was run by and—as it seemed—for old men.
Authority, whether in the bedroom, the home, the streets, educational establishments, workplaces, the media or politics, passed unquestioned.
Authority had either been withdrawn from most spheres of social life, or else was acknowledged only in the breach.
Elsewhere—Britain, perhaps—the transition was spread over a period of years and its dimensions could only be fully appreciated in retrospect.
It was one of the self-delusions of the age that the Sixties were an era of heightened political consciousness.
The deflation of the causes—and the demobilization of the coming decades—thus confers in retrospect an air of failure upon a decade of frenetic political activity.
The peccadilloes of a fallen elite might continue to arouse a certain prurient interest, but after the Sixties they could no longer shock.
In Eastern Europe, the ‘revisionist’ interlude and its tragic denouement saw off the last illusions of Marxism as a practice.
In the West, Marxist and para-Marxist theories soared clear of any relationship to local reality, disqualifying themselves from any future role in serious public debate.
In 1945 the radical Right had discredited itself as a legitimate vehicle for political expression.
Robert Hewison Even before the effervescence of the Sixties had subsided, the unique circumstances that made it possible had passed forever.
Within three years of the end of the most prosperous decade in recorded history, the post-war economic boom was over.
Western Europe’s ‘thirty glorious years 5 gave way to an age of monetary inflation and declining growth rates, accompanied by widespread unemployment and social discontent.
Most of the radicals of the Sixties, like their followers, abandoned ‘the Revolution 5 and worried instead about their job prospects.
A few opted for violent confrontation; the damage they wrought—and the response their actions elicited from the authorities—led to much nervous talk of the ‘ungovernable 5 condition of Western societies.
But there was to be no return to the optimism—or the illusions—of the first post-war decades.
The impact of economic slowdown was only just beginning to be felt when two external shocks brought the Western European economy to a shuddering halt.
On August 15th 1971, United States President Richard Nixon unilaterally announced that his country was abandoning the system of fixed exchange rates.
The background to this decision was the huge military burden of the Vietnam War and a growing United States Federal budget deficit.
The dollar was tied to a gold standard, and there was a growing fear in Washington that foreign holders of United States currency would seek to exchange their dollars for gold, draining American reserves.
Having opted to fight an expensive war of attrition on the other side of the world—and pay for it with borrowed money—the United States could not expect to maintain the dollar indefinitely at its fixed and increasingly over-valued rate.
If the dollar was to float, then so must the European currencies, and in that case all of the carefully constructed certainties of the postwar monetary and trading systems were called into question.
The fixed rate system, established before the end of the Second World War in anticipation of a controlled network of national economies, was over.
Following some months of confusion, two successive devaluations of the dollar, and the ‘floating’ of the British pound in 1972 (belatedly bringing to an inglorious end sterling’s ancient and burdensome role as an international ‘reserve’ currency), a conference in Paris, in March 1973, formally buried the financial arrangements so laboriously erected at Bretton Woods and agreed to establish in its place a new floating-rate system.
But the uncertainty produced by America’s retreat from a dollar-denominated system encouraged growing currency speculation, which international accords on floating-rate regimes were powerless to restrain.
This in turn undermined the efforts of individual governments to manipulate local interest rates and maintain the value of their national currency.
And it was in this already unstable situation that the international economy was hit by the first of the two oil shocks of the 1970s.
On October 6th 1973, Yom Kippur in the Jewish cal'The United States federal budget deficit grew from $1. billion in 1965 to $25. billion in 1968.
Within twenty-four hours major Arab oilexporting states had announced plans to reduce oil production; ten days later they announced an oil embargo against the United States in retaliation for its support for Israel and increased the price of petroleum by 70 percent.
The Yom Kippur War itself ended with an Egyptian-Israeli cease-fire on October 25th, but Arab frustration at Western support for Israel did not abate.
On December 23rd the oil-producing nations agreed to a further increase in the price of oil.
To appreciate the significance of these developments for Western Europe especially, it is important to recall that the price of oil, unlike almost every other primary commodity on which the modern industrial economy rests, had remained virtually unchanged over the decades of economic growth.
One barrel of Saudi light crude—a benchmark measure—cost $1.93 in 1955; in January 1971 it went for just $2.18.
Given the modest price inflation of those years, this meant that in real terms oil had actually got cheaper.
OPEC, formed in i960, had been largely inert and showed no inclination to constrain its major producers to use their oil reserves as a political weapon.
The West had grown accustomed to readily available and remarkably cheap fuel—a vital component in the long years of prosperity.
Just how vital can be seen from the steadily growing place of oil in the European economy.
In 1950, solid fuel had accounted for 83 percent of Western Europe’s energy consumption; oil for just 8. percent.
Seventy-five percent of Italy’s energy requirements in 1973 were met by importing oil; for Portugal the figure was 80 percent.
The UK, which would for a while become self-sufficient thanks to newly discovered reserves of oil in the North Sea, had only begun production in 1971.
Floating exchange rates and oil price increases thus introduced an unprecedented element of uncertainty.
Whereas prices and wages had risen steadily, if moderately, over the course of the previous two decades—an acceptable price for social harmony in an age of rapid growth—monetary inflation now took off.
According to the OECD, the inflation rate in non-Communist Europe for the years 1961-1969 was steady at 3. percent; from 1969-1973 it was 6. percent; from 1973-1979 it averaged 11. percent.
French prices inflated at an average of 10. percent per annum in those years.
In Italy the inflation rate averaged 16. percent; in Spain over 18 percent.
The UK average was 15. percent, but in its worst year the British inflation rate exceeded 24 percent per annum.
Price and wage inflation at these levels was not historically unprecedented.
But after the stable rates of the fifties and sixties it was a new experience for most people—and for their governments.
In the past, inflation was associated with growth, often over-rapid growth.
But in 1970s Europe the conventional pattern seemed no longer to apply.
In retrospect this outcome is less surprising than it seemed to contemporaries.
By 1970 the great European migration of surplus agricultural labor into productive urban industry was over; there was no more ‘slack’ to be taken up and rates of productivity increase began inexorably to decline.
Pointing in justification to the increased rate of inflation from 1971, workers’ representatives were pressing their case for higher wages and other compensation upon economies that were already showing signs of exhaustion even before the crisis of 1973.
Real wages had begun to outstrip productivity growth; profits were declining; new investment fell away.
The excess capacity born of enthusiastic post-war investment strategies could only be absorbed by inflation or unemployment.
The depression of the 1970s seemed worse than it was because of the contrast with what had gone before.
By historical standards the average rates of Gross Domestic Product growth in western Europe through the 1970s were not especially low.
They ranged from 1. percent in the UK to 4. percent in Norway and were thus actually a distinct improvement over the 1. percent average growth rates achieved by France, Germany and the UK over the years 1913-1950.
Nevertheless, the pain was real, made worse by growing export competition from new industrial countries in Asia and ever more costly import bills as commodities increased in price.
By the end of the decade the numbers out of work in France exceeded 7 percent of the workforce; in Italy 8 percent; in the UK 9 percent.
In some countries—Belgium, Denmark—unemployment levels in the seventies and early eighties were comparable to those experienced in the 1930s; in France and Italy they were actually worse.
One immediate result of the economic down-turn was a hardening of attitudes towards ‘foreign workers of all sorts.
If published unemployment rates in West Germany did not climb above 8 percent of the labor force despite a slump in demand for manufactured goods, it was because most of the unemployed workers in Germany were not German—and thus not officially recorded.
When Audi and BMW, for example, laid off large numbers of their workforce in 1974 and 1975, it was the ‘guest workers’ who went first; four out of five BMW employees who lost their jobs were not German citizens.
In 1975 the Federal Republic permanently closed its recruiting offices in North Africa, Portugal, Spain and Yugoslavia.
In 1975, 290,000 immigrant workers and their families left West Germany for Turkey, Yugoslavia, Greece and Italy.
In that same year, 200,000 Spaniards returned to Spain in search of work; returnees to Italy now outnumbered emigrants for the first time in modern memory, as they were shortly to do in Greece and Portugal.
By the midseventies, nearly a third of a million Yugoslav emigrants had been obliged to return to the Balkans, where their expectation of employment was no better than in Germany or France.
The northern European jobs crisis was being re-exported to the Mediterranean.
Meanwhile France imposed strict restrictions on immigration from Algeria and its former African colonies, and theTJnited Kingdom placed ever tighter limits on would-be immigrants from the South Asian sub-continent.
The combination of structural unemployment, rising oil import bills, inflation 3 An average, of course, is just an average.
Even West Germany, the continents manufacturing capital and leading exporter, was not spared.
The country’s balance-of-payments surplus of $9,481 million in 1973 fell within a year to a deficit of $692 million.
The British national accounts were by now chronically in deficit—so much so that by December 1976 there appeared a serious risk of a national debt default and the International Monetary Fund was called in to bail Britain out.
French payments balances fell into the red in 1974 and remained there for most of the ensuing decade.
Italy, like Britain, was forced in April 1977 to turn to the IMF for help.
As in the British case its leaders could then blame ‘international forces’ for the unpopular domestic policy measures that ensued.
In Keynesian thinking, budget shortfalls and payments deficits—like inflation itself—were not inherently evil.
In the Thirties they had represented a plausible prescription for ‘spending your way’ out of recession.
But in the Seventies all Western European governments already spent heavily on welfare, social services, public utilities and infrastructure investment.
If anything, the risk now was of growing domestic pressure to re-impose protection against competition.
There was a further complicating element in the choices facing policymakers in the 1970s.
The economic crisis, however circumstantial and conjunctural its triggers, coincided with a far-reaching transformation which governments could do little to arrest.
In the course of a generation, Western Europe had undergone a third ‘industrial revolution’; the smokestack industries that had been so much a part of daily life just a few years before were on their way out.
If steelworkers, miners, car workers and mill hands were losing jobs, it wasn’t just because of a cyclical downturn in the local economy, or even a by-product of the oil crisis.
The venerable manufacturing economy of Western Europe was disappearing.
The evidence was incontrovertible, though policymakers had for some years been trying hard to ignore its implications.
Between 1955 and 1985 100,000 mining jobs disappeared in Belgium; ancillary trades of various kinds suffered accordingly.
Even greater losses were experienced in British mining, though spread across a longer period.
Steel, the other staple industry of industrial Europe, suffered a similar fate.
It was not that demand for steel had fallen so very dramatically—unlike coal, it could not so readily be replaced.
But as more non-European countries entered the industrial ranks, competition increased, the price fell and the market for expensively produced European steel collapsed.
Shipbuilding declined for similar reasons; motor car manufacturing and textiles likewise.
Courtaulds, the UK’s leading textile and chemical combine, reduced its workforce by 50 percent in the years 1977-83.
The recession of the Seventies saw an acceleration of job losses in virtually every traditional industry.
Before 1973 the transformation was already under way in coal, iron, steel, engineering; thereafter it spread to chemicals, textiles, paper and consumer goods.
The industrial zone of Lorraine, in north-west France, lost 28 percent of its manufacturing jobs.
The industrial workforce in Liineburg, West Germany, fell by 42 percent in the same years.
When FIAT of Turin began its switch to robotization at the end of the 1970s, 65,000 jobs were lost in just three years.
In the city of Amsterdam, 40 percent of the workforce was employed in industry in the 1950s; a quarter of a century later the figure was just one employee in seven.
In the past, the social cost of economic change on this scale, and at this pace, would have been traumatic, with unpredictable political consequences.
Thanks to the institutions of the welfare state—and perhaps the diminished political enthusiasms of the time—protest was contained.
In the years 1969-1975 there were angry marches, sit-ins, strikes and petitions all across industrial Western Europe, from Spain (where 1. million days were lost to industrial strikes in the years 1973-75) to Britain, where two major strikes by coalminers—in 1972 and 1974—persuaded a nervous Conservative government that it might be the better part of valor to postpone major mine closures for a few more years, even at the cost of further subsidies charged to the population at large.
The miners and steelworkers were the best-known and perhaps the most desperate of the organized protesters of the time, but they were not the most militant.
The decline in the number of workers in old industries had shifted the balance of strength in trade union movements to the service-sector unions, whose constituency was rapidly growing.
In Italy, even as the older, Communist-led industrial organizations lost members, teachers and civil service unions grew in size and militancy.
It was the combative service-sector unions —Force Ouvriere in France, NALGO, NUPE and ASTMS in Britain 4 —which enthusiastically took up the cause of the young and the jobless.
Faced with an unprecedented raft of demands for job security and wage protection, European leaders initially resorted to proven past practice.
Inflationary wage settlements were negotiated with powerful unions in Britain and France; in Italy a flat-rate indexing system linking wages to prices, the Scala Mobile , was inaugurated in 1975.
In West Germany the Federal government, following form, encouraged private consolidation rather than state control, but with similar cartelizing outcomes.
By the mid-seventies one holding company, Ruhrkohle AG, was responsible for 95 percent of the mining output of the Ruhr district.
What remained of the domestic textile industries of France and Britain was preserved, for the sake of the jobs it offered in depressed regions, by substantial direct job subsidies and protective measures against third-world imports.
In the Federal Republic the Bonn government undertook to cover 80 percent of the wage costs of industrial employees put on part-time work.
The Swedish government poured cash into its unprofitable but politically sensitive shipyards.
There were national variations in these responses to economic downturn.
The French authorities pursued a practice of micro-economic intervention, identifying ‘national champions’ by sector and favoring them with contracts, cash and guarantees; whereas the UK Treasury continued its venerable tradition of macroeconomic manipulation through taxes, interest rates and blanket subsidies.
But what is striking is how little variation there was along political lines.
But over the course of the seventies a growing number of politicians came to the conviction that inflation now posed greater risks than high levels of unemployment—especially since the human and political costs of joblessness were 4 National Association of Local Government Officers; National Union of Public Employees; Association of Scientific, Technical and Managerial Staffs.
Inflation could not be addressed without some sort of international arrangements for the regulation of currencies and exchange rates, to replace the Bretton Woods system precipitately overthrown by Washington.
Even the French were twice forced out of the ‘snake’, in 1974 and again in 1976.
A grid of fixed bilateral exchange rates would be set up, linked by a purely notional unit of measure, the European Currency Unit , and underwritten by the stability and anti-inflationary priorities of the German economy and the Bundesbank.
This was the first German initiative of its kind and it amounted in fact if not in name to the recommendation that, for Europe at least, the Deutschmark replace the dollar as the currency of reference.
Some countries stayed out—notably the UK, where Labour Prime Minister James Callaghan correctly understood that the EMS would prevent Britain adopting reflationary policies to address the country’s unemployment problem.
Indeed, this was the true long-term significance of the new arrangements.
It was not so much that they succeeded in time in driving out the demon of inflation , but that they did so by steadily depriving national governments of their initiative in domestic policy.
This was a momentous shift, of greater consequence than was sometimes appreciated at the time.
In the past, if a government opted for a ‘hard money’ strategy by adhering to the gold standard or declining to lower interest rates, it had to answer to its local electorate.
If the European state could no longer square the circle of full employment, high real wages and economic growth, then it was bound to face the wrath of those constituents who felt betrayed.
It was the heavily-taxed middle classes—white-collar public and private employees, small tradesmen and the selfemployed—whose troubles translated most effectively into political opposition.
The greatest beneficiaries of the modern welfare state, after all, were the middle classes.
As in the past, the redistributive impact of inflation, made worse by the endemic high taxation of the modern service state, was felt most severely by citizens of the middling sort.
The fear, widely expressed in the course of the 1970s, that Europe’s democracies had lost control of their fate derived from a number of sources.
In the first place there was a backlog of nervousness provoked by the iconoclastic rebellions of the 1960s; what had seemed curious and even exciting in the confident atmosphere of those days now looked more and more like a harbinger of uncertainty and anarchy.
Then there was the more immediate anxiety born of job losses and inflation, about which governments seemed helpless to act.
Indeed, the very fact that European leaders appeared to have lost control was itself a source of public angst—all the more so in that politicians, as we have seen, found some advantage in insisting upon their own inadequacy.
In Britain there was even passing talk of the inadequacy of democratic institu6 Quoted in Harold James, International Monetary Cooperation since Bretton Woods , 180.
Like De Gaulle , some senior British political figures in these years thought it prudent to meet with police and military leaders to reassure themselves of their support in the event of public disorder.
Even in Scandinavia and the Low Countries, where the core legitimacy of representative institutions was never seriously called into question, the disarray of the world financial system, the apparent unraveling of the post-war economy and the disaffection of traditional electorates called into question the easy confidence of the post-war generation.
Behind these nebulous stirrings of doubt and disillusion there was a very real and, as it seemed at the time, present threat.
Since the end of the Second World War, Western Europe had been largely preserved from civil conflict, much less open violence.
Armed force had been deployed to bloody effect all across Eastern Europe, in the European colonies, and throughout Asia, Africa and South America.
The Cold War notwithstanding, heated and murderous struggles were a feature of the post-war decades, with millions of soldiers and civilians killed from Korea to the Congo.
The United States itself had been the site of three political assassinations and more than one bloody riot.
When European policemen did beat or shoot civilians, the latter were usually foreigners, often dark-skinned.
Aside from occasional violent encounters with Communist demonstrators, the forces of order in Western Europe were rarely called upon by their governments to handle violent opposition and, when they were, the violence was often of their own perpetrating.
By the standards of the interwar decades, Europe’s city streets were quite remarkably safe—a point that was frequently underscored by commentators contrasting Europe’s well-regulated society with the rampant and uncaring individualism of urban America.
Watergate and the fall of Saigon had decidedly reduced America’s standing while the USSR, as the world’s 7 Most notoriously on October 17th 1961, when the French police murdered an estimated two hundred Algerians, many of them drowned in the Seine, following a protest march through Paris.
The Chief of Police at the time was Maurice Papon, later indicted and found guilty of crimes against humanity for his collaboration in the wartime rounding up and despatch of French Jews to Auschwitz.
But the publication in English of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s Gulag Archipelago and his subsequent expulsion from the Soviet Union in February 1974, followed within a few years by the massacres in Cambodia and the plight of the Vietnamese ‘boat people’, ensured that there would be no revival of illusions about Communism.
Nor, except in a very few marginal instances, was there a credible revival of the far Right.
Italy’s neo-Fascist Movimento Sociale Italiano never received more than 6. percent of the vote in national elections and in any case took care to present itself as a legitimate political party.
The nationalists in West Germany were less concerned with such niceties of appearance, but like comparable parties of the nationalist fringe in Belgium, France or Britain, they had negligible electoral significance.
In short, Communism and Fascism, in their classic incarnations, had no future in Western Europe.
In the course of the 1970s, Western European society faced two violent challenges.
The first of these was pathological, in the sense that it was born of a longstanding malaise, albeit cast in a very modern form.
In the Basque region of northern Spain, in the Catholic minority of Northern Ireland, in Corsica and elsewhere, old grievances flared into violent revolt.
The Basques and the Ulster Catholics, however, were another matter altogether.
The emergence of modern Basque terrorism was a direct response to Franco’s policies, though its spokesmen and defenders always claimed deeper roots in their region’s frustrated dreams of independence.
ETA —Euskadi TaAskatasuna (Basquia and Freedom)—was formed in December 1958 to lead the armed struggle for Basque independence.
But like the IRA and other comparable organizations, ETA also had ambitions to function as a society within the state.
This did not prevent ETA from assassinating Franco’s Prime Minister (Admiral Luis Carrero Blanco) in Madrid on December 20th 1973, or killing twelve civilians in a bomb attack in the capital nine months later.
Nor did the execution of five ETA gunmen in September 1975, shortly before Franco’s death, have any moderating impact upon the group’s activities.
What the Basque region got, under Spain’s post-Franco constitution , was a Statute of Autonomy, approved by referendum in 1979.
Infuriated—not least at the prospect of losing the support of moderate sympathizers satisfied by self-government and the right to linguistic and cultural self-expression—ETA stepped up its campaigns of bombing and assassination.
The economic transformations of Spain in the 1960s, and the large-scale migrations within the country and abroad, had wrought changes that the old nationalists and their fanatical young followers simply did not grasp.
By the mid-eighties, less than half the population of the Basque region had Basque parents, much less Basque grandparents.
As its political project lost touch with social reality ETA became ever more extreme—having forgotten its aim it redoubled its efforts, to cite George Santayana’s definition of fanaticism.
Financed by crime and extortion, its operatives increasingly constrained to function from across the border in the Basque departements of south-west France, ETA survived and it survives still, murdering the occasional politician or village policeman.
But it has failed either to mobilize Basque sentiment in support of political independence, or to bludgeon the Spanish state into conceding its case.
ETA’s greatest ‘success’ came early in the 1980s, when its actions prompted the Socialist Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez to allow counterterrorist hit men to base themselves illegally on French soil and pick off ETA operatives, twenty-six of whom were killed between 1983 and 1987.
Gonzalez’s decision, only revealed many years later (see Chapter 22), has cast a retrospective shadow across the early post-Franco years of constitutional democracy in Spain; but in the circumstances it was arguably a remarkably moderate response.
The Provisional IRA was much like ETA in its methods, and in some of its proclaimed objectives.
Just as ETA sought to make the Basque provinces ungovernable and thereby secure their exit from Spain, so the Irish Republican Army aimed at making Northern Ireland ungovernable, expelling.the British, and uniting the six northern provinces with the rest of Ireland.
Since an independent Ireland already existed, there was—at least in principle—a practicable national goal for the rebels to hold out to their supporters.
On the other hand, there was more than one Northern Irish community, and the distinctions between them went back a very long way.
Like French Algeria, Northern Ireland—Ulster—was both a colonial remnant and an integral part of the metropolitan nation itself.
When London finally relinquished Ireland to the Irish, in 1922, the UK retained the six northern counties of the island on the reasonable enough grounds that the overwhelmingly Protestant majority there was intensely loyal to Britain and had no desire to be governed from Dublin—and incorporated into a semi-theocratic republic dominated by the Catholic episcopate.
Whatever they said in public, the political leaders of the new Republic were themselves not altogether unhappy to forgo the presence of a compact and sizeable community of angrily recalcitrant Protestants.
As this last observation suggests, the divisions in Northern Ireland were unusually complicated.
And it was ancient—references to seventeenthand eighteenth-century quarrels and victories might appear to outsiders absurdly ritualistic, but the history behind them was real.
But the Catholic/Protestant divide was never a class distinction in the conventional sense, despite the IRA’s efforts to import Marxist categories into its rhetoric.
There were workers and priests—and to a lesser extent landowners, businessmen and professionals—on both sides.
Moreover, many Ulster Catholics felt no urgent desire to be ruled from Dublin.
In the 1960s Ireland was still a poor and backward country and the standard of living in the North, while below that of most of the rest of the UK, was still considerably above the Irish average.
The old industries of Ulster, like those of the rest of the UK, were in decline by the end of the 1960s, and it was already clear to planners in London that the overwhelmingly Protestant blue-collar workforce there had an uncertain future.
But beyond this, it is fair to say that the British authorities had not given Ulster serious thought for many decades.
The IRA had declined to a marginal political sect, denouncing the Irish Republic as illegitimate because incomplete while reiterating its ‘revolutionary’ aspiration to forge a different Ireland, radical and united.
Faced with growing public violence and demands from Catholic leaders for London to intervene, the UK government sent in the British Army and took over control of policing functions in the six counties.
The army, recruited largely in mainland Britain, was decidedly less partisan and on the whole less brutal than the local police.
Various efforts through the 1970s to build inter-community confidence and allow the province to run its own affairs fell foul of suspicion and intransigence on both sides.
Catholics, even if they had no liking for their own armed extremists, had good precedent for mistrusting promises of power-sharing and civic equality emanating from the Ulster Protestant leadership.
The latter, always reluctant to make real concessions to the Catholic minority, were now seriously fearful of the intransigent gunmen of the Provisionals.
Without the British military presence the province would have descended still further into open civil war.
At first London was sympathetic to Catholic pressure for reforms; but following the killing of a British soldier in February 1971 the government introduced internment without trial and the situation deteriorated rapidly.
In January 1972, on ‘Bloody Sunday’, British paratroopers killed thirteen civilians in the streets of Derry.
Buoyed up by a new generation of martyrs and the obstinacy of its opponents, the Provisional IRA mounted what was to become a thirty-year campaign, in the course of which it bombed, shot and maimed soldiers and civilians in Ulster and across mainland Britain.
It made at least one attempt to assassinate the British Prime Minister.
Even if the British authorities had wanted to walk away 8 The Provisionals took their name from the April 24th 1916 declaration in Dublin, when the insurrectionists proclaimed a provisional government.
As a referendum of March 1973 showed and later polls confirmed, an overwhelming majority of the people of Ulster wished to maintain their ties to Britain.
Nor did it destabilize British politics, though the assassination of politicians and public figures (notably Lord Mountbatten, former Viceroy of India and godfather of the Prince of Wales) genuinely shocked public opinion on both sides of the Irish Sea.
But the Irish ‘Troubles’ further darkened an already gloomy decade in British public life and contributed to the ‘ungovernability’ thesis being touted at the time, as well as to the end of the carefree optimism of the 1960s.
By the time the Provisional IRA—and the Protestant paramilitary groups that had emerged in its wake—finally came to the negotiating table, to secure constitutional arrangements that the British government might have been pleased to concede almost from the outset, 1,800 people had been killed and one Ulster resident in five had a family member killed or wounded in the fighting.
Against this background, the other ‘pathologies’ of 1970s Europe were small indeed, though they contributed to the widespread atmosphere of unease.
A selfstyled Angry Brigade’, purportedly acting on behalf of the unrepresented unemployed, planted bombs around London in 1971.
Francophone separatists in the Swiss Jura, modeling their tactics on those of the Irish, rioted in 1974 at their enforced incorporation into the canton of Bern.
Crowds of rioters in Liverpool, Bristol and the Brixton district of London battled with police over control of ‘no-go’ inner-city slums.
They were trying to achieve something and would—by their own account—have desisted if their demands were met.
ETA, the IRA and their imitators were terrorist organizations; but they were not irrational.
In due course most of them ended up negotiating with their enemies, in the hope of securing their objectives if only in part.
But such considerations were never of interest to protagonists of the second violent challenge of the times.
In most of Western Europe, the airy radical theorems of the 1960s dissipated harmlessly enough.
But in two countries in particular they metamorphosed into a psychosis of self-justifying aggression.
A small minority of erstwhile student radicals, intoxicated by their own adaptation of Marxist dialectics, set about ‘revealing’ the ‘true face’ of repressive tolerance in Western democracies.
If the parliamentary regime of capitalist interests were pushed hard enough, they reasoned, it would shed the cloak of legality and show its true face.
Such a summary gives too much credit to the terrorist underground of the 1970s—and too little.
Most of the young men and women swept up in it, however familiar they were with the justificatory vocabulary of violence, played little part in its formulation.
On the other hand, especially in West Germany, the emotional energy invested in their hatred of the Federal Republic drew on sources deeper and darker than the mal-adapted rhetorical gymnastics of nineteenth-century radicalism.
The urge to bring the architecture of security and stability crashing down on the heads of their parents’ generation was the extreme expression of a more widespread skepticism, in the light of the recent past, about the local credibility of pluralist democracy.
It was not by chance, therefore, that ‘revolutionary terror’ took its most menacing form in Germany and Italy.
The link between extra-parliamentary politics and outright violence first emerged in Germany as early as April 1968, when four young radicals—among them Andreas Baader and Gudrun Ensslin—were arrested on suspicion of burning two department stores in Frankfurt.
Two years later Baader escaped from prison in the course of an armed raid planned and led by Ulrike Meinhof.
She and Baader then issued their ‘Concept City Guerrilla Manifesto’, announcing the formation of a ‘Rote Armee Fraktion ’ whose goal was to dismantle the Federal Republic by force.
Between 1970 and 1978, the RAF and its ancillary offshoots pursued a strategy of deliberately random terror, assassinating soldiers, policemen and businessmen, holding up banks and kidnapping mainstream politicians.
In the early years they also targeted American Army bases in West Germany, killing and injuring a number of soldiers, notably in the late spring of 1972.
In their peak year of 1977, the RAF kidnapped and subsequently executed Hans Martin Schleyer, the chairman of Daimler Benz and President of the West German Federation of Industries, and assassinated both Siegfried Buback, the West German Attorney General, and Jurgen Ponto, the head of Dresdner Bank.
Already, in May 1976, Meinhof had been found dead in her Stuttgart prison cell.
She had apparently hung herself, though rumors persisted that she had been executed by the state.
Since the German terrorist underground had no defined goals, its achievements can only be measured by the extent of its success in disrupting German public life and undermining the institutions of the Republic.
The most distinctively repressive governmental action of the time was the passing of the Berufsverbot in 1972 by the Social Democratic government of Willy Brandt.
This decree excluded from state employment any person who engaged in political acts considered detrimental to the Constitution, and was ostensibly aimed at keeping supporters of Left and Right political extremes out of sensitive posts.
In a culture already preternaturally disposed to public conformity this certainly aroused fears of censorship and worse; but it was hardly the prelude to dictatorship that its critics feared and—at the outer extreme—hoped.
Much more worrying was the extent to which the Baader-Meinhof Group in particular was able to tap into a fund of generalized sympathy for its ideas among otherwise law-abiding intellectuals and academics.
One source of local sympathy was a growing nostalgia in literary and artistic circles for Germany’s lost past.
The distinctly nationalist tinge to German extreme-Left terrorism—its targeting of American occupiers, multinational corporations and the ‘international’ capitalist order—rang a chord, as did the terrorists’ claim that it was Germans who were now the victims of the manipulations and interests of others.
These same years saw an outpouring of films, speeches, books, television programs and public commentary on the country’s problematic history and identity.
In Reitz’s film the inter-war years especially are bathed in a sepia-like afterglow of fond memory; even the Nazi era is hardly permitted to intrude upon fond recollections of better times.
Reitz, like Syberberg and others, was publicly scornful of the American television series ‘Holocaust’, first shown on German television in 1979.
If there were to be depictions of Germany’s past, however painful, then it was the business of Germans to produce them.
The application of a ‘commercial aesthetic’ to Germany’s past was America’s way of controlling it.
The struggle of German directors and artists against American ‘kitsch’ was part of the struggle against American capitalism.
Reitz and Fassbinder were among the directors of Deutschland im Herbst (‘Germany in Autumn’) a 1978 collage of documentary, movie clips and interviews covering the events of the autumn of 1977, notably the kidnapping and killing of Hans Martin Schleyer and the subsequent suicide of Ensslin and Baader.
The film is notable not so much for its expressions of empathy for the terrorists as for the distinctive terms in which these are conveyed.
By careful inter-cutting, the Third Reich and the Federal Republic are made to share a family resemblance.
Considerable cinematic talent was deployed in Deutschland im Herbst —as in other contemporary German films—to depict West Germany as a police state, akin to Nazism if only in its capacity for repression and violence.
Horst Mahler, a semi-repentant terrorist then still in prison, explains to the camera that the emergence of an extra-parliamentary opposition in 1967 was the ‘antifascist revolution’ that did not happen in 1945.
The implicit relativizing of Nazism in Deutschland im Herbst was already becoming quite explicit in intellectual apologias for anti-capitalist terror.
It was this easy slippage—the thought that what binds Nazism and capitalist democracy is more important than their differences, and that it was Germans who had fallen victim to both—that helped account for the German radical Left’s distinctive insensitivity on the subject of Jews.
On September 5th 1972, the Palestinian organization Black September attacked the Israeli team at the Munich Olympics and killed eleven athletes, as well as one German policeman.
The link between Palestinian organizations and European terrorist groups was already wellestablished—Ensslin, Baader and Meinhof all ‘trained’ at one time with Palestinian guerillas, along with Basques, Italians, Irish Republicans and others.
Germans, not Jews, were now the victims; and American capitalism, not German National Socialism, was the perpetrator.
There was a ‘new patriotism’ abroad in West Germany, and it is more than a little ironic that Baader, Meinhof and their friends, whose violent revolt was initially directed against the Germany-first self-satisfaction of their parents’ generation, should find themselves co-opted by the reverberations of that same nationalist heritage.
It was altogether appropriate that Horst Mahler, one of the few surviving founders of Left terrorism in West Germany, should end up three decades later on the far Right of the political spectrum.
In external respects, contemporary Italian terrorism was not markedly different from the German kind.
It too drew on para-Marxist rhetoric from the Sixties, and most of its leaders received their political education in the university protests of that time.
Like Baader, Meinhof and others, the leaders of the BR were young , mostly former students, and devoted to armed underground struggle for its own sake.
From the outset, Italian Left terrorists placed far greater emphasis upon their purported relationship to the ‘workers’; and indeed in certain industrial towns of the north, Milan in particular, the more respectable fringes of the ultra-Left did have a small popular following.
Unlike the German terrorists, grouped around a tiny hard core of criminals, the Italian far Left ranged from legitimate political parties through urban guerrilla networks to micro-sects of armed political bandits, with a fair degree of overlap in membership and objectives.
These groups and sects replicated in miniature the fissiparous history of the mainstream European Left.
In the course of the 1970s each violent act would be followed by assertions of responsibility by hitherto unknown organizations, frequently by sub-sections and breakaways from the original unit.
Beyond the terrorists themselves orbited a loose constellation of semi-clandestine movements and journals whose sententious ‘theoretical’ pronouncements offered ideological cover for terrorist tactics.
If this list suggests in retrospect a desperate desire to inflate the social and revolutionary significance of a few thousand ex-students and their followers at the disaffected edges of the labour movement, the impact of their efforts to bring themselves to public attention should not be underestimated.
Curcio, his companion Mara Cagol and their friends may have been living out in fantasy a romanticized fairy tale of revolutionary bandits (derived in large measure from the popularized image of revolutionary guerrillas in Latin America), but the damage they wrought was real enough.
Between 1970 and 1981 not a year passed in Italy without murders, mutilations, kidnapping, assaults and sundry acts of public violence.
In the course of the decade three politicians, nine magistrates, sixty-five policemen and some three hundred others fell victim to assassination.
But by the mid-seventies they had progressed to political assassination—at first of right-wing politicians, then po474 DIMINISHED EXPECTATIONS licemen, journalists and public prosecutors—in a strategy designed to ‘strip away the mask’ of bourgeois legality, force the state into violent repression and thus polarize public opinion.
Until 1978 the Red Brigades had failed to provoke the desired backlash, despite a rising crescendo of attacks in the course of the previous year.
Moro was held hostage for two months; backed by the Communists and most of his own party, the Christian Democrat Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti refused even to consider the kidnappers’ demand for the release of‘political prisoners’ in exchange for Moro’s life.
In spite of unanimous condemnation across the Italian political spectrum and appeals from the Pope and the Secretary General of the UN, the terrorists refused to relent.
On May 10th Aldo Moro’s body was found in a car brazenly parked on a street in the centre of Rome.
The Moro Affair certainly illustrated the incompetence of the Italian state—the Interior Minister resigned the day after the body was found.
After eight years of frantic anti-terrorist legislation and nationwide manhunts, the police had manifestly failed to break the terrorist underground.
And the reverberations of the Red Brigades’ success in committing political murder at the very heart of the state and its capital city were significant.
Two weeks later the Formazione Comuniste Combattenti assassinated a senior public prosecutor.
But the very scale of the terrorists’ challenge to the state now began to extract a price.
Negri and his supporters insisted that the radical ‘autonomists’, neither clandestine nor armed, should not be confused with illegal secret societies, and that the political decision to go after them represented precisely the retreat from ‘bourgeois order’ that the Red Brigades had prophesied and sought u As in Germany, the police had actually found the leaders at one point, only to lose them again.
The slogans of‘mass illegality’, ‘permanent civil war’ and the need to organize ‘militarily’ against the bourgeois state were widely declaimed in respectable academic circles—including Negri’s own paper Rosso.
What Negri was affirming, and what the Red Brigades and their friends were practicing, was no different from the ‘cleansing power of force’ as exalted by Fascists.
By 1980 both the targets and the methods of terrorist Left and terrorist Right in Italy had become indistinguishable.
But to the extent that the re-emergence of neo-Fascist terror and the resurgence of Mafia violence illustrated and exacerbated the vulnerability of democratic institutions, their undertakings were—perhaps correctly—interpreted by Left terrorists as a sign of their own success.
Both extremes sought to destabilize the state by rendering normal public life intolerably dangerous—with the difference that the far Right could count on some protection and collaboration from the very forces of order they sought to subvert.
That democracy and the rule of law in Italy survived these years is a matter of no small note.
From 1977 to 1982 especially, the country was under siege from random acts of extreme violence by far Left, far Right and professional criminals alike—it was in these same years that the Mafia and other criminal networks as“Initially released, Negri was re-arrested in 1983.
While the more serious threat came from the extreme Right—better organized and much closer to the heart of the state—the ‘Red’ terrorists made the greater impact upon the public imagination.
This was in part because, like the Red Army Fraktion in Germany, they traded upon widespread local sympathy for radical ideas.
Official Communists correctly saw this appropriation of the revolutionary heritage as the terrorists’ chief asset, as well as a symptom of the risk that they posed for the credibility of the mainstream Left.
Ironically, and unbeknown to local Communists themselves, the Red Brigades and the Red Army Fraktion—like the similarly motivated but ineffectual Cellules communistes combattantes in Belgium, Action Directe in France and other, even smaller operations elsewhere—were financed in part with money supplied by the Soviet secret services.
All the mainstream political organizations of the Left, Communists especially, were constrained to take and maintain their distance from violence of any kind.
But partly it was because the ‘lead years’ of the 1970s served to remind everyone of just how fragile liberal democracies might actually be—a lesson occasionally neglected in the heady atmosphere of the sixties.
The net effect of years of would-be revolutionary subversion at the heart of Western Europe was not to polarize society, as the terrorists had planned and expected, but rather to drive politicians of all sides to cluster together in the safety of the middle ground.
In the life of the mind, the nineteen seventies were the most dispiriting decade of the twentieth century.
In a more threatening world, securing one’s self-interest took precedence over advancing common causes.
There is no doubt that this change in mood was also a response to the heady indulgence of the previous decade.
Whereas the Sixties were marked by the naive, self-congratulatory impulse to believe that everything happening was new—and everything new was significant—the Seventies were an age of cynicism, of lost illusions and reduced expectations.
It was an age depressingly aware of having come after the big hopes and ambitious ideas of the recent past, and having nothing to offer but breathless and implausible re-runs and extensions of old thoughts.
It was, quite self-consciously, a ‘post-everything’ era, whose future prospects appeared cloudy.
As the American sociologist Daniel Bell observed at the time, ‘The use of the hyphenated prefix postindicates sense of living in interstitial time.
As a description of the real world—‘post-war’, ‘post-imperial’, and most recently ‘post-industrial’—the term had its uses, even if it left uncertain what might follow.
But when applied to categories of thought—as in ‘post-Marxist’, ‘post-structuralist’ and, most elusively of all, ‘post-modern’—it merely added to the obscurities of an already confused time.
The projects of the Sixties, however fantastic, presumed a relationship between individual and class, class and society, society and state, that would have been familiar in its form if not its content to theorists and activists at any point in the previous century.
The culture of the Seventies turned not on the collective but the individual.
Just as anthropology had displaced philosophy as the Ur-discipline of the Sixties, so psychology now took its place.
In the course of the Sixties the notion of ‘false consciousness’ had been widely taken up by young Marxists to explain the failure of workers and others to liberate themselves from identification with the capitalist interest.
In a perverted variant this idea formed, as we have seen, the core premise of Left terrorism.
The sexual variant on this theme—the idea that social and sexual repression were integrally linked—was already a truism in certain milieux of the late Sixties.
But Marcuse, or Wilhelm Reich, stood in clear line of descent from both Freud and Marx—seeking collective transformation through individual liberation.
The followers of Jacques Lacan on the other hand, or contemporary theorists of feminism like Kate Millett and Annie Leclerc, were both less ambitious and more.
Instead they sought to undermine the very concept of the human subject that had once underlain them.
Two widespread assumptions lay behind such thinking, shared very broadly across the intellectual community of the time.
The first was that power rested not—as most social thinkers since the Enlightenment had supposed—upon control of natural and human resources, but upon the monopoly of knowledge, knowledge about the natural world; knowledge about the public sphere; knowledge about oneself; and above all, knowledge about the way in which knowledge itself is produced and legitimized.
At the time, this account of the human condition was widely and correctly associated with the writings of Michel Foucault.
But for all his occasional obscurantism Foucault was a rationalist at heart.
His early writings tracked quite closely the venerable Marxist claim that in order to liberate workers from the shackles of capitalism one had first to substitute a different account of history and economics for the self-serving narrative of bourgeois society.
A second assumption, one that was to acquire an even stronger grip on intellectual fashions, went considerably further.
This was the seductive insistence upon subverting not just old certainties but the very possibility of certainty itself.
All behavior, all opinion, all knowledge, precisely because it was socially derived and therefore politically instrumental, should be regarded with suspicion.
The very idea that judgments or evaluations might stand independent of the person making them came to be treated in certain quarters as itself the expression and representation of a partisan social position.
All iterations of judgment or belief could in principle be reduced in this way.
The natural outcome of such developments was a growing skepticism towards all rational social argument.
The underlying and usually unacknowledged source of these predominantly French intellectual influences was, as so often in past decades, German.
Whereas the humanist sensibilities of an earlier generation had been drawn to Marx and Hegel, the self-doubting Seventies were seduced by an altogether darker strain in German thought.
Michel Foucault’s radical skepticism was in large measure an adaptation of Nietzsche.
Other influential French authors, notably the literary critic Jacques Derrida, looked instead to Martin Heidegger for their critique of human agency and their ‘de-construction’, as it was becoming known, of the cognitive human subject and his textual subject matter.
To scholarly specialists on Heidegger or his German contemporary Carl Schmitt (whose historicist realism was attracting attention among students of international affairs), this interest was more than a little odd.
Both Heidegger and Schmitt, after all, were identified with Nazism—Heidegger quite explicitly thanks to his acceptance of academic office under Nazi auspices.
But the renewed interest in criticizing optimistic assumptions about progress, in questioning the underpinnings of enlightened rationalism and its political and cognitive by-products, established a certain affinity between early-twentieth-century critics of modernity and technical progress like Heidegger and the disabused skeptics of the ‘post-modern’ age— and allowed Heidegger and others to launder their earlier associations.
By the time German philosophy had passed through Parisian social thought into English cultural criticism—the forms in which it was familiar to most readers of the time—its inherently difficult vocabulary had attained a level of expressive opacity that proved irresistibly appealing to a new generation of students and their teachers.
The junior faculty recruited to staff the expanded universities of the time were themselves in most cases graduates of the Sixties, raised in the fashions and debates of those years.
But whereas European universities of the previous decade were preoccupied with grand theories of various sorts—society, the state, language, history, revolution—what trickled down to the next generation was above all a preoccupation with Theory as such.
Seminars in ‘Cultural Theory’, or ‘General Theory’ displaced the conventional disciplinary boundaries that had still dominated even radical academic debate a few years before.
With a ready-made audience in the universities, newly lionised theorists like Lacan and Derrida elevated the vagaries and paradoxes of language into full-fledged philosophies, infinitely flexible templates for textual and political explication.
Marxism was relieved of its embarrassingly atavistic attachment to economic categories and political institutions and recycled as cultural criticism.
The inconvenient reluctance of the revolutionary proletariat to vanquish the capitalist bourgeoisie was no longer an impediment.
But in fact this narcissistic obscurantism was very much of its time, its detachment from daily reality bearing unconscious witness to the exhaustion of an intellectual tradition.
Moreover, it was by no means the only symptom of cultural depletion in these years.
Even the sparkling originality of 1960s French cinema declined into self-conscious artistry.
If one strand in the heritage of the Sixties was high-cultural pretension, the other, its intimate inversion, was a hardening crust of knowing cynicism.
The relative innocence of rock and roll was increasingly displaced by media-wise pop bands whose stock in trade was a derisive appropriation and degradation of the style forged by their immediate precursors.
Much as popular romances and tabloid journalism had once fastened on to mass literacy for commercial advantage, so ‘punk’ rock appeared in the Seventies in order to exploit the market for popular music.
Presented as ‘counter-cultural’ it was in fact parasitic upon mainstream culture, invoking violent images and radical language for frequently mercenary ends.
The avowedly politicized language of punk rock bands, exemplified in the Sex Pistols’ 1976 hit ‘Anarchy in the UK’, caught the sour mood of the time.
But the punk bands’ politics were as one-dimensional as their musical range, the latter all too often restricted to three chords and a single beat and dependent upon volume for its effect.
Like the Red Army Fraction, the Sex Pistols and other punk rock groups wanted above all to shock.
Musical subversion now consisted of angry songs decrying ‘hegemony 5 , their counterfeit political content masking the steady evisceration of musical form.
However bogus their politics and their music, the punk generation’s cynicism at least was real, and honestly come by.
Exploiting the rapidly growing television audience and the steady retreat of state censorship, Monty Python and its successors and imitators blended broad slapstick, ribald social commentary and sardonic political mockery—a mixture last seen in the trenchant political cartoons of Gillray and Cruikshank.
Yet the same public television channels that broadcast pointed and irreverent parodies of popular and middlebrow culture also provided humorists with copious raw material.
Perhaps the most widely celebrated object of ridicule was the ‘Eurovision Song Contest 5 , an annual television competition first broadcast in 1970.
A commercial exercise glossed as a celebration of the new technology of simultaneous television transmission to multiple countries, the show claimed hundreds of millions of spectators by the mid-Seventies.
The Eurovision Song Contest—in 14 West European punk left a particularly ugly aftertaste in the waning years of Communist Eastern Europe, where it was taken up by nihilistic underground bands cynically fastening on to a heritage of political and musical dissidence for their own ends.
The enthusiasm with which the Eurovision Song Contest promoted and celebrated a hopelessly dated format and a stream of inept performers reflected a growing culture of nostalgia, at once wistful and disabused.
If punk, post-modern and parody were one response to the confusions of a disillusioned decade, ‘retro’ was another.
The French pop group II Etait Une Fois sported 1930s clothing, one of many short-lived sartorial revivals from ‘granny skirts’ to the neo-Edwardian hairstyles of the ‘New Romantics’—the latter reprised for the second time in three decades.
In clothing and music the temptation to recycle old styles—mixing and matching with little self-confidence—substituted for innovation.
The Seventies, a self-questioning time of troubles, looked backward, not forward.
Timothy Garton Ash In the 1970s the political landscape of western Europe started to fracture and fragment.
Since 1945 the two sides had drawn ever closer, but the pattern had not radically altered.
The spectrum of political options available to European voters in 1970 would not have been unfamiliar to their grandparents.
The longevity of Europe’s political parties derived from a remarkable continuity in the ecology of the electorate.
The choice between Labour and Conservatives in Britain, or Social Democrats and Christian Democrats in West Germany, no longer reflected deep divisions over particular policies, much less profound ‘lifestyle’ preferences as they would come to be known.
In most places it was an echo of longstanding, trans-generational voting habits, determined by the class, religion or locality of the voter rather than by the party’s program.
Men and women voted as their parents had voted, depending on where they lived, where they worked and what they earned.
But beneath the surface continuity a tectonic shift was taking place in the political sociology of European voters.
The block vote of the white, male, employed working class—the universal bedrock of Communist and Socialist party support— was contracting and splitting.
To the extent that they persisted, such traditional voters were no longer the majority.
In the first place, social and geographical mobility over the course of the postwar decades had diluted fixed social categories almost beyond recognition.
The Christian voting bloc in rural western France or the small towns of the Veneto, the proletarian industrial strongholds of southern Belgium or northern England, were now fissured and fragmented.
Men and women no longer lived in the same places as their parents and often did very different jobs.
Unsurprisingly, they saw the world rather differently as well; their political preferences began to reflect these changes, though slowly at first.
Secondly, the prosperity and social reforms of the Sixties and early Seventies had effectively exhausted the programs and vision of the traditional parties.
Their very success had deprived politicians of moderate Left and Right alike of a credible agenda, especially after the spate of liberal reforms of the Sixties.
The institutions of the state itself were not in dispute, nor were the general objectives of economic policy.
Thirdly, there were now alternative denominators of political allegiance.
Ethnic minorities, often unwelcome in the white working-class communities of Europe where they had arrived, were not always invited into local political or labour organizations and their politics reflected this exclusion.
And lastly, the generational politics of the Sixties had introduced into public discussion concerns utterly unfamiliar to an older political culture.
The ‘New Left’ might have lacked a program, but it was not short of themes.
The fascination with sex and sexuality led naturally to sexual politics; women and homosexuals, respectively subordinate and invisible in traditional radical parties, now surfaced as legitimate historical subjects, with rights and claims.
Youth, and the enthusiasms of youth, moved to center stage, especially as the voting age fell to eighteen in many places.
The prosperity of the time had encouraged a shift in people’s attention from production to consumption, from the necessities of existence to the quality of life.
In the heat of the Sixties few troubled themselves much over the moral dilemmas of prosperity—its beneficiaries were too busy enjoying the fruits of their good fortune.
But within a few years, many—notably among the educated young adults of north-west Europe—came to look upon the commercialism and material wellbeing of the Fifties and Sixties as a burdensome inheritance, bringing tawdry commodities and false values.
The price of modernity, at least to its main beneficiaries, was starting to look rather high; the ‘lost world’ of their parents and grandparents rather appealing.
Hitherto—in Europe—political constituencies had emerged from the elective affinities of large groups of voters defined by class or occupation, bound by a common, inherited, and often rather abstract set of principles and objectives.
But there was nothing whimsical or quaint about other single-issue political networks, most of them—like CAMRA—organized by and for the middle class.
In continental Europe the cultures of both Left and Right reflected a very different history.
Whereas Britain’s Good Food Guide was founded and edited by Fabian socialists and presented from the outset as a contribution to class warfare on the gastronomic front, France’s Guide Michelin was always and only a commercial enterprise, albeit directed to much the same audience.
The anti-tax parties, like the agrarian protest parties of inter-war Europe, were primarily reactive and negative—they were against unwelcome change and asked of the state above all that it remove what they saw as unreasonable fiscal burdens.
Other single-issue movements had more positive demands to make of the state, or the law, or institutions.
Their concerns ranged from prison reform and psychiatric hospitals through access to education and medical services and into the provision of safe food, community services, the amelioration of urban environments and access to cultural resources.
All were ‘anti-consensus’ in their reluctance to confine their support to any one traditional political constituency and their willingness— of necessity—to consider alternative ways of publicizing their concerns.
Three of the new political groupings—the women’s movement, environmentalism, and peace activism—are of particular significance, for their scale and their lasting impact.
For obvious reasons, the women’s movement was the most diverse and far-reaching.
To these should be added the attention paid by the more radical women’s groups to homosexual rights, and the growing feminist concern with pornography.
Yet within a decade it was again under fire, this time from networks of women’s groups, often led by coalitions of radical feminists and traditional conservatives who united around this one issue.
The women’s movement in Europe was from the outset a variable mix of intersecting objectives.
In 1950, one quarter of West German married women were in paid employment outside the home, by 1970 the number had risen to one married woman in two; of one and a half million new entrants to the labour force in Italy between 1972 and 1980, one and a quarter million were women.
By the mid1990s women constituted over 40 percent of the total labour force in every European country except Portugal and Italy.
The flexibility of part-time jobs suited many working mothers, but in the straitened economic circumstances of the Seventies this did not compensate for poor wages and job insecurity.
Equal pay and the workplace provision of childcare facilities thus emerged early as the main demands of most working women in the West and have remained at the forefront ever since.
Working women increasingly sought assistance in caring for their children; but they did not necessarily wish for more children of their own.
Indeed, with increased prosperity and more time spent working outside the home, they wanted fewer—or at least more say in the matter.
The demand for access to contraceptive information, and contraceptives, dates to the early years of the twentieth century, but it gathered speed within a decade of the peak of the baby boom.
The French Association Maternite was formed in 1956 to press for contraceptive rights; four years later it was succeeded by the Mouvement Frangais pour le Planning Familial, the change in name a clear indication of a shift in mood.
By the early seventies contraception was widely available throughout Western Europe, though not in remote rural districts or regions where Catholic authorities held moral sway over the local population.
It is thus not surprising that the demand for reform of abortion laws became a leitmotif of the new women’s politics—a rare point of intersection where the politics of radical feminism encountered the needs of apolitical everywoman.
But legal or otherwise, abortions were part of the life experience of millions of women—in tiny Latvia, in 1973, there were 60,000 abortions for 34,000 live births.
And where abortion was illegal the risks it entailed, both legal and medical, united women across class, age and political affiliation.
The signatories were all well known, some of them—the writers Simone de Beauvoir and Fran^oise Sagan, the actresses Catherine Deneuve, Jeanne Moreau and Marie-France Pisier, the lawyers and political activists Yvette Roudy and Gisele Halimi—very well known indeed.
The petition had been organized by the Mouvement de Liberation des Femmes , founded the previous year; the political stir aroused by their action prompted Halimi and de Beauvoir to form Choisir, a political organization dedicated to ending the ban on abortion.
In January 1973, at a press conference, French President Georges Pompidou conceded that French law had fallen behind the evolution of public opinion.
Pompidou’s successor, Valery Giscard D’Estaing, instructed his health minister, Simone Weil, to present parliament with a revision of the law and on January 17th 1975, the Assemblee Nationale legalized abortion (during the first ten weeks of pregnancy) in France.
The French example was studied closely by women throughout Western Europe.
Three years after the belated introduction in 1975 of a new ‘family code’ to replace that of the Fascists, the Italian parliament voted—on May 29th 1978, three weeks after the discovery of Aldo Moro’s corpse—to legalise abortion.
The decision was indirectly confirmed at a national referendum in May 1981, when Italian voters rejected both a proposal to loosen further the existing restrictions on legal abortion and a move to re-criminalize it, proposed by a newly formed Pro-Life Movement.
They were thus slow to exploit established political institutions in pursuit of their goals.
In Spain, the French strategy was followed more closely still, accelerated by the energies released by the collapse of the old regime.
The first feminist demonstration in Spain was organized in January 1976, within two months of Franco’s death.
Two years later adultery was de-criminalized and contraception legalized.
In 1979 one thousand women, including prominent public figures, signed a public statement declaring themselves to have broken the law by undergoing an abortion—a reminder that Spain under Franco’s rule had one of Europe’s highest rates of illegal abortion, comparable to those of Eastern Europe and driven by the same authoritarian, pro-natalist disapproval of all forms of birth control.
Together with the right to divorce, the successful battle over abortion rights was the main achievement of women’s political groups in these years.
As a consequence, the personal circumstances of millions of women were inestimably improved.
The availability of abortion, in conjunction with effective and available contraception, not only improved the life chances of many, especially the poor, but also offered working women the option of postponing their first child to a historically late point in their childbearing years.
The Spanish birth rate per woman fell by nearly 60 percent between i960 and 1996; Italy, West Germany and the Netherlands were close behind.
Within a few years of the reforms of the Seventies, no west European country except Ireland had a birthrate sufficient to replace the previous generation.
In Britain the annual birthrate fell in the three decades after i960 from 2.71 children per woman to 1.84; in France from 2.73 to 1.73.
As the economy slowed and the emancipation of women gathered pace, the demography of Europe was changing—with ominous implications for the welfare state in years to come.
The social changes wrought by the women’s movement were not, however, mirrored in politics itself.
No ‘women’s party’ emerged, capable of siphoning off votes and getting its representatives elected.
The Left proved generally more open to electing women than the Right (but not everywhere—in both Belgium and France, Christian parties of the Center-Right were for many years more likely than their Socialist opponents to nominate women to safe constituencies), but the best predictor of women’s prospects in public life was not ideology but geography.
Between 1975 and 1990 the number of women in Finland’s parliament rose from 23 percent to 39 percent; in Sweden from 21 percent to 38 percent; in Norway from 16 percent to 36 percent; and in Denmark from 16 percent to 33 percent.
Farther south, in the parliaments of Italy and Portugal, women constituted just one in twelve of parliamentary deputies in 1990.
In the UK House of Commons they were just 7 percent of the total; in France’s Assemblee Nationale , a mere 6 percent.
Environmentalists, men and women alike, had considerably more success in translating their sentiments into electoral politics.
The longing for a more ‘natural’ world and the search for a personal politics of ‘authenticity’ had deep roots on both sides of the ideological divide, traceable to the Romantics and their horror at the depredations of early industrialism.
By the early twentieth century both Left and Right had their cycling clubs, vegetarian restaurants, Wandervogel movements and ramblers, affiliated variously to socialist or nationalist dreams of emancipation and return.
Environmentalism (like pacifism) often aroused in its wake a revival of nationalism—or regionalism—but with a human face.
The ‘ Alternative^ of West Berlin, or the anti-nuclear protesters of Austria who won a 1978 referendum forbidding their government from activating the nuclear power station at Zwentendorf, would never have identified themselves as nationalists or even patriots.
But their anger against the pollution of the local environment above all (and their relative indifference to similar havoc being wreaked elsewhere) suggests otherwise.
The ‘not in my backyard’ quality of the incipient Green Movement harked back to an earlier model.
There was thus nothing contradictory in the enthusiasm with which Portugal’s ageing dictator Antonio Salazar enforced the same environmental controls being urged upon their democratic governments by post-’68 radicals in Vienna or Amsterdam.
Distrustful of‘materialism’ and determined to keep the twentieth century at bay, Salazar was, in his way, a genuine enthusiast for ecological objectives— attained in his case by the simple expedient of maintaining his fellow countrymen in a condition of unparalleled economic torpor.
In Eastern Europe, of course, the doctrine of unrestricted primary production— and the absence of any official countervailing voices—left the environment at the mercy of official polluters of every sort.
Whereas Austria might be constrained by internal opposition to abandon nuclear power, her Communist neighbors had no such compunction about building nuclear reactors in Czechoslovakia, planning massive dams just downstream along the Danube, in Czechoslovakia and Hungary, or steadily increasing output and air pollution a few dozen miles north in Nowa Huta, Poland’s ‘purpose-built’ steel town.
But for all that, the moral and human costs of rampant industrial pollution and environmental degradation had not passed unnoticed in the Eastern bloc.
Thus the cynical indifference of the post-’68 Husak regime in Prague—its willingness to wreak havoc along the common Danube frontier in pursuit of domestically generated kilowatts—triggered a rising backlash among otherwise politically quiescent Hungarians.
Implausible as it would have seemed in earlier days, the proposed Gabcikovo-Nagymaros dam was to become a significant source of domestic opposition to the Budapest regime itself—as well as a major embarrassment to relations between the two ‘fraternal’ neighbors.
In Czechoslovakia, an older distaste for technological modernity had passed to a new generation of intellectuals via the writings of the philosophers Jan Patocka and Vaclav Belohradsky especially; the latter working from exile in Italy after 1970, his neo-Heideggerian musings read in samizdat back in his country of origin.
The idea that the effort to subdue and dominate nature to human ends—the project of the Enlightenment—might come at too high a price was already familiar to readers on both sides of the Cold War divide through the writings of the Frankfurt School, notably Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer in their Dialectic of Enlightenment, published in 1944.
With a Heideggerian twist—the suggestion that Communism itself was an illicit Western import, touched with the hubristic illusion of endless material progress—these ruminations formed the basis of an in3 Within certain limits environmental protest—because of its ostensibly apolitical character—offered a safe space for political action and national self-expression in otherwise restrictive regimes.
In time, a common environmentalist critique would serve as a bridge between new forms of protest in East and West.
But in the circumstances of the early Seventies neither side yet knew—nor in the Western case cared—much about the views or problems of their counterparts across the Iron Curtain.
The west European environmentalists especially were far too busy building their local political constituency to pay attention to international politics, except in so far as these affected the unique object of their attentions.
It was in 1973 that the first ecology’ candidates stood in local elections in France and Britain—the same year that saw the founding Bauern Congress in West Germany, forerunner to the Greens.
Fuelled by the first oil crisis, the West German environmental movement moved rapidly into the political mainstream.
From sit-ins, protest marches and citizens’ initiatives at the start of the decade, the Greens—variously backed by farmers, environmentalists, pacifists and urban squatters—had progressed by 1979 to the point of securing their own representation in the parliaments of two of the German Lander.
Four years later, in the wake of the second oil shock, their support at the Federal elections of 1983 increased from 568,000 to 2,165,000 and won them parliamentary representation for the first time.
The German Greens’ success was not immediately repeated elsewhere, although in time the Austrian and especially the French parties would do quite respectably.
Environmentalism in Norway, for example, was at least as widely embraced as in Germany—as early as 1970 the Labour government’s plans to exploit Northern Europe’s largest waterfall, at Mardola in the Arctic Circle, for hydro-electric power provoked widespread national outrage and prompted the emergence of environmental politics in Norway.
The proliferation of single-issue parties and programs, and their steady absorption into mainstream public life, took its toll upon the traditional organizations of the Left in particular.
Communist parties in Western Europe, undermined by the steady erosion of their proletarian constituency and discredited by the invasion of Czechoslovakia, were most vulnerable.
But the Italians did at least express public disapproval for egregious Soviet actions—notably the invasion of Czechoslovakia.
This shift was driven in part by the shock of the 1973 coup d’etat in Chile, which convinced Berlinguer and other Communist intellectuals that even if the Communists won a parliamentary majority they would never be allowed—by the Americans, or their allies in Italian military, business and Church circles—to form a government of their own.
With 34. percent of the votes cast, it was just four percentage points and 34 seats short of the ruling Christian Democrats, an unprecedented score for a Western Communist party.
The PCI was making a credible attempt to present itself as a ‘system’ party, perhaps even an alternative government-in-waiting.
Like their Italian comrades, they understood that the best way to achieve this was by taking their distance, both from the contemporary Soviet Union but also, and more significantly, from their common Leninist past.
If Western Communists were to overcome the burden of their history and reprogram themselves as a— the —democratic movement of the Left, they needed to jettison more than just ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’ and other rhetorical dogmas abandoned in a bonfire of the ideological vanities during the course of the 1970s.
They also needed very publicly to abandon their association with Soviet Communism itself, and this even Berlinguer and Carrillo were unable to do.
Eurocommunism was thus a contradiction in terms, despite the best efforts of its spokesmen.
Subordination to Moscow was, as Lenin had always intended, the primary identification tag of any Communist party.
Until the disappearance of the Soviet Union itself the Communist parties of Western Europe were shackled to it— if not in their own eyes then most assuredly in the opinion of voters.
In Italy, where the PCI had uniquely succeeded in establishing itself in certain regions as the natural party of governance, the Communists held on to a sizeable vote, though never again scaling the heights of their 1976 successes.
But elsewhere Eurocommunism’s steady decline continued almost uninterrupted.
The Spanish Communists, who invented it, saw their share of the vote fall to just 4 percent by 1982.
Ironically, Leonid Brezhnev in Moscow actually gave his blessing to the Eurocommunists’ efforts to secure their local base by distancing themselves from him.
The Soviet move, a by-product of the strategy of international detente then being pursued, did little for the would-be Communist reformers.
But then, for all the support they continued to furnish in cash and kind, the Soviet leaders were losing interest in Western Communist parties, who had limited political impact and seemed unlikely to take power in the foreseeable future.
Social Democrats, however, especially those in positions of influence, were another matter.
And Social Democrats in Germany, still the crucible of a divided continent, were of very particular interest indeed.
Hitherto, West German foreign policy had been dominated by Adenauer’s view that the new Republic, firmly tied to the West through the West European Union, the European Economic Community and NATO, must be unwavering in its refusal to recognize the German Democratic Republic to its east.
Claiming that the FRG alone represented Germany, Adenauer had also refused to recognize states that had diplomatic relations with the GDR, with the exception of the Soviet Union.
His successor, Ludwig Erhard, had opened trade missions in Bucharest, Sofia, Warsaw and Budapest; but the first real breach of the principle had come only in 1967, when at Brandt’s encouraging Bonn established diplomatic relations with Romania, followed a year later by Yugoslavia.
Adenauer had always insisted that the division of Germany, and unresolved frontier disputes to its east, had to be addressed before there could be any detente or military disengagement in central Europe.
If Willy Brandt was willing to risk a breach with the conventions of West German politics it was in large measure because of his experience as Mayor of West Berlin.
To these men it was obvious that the Western Allies would take no untoward risks to overcome the division of Europe—an interpretation reconfirmed by the West’s passive acceptance of the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia.
If West Germans wanted to break the central European stalemate, they would have to do it themselves, by dealing directly with the authorities in the East.
With these considerations always in mind, Brandt and Bahr devised their approach to the east in order to achieve what Bahr called ‘ Wandel durch Annaherung —change through rapprochement.
The aim was to ‘overcome Yalta’ through a multitude of contacts—diplomatic, institutional, human; and thereby to ‘normalize’ relations between the two Germanies and within Europe, without provoking disquiet at home or abroad.
In a characteristic rhetorical innovation, Brandt quietly abandoned West German insistence upon the illegitimacy of the GDR and the non-negotiable demand for reunification.
For these achievements, and in the aftermath of a moving pilgrimage to Warsaw, where he knelt in homage to the memory of the Warsaw Ghetto, Willy Brandt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
He triumphed at home, too—in the elections of 1972 his SPD emerged for the first time as the leading party in the Federal Parliament.
Despite side-stepping Bonn’s longstanding insistence that no final settlement of frontiers and peoples had been reached, that the Yalta divisions had no de jure status, and that the legal fiction of the continuity of the December 1937 frontiers of Germany must be maintained, Brandt was very popular at home in Germany.
There were three distinct constituencies whom the framers of Ostpolitik had to consider if they were to succeed in their ambitions.
Western Europeans needed reassurance that Germany was not turning East.
French President Georges Pompidou’s first response to the Moscow Treaty had been to make encouraging overtures to Great Britain—British membership of the European Community now held out the attraction of providing a counterweight to a less pliable Germany.
The French were eventually appeased by German promises to anchor the Federal Republic ever more firmly in West European institutions (much as Pompidou’s successors would be reassured by Germany’s commitment to a common European currency following German unification two decades later); but in Paris as in Washington, remarks such as those of Finance Minister Helmut Schmidt in 1973, depicting a ‘changing world’ in which ‘the traditional categories of East and West’ were losing significance, were not soon forgotten.
In 1969 a mere half-million phone calls had been placed from West to East Germany.
Telephone contact between the two halves of Berlin, virtually unknown in 1970, had reached the level of ten million calls per year by 1988.
By the mid-Eighties most East Germans had virtually unrestricted access to West German television; indeed, the East German authorities even went so far as to lay cable into the ‘valley of the clueless’ around Dresden (so-called because of local topographical impediments to West German television signals), in the wishful belief that if East Germans could watch West German television at home they would not feel the need to emigrate.
The rulers of East Germany had particularly good reason to be pleased with these developments.
In an ironic echo of changes in Bonn, the GDR’s own leaders stopped referring to ‘Germany’ and instead began speaking with growing confidence of the GDR as a distinctive and legitimate German state in its own right, with a future of its own—rooted, they now insisted, not just in ‘good’, anti-Fascist Germans but in the soil and heritage of Prussia.
Since 1963 the GDR had been ‘selling’ political prisoners to Bonn for cash, the sum depending upon the ‘value’ and qualifications of the candidate.
By 1977, in order to obtain the release of a prisoner from East German jails, Bonn was paying close to DM 96,000 per head.
By one estimate, the total amount extracted from Bonn by the GDR, in return for releasing 34,000 prisoners, reuniting 2,000 children with their parents, and ‘regulating’ 250,000 cases of family reunification, was by 1989 close to DM 3 billion.
One of the unintended consequences of these developments was the virtual disappearance of ‘unification’ from the German political agenda.
To be sure, reunification of the divided country remained the Lebensliige of the Federal Republic, as Brandt put it.
But by the mid-Eighties, a few years before it unexpectedly took place, re-unification no longer mobilized mass opinion.
Polls taken in the Fifties and Sixties suggested that up to 45 percent of the West German population felt unification was the ‘most important’ question of the day; from the mid-Seventies the figure never exceeded 1 percent.
The third constituency for Bonn’s new approach, of course, was the Soviet Union.
From Willy Brandt’s first negotiations with Brezhnev in 1970, through Gorbachev’s visit to Bonn nearly two decades later, all West German plans for ‘normalization’ to the east passed through Moscow and everyone knew it.
Indeed, once the West Germans and Russians had agreed on the permanence of Poland’s new frontiers (respecting long-established European practice, no one asked the Poles for their views) and Bonn had consented to recognize the People’s Democracies, West Germans and Russians found much common ground.
But if the reminiscences were perhaps illusory, the shared interests were real enough.
Defined by family or ethnic origin, such people were accorded full citizenship if they could reach the Federal Republic.
Hundreds of thousands of residents of Ukraine, Russia, Romania, Hungary and elsewhere suddenly rediscovered German backgrounds they had taken great pains to deny for the previous half century.
The Western Allies, the United States especially, had long been unwilling to go beyond de facto acknowledgement of the status quo, pending resolution of the ‘German Question’ in particular.
But now that the Germans themselves were making overtures to their eastern neighbors, the Western position was bound to change; the Soviet leaders were about to realize their hopes.
Thus, in December 1971, NATO ministers met in Brussels and agreed in principle to take part in a European Security Conference.
Within a year a preparatory session was under way in Helsinki, Finland; and in July 1973, still in Helsinki, the official Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe opened.
Over the ensuing two years the Helsinki conferees drew up conventions, drafted agreements, proposed ‘confidence-building’ measures to improve EastWest relations and much else besides.
In August 1975 the Helsinki Accords were unanimously approved and signed.
On the face of things, the Soviet Union was the major beneficiary of the Accords.
But it was an illustration of Moscow’s endemic insecurity that these clauses in the Helsinki agreements, together with Principle IV affirming that ‘the participating States will respect the territorial integrity of each of the participating States’, were accorded such significance.
Most of the 1975 Helsinki principles and protocols merely gift-wrapped existing international arrangements.
From this wordy and, as it seemed, toothless checklist of rights and obligations was born the Helsinki Rights movement.
Brezhnev had been right to count upon Henry Kissinger and his hard-headed successors to take seriously the non-intervention clauses at Helsinki; but it had never occurred to him that others might take no less seriously the more utopian paragraphs that followed.
Its eleven initial members included Yuri Orlov, Yelena Bonner and Anatoly Sharansky.
Helsinki Watch, the international umbrella organization set up specifically to publicize rights abuses in the Helsinki signatory states, was born two years later.
Against this sort of opposition, violent repression was not just ineffective but, to the extent that it was public knowledge, self-defeating.
Hoist by the petard of their own cynicism, Leonid Brezhnev and his colleagues had inadvertently opened a breach in their own defenses.
Ortega y Gasset ‘Europe is not just about material results, it is about spirit.
Jacques Delors In Northern Europe, domestic and international change was played out against the ever-present backdrop of these Great Power dealings and the East-West division of the continent.
Until the early Seventies, Spain, Portugal and Greece were peripheral to Europe in more than just a geographical sense.
Despite being ‘Western’ in their Cold War allegiance , all three countries stood otherwise quite apart.
The standard of living in southern Spain and most of Portugal and Greece was comparable to that of Eastern Europe and parts of the developing world.
All three countries were governed in the early 1970s by authoritarian rulers of a species more familiar in Latin America than Western Europe; the political transformations of the post-war decades seemed largely to have passed them by.
In Portugal—ruled by Antonio Salazar from 1932 to 1970—and Spain, where General Franco had staged his military coup in 1936 and ruled unchallenged from 1939 to his death in 1975, hierarchies of authority from another era were frozen into place.
In Greece, a military cabal had overthrown king and parliament in 1967; thenceforward, the country was governed by a junta of colonels.
The spectre of their unstable past hovered oppressively across the unpromising future prospects of all three countries.
The recent history of Greece, like that of Spain, was heavily back-shadowed by civil war.
After the Communists abandoned the struggle, in October 1949, it was the Left’s turn to suffer sustained repression.
Wartime partisans (including many who had fought against the Germans in earlier years) were forced into foreign exile for decades to come.
Those who remained, together with their children and even their grandchildren, were forbidden public sector employment until well into the seventies.
At the notorious prison on the island of Makronisos, Communists were detained at length and treated with notorious brutality.
But the political divisions of Greece, however tidily they appeared to fold into Cold War categories, were always dominated by distinctive local concerns.
In March 1949, at the height of the Tito-Stalin struggle, the slavishly pro-Moscow KKE issued a radio announcement endorsing demands for an independent Macedonia.
By encouraging the territorial fragmentation of Yugoslavia this was intended to weaken Tito, but it had no such effect.
Instead it undercut for a generation the domestic credibility of Greek Communism, by suggesting that a Communist victory would result in autonomy for the Macedonian north, with its Slav and Albanian minorities, and thence to the break up of the Greek state.
If this mattered so much, it was because Greek nationalism was peculiarly insecure, even by regional standards.
Permanently on the qui vive for conflict with their former imperial masters in Turkey, in a state of war with Albania since 1940 , and unwilling to concede even the fact of a large Slav community abutting their frontiers with Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, Greece’s conservative post-war politicians emphatically opted for order and stability over democracy or post-war reconciliation.
Conflating old Greek concerns with new international divisions the Greek king, his army and his ministers presented themselves to the West as the most reliable allies in an unstable region.
In February 1947, the Treaty of Paris obliged Italy to cede the Dodecanese islands to Athens.
Greece was a major beneficiary of American aid, both following the pronouncement of the ‘Truman Doctrine’ and under the Marshall Plan.
The country was admitted to NATO in 1952 and the Greek armed forces were the happy recipients of copious practical assistance with planning and materiel.
The British had originally hoped to bequeath to liberated Greece a properly non-political army and modern police force; but in the circumstances of time and place, this proved impossible.
Instead, the Greek army emerged from eight years of war as uncompromisingly anti-Communist, royalist and undemocratic, its al’The Makronisos* warders’ practice of forcing Communists to repent and then turn on those who refused was remarkably similar to Romanian Communist techniques in the prison at Pitesti in the same years, albeit marginally less vicious.
Indeed—and much like the traditional Spanish officer corps in this respect— Greek officers saw themselves , rather than the ephemeral constitutional documents they were sworn to defend, as the guardians of the nation and its integrity.
Until 1963 the military were happy enough to give their support to Constantine Karamanlis, who led the re-named Greek Rally party to election victories in 1956,1958 and again in 1961—though he was suspected after the last and greatest of these successes of widespread electoral fraud.
Karamanlis was not himself ideologically anti-Communist nor even especially close to the armed forces.
But it is not irrelevant that he was born in Greek Macedonia and was profoundly anti-Slav.
Of peasant background and Orthodox faith, he was instinctively provincial, nationalist and conservative—a fitting representative of his country and a safe pair of hands in the eyes of American diplomats and Greek officers alike, evincing no desire to enforce civilian oversight of the military or investigate too closely the growing rumors of anti-parliamentary political networks and conspiracies in high places.
Under Karamanlis, Greece remained stable, if economically stagnant and more than a little corrupt.
Grigoris Lambrakis, was assaulted in Thessaloniki while speaking at a peace rally.
His death five days later created a political martyr for the Left and the nascent peace movement in Greece, while the authorities’ studied failure to investigate the murky background to Lambrakis’ assassination gave rise to widespread suspicion.
Six months later Karamanlis narrowly lost the elections to George Papandreou’s Center Union, a centrist party backed by the country’s growing urban middle class.
The following year, at a fresh round of elections, Papandreou’s party and its allies did better still, winning an absolute majority of the votes cast and increasing their share from 42 percent to 52. percent.
The new parliamentary majority demanded an investigation into the rigging of the 1961 elections, and tensions began to mount between parliament and the young King Constantine.
The king’s conservative political sympathies were public knowledge, and he was under increasing pressure from the Right to dismiss Papandreou, who was eventually maneuvered into resigning.
He was succeeded by a series of interim prime ministers, none of whom could form a stable parliamentary majority.
Relations between parliament and court were strained still further when a group 3 And to Costas Gavras’ influential 1969 film Z, based on the Lambrakis affair.
Parliamentary government in Greece had by now ceased to function in all but name.
Conservatives and army officers warned darkly of growing ‘Communist’ influence in the country at large.
The king would not work with the majority Center Union, which he accused of depending on the votes of the far Left, while the opposition National Radical Union refused to back successive efforts to install ‘caretaker’ governments.
Finally, in April 1967, the National Radical Union itself formed a minority government just long enough for the King to dissolve the parliament and call for new elections.
Popular frustration at the parliamentary stalemate, and a widespread feeling that the king had played an unacceptably partisan role, suggested that the forthcoming elections would produce a further swing to the Left.
Proferring just this excuse— the ‘Communist threat’ insistently invoked in Greece since 1949—and pointing to the undoubted inadequacies of Greece’s democratic institutions and the incompetence of its political class, a group of officers working inside the army’s longestablished right-wing networks seized power on April 21st.
King Constantine passively, if unenthusiastically, assented and swore the conspirators into office.
Eight months later, after a half-hearted attempt at a ‘counter-coup’, Constantine and his family fled to Rome, un-mourned.
The junta appointed a regent and Papadopoulos was named prime minister.
Initially violent and always repressive, Papadopoulos and his colleagues dismissed nearly a thousand civil servants, imprisoned or expelled politicians of the left and center, and turned Greece in upon itself for seven stifling years.
Anti-modern to the point of parody, the colonels censored the press, outlawed strikes and banned modern music along with mini-skirts.
They also banned the study of sociology, Russian and Bulgarian in addition to Sophocles, Euripides and Aristophanes.
The uniforms of palace guards and other ceremonial officials were replaced with gaudily ‘traditional’ Greek costume.
Tourism did not suffer—politically-conscious travelers who boycotted the colonels’ Greece were readily replaced by tourists attracted to cheap, if suffocatingly over-regulated resorts.
The junta even had widespread initial support in the rural districts from which the colonels mostly came, especially after they cancelled all peasant debt in 1968.
This was bound eventually to bring the military regime into conflict with the country’s urban middle class, whose interests as consumers and producers alike would within a few years triumph over their relief at the dismissal of the bickering politicians.
Moreover the regime, secure enough at home, was increasingly isolated abroad—in December 1969 the Council of Europe unanimously voted to expel Greece; two months later the EEC broke off all negotiations with the junta.
It was thus altogether appropriate that the dictatorship should fall in the course of an incompetent attempt to apply force beyond its frontiers, to resolve the long-running problem of Cyprus.
The island of Cyprus, part of the Ottoman Empire since 1571, had been administered by Britain since 1878 and unilaterally annexed at the outbreak of World War One.
In the far-eastern Mediterranean, close to Turkish Anatolia and far removed from the Greek mainland or any other outlying Greek islands, Cyprus nonetheless had a Greek-speaking, Eastern Orthodox majority increasingly disposed to seek union with the Greek state.
The Turkish minority, some 18 percent of the island’s population, was understandably opposed to any such arrangement and was vociferously supported by the authorities in Ankara.
The fate of Cyprus—caught between British efforts to dispose of a troublesome imperial inheritance and longstanding Greek-Turkish hostility—remained troublingly unresolved throughout the Fifties.
Denied their project of ‘Etiosis '—union with Greece—the majority of the island’s Greek-Cypriot leadership settled somewhat reluctantly for independence, which the UK granted in i960, retaining only certain transit rights and a strategi4 The officers, most of them formed in military cadet schools under the pre-war dictatorship of Ioannis Metaxas, were perhaps not as unpopular as their foreign critics asserted.
But they were—rightly— presumed to have the sympathy of the United States.
What was in essence a belated extension of the Greek civil war of the 1940s rapidly came instead to be seen as the latest cause cilibre in Europe’s century-old civil war.
The new Republic of Cyprus, its sovereignty and constitution guaranteed by Britain, Turkey and Greece, was ruled by a Greek-Turkish ‘partnership’ arrangement dominated by the presidency of Archbishop Makarios, once exiled by London as an armed and violent terrorist, now the respected spokesman of‘reasonable’ Greek Cypriot ambitions.
Meanwhile the island’s Greek and Turkish communities lived alongside each other in suspicious unease, interrupted by sporadic outbursts of inter-communal violence.
The governments in Athens and Ankara both advertised themselves as the protectors of their respective compatriots and occasionally threatened to intervene.
But prudence, and international pressure, kept them from doing so, even when attacks on Turkish Cypriots in 1963 led to the arrival of a UN Peacekeeping Force the following year.
Despite the Greek Cypriots’ near-monopoly of public employment and positions of authority (loosely comparable to the Protestant majority’s exclusion of Catholics from privileges and power in Ulster)—or perhaps because of it—the situation in Cyprus appeared stable.
Thus in 1973, when students in Athens (first at the Law School, later at the Polytechnic) embarrassed the colonels by publicly opposing their rule for the first time, the military’s response was to divert attention and seek to shore up public support by re-asserting the Greek claim to Cyprus.
General Ioannides, a ‘hard-liner’ who displaced Papadopoulos as junta leader following the Polytechnic demonstrations, plotted with George Grivas and other Greek-Cypriot nationalists to overthrow Makarios and ‘re-unite’ the island with Greece.
On July 15th 1974, units of the Cypriot National Guard along with hand-picked Greek officers attacked the Presidential Palace, expelled Makarios and installed a puppet government in anticipation of direct rule from Athens.
At this juncture, however, the Turkish government announced its own intention to invade Cyprus in order to protect the interests of the Turkish-Cypriot community, and promptly did so, on July 20th.
Faced with widespread public anger at this national humiliation, the Greek dictators themselves turned to the ageing Karamanlis and invited him to return home from his exile in Paris.
By July 24th the former Prime Minister was back in Athens and had initiated the country’s return to civilian rule.
Karamanlis’s New Democracy party swept home in the November 1974 elections and repeated its success three years later.
The smoothness of Greece’s return to democracy was due in part to Karamanlis’s skill in breaking with his own past, while at the same time conveying an image of seasoned competence and continuity.
Rather than re-establish his discredited Center Union he had formed a new party.
He called a referendum on the discredited monarchy in December 1974, and when 69. percent of the voters demanded its abolition he oversaw the establishment of a republic.
In order to avoid alienating the military he resisted calls to purge the army, preferring instead to impose early retirement on the more compromised senior officers while rewarding and promoting loyalists.
With the monarchy out of the way, and the army neutralized, Karamanlis had to address the unfinished business of Cyprus.
Neither he nor his successors had any intention of re-opening the Enosis question, but nor could they publicly ignore Turkey’s presence on the island, even after Makarios’s return there in December 1974.
In a largely symbolic move that attracted widespread domestic approval on Left and Right alike, Karamanlis pulled Greece out of the military organization of NATO for the next six years in protest at the behavior of a fellow NATO member.
Greek-Turkish relations entered an ice age, marked by the Turkish minority’s unilateral declaration in February 1975 of a ‘Turkish Federated State of Cyprus’—only ever recognized by Turkey itself—and by sporadic diplomatic tiffs over territorial claims in the eastern Aegean.
Cyprus itself thus became an object of international concern, as UN diplomats and lawyers were to spend fruitless decades trying unsuccessfully to resolve the island’s divisions.
Meanwhile Greek politicians were thereby relieved of responsibility for the island’s affairs (though they remained constrained by domestic politics to express a continued interest in its fate) and could turn to more promising horizons.
On January 1st 1981, in what many in Brussels would come to regard as a regrettable triumph of hope over wisdom, Greece became a full member of the Community.
Unlike Greece, Portugal had no recent experience of even the most vestigial of democracies.
Salazar’s authoritarian reign had been peculiarly and self-consciously retrograde even by the standards prevailing when he first took over power in 1932— indeed, in its mix of censorious clericalism, corporate institutions and rural under6 The junta itself, however, did not escape retribution.
Brigadier-General Ioannidis was convicted at a later trial for his role in the suppression of the Polytechnic revolt.
The rich were very rich indeed, infant mortality was the highest in Europe, and 32 percent of the population was illiterate.
Like the Romanian dictator Ceau§escu, Salazar was obsessed with the avoidance of debt, and conscientiously balanced every annual budget.
Fanatically mercantilist, he built up unusually high gold reserves which he took care not to spend on either investment or imports.
As a result, his country was locked into poverty, most of the population working on small family farms in the north of the country and latifundia further south.
With no local capital available to finance domestic industry and foreign investors distinctly unwelcome, Portugal was largely dependent upon the export or re-export of primary commodities, including its own people.
Right up to his death in 1970, it was Salazar’s proud boast that not only had he kept Portugal out of the devastating foreign wars of the century, but he had navigated his country between the Scylla of rapacious market capitalism and the Charybdis of state socialism.
In the absence of domestic opposition, the only resistance to Salazar came from the military, the country’s sole independent institution.
The Portuguese armed forces were ill paid—rather than expend scarce resources on wages, Salazar actively encouraged impecunious army officers to marry into the better-heeled bourgeoisie.
But until 1961 the regime could count on at least their passive loyalty, in spite of two abortive and easily crushed military coup attempts in 1947 and again in 1958.
Reform-minded junior officers in the army or navy might chafe at the stagnation around them, but they lacked allies or any popular base.
All that changed in 1961, when Delhi forcibly annexed Portugal’s mainland In7 Maurras died in 1952, aged 84.
Salazar himself, the son of an estate manager, was born in Vimeiro, Portugal, on April 28th 1889, just a week after Hitler.
The loss of Goa was a national humiliation, but rebellion in Africa was more serious still.
Portugal’s considerable African ‘provinces’, as they were known, comprised Angola, Guinee-Bissau and the Cape Verde Islands in West Africa, and Mozambique in the south-east.
Of these Angola, with nearly half a million European residents in a total population of under six million, was by far the most important.
Its untapped material wealth—in iron, diamonds and recently-discovered offshore oil—had led Salazar reluctantly to permit foreign investment (notably by the United States company Gulf Oil), and in the course of the Sixties the territory was taking on growing economic significance for Portugal itself.
The plan failed to break the insurgency, although it had baneful and enduring effects on Angola’s society and rural economy.
In Angola the rebels were divided between different factions and the Portuguese army was able to contain them, at least for a while.
In Mozambique, where 60,000 Portuguese soldiers were kept busy protecting a European settler population numbering just 100,000, or in Guinee and Cape Verde, where the charismatic Amilcar Cabral tied down over 30,000 Portuguese troops in thankless guerilla warfare against ten thousand insurgents, the situation was becoming untenable.
By the beginning of the 1970s its African wars were consuming half the annual defense budget of Europe’s poorest country.
One in every four Portuguese men of military age was being conscripted to serve in Africa—and, after 1967, for a compulsory minimum term of four years.
Portugal’s defense of its colonial holdings was expensive, bloody and increasingly hopeless; the armed forces knew this better than anyone.
To secure his own power and distract attention from the country’s overseas woes, Marcello Caetano—Salazar’s anointed successor—had eased credit restrictions, borrowed heavily from abroad and encouraged the flow of imports.
In the years 1970-73, further fuelled by remittances from Portuguese working abroad, the country underwent a brief consumer boom.
But it was followed in short order by spiraling inflation brought on by the oil crisis.
The residents of the shanty towns around the capital, many of them recent arrivals from the impover512 A TIME OF TRANSITION ished Alentejo region, suffered not just their own endemic indigence but the sight of a new and showy wealth in nearby Lisbon.
The army increasingly resented fighting the country’s ‘dirty wars’ in far-away lands on behalf of an unpopular government run by unelected technocrats, and its discontent was now finding a widespread echo at home.
The grievances of junior officers and their families, unable to subsist on already low wages further reduced by inflation, were now shared by a rising generation of businessmen frustrated at their rulers’ incompetence and who understood that their country’s future lay in Europe, not Africa.
On April 25th 1974, officers and men of the Armed Forces Movement (Movimento das Formas Armadas—MFA) ousted Caetano and his colleagues from office and declared a provisional government whose goals were to be democratization, decolonization and economic reform.
The coup (like the young officers’ pronunciamento that first brought Salazar to power in 1926) aroused little resistance, and the leaders of the old regime were allowed to fly into exile—first to Madeira, thence to Brazil.
General Antonio de Spinola, former deputy chief of staff of the Portuguese army and governor of Guinee from 1968 to 1972, was appointed by his fellow officers to head the junta.
The secret police was abolished, all political prisoners were released, freedom of the press was restored and the leaders of Portugal’s Socialist and Communist parties returned from exile, their organizations legally permitted for the first time in nearly half a century.
Spinola brought centrists and socialists into his provisional cabinet and in July he publicly announced plans to offer the African colonies full self-determination.
Within a year the colonies were all independent—and Indonesia had seized control of Portuguese East Timor.
The decolonization was more than a little chaotic—guerillas in Guinee and Mozambique ignored Spinola’s insistence that they first lay down arms and Angola deteriorated into civil war—but seen from Portugal it had the virtue of being quick.
It also precipitated, in the wake of the army’s retreat and violent clashes in the Angolan capital, Luanda, the return to Portugal of some 750,000 Europeans.
Many of them settled in Portugal’s more conservative north and would play a significant political role in coming years.
These rapid changes disturbed Spinola, whose conservative instincts were at odds with the increasingly radical projects of his younger colleagues, and in September 1974 he resigned.
For the next fourteen months Portugal appeared to be moving towards a full-scale social revolution.
Nationalization was popular in the towns, and agrarian reform in the South— essentially collectivization of the land—was driven initially by ‘spontaneous’ occupations and land seizures by local tenants and labourers mobilized by the Communists and their allies, the Communists in particular benefiting from their well-deserved reputation as the best-organized and most effective clandestine opponents of the old regime.
But the same practices in the center and north of the country, where the land was already sub-divided into thousands of small, familyrun property holdings, were decidedly unwelcome.
Rural and small-town northern Portugal was also actively Catholic, with an average of one priest for every five hundred souls in 1972; the figure for south-central Portugal was 1:4500, and lower still in the far south.
The anti-clerical, collectivizing projects of Communist unionists and peasant leaders thus encountered strong and vociferous opposition in the populous northern regions.
In the Constituent Assembly elections of April 1975 the Communists were held to just 12. percent of the vote.
Portugal will not be a country with democratic freedoms and monopolies.
Foreign commentators warned of an impending Communist coup, and Portugal’s NATO allies and western European trade partners held out promises of aid and affiliation if the country abjured Marxist revolution.
On November 8th the Constituent Assembly in Lisbon was besieged by building workers and for two weeks there were rumors of an imminent ‘Lisbon Commune’ and even a civil war between north and south.
Initially they had the tacit support of the PCP, but when it became clear that the bulk of the armed forces and even some of the left-wing officers themselves were opposed to the uprising, even Cunhal backed off.
In February 1976 the Portuguese military, still in effective control of the country nearly two years after their coup, officially handed over power to the civilian authorities.
In the legislative elections of that same month, the Socialists once again came first, though with a slightly reduced vote, and Mario Soares formed Portugal’s first democraticallyelected government in nearly half a century.
The prospects for Portuguese democracy remained cloudy—Willy Brandt was just one of many sympathetic contemporary observers who saw in Soares another Kerensky, an unwitting stalking horse for undemocratic forces that would replace him at the earliest opportunity.
The armed forces remained confined to barracks, the role of their politicized fringes increasingly marginal.
The Communists’ vote actually rose—improving to 14. percent in 1976 and thence to 19 percent three years later, as the economy deteriorated and Soares’ moderate policies frustrated his party’s left-wing, to whom he had promised the coming destruction of capitalism in a Socialist Portugal—but at the price of abandoning their insurrectionist ambitions.
In 1977 the Parliament passed an Agrarian Reform Law that confirmed the land collectivization of the immediate past but confined it to the South, with restrictions on the amount of land that could be expropriated from existing owners.
This move ended the risk of rural conflict and a conservative backlash, but it could do little in the short run to alleviate the economic mess that democratic Portugal had inherited.
Deprived of cheap raw materials from its former colonies (and the captive market they had provided for its otherwise uncompetitive exports), unable to export unskilled labour to Western Europe as in the past, and constrained under the terms of vital IMF loans to balance its budgets and practice fiscal rigor, Portugal suffered years of unemployment and under-consumption.
But they offered no objection when parliament revised the constitution in the course of the next two years, reducing the power of the executive , and quietly removing the anti-capitalist emphasis in the original document.
For the next twenty years the Socialists and their opponents, centrist Social Democrats led by Anibal Cava^o Silva, were to alternate in office.
The country remained strikingly poor by West European standards, a tribute to Salazar’s enduring legacy.
The Communists, while still popular in the rural south and the industrial suburbs of Lisbon, remained unrepentantly hard-line under the ageing Cunhal, who stayed in charge until 1992.
The repatriated colonials never succeeded in forming a far-right party of embittered nationalists.
In the circumstances, the emergence of a democratic Portugal was a very considerable achievement.
To a visitor crossing from France into Spain in, say, 1970, the chasm separating the two sides of the Pyrenees seemed immense.
Franco’s thirty-year long reign had accentuated the social backwardness and cultural isolation in which Spain had languished for much of the past two centuries, and his authoritarian regime appeared even more at odds with modern European political culture than it had at the outset.
Franco was a rigid and truly reactionary dictator, but unlike his neighbor Salazar he was also an economic realist.
In 1959 Spain abandoned the autarkic practices of the past two decades and, at the instigation of a group of Opus Dei ministers, adopted a National Stabilization Plan intended to stifle the country’s endemic inflation and open it up to trade and investment.
But the private sector, hitherto constrained by corporatist regulations and a longstanding policy of import substitution, was freer to expand.
The Spanish domestic economy had been protected against competition in the early years of Europe’s post-war boom, but was opening itself to foreign commerce at just the right moment.
The percentage of the labor force employed on the land—one worker in two in 1950—fell pre10 As recently as 1963 the Spanish leader had not hesitated to execute a captured Communist, Juan Grimau, in defiance of widespread international criticism.
Already, by the mid-Sixties, Spain had ceased to qualify as a ‘developing nation’ under UN criteria.
Spain was not burdened by the residue of empire and thus faced none of the economic or social costs of decolonization.
Outside of Barcelona, the Costa Brava, parts of the Basque country and Madrid, the transport, education, medical and service infrastructure of the country still lagged far behind.
Even in 1973, per capita income in the country as a whole was still lower than that of Ireland and less than half the EEC average.
Nevertheless, the social consequences of even limited economic modernization were significant.
In a time before television Spain may have been largely shielded from the cultural impact of the Sixties elsewhere, but the economic disparities and disruption engendered by the Stabilization Plan produced widespread labour discontent.
From the later Sixties through Franco’s death, strikes, lockouts, demonstrations and widespread demands for collective bargaining and union representation became a fixture of Spanish life.
The regime was adamantly opposed to any political concessions; but it could not afford to present too repressive a public face, at a time when so many foreigners were visiting the country—17. million in 1966, rising to 34 million the year before Franco’s death.
Nor could the Spanish authorities forgo the cooperation and skills of a growing urban work force.
They were thus constrained to concede the de facto emergence of a labor movement, overwhelmingly based in Catalonia and the heavy industries of the Basque region.
Together with the unofficial unions formed by public employees, banking staff and other expanding white-collar occupations, this semi-clandestine network of workers’ and employees’ representatives could call upon nearly a decade of organization and experience by the time Franco died.
Labor protest in Spain, however, was kept firmly confined to bread and butter issues.
By its last years, Franco’s regime—rather like that of Janos Kadar in Hungary—depended not on open and violent repression but rather upon a sort of enforced passive acceptance, a decades-long de-politicization of the culture.
Student protesters, who since 1956 had been seeking greater campus autonomy and a relaxing of moral codes and other restrictions, were accorded a certain liberty to organize and protest within strictly circumscribed boundaries; they could even count upon some sympathy from the regime’s internal critics—reform-minded Catholics and disappointed ‘social-Falangists’ among others.
Indeed, all properly political opinions were kept firmly under wraps, and independent political parties were banned.
Until 1967 the country lacked even a constitution, and such rights and procedures as existed were largely window dressing for the benefit of Spain’s Western partners.
Officially a ‘regent’ for the suspended monarchy, Franco had anointed the young Juan Carlos—grandson of Spain’s last king—to succeed him in due course, but for most observers the question of the monarchy played little part in Spanish affairs.
Even the Church, still a major presence in the daily life of many Spaniards, played only a limited role in public policy.
Spain’s traditional role as a bulwark of Christian civilization against materialism and atheism was a staple of the primary-school curriculum; but the Catholic hierarchy itself was kept well away from the reins of power, in marked contrast to the neo-Crusading ‘National Catholicism’ spirit of the regime’s first decade.
In June 1968, bowing to modern reality, Franco conceded for the first time the principle of religious freedom, allowing Spaniards openly to worship at a church of their choosing.
Having himself come to power by a military coup, Franco understood very well the risks of alienating a military caste that had inherited an over-developed sense of its responsibility for the preservation of the Spanish state and its traditional values.
Throughout the post-war years the Spanish Army was cosseted and flattered.
Its victory in the Civil War was celebrated annually in the streets of major cities, its losses ostentatiously memorialized in the monumental Valley of The Fallen, completed in September 1959.
Franco had for decades preserved his military from any foreign or colonial wars.
Unlike the French or Portuguese armies, they suffered no humiliating defeats or forced retreats.
Spain faced no military threats, and its domestic security was handled by police, genn One ironic consequence of the carefully calibrated freedoms that Franco allowed to university activists in his last decade is that Spanish students of the Sixties generation typically exaggerate in retrospect the role they were to play in their country’s subsequent struggle for democracy.
As a result, Catholic leaders, unsullied by any Francoist past, were able to play an active role in the transition to democracy, serving as a ‘bridge’ between radicals and conservatives.
The army, largely confined to a ceremonial role, had become risk averse; its traditional conservatism was expressed increasingly in enthusiasm for the return of the monarchy, an identification that was to prove ironically beneficial in the nation’s transition to democracy.
The affairs of the country were run by a restricted network of lawyers, Catholic professors and civil servants, many of them with active interests in the private companies favoured by their policies.
Refusing to the end to consider any serious liberalizations or transfer of authority, he had already outlived his usefulness even to his own supporters, many of whom sympathized with demonstrators who earlier in the year had demanded a lifting of restrictions on the press and political associations.
The transition to democracy was thus managed from within the ranks of Franco’s own ministers and appointees, which helps account for its speed and success.
In the initial stages of Spain’s exit from Franco ism the traditional forces of democratic change in Spain—liberals, Socialists, Communists, trade unions—played a subordinate role.
Initially he kept on Carlos Arias Navarro, Franco’s last Prime Minister, together with his cabinet colleagues, the better to reassure the army and others that there would be no sudden breach with the past.
But in April 1976 Arias incurred royal disfavor when he clamped down on the newly-formed Democratic Coordination, a coalition of stillunauthorized parties of the Left, and arrested its leaders.
Within two months the king had replaced Arias with one of his own ministers, Adolfo Suarez Gonzalez.
At forty four, Suarez was a typical late-Franco era technocrat; indeed, he had served for one year as the head of the Caudillo’s own Falangist National Movement.
He formed a new political party, the Center Democratic Union and set about persuading the sitting Francoist assembly to accept a national referendum on political reform—essentially, to approve the introduction of universal suffrage and a bi-cameral parliament.
Wrong-footed by someone they had supposed to be one of their own, the Francoist old guard agreed—and the referendum passed, on December 15th 1976, with over 94 percent in favor.
At the same time trade unions were legalized and accorded the right to strike.
In June 1977 elections were held to form a Constituent Assembly with the task of writing a new Constitution.
Suarez’s victory reassured conservatives that there would be no sharp lurch to the Left, while the absence of a clear majority obliged him to work with Left-wing deputies who thus shared responsibility for the new Constitution that the new Assembly was to draft.
Spain was to be a parliamentary monarchy; there was to be no official religion (though in a calculated concession to the Church, Catholicism was recognized as a ‘social fact’); the voting age was reduced to eighteen; and the death penalty was abolished.
But in a major break with the recent past, the Assembly wrote into Spain’s new laws a right of autonomy for the country’s historic regions, notably Catalonia and the Basque country.
The subsequent Statutes of Autonomy acknowledged the ancient fact of linguistic variety and regional sentiment within Spain’s hitherto ultra-centralized state; they also recognized the disproportionate demographic significance of Catalonia in particular, and the depth of autonomist sentiment in the Basque country and Catalonia alike.
But what was granted some Spaniards could hardly be withheld from others.
Within four years Spain was to be divided into seventeen self-administering regions, each with its own flag and capital city.
Not just Catalans and Basques, but Galicians, Andalusians, Canaries, Valencians, Navarrese and many others were to be recognized as distinct and separate.
Under the new constitution, however, Madrid retained responsibility for defense, justice and foreign affairs, an unacceptable compromise for Basque nationalists especially.
As we have seen, ETA had deliberately stepped up its campaign of violence and assassinations in the months when the new constitution was under dis13 One month before it was declared legal, the PCE hosted in Madrid a public meeting of the Eurocommunist parties of Western Europe.
On January 29th, with economic discontent at its peak and Catalonia, the Basque region, Galicia and Andalucia all embarking upon separatist experiments in home rule, Suarez was forced to resign by his own party—resentful not at his failures (the 1979 general elections under the new constitution had produced another victory for the UCD) but at his achievements—and his autocratic management style.
Before another UCD politician, Calvo Sotelo, could succeed him in office, a general strike broke out in the Basque Provinces.
To its critics on the Right, democratic Spain appeared leaderless and on the verge of breaking up.
Colonel Antonio Tejero Molin Molina of the Civil Guard seized the Cortes at gunpoint.
In a coordinated move, General Jaime Milans del Bosch, commander of the Valencia military region, declared a state of emergency and called upon the King to dissolve the Cortes and install a military government.
Though in retrospect their actions appear theatrical and bumbling, Tejero and Milans del Bosch surely had tradition and precedent on their side.
Moreover there was little the Cortes itself, or the various political parties and their supporters, could have done to block a military coup d’etat, and the sympathies of the army itself were far from certain.
What determined the outcome, and the shape of subsequent Spanish history, were King Juan Carlos I’s outright rejection of the conspirators’ demands and his televised speech uncompromisingly defending the Constitution and unambiguously identifying himself and the monarchy with the country’s emerging democratic majority.
Both sides were probably equally surprised by the courage of a young king who until then had lived in the shadow of his own appointment by the late dictator; but now his fate was irrevocably linked with parliamentary rule.
The discredit that Tejero had brought on his ‘cause’ initially afforded an opportunity for the Cortes to cut the military budget and pass a long-overdue bill legalizing divorce.
As in Portugal, the political transition had come at a difficult economic moment.
In large measure this was the responsibility of the last governments of the Franco era, who between 1970 and 1976 had sought to buy popularity by increasing public spending and public sector employment, subsidizing energy costs, holding back prices while letting wages rise, and paying little attention to the long term.
As in the short-lived Republic of the 1930s, Spain was building a democracy in the teeth of an economic recession, and there was much talk of the country going the way of Argentina, with indexed wages and government-subsidized prices degenerating into hyper-inflation.
But without the Pacts these divisions, and their social consequences, would almost certainly have been more severe still.
Suarez’s Center Democrats—who had led the transition out of Francoism—were all but eliminated from parliament, winning just two seats.
Henceforth Spanish politics were to follow the pattern of the rest of western Europe, regrouping around a center-Left and a center-Right, in this case Fraga’s Pop17 By the mid-Eighties official unemployment data suggest that more than one in five of the workingage population was out of work.
In a country still lacking a fully functioning social safety net and where few people had private savings, these figures indicate widespread hardship.
Once in power, however, Gonzalez maintained policies of economic austerity, began the modernization (and later the progressive privatization) of Spanish industry and services, and in 1986 defeated many of his own supporters in a referendum on the question of NATO membership, which he now favored.
But for a politician whose core support came increasingly from men and women too young to remember the Civil War, and whose openly-avowed goal was to overcome Spain’s backwardness—the much-debated atraso or ‘lag’ that had afflicted the Peninsula since the end of the Golden Age—the old ideological Left was part of the problem, not the solution.
In Gonzalez’s estimation, Spain’s future lay not in socialism but in Europe.
On January 1st 1986 Spain, accompanied by Portugal, took up full membership of the European Community.
The democratic transition of Mediterranean Europe was quite the most remarkable and unexpected development of the age.
The regimes of Salazar and Franco disappeared not just from office but from memory, as a new generation of politicians competed for the allegiance of a youthful, ‘modern’ electorate.
One, already noted, was that in Spain in particular it was the political state, not society at large, which had fallen so very far behind.
The economic development of Franco’s last decade, and the large-scale social and geographical mobility that it brought about, meant that daily life and expectations in Spain had changed far more than outside observers supposed, who still looked at the country through the prism of the years 1936-56.
Young people in Mediterranean Europe did not find it difficult to adapt to social routines long familiar further north; indeed, they were already doing so before the political revolutions.
Visitors to Lisbon or Madrid in the post-transition years were consistently taken aback at the absence of any reference to the recent past, whether in politics or culture.
The coming irrelevance of the 1930s was presciently captured in La Guerre Est Finie , Alain Resnais’s sad, elegiac film of 1966 in which the emigre Spanish Communist Diego—portrayed by the incomparable Yves Montand— travels clandestinely from Paris to Madrid, courageously conveying subversive literature and plans for a ‘workers’ uprising’ that he knows will never happen.
The popular films of Pedro Almodovar offer a sort of self-conscious inversion of fifty years of fusty authoritarian rule, a potted exercise in the new counter-cultural conventions.
Directed with a cunning, existentialist wink at their subject matter, they typically depict bewildered young women in sexually charged circumstances.
With each film the settings become glossier, the urban locations ever more chic.
By 1988, with Mujeres al horde de un ataque de nervios (Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown ), Almodovar had achieved a convincing cinematic encapsulation of a hectic and self-consciously modern society desperately making up for lost time.
It is all the more ironic that these changes were made possible not by cultural or political radicals and innovators but by conservative statesmen from the old regime itself.
Constantine Karamanlis, Antonio de Spinola and Adolfo Suarez—like “Spain’s new constitution of 1978, whose design was aimed above all at reconciling the antagonistic poles of Spanish history—Left/Right; Church/anti-clericals; center/periphery—was conspicuously silent about the regime it replaced.
Karamanlis, it is true, had been in exile during the colonels’ rule; but he was as irreproachably nationalist and narrow-minded as anyone and, furthermore, he bore direct responsibility for the tainted Greek elections of 1961 that played so central a role in discrediting the post-war system and bringing the army to power.
But it was the very reassurance that such men held out to their own constituency that allowed them to dismantle the authoritarian institutions they had once loyally served.
And they, in turn, were succeeded by Socialists—Soares, Gonzalez, Papandreou—who convincingly reassured their own supporters of their unbroken radical credentials while implementing moderate and often unpopular economic policies forced upon them by circumstances.
The familiar odour of judiciously broken promises and conveniently misplaced memories hung heavy over Mediterranean public life in these years and must go some way to explain the skeptical, apolitical mood of a new generation in all three countries.
But those who clung faithfully and unrepentantly to past commitments, from Communists to Falangists, were rapidly overtaken by events.
Finally, Spain, Portugal and Greece were able to enter or re-enter the ‘West’ with such little difficulty, despite their self-imposed political isolation, because their foreign policies had always been compatible—indeed, aligned—with those of NATO or the EEC states.
The institutions of the Cold War, not to speak of a common anti-Communism, had facilitated growing communication and collaboration between pluralist democracies and military or clericalist dictatorships.
After many years spent meeting, negotiating, planning or just doing business with their unelected counterparts, North Americans and West Europeans had long ceased to take active offence at domestic arrangements in Madrid or Athens or Lisbon.
To most onlookers—including many of their local critics—the unpleasant regimes of southern Europe were thus not so much morally bankrupt as institutionally anachronistic.
And, of course, their economies were in essential respects similar to those of other Western nations and already well integrated into international markets for money, goods and labour.
Even Salazar’s Portugal was recognizably a part of the international system of capitalism—albeit on the wrong end of it.
The emerging middle class, in Spain especially, modeled its ambitions no less than its dress upon managers, businessmen, engineers, politicians and civil servants “Victor Perez-Diaz, Spain at the Crossroads.
For all their backwardness, the societies of Mediterranean Europe already belonged in a world they now aspired to join on equal terms, and the transition out of authoritarian rule was above all facilitated by the opportunity afforded them to do so.
Their elites, who had once faced resolutely backward, now looked north.
In January 1972, in Brussels, the EC formally approved the accession of Britain, Ireland, Denmark and Norway, to take effect a year later.
The successful British application was the work of the Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath, the only British political leader since World War Two unambiguously and enthusiastically in favor of joining his nation’s fate to that of its continental neighbors.
British membership of the Community would prove controversial in later years, when Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher opposed the emerging projects for evercloser union and demanded that Britain be refunded her ‘overpayments’ to the common budget.
But in the Seventies London had problems of its own and, despite the price-inflationary impact of membership, was relieved to be part of a trading area that now supplied one third of Britain’s inward investment.
The first direct elections to a new European Parliament were held in 1979—until then, members of the European Assembly sitting in Strasbourg had been selected by the respective national legislatures—but aroused little popular interest.
In the UK the 23 On both occasions the capital, Oslo, voted heavily in favor.
But the decision was carried by an antiEuropean coalition of radicals, environmentalists, ‘linguistic nationalists’ and farmers from the country’s coastal and northern provinces, along with fishermen vehemently opposed to the EEC’s restriction of the exclusive coastal fishing zone to just twelve miles.
Denmark’s entry also brought in Greenland, at the time still governed from Copenhagen.
But after Greenland achieved self-rule in 1979, a referendum was called in which the country voted to leave the EEC, the only member-state ever to do so.
The adhesion of three ‘northern tier’ countries to the EC was relatively unproblematic for newcomers and old members alike.
Ireland was poor but tiny, while Denmark and the UK were wealthy and thus net contributors to the common budget.
Like the next round of prosperous additions, in 1995, when Austria, Sweden and Finland joined what was by then the European Union, the new participants added to the coffers and clout of the expanding community without significantly increasing its costs, or competing in sensitive areas with existing members.
Greece, like Ireland, was small and poor and its agriculture posed no threat to French farmers.
Thus despite certain institutional impediments—the Orthodox Church had official and influential standing and civil marriage, to take one example, was not permitted until 1992—there were no powerful arguments against its admission, which was championed by French President Giscard d’Estaing among others.
But when it came to Portugal and Spain, the French put up strong opposition.
Wine, olive oil, fruit and other farm products cost far less to grow and market south of the Pyrenees; were Spain and Portugal to be admitted to the common European market on equal terms, the Iberian farmers would offer French producers stiff competition.
Indeed, with the accession of three poor, agrarian countries, the Common Agricultural Fund took on heavy new burdens—and France ceased to be its main beneficiary.
The newcomers in turn were duly compensated for their own disadvantages and for the long ‘transition period’ which France succeeded in imposing before allowing their exports into Europe on equal terms.
The Spanish and Portuguese did well enough out of‘Europe’ , Spanish negotiators becoming notably adept at advancing and securing their country’s financial advantage.
Indeed, it was because Greece was so poor—by 1990 half of the European Community’s poorest regions were Greek—that it did so well.
So long as there were no other poor countries waiting in line, this level of redistributive generosity—the price of Greek acquiescence in Community decisions— could be absorbed by the Community’s national paymasters, chiefly West Germany.
But with the costly unification of Germany and the prospect of a new pool of indigent applicant-states from Eastern Europe, the generous precedents of the Mediterranean accession years would prove burdensome and controversial, as we shall see.
The unanimity required in the inter-governmental Council of Ministers ushered in interminable debates.
Decisions could take years to be agreed—one directive on the definition and regulation of mineral water took eleven years to emerge from the Council chambers.
There was a longstanding consensus that the European ‘project’ needed an infusion of purpose and energy—a conference at The Hague back in 1969 was the first of an irregular series of meetings intended to ‘re-launch Europe’—and the personal friendship of France’s President Valery Giscard d’Estaing and German Chancellor Schmidt in the years 1975-1981 favored such an agenda.
But it was easier to advance by negative economic integration—removing tariffs and trade restrictions, subsidizing disadvantaged regions and sectors—than to agree on purposeful criteria requiring positive political action.
Only when powerful leaders of dominant states agreed for reasons of their own to work together toward some common purpose could change be brought about.
Thus it was Willy Brandt and Georges Pompidou who had launched the first system of monetary coordination, the ‘Snake’; Helmut Schmidt and Giscard d’Estaing who developed it into the European Monetary System ; and Helmut Kohl and Francois Mitterrand, their respective successors, who would mastermind the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 that gave birth to the European Union.
It was Giscard and Schmidt, too, who invented ‘summit diplomacy’ as a way to circumvent the impediments of a cumbersome supranational bureaucracy in Brussels—a further reminder that, as in the past, Franco-German cooperation was the necessary condition for the unification of Western Europe.
The impulse behind Franco-German moves in the Seventies was economic anxiety.
The European economy was growing slowly if at all, inflation was endemic and the uncertainty resulting from the collapse of the Bretton Woods system meant that exchange rates were volatile and unpredictable.
The Snake, the EMS and the ecu were a sort of second-best—because regional rather than international—response to the problem, serially substituting the Deutschmark for the dollar as the stable currency of reference for European bankers and markets.
A few years later the replacement of national currencies by the euro, for all its disruptive symbolic implications, was the logical next step.
The ultimate emergence of a single European currency was thus the outcome of pragmatic responses to economic problems, not a calculated strategic move on the road to a pre-determined European goal.
Nevertheless, by convincing many observers—notably hitherto skeptical Social Democrats—that economic recovery and prosperity could no longer be achieved at a national level alone, the successful monetary collaboration of Western European states served as an unexpected stepping stone to other forms of collective action.
With no powerful constituency opposed in principle, the Community’s heads of state and government signed a Solemn Declaration in 1983 committing them to a future European Union.
The precise shape of such a Union was then hammered out in the course of negotiations leading to a Single European Act which was approved by the European Council in December 1985 and entered into force in July 1987.
The SEA was the first significant revision of the original Rome Treaty.
And merely by replacing ‘Community’ with ‘Union’ the leaders of the twelve member nations took a decisive step forward in principle.
But the signatories avoided or postponed all truly controversial business, notably the growing burden of the Union’s agricultural budget.
They also stepped cautiously around the embarrassing absence of any common European policy on defense and foreign affairs.
What they did agree on, however, was to move purposefully towards a genuine single internal market in goods and labour , and to adopt a system of ‘qualified majority voting in the Union’s decision-making process—‘qualified’, that is, by the insistence of the bigger members (notably Britain and France) that they retain the power to block proposals deemed harmful to their national interest.
These were real changes, and they could be agreed to because a single market was favored in principle by everyone from Margaret Thatcher to the Greens, albeit for rather different reasons.
They facilitated and anticipated the genuine economic integration of the next decade.
A retreat from the system of national vetoes in the European Council was unavoidable if any decisions were to be taken by an increasingly cumbersome community of states that had doubled its size in just thirteen years and was already anticipating applications for membership from Sweden, Austria and elsewhere.
The larger it grew, the more attractive—and somehow ‘inevitable’—the future European Union would become to those not yet inside it.
To citizens of its memberstates, however, the most significant feature of the European Union in these years was not the way in which it was governed (about which most of its people remained entirely ignorant), nor its leaders’ projects for closer integration, but the amount of money flowing through its coffers and the way that money was disbursed.
But a generation later regional expenditures, in the form of cash subsidies, direct aid, start-up funds and other investment incentives were the leading source of budgetary expansion in Brussels and by far the most influential lever at the Community’s disposal.
The reason for this was the confluence of regionalist politics within the separate member states and growing economic disparities between the states themselves.
In the initial post-WWII years, European states were still unitary, governed from the center with little regard for local variety or tradition.
Only the new Italian constitution of 1948 even acknowledged the case for regional authorities; and even so, the limited local governments that it stipulated remained a dead letter for a quarter of a century.
From the point of view of Brussels-based officials, the ERDF and other so-called ‘structural funds’ had two purposes.
The first was to address the problem of eco530 A TIME OF TRANSITION nomic backwardness and unevenness within a Community that was still very much guided by a post-war culture of‘growth’, as the Single European Act made quite explicit.
With each new group of members came new inequalities that required attention and compensation if economic integration was to succeed.
In 1982, taking the European Community’s average income as 100, Denmark— the wealthiest member—stood at 126, Greece at just 44.
And these were national averages—regional disparities were greater still.
To correct geographical and market deformations that locked Spain’s Galicia or Sweden’s Vasterbotten into dependency, agencies in Brussels would devote large amounts of cash—bringing undoubted local benefits but also setting up expensive, cumbersome and occasionally corrupt local bureaucracies in the process.
The second motive behind Europe’s enormously costly regional funding projects—between them the various ‘Structural’ and ‘Cohesion’ Funds would consume 35 percent of all EU expenditure by the end of the century—was to enable the European Commission in Brussels to bypass uncooperative central governments and collaborate directly with regional interests within the member-states.
Ever since the late 1960s, regionalist sentiment had been growing everywhere.
Quondam 1968 activists, substituting regional affinity for political dogma, now sought to revive and use the old Occitan language in south-western France.
Like their fellow activists in Brittany they found common cause with Catalan and Basque separatists, Scottish and Flemish nationalists, northern Italian separatists and many others, all expressing a common resentment at ‘misrule’ from Madrid, or Paris, or London or Rome.
In the second category were Andalusia, much of Scotland, French-speaking Wallonia and many others.
Wealthy regions like Catalonia or Baden-Wiirttemburg set up offices in Brussels and learned how to lobby on their own behalf, for investment or for Community policies favoring local over national institutions.
Political representatives from disadvantaged regions were just as quick to manipulate grants and aid from Brussels to increase their local popularity—and thereby pressure compliant authorities in Dublin or London into encouraging and even supplementing Brussels’ largesse.
Ireland successfully replaced or updated much of its dilapidated transport and sewerage infrastructure in this way, and among poorer, peripheral member states it was not alone.
The SEA expanded Community powers into many policy areas—the environment, employment practices, local research-and-development initiatives—in which the EC had not previously been involved, all of which entailed the dispensing of Brussels funds directly to local agencies.
This cumulative ‘regionalization’ of Europe was bureaucratic and costly.
In this dual capacity the Alto Adige was now eligible for environmental protection funds; grants to support agriculture; grants to improve vocational training; grants to encourage traditional handicrafts; and grants to ameliorate living conditions in order to retain population.
In the so-called ‘Third Period’ of European structural funding, scheduled to run from 2000-2006, a further 57 million euros were to be put at the province’s disposal.
Under ‘Objective 27 Richer countries were typically less beholden to Brussels and maintained closer control of their affairs.
In France, despite the ‘decentralization’ enshrined in laws passed during the 1980s, the reins of budgetary power stayed firmly in Parisian hands.
As a result, prosperous regions of France followed the international trend and benefited from their EU links, but poor districts remained dependent on state aid above all.
Since 1990, a government department in Bolzano, the provincial capital, has been devoted exclusively to instructing local residents how to benefit from ‘Europe’ and European resources.
The result, in the South Tyrol as elsewhere, was that—costly or not—integrating the continent ‘from the bottom up’, as its advocates insisted, did seem to work.
A certain sort of united Europe was indeed beginning to come into focus.
The residents of this increasingly parcelized Community, whose citizens now professed multiple elective allegiances of variable cultural resonance and daily significance, were perhaps less unambiguously‘Italian’ or ‘British’ or ‘Spanish’ than in decades past; but they did not necessarily therefore feel more ‘European’, despite the steady proliferation of ‘European’ labels and elections and institutions.
The lush undergrowth of agencies, media, institutions, representatives and funds brought many benefits but won scant affection.
The outcome was not just bureaucracy on an unprecedented scale but also corruption, induced and encouraged by the sheer volume of funding available, much of it requiring the exaggeration and even invention of local needs and thus all but inviting the sorts of venal, local abuses that passed unnoticed by the Community’s managers in Brussels but risked discrediting their enterprise even in the eyes of its beneficiaries.
Between a reputation for policy-making by distant unelected civil servants, and well-stocked rumors of political back-scratching and profiteering, ‘Europe’ in these years was not well served by its own achievements.
The familiar shortcomings of local politics—clientelism, corruption, manipulation—that the better-run nation states were thought to have overcome now resurfaced on a continental scale.
The decades-long drive to overcome continental disunity by purely technical measures was looking decidedly political, while lacking the redeeming legitimacy of a traditional political project pursued by an elected class of familiar politicians.
Insofar as ‘Europe’ had a distinctive goal, its economic strategy was still grounded in the calculations and ambitions of the Fifties.
For all their laudable efforts to transcend the shortcomings of national political calculation, the men and women who were constructing ‘Europe’ in the Seventies and Eighties were still curiously provincial.
Their greatest trans-national achievement of the time, the Schengen Agreement signed in June 1985, is revealingly symptomatic in this respect.
Under the terms of this arrangement France, West Germany and the Benelux countries agreed to dismantle their common frontiers and inaugurate a shared regime of passport control.
Henceforward it would be easy to cross from Germany to France, just as it had long been unproblematic to move between, say, Belgium and Holland.
In opening the internal frontiers between some EC member states, therefore, the Agreement resolutely reinforced the external borders separating them from outsiders.
Civilized Europeans could indeed transcend boundaries—but the ‘barbarians’ would be kept resolutely beyond them.
Donald Sassoon Every politically significant revolution is anticipated by a transformation of the intellectual landscape.
The economic crisis of the early Seventies undermined the optimism of Western Europe’s post-war decades, fracturing conventional political parties and propelling unfamiliar issues to the center of public debate.
Political argument on both sides of the Cold War divide was breaking decisively with decades of encrusted mental habits—and, with unexpected speed, forming new ones.
The first victim of the change in mood was the consensus that had hitherto embraced the post-war state, together with the neo-Keynesian economics that furnished its intellectual battlements.
By the late 1970s the European welfare state was starting to count the cost of its own success.
The post-war baby-boom generation was entering middle age, and government statisticians were already warning of the cost of supporting it in retirement—a problem that loomed closer on the budgetary horizon thanks to widespread reductions in the retirement age.
Moreover, being also the best-nurtured generation ever, they would almost certainly live longer.
And to this concern was now added the growing cost of paying unemployment benefits, by 1980 a major budgetary consideration in every Western European state.
Both assumptions were now open to question, but the demographic miscalculation was the more dramatic of the two.
By the beginning of the 1980s, in Western Europe, the population replacement ratio of 2. children per woman was being met or exceeded only in Greece and Ireland.
In prosperous Western Europe, then, it appeared that within two decades there would not be enough people around to pay the bills—and prosperity itself seemed to be the culprit, together with reliable contraception and a growing number of women working outside the home.
Already the cost of pension and national insurance provision in some places weighed heavily on employers—a serious consideration in a time of endemic high unemployment.
In Sweden, by 1977, one-third of the national product was taken up by social expenditures, a budgetary charge that could only be met either by deficits or else by raising taxes on the very constituencies—employed workers, civil servants and professionals—on whom the Social Democratic consensus had hitherto depended.
Public policy since the 1930s rested on a broadly unquestioned ‘Keynesian’ consensus.
This took for granted that economic planning, deficit financing and full employment were inherently desirable and mutually sustaining.
The first, quite simply, was that the array of social services and provisions to which Western Europeans had become accustomed were not sustainable.
The second argument, offered with particular urgency in Britain—where 1 Were it not for the distinctly upward curve of the birth rate in immigrant communities from Asia, Africa and the Caribbean, the figures would have been even lower.
The state, these critics insisted, should be removed as far as possible from the market for goods and services.
It should not own the means of production, it should not allocate resources, it should not exercise or encourage monopolies, and it should not set prices or incomes.
In the view of these ‘neo-liberals’, most of the services currently furnished by the state—insurance, housing, pensions, health and education—could be provided more efficiently in the private sector, with citizens paying for them out of income no longer directed to public resources.
They were the staple nostrums of an earlier generation of pre-Keynesian liberals, brought up on the ffee-market doctrines of neoclassical economics.
In more recent times they were familiar to specialists from the work of Hayek and his American disciple Milton Friedman.
But with the Depression of the 1930s and the demand-led boom of the Fifties and Sixties, such views had been typically dismissed as politically myopic and economically anachronistic.
Since 1973, however, ffee-market theorists had re-emerged, vociferous and confident, to blame endemic economic recession and attendant woes upon ‘big government’ and the dead hand of taxation and planning that it placed upon national energies and initiative.
In many places this rhetorical strategy was quite seductive to younger voters with no first-hand experience of the baneful consequences of such views the last time they had gained intellectual ascendancy, half a century before.
But only in Britain were the political disciples of Hayek and Friedman able to seize control of public policy and wreak a radical transformation in the country’s political culture.
It is more than a little ironic that this should have happened in Britain of all places, for the economy of the UK, though intensively regulated, was perhaps the least ‘planned’ of any in Europe.
There was constant government manipulation of price mechanisms and fiscal ‘signals’; but the only ideologically-driven aspect of British economic life were the nationalizations first introduced by the Labour government after 1945.
The core of Britain’s welfare state lay not in economic ‘collectivism’ but in the country’s universalized social institutions, anchored firmly in the early twentiethcentury reformism of Keynes’s liberal contemporaries.
These facilities were not very good—the cost of running a welfare state in Britain was actually lower than elsewhere, thanks to under-funded services, inadequate public pensions and poor housing provision—but they were widely perceived as an entitlement.
However intensely such social goods were condemned by neoliberal critics as inefficient and under-performing, they remained politically untouchable.
When, in 1970, Edward Heath brought a group of free-marketers together at Selsdon Park near London, to discuss economic strategies for a future Conservative government, his brief and decidedly ambivalent flirtation with their rather moderate proposals brought down upon him a thunderstorm of derisory condemnation.
Accused of seeking to return to the Neanderthal primitivism of the economic jungle, ‘Selsdon Man’ beat a hasty retreat.
If the British political consensus collapsed in the ensuing decade it was not because of ideological confrontation but as a consequence of the continuing failure of governments of all colours to identify and impose a successful economic strategy.
Starting with the view that Britain’s economic woes were the result of chronic under-investment, managerial inefficiency and endemic labour disputes over wages and job demarcation, both Labour and Conservative governments tried to replace the anarchy of British industrial relations with planned consensus along AustroScandinavian or German lines—a ‘Prices and Incomes Policy’ as it was known in Britain, with characteristic empirical minimalism.
The Conservatives, notably Edward Heath’s government of 1970-1974, had even less success, largely thanks to the well-founded, historically-engrained suspicion in certain sectors of the British working class—the coalminers above all—of any compromise with Tory ministries.
When he called an election to decide, as he put it, ‘who runs the country’, he narrowly lost to Harold Wilson, who prudently declined to take up the cudgels himself.
Driven by desperation and the conditions of an IMF loan, Callaghan and his Chancellor of the Exchequer (the redoubtable Denis Healey) initiated a retreat from the central nostrums of post-war government practice.
They embarked on a restructuring program that acknowledged the inevitability of a certain level of unemployment; reduced social transfer payments and labour costs by protecting skilled workers while permitting the emergence of a disfavored periphery of unprotected, non-unionized part-time employees; and set out to control and reduce inflation and government spending even at the price of economic hardship and slower growth.
The Labour government maintained to the end that it was adhering to its core values and defending the institutions of the welfare state even as it inaugurated a cautiously planned breakout, seeking to achieve by stealth the sorts of reforms that its predecessors had been unable to legislate in the open.
Labour succeeded only in alienating its own supporters without being able to take any credit for its achievements.
By August 1977, thanks in part to the Labour government’s deep cuts in public spending, UK unemployment levels had passed 1. million and kept on rising.
What Crisis?’—that helped lose him the general election he was forced to hold the following spring.
Margaret Thatcher was not, on the face of it, a likely candidate for the revolutionary role she was to perform.
Born in Grantham, a sleepy, provincial town in Lincolnshire, she was the daughter of an earnest Methodist couple who ran a grocer’s shop.
In 1950, at the age of 25, she was an 3 The highest level of resentful anger was to be found in the public service unions, covering underpaid government employees from dustmen to nurses.
They were rather taken aback to discover that no such deals could be cut with Mrs.
A chemist and subsequently a tax lawyer by profession, she first entered Parliament in 1959, winning a seat in the solidly conservative borough of Finchley which she would continue to represent until she entered the House of Lords in 1992.
Yet this decidedly unfavorable public image proved no impediment to Mrs.
Thatcher’s advance—her willingness to court and confront unpopularity not only did her no harm among colleagues, but may even have been part of her appeal.
Indeed, a surprisingly broad range of hardbitten statesmen in Europe and the United States confessed, albeit off the record, to finding Mrs.
She could bully and browbeat with less mercy than any British politician since Churchill, but she also seduced.
From 1979 to 1990 Margaret Thatcher bullied, browbeat—and seduced—the British electorate into a political revolution.
Some of these—the economic policies—were an extension of proposals already circulating in Conservative and Labour circles alike.
But they came in the wake of a backlash against the libertarianism of the Sixties and appealed to many of Mrs.
By the end of the Seventies there was much anxious debate about Britain’s purported ‘ungovernability’, the widely-shared perception that the political class had lost control, not just of economic policy but of the workplace and even the streets.
In their 1979 election campaign, the Tories made great play not just with the need for economic rigour and proper money management, but with the nation’s ostensible longing for strong, confident rulers.
It did not so much win elections as watch Labour lose them, many Labour voters switching to Liberal candidates or else abstaining altogether.
In this light, Margaret Thatcher’s radical agenda and determination to see it through can seem out of all proportion to her national mandate, an unexpected and even risky break with the longstanding British tradition of governing from as close to the political centre as possible.
But it seems clear in retrospect that this was just what accounted for Margaret Thatcher’s success.
As every opinion poll suggested, even those who didn’t care for Thatcherite policies often conceded a certain reluctant admiration for the woman herself.
Indeed, and for all her talk of the individual and the market, Margaret Thatcher presided over a remarkable and somewhat disconcerting revival of the British state.
The direction of educational policy and regional economic planning reverted to central government departments under direct political control, while government ministries themselves found their traditional freedom of maneuver increasingly constrained by a Prime Minister who depended far more on a small coterie of friends and advisers than on the traditional elite corps of senior civil servants.
Margaret Thatcher instinctively suspected the latter, like their peers in the educational and judicial establishment, of preferring the old statesubsidized paternalism.
In the complex conventions of Britain’s class-conscious politics, Margaret Thatcher—a lower-middle class upstart with a soft spot for nouveau riche businessmen—was not much liked by the country’s venerable governing £lite and she returned the sentiment with interest.
The Thatcherite revolution strengthened the state, cultivated the market—and set about dismantling the bonds that had once bound them together.
She destroyed forever the public influence exercised by Britain’s trade unions, passing laws that limited union leaders’ ability to organize strikes, and then getting them enforced in the courts.
In a highly symbolic confrontation in 1984-85, pitting the armed state against a doomed community of industrial proletarians, she crushed a violent and emotional effort by the National Union of Miners to break her government’s policy of closing inefficient mines and ending subsidies to the coal industry.
The miners were badly led, their cause hopeless, their strike prolonged more from desperation than calculation.
But the fact that Margaret Thatcher won a battle that Edward Heath had lost immensely strengthened her hand—as did an unsuccessful attempt by the Provisional IRA to assassinate her in the midst of the strike.
Thatcher, like all the best revolutionaries, was fortunate in her enemies.
They allowed her to claim that she alone spoke for the frustrated, over-regulated, little people whom she was freeing from decades of domination by vested interests and by the subsidized, parasitical beneficiaries of taxpayer largesse.
There is no doubt that Britain’s economic performance did improve in the Thatcher years, after an initial decline from 1979-81.
Thanks to a shakeout of inefficient firms, increased competition and the muffling of the unions, business productivity and profits rose sharply.
The Treasury was replenished (on a one-time basis) with the proceeds from the sale of nationally-owned assets.
But by 1983 the political as well as the financial benefit of liquidating the country’s state-owned or state-run assets led the Prime Minister to inaugurate a decade-long national auction, ‘liberating’ producers and consumers alike.
In the first round were smaller firms and units, mostly in manufacturing, in which the state held a partial or controlling interest.
These were followed by hitherto ‘natural’ monopolies like the telecommunications network, energy utilities, and air transportation, beginning with the sale of British Telecom in 1984.
Between 1984 and 1991, one-third of all the world’s privatized assets were accounted for by UK sales alone.
This was because the Conservative government had to pay unprecedented sums in unemployment benefit.
The ‘scandalously’ high figure of 1. million jobless that had so damaged Callaghan’s government in 1977 had reached 3.25 million by 1985 and remained one of the highest in Europe for the rest of Mrs.
Many of those who lost jobs in inefficient industries like steel, coal-mining, textiles and shipbuilding would never find work again, becoming lifelong dependents of the state in all but name.
If their former employers went on in some cases to become profitable private companies it was less through the miracle of private ownership than because Margaret Thatcher’s governments had relieved them of high fixed labour costs, ‘socializing’ the expense of superfluous workers in the form of state-subsidized unemployment.
There was something to be said for the privatization of certain public industries and services.
For many years vital economic assets had been held in the public sector with little thought given to investment or modernization.
They had been starved of cash, their performance cushioned against pressure from competition and consumer alike, their managers hamstrung by bureaucratic inertia and political meddling.
Thatcher there emerged in Britain a much-expanded market for goods, services and, eventually, labour.
There was more choice and (though this took longer and remained imperfect) more price competition.
But as a society it suffered meltdown, with catastrophic long-term consequences.
By disdaining and dismantling all collectively-held resources, by vociferously insisting upon an individualist ethic that discounted any unquantifiable assets, Margaret Thatcher did serious harm to the fabric of British public life.
Citizens were transmuted into shareholders, or ‘stakeholders’, their relationship to one another and to the collectivity measured in assets and claims rather than in services or obligations.
With everything from bus companies to electric supply in the hands of competing private companies, the public space became a market place.
Thatcher asserted—there is ‘no such thing as Society’, then in due course people must lose respect for socially-defined goods.
And so they did, as late-Thatcherite Britain began to take on some of the more unappealing characteristics of the American model that the Iron Lady so admired.
Services that re4 In 1996 Britain’s nationalized railway network‘boasted’ the lowest public subsidy for a railway in Europe.
Petty crime and delinquency rose in line with the growing share of the population caught in permanent poverty.
The typical ‘Thatcherite’ voter—caricatured as a thirty-something realtor in the eastern suburbs of London, under-educated but well-remunerated, with material assets (house, car, foreign vacations, a handful of shares in mutual funds and a private pension scheme) of which his parents could only have dreamed—might have entered the world of Thatcherite individualism.
Thatcher and her successor John Major so much as hinted that they might begin privatizing the National Health Service or charging fees for state education, public support evaporated—among precisely those newly-prosperous but highly vulnerable sectors of the population that had been attracted to Thatcherism in the first place.
Thatcher’s departure, John Major did indeed succeed in pushing through the privatization of the railway services.
The Conservatives were encouraged by the prospect of further profit from the sale of public assets into private ownership; but their chief motive was Major’s need to be seen to be privatizing something —Mrs.
But the incompetence and malfeasance of the procedure, and the disasters that followed— culminating in a series of tragic and palpably avoidable train crashes—helped bring about not just the defeat of the Conservative government two years later, but the end of a cycle of privatizations and the retrospective discrediting of the more extreme incarnations of Thatcherism itself.
This seems a harsh judgment to make of a woman who led her party to three electoral victories in succession and governed virtually alone for nearly twelve years.
In the words of Frederick the Great, ‘The people say what they like and then 5 And private poverty, too.
By breaking the link between pensions and wages, Thatcher sharply reduced the retirement income of most of her fellow citizens.
Any colleague who differed from her on any significant issue and who was thus not one of us’, was cast into the outer darkness.
Most of Mrs Thatcher’s Tory contemporaries, not to mention the party’s cohort of elder statesmen whom she thrust aside as soon as she dared, were genuine conservatives , old enough in many cases to remember the bitter political divisions of the inter-war years and wary of arousing the demon of class warfare.
Thatcher was a radical , bent upon destruction and innovation; she scorned compromise.
For her, class warfare, suitably updated, was the very stuff of politics.
Her policies, often dreamed up at very short notice, were secondary to her goals; and these in turn were in large measure a function of her style.
Her unfortunate Conservative successors, cast out upon the blasted landscape of post-Thatcherism, had no policies, no goals—and no style.
In the short-run, of course, she crushed her Labour opponents—indeed, she could not have wrought the changes she did but for their stunning incompetence.
With Thatcher in power, the British Labour movement entered a decade of turmoil.
Britain must choose between a protectionist, collectivist, egalitarian, regulatory state and open markets, untrammeled competition, privatized resources and a minimum of shared goods and services.
Labour’s traditional moderates, like their Conservative counterparts, were in despair.
Led by the intellectually appealing but politically ineffectual Michael Foot, the party fought the 1983 general election on a shamelessly anachronistic program committed to undoing not just Thatcherism but many of the compromises of Labour’s own past governments.
Safe behind the protective walls of a closed economy, the Little Englanders of Britain’s Left would defiantly build, at last, the New Jerusalem so often traduced by their colleagues.
Buoyed by her recent victory in the Falklands War, in which she had established a party monopoly upon ‘patriotism’ and displayed once again her unusual taste for confrontation, 7 Mrs.
Its share of the vote fell to 27. percent, the party’s worst performance since the First World War.
Thatcher was selling remained uncertain ; but they decidedly did not want the alternative on offer.
Sociologically, it needed to come to terms with its failure to keep abreast with the concerns and aspirations of a new middle class, without whose support it could never again be elected to office, and which outnumbered the evaporating core of industrial proletarians and public sector employees on whom Labour had traditionally relied.
Intellectually, Labour’s leaders needed to identify a new set of policy objectives—and a new language in which to present them.
The party changed its name to New Labour in 1996, a year after its incoming leader, Tony Blair, persuaded his colleagues finally to abandon the controversial Clause IV committing the party to nationalization.
When Labour at last returned to power in 1997, comprehensively defeating an exhausted Conservative party, there was no talk of unraveling the Thatcherite revolution.
Instead New Labour’s campaign, aimed almost exclusively at marginal, ‘soft’ Conservative voters, inveighed against high taxes, corruption and inefficiency—the very objects of Mrs.
If Tony Blair and his colleagues drew a discreet veil over the Thatcherite era, this was not by chance.
Blair’s successes rested squarely upon a threefold inheritance from Mrs.
First, she ‘normalized’ the radical dismantling of the public sector in industry and services and its replacement with the ‘privatized’, entrepreneurial Britain whose praises Blair sang with such gusto.
And third, as we have seen, her asperity and her intolerance of dissent and disagreement had fractured her own party and rendered it unelectable.
Riding on Thatcher’s coat-tails, Tony Blair shared many of her prejudices, albeit in a less abrasive key.
Thatcher, Blair showed very little tolerance for decentralized decision-making or internal dissent.
Like her, he preferred to surround himself with private-sector businessmen.
And although New Labour remained vaguely committed to ‘society’, its Blairite leadership group was as viscerally suspicious of‘the state’ as the most doctrinaire of Thatcherites.
Not only did she destroy the post-war consensus but she forged a new one.
Before she rose to power the default position in British public policy was that the state is the natural fount of legitimacy and initiative.
For the first time in two generations the role of the state had been put up for discussion and fewer and fewer voices were heard in its defense, at least within the political mainstream.
To be sure, there were those who continued to believe that the Thatcherite revolution wrought havoc, and that a return to direct state management of services was still be desired.
Thatcher theirs was a case that had to be made—and except with respect to core social goods like education and medicine, it was no longer guaranteed a sympathetic hearing.
It is the sheer scale of the transformation she wrought, for good and ill, that has to be acknowledged.
France, too, changed dramatically in the course of these years, and with some of the same consequences.
Together with their junior partners on Left and Right alike, Communists and Gaullists faithfully incarnated and extended a peculiarly French tradition of political allegiance determined by region, occupation and religion.
These rigidities of French political sociology, unbroken since the mid-nineteenth century, were already under siege, as we have seen, from the social and cultural shifts of the Sixties.
The Right was no longer bound together by the person and aura of De Gaulle, who had died in 1970; and the fundamental measure of political conservatism in France—the propensity of conservative voters to be practicing Catholics—was being undermined by the decline in public religious observance, as the churches of village and small-town France lost their parishioners, and especially their parishioners’ children, to the metropolitan centers.
In the course of the 1970s and early 1980s, traditional French society and an older way of life—variously and affectionately described and recalled as la France profonde, la douce France , la bonne vieille France, la France eternelle —seemed, to the French, to be disappearing before their eyes.
The agricultural modernization of the 1950s and 1960s, the migration of the sons and daughters of peasants to the cities, had been steadily depleting and depopulating the French countryside.
The revitalized national economy was effecting a transformation in the jobs, travel patterns, and leisure time of a new class of city-dwellers.
Roads and railways that had gathered weeds and grime for decades were rebuilt, re-landscaped, or replaced by a virtually new network of national communications.
Towns and cities themselves, long preserved in the dowdy urban aspic of decay and underinvestment, were becoming crowded and energetic.
Political movements emerged to protest at the acceleration and urbanization of social life, the growth of cities and depopulation of the countryside.
One legacy of the Sixties—the renewed interest in local and regional languages and culture—seemed to threaten the very territorial integrity and unity of France itself.
To fearful contemporaries their country appeared to be modernizing and splitting apart all at once.
In Britain the relationship between an all-embracing state and an inefficient economy, upon which Margaret Thatcher placed such pejorative emphasis, appeared self-evident to many.
But in France it was the state itself that seemed to hold the key to the country’s economic resurgence.
Its managers were the country’s intellectual elite; its planners saw themselves as a class of disinterested civil servants unaffected by the nation’s ephemeral ideological passions and social eruptions.
Politics in France divided the nation bitterly over the question of who would gain power and to what social ends; but con548 THE NEW REALISM cerning the question of how they would wield that power there was a remarkable practical consensus.
From 1958 to 1969 the French state had been ruled by Charles De Gaulle.
The Presidents self-consciously traditional style, and his avowed unconcern for the minutiae of economic planning, had proved no impediment to change.
De Gaulle’s opponents and critics made much play with the ‘undemocratic’ way in which the General had seized and exercised power—‘le coup d’etat permanent’ as Francois Mitterrand called it in a pamphlet published in 1965—but the resources and trappings of virtually unrestricted presidential power proved no less appealing to his successors of all political stripes.
And the distinctive system of direct presidential election cast a shadow across the country’s quinquennial parliamentary elections, placing a premium upon the political skills and personality of individual candidates around whom political parties had perforce to regroup.
It was in this setting that the redoubtable Mitterrand was himself to excel.
Francois Mitterrand, like Margaret Thatcher, was an implausible candidate for the role he was to play in his country’s affairs.
Born to a practicing Catholic family in conservative south-western France, he was a right-wing law student in the 1930s and an activist in some of the most extreme anti-democratic movements of the age.
He spent most of World War Two as a junior servant of the collaborationist government in Vichy, switching his allegiance just in time to be able to claim postwar credentials as a resister.
His parliamentary and ministerial career in the Fourth Republic was pursued in various minor parties of the center-Left, none of them bearing any allegiance to the Marxist mainstream.
Even when he ran unsuccessfully for president in 1965 with the support of the parties of the official Left, Mitterrand was in no sense their candidate and took care to keep his distance from them.
The relationship binding Mitterrand and the remnants of French Socialism’s proud heritage was mutually instrumentalist.
In much the same cynical vein he might have added that he was born a conservative and would die one, but managed to become a Socialist in the meantime.
This marriage of convenience worked better than either party could have imagined.
The twin impediments to the re-emergence of a left majority in France had been De Gaulle’s personal appeal, and the fear of many voters that a government of the Left would be dominated by the Communists.
By 1970, De Gaulle was dead; within ten years, so were the prospects of the Communists.
For the former Mitterrand could take no direct credit, but the latter was unquestionably his achievement.
By the elections of 1977 the Communists, the dominant party of the Left since 1945, were ten percentage points behind Mitterrand’s Socialists.
The Communists, meanwhile, were weak—the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 was an acute embarrassment, as were their own declining polls.
But in the run-off two weeks later between the two best-placed candidates, Mitterrand secured the backing of Socialists, Communists, environmentalists and even the normally uncooperative Trotskyists, more than doubled his first-round share and defeated Giscard to become the first directly-elected Socialist head of state in Europe.
He promptly dissolved parliament and called legislative elections at which his own party trounced Communists and Right alike, winning for itself an absolute majority in the Assemble Nationale.
The spontaneous celebrations that greeted the Socialists’ victories were unprecedented.
For the tens of thousands of Mitterrand supporters who danced in the streets this was the ‘grand soir\ the revolutionary eve, the threshold of a radical break with the past.
On the basis of electoral data alone that would have been a curious claim.
As in past electoral upheavals—the French Popular Front victory in April 1936 to which Mitterrand’s achievement was immediately compared, or Margaret Thatcher’s election in 1979—the French vote in 1981 was not radically re-distributed.
Indeed, Mitterrand actually fared worse, in the initial voting, than in his earlier bids for the presidency in 1965 and 1974.
What made the difference was the discipline showed by Left voters this time around in coalescing behind Mitterrand at the second round rather than abstaining in sectarian obstinacy, and the division of opinion on the Right.
Had the Right not divided thus there would have been no President Mitterrand, no Socialist sweep in the ensuing legislative elections—and no grand soir of radical expectations.
It is worth emphasizing this because so much seemed to hang on the outcome of the 1981 election.
But to Mitterrand’s supporters in 1981 the picture looked very different.
Their goal was not to normalize the alternation of power in the future but to seize it and use it, here and now.
They took for good coin their leader’s promises of radical transformation, his undertaking to sweep away not just the corruption and ennui of the Giscard years but also the very capitalist system itself.
Excluded from office for so long, France’s Socialist militants had remained free to dream a dream of revolution.
For the Left had not exercised power in France for many decades; indeed, it had never exercised power untrammeled by coalition partners, uncooperative bankers, foreign exchange crises, international emergencies and a litany of other excuses for its failure to implement socialism.
In 1981, as it seemed, none of these applied and there would be no excuse for backsliding.
Moreover, the association of control of the state with implementation of revolutionary change was so deeply embedded in radical political culture in France that the mere fact of winning the election was itself taken as signifying a coming social confrontation.
Like Marx himself, the French Left identified all real change with political revolution in general and the great French Revolution in particular.
Nothing Mitterrand had said in the campaign had led the more committed of his followers to think otherwise.
In order to ‘dish’ the Communists and the left wing of his own party, Mitterrand had stolen their revolutionary clothes.
His election campaign aroused expectations that he was now expected to fulfill.
But the core element of the programme was an unprecedented schedule of nationalizations.
Prime Minister Chirac, back in the mid-Seventies, had briefly entertained similarly demand-led projects for growth.
The prime function of the nationalizations of 1981-82, like the exchange controls that accompanied them, was to symbolize the anti-capitalist intent of the new regime; to confirm that the elections of 1981 had really changed something more than just the personnel of government.
This pragmatic concession illustrates the broader impediment facing the Mitterrand ‘revolution.
For a year the new regime strove boldly to present a radical face to France and the world.
At first this was convincing—Jacques Attali, Mitterrand’s close adviser, recorded that United States officials claimed to see little difference between French economic policy and that of the Soviet Union.
But for France to take a ‘Socialist’ path in 1982 would have meant imposing not just exchange controls but a whole gamut of regulations cutting the country off from its commercial partners and putting the economy on a virtually autarkic footing.
Of greater significance was the fact that such a move would have triggered France’s separation and perhaps even departure from the European Community, whose agreements on tariffs, markets and currency alignments—not to mention impending plans for a single market—already severely restricted the options open to member states.
These considerations appear to have concentrated Mitterrand’s thinking— aided, no doubt, by evidence of mounting panic in business circles and signs that currency, valuables and people were moving abroad with increasing urgency, precipitating an economic crisis.
The President’s Communist allies and some of his Socialist colleagues were deeply shocked.
The supreme pragmatist, Mitterrand grasped readily enough that it was unthinkable for France even to contemplate choosing between remaining in the Western economic orbit and casting itself out into a doubtfully sustainable middle route between capitalism and Communism.
France would build a better society through European unification rather than against it.
Rather than struggle against capitalism France would invent a superior version.
Whether they wanted him to ‘modernize’ with quite so much enthusiasm is less certain, but modernize he did.
The initial drive to privatize France’s huge public sector was undertaken by the conservative parliamentary majority that emerged victorious from the 1986 elections.
But successive governments of all stripes pursued the same goal—indeed, the Socialist governments of Mitterrand’s final years were by far the most energetic privatizes of all.
The first assets to be sold into private hands, following the British model of public offerings, were the major banks and TFi, one of three national television channels.
There followed public holding companies, insurance concerns, chemical and pharmaceutical corporations and the giant oil conglomerates Total and Elf.
In markets as in gardens, the French were suspicious of unplanned growth.
They preferred to retain a certain capacity to intervene, typically by keeping a portion of even privatized firms in state hands.
Privatization itself, in France, was thus a distinctly regulated affair—controlling shares were carefully directed towards enterprises and businesses on whom the state could rely, and international investors remained for many years understandably suspicious.
Nevertheless, by French standards the changes were momentous, bringing the country sharply back into line with European and international developments.
This is perhaps an appropriate moment to say something about the privatiza10 A former banker and one-time adviser to Gaullist Prime Minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas, Delors would go on to preside over the European Commission from 1985-1995.
British Petroleum had been progressively sold off, beginning in 1977, as we have seen; the West German government had dispensed with the chemical combine Preussag by a public share issue as early as 1959 and sold its shares in Volkswagen a few years later; even the Austrian state had sold 40 percent of its shares in two nationalized banks in the course of the 1950s and relinquished its sizeable holding in Siemens in 1972.
What happened in the nineteen-eighties was something quite different, pressed upon governments from two quite distinct directions.
In the first place, accelerating developments in technology—notably in telecommunications and the financial markets—were undermining the old natural’ monopolies.
If governments could no longer harness the airwaves, or the movement of money, for their own exclusive use, it made little sense for them to own’ them.
There remained a powerful political or social case for the state retaining part of a given sector—a public television channel, say, or the post office; but competition was now unavoidable.
In the second place, governments were being driven to sell public assets out of short-term economic necessity.
Pressed by inflation, the oil crisis of 1979-80, large annual deficits and growing government indebtedness, finance ministers looked upon the sale of publicly-owned assets as doubly beneficial.
The state would offload loss-making industries or services; and the monies thus raised would help balance the budget, albeit on a one-time basis.
Even if an industry or service remained in partial public-ownership (the state typically keeping the unprofitable parts that private buyers didn’t want), the injection of cash from share sales could be applied to future investment.
For this reason even many public sector managers were enthusiastic partisans of such partial sales, having long resented the diversion of their profits to help make good national budgetary shortfalls.
There was considerable variation in the form and extent of European public ownership and control.
The public industrial sector was smallest in Holland, Denmark and Sweden, most extensive in Italy, France, Spain and Austria.
Excluding health and social services, the share of the workforce in the early eighties directly employed by the state varied from 15 percent in West Germany to 28 percent in Italy and nearly one in three in Austria.
In some countries—Austria, Spain and Italy— the public sector was organized into huge industrial holding companies, of which Italy’s IRI was the largest.
Elsewhere the state’s interest was filtered through a National Investment Bank and Industrial Guarantee Fund—as in the Netherlands—or its Belgian equivalent, 12 In 1982 IRI controlled, among much else, all of Italy’s castiron manufacturing, two-thirds of its special steel output, one quarter of its ice-cream production and 18 percent of its peeled tomatoes.
Given such national disparities, the forms of privatization in Europe naturally diverged significantly.
In every case, however, they entailed some element of deregulation; the liberalization of markets; and the introduction of new financial instruments to facilitate the sale and re-sale of shares in partlyor wholly-privatized companies.
In West Germany, where the main export sectors (cars, mechanical engineering, chemical and electronics companies) were already in private hands, the impediment to efficiency and competition came not from state control but rather from high fixed costs and labour-market regulations.
Privatization in Germany, when it came, was primarily the responsibility of the Treuhandgesellschaft , the public corporation established in 1990 to dispose of former East German stateowned enterprises.
In Italy, the chief stumbling block on the road to privatization was the vested interest not of the state but of political parties.
The Christian Democrats and Socialists in particular used the state sector and public holding companies to reward colleagues and bribe supporters, often favoring them with public contracts and absorbing them into the sottogoverno or submerged power structure that underpinned their dominion.
But in spite of this powerful disincentive the Italian private sector grew steadily in this period, especially among manufacturing firms employing fewer than one hundred persons—far more numerous in Italy than in Britain, France or Germany.
Already in 1976 the Constitutional Court had ended the monopoly of RAI, the state-run radio and television networks.
Within six years the major holding companies themselves—IRI, INA, ENI, and ENEL 14 —had all been converted to public joint-stock companies.
But they were able to issue bonds that were convertible to shares in the companies under their control now scheduled for privatization.
The situation in countries newly-emerged from authoritarian rule was rather different.
The public sector in post-Franco Spain, for example, actually expanded.
But under political pressure it preferred to rehabilitate or consolidate many of the unprofitable concerns, ironically thereby creating a new, semi-public sector subsidized from public funds.
They could hardly do otherwise—for varying reasons, nationalization in this form was the preference of workers, owners, national politicians and regional authorities alike.
In any case, one of the chief general arguments for cutting the public sector—that the welfare state it incarnated was too costly to maintain—did not apply in Spain, or Portugal or Greece.
Nevertheless, even in the absence of European-level social services and protections, the public sector—saddled with the abandoned and unprofitable refuse from Spanish capitalism’s accelerated and cosseted adolescence—was hopelessly overburdened.
Some measure of privatization and de-regulation was inevitable if Spain were ever to be solvent.
As in France, it was a Socialist government that initiated this process, introducing private pension funds in 1987 and abolishing the state television monopoly two years later.
In post-revolutionary Portugal, Article 85 of the Constitution and a subsequent 1977 law explicitly forbade private enterprise in banking, insurance, transport, posts and telecommunications, electricity production and distribution, petroleum refining and the arms industry.
The Socialist administration of Mario Soares sought in 1983 to introduce some flexibility by allowing the private sector to compete with the state in banking and insurance, and authorizing joint-stock companies to form in the steel, petroleum, chemical and arms industries.
But it would be some time before the remaining protected sectors were opened even to limited competition.
Mediterranean Europe—like post-Communist Central Europe a few years later—would probably have been even slower to relinquish state controls but for the impact of the European Community/Union.
But Brussels’ chief means of leverage were the rules being drawn up for the operation of a single European market.
The latter obliged all businesses—public and private alike—to conform to norms of open competition within and eventually between countries.
There was to be no favoring of national ‘champions’, or hidden subsidies or other advantage for publicly-owned or controlled enterprises competing for contracts or custom.
However much these regulations were circumvented in practice, their mere existence obliged state-owned firms to comport themselves in the marketplace no differently from private ones—at which point there was little reason to maintain the state’s involvement in their affairs.
Despite the excited talk in Brussels of increased openness and ‘competitiveness’ the European privatization fever of these years probably wrought less change than its supporters promised or expected.
Critics had warned that the result would not be more competition but simply a transfer of concentrated economic power from the public to the private sphere and this is what happened.
Thanks to complicated cross-shareholding arrangements, many large private firms in France, for example, mimicked the behaviour of the old public companies.
They monopolized whole sectors and were no more responsive to their small ‘stakeholders’ than they had been to taxpayers or consumers when administered under public management.
Ironically, privatization and increased competition also had little immediate impact upon the size of the state sector itself.
We have already seen that in Thatcher’s Britain the scope of the state actually expanded.
Economic liberalization did not signal the fall of the welfare state, nor even its terminal decline, notwithstanding the hopes of its theorists.
It did, though, illustrate a seismic shift in the allocation of resources and initiative from public to private sectors.
This change went far beyond the technical question of who owned which factories, or how much regulation there was to be in any given industry.
For nearly half a century Europeans had watched the state, and public authorities, play a steadily more prominent part in their affairs.
This process had become so commonplace that the premise behind it—that the activist state was a necessary condition of economic growth and social amelioration—was largely taken for granted.
Without the cumulative unraveling of this assumption in the course of the waning decades of the century, neither Thatcherism nor the Mitterrand volte-face would have been possible.
Czeslaw Milosz Behind the long‘Social-Democratic moment’ in Western Europe there had lain not just pragmatic faith in the public sector, or allegiance to Keynesian economic principles, but a sense of the shape of the age that influenced and for many decades stifled even its would-be critics.
This widely-shared understanding of Europe’s recent past blended the memory of Depression, the struggle between Democracy and Fascism, the moral legitimacy of the welfare state, and—for many on both sides of the Iron Curtain—the expectation of social progress.
It was the Master Narrative of the twentieth century; and when its core assumptions began to erode and crumble, they took with them not just a handful of public-sector companies but a whole political culture and much else besides.
If one were seeking a symbolic moment when this transformation was accomplished, a hinge on which post-war Europe’s self-understanding turned, it came in Paris on December 28th 1973 with the first Western publication of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s The Gulag Archipelago.
The Gulag Archipelago added hundreds of pages of detail and data to earlier testimonies, but in its moral fervor and emotional impact it was not obviously a greater work of witness than Evgenia Ginzburg’s Journey into the Whirlwind, published in 1967; Margarete BuberNeumann’s memoir of her experiences in both Soviet and Nazi camps, first published in German in 1957; Wolfgang Leonhard’s disabused account of his own misplaced faith, which appeared in 1955; or even earlier demolitions of the Soviet myth by Victor Serge and Boris Souvarine.
Intellectual critics of Communism had never been lacking; however their impact had for many decades been blunted by a widespread desire in Western Europe to find some silver lining, however dim, in the storm cloud of state socialism that had rolled across much of the continent since it first broke upon Russia in 1917.
To suggest, as Hayek and others had done, that market-restraining plans for the common good, albeit well-intentioned, were not just economically inefficient but also and above all the first step on the road to serfdom, was to tear up the road map of the twentieth century.
Even opponents of Communist dictatorship like Arthur Koestler, Raymond Aron, Albert Camus or Isaiah Berlin, who tried to insist upon the distinction between social-democratic reforms for the common benefit and party dictatorships established in the name of a collectivist myth, appeared to many of their ‘progressive’ critics to echo and thus serve partisan political allegiances taken up in the Cold War.
Accordingly, they fell foul of a widespread reluctance, especially on the part of the Sixties generation, to abandon the radical catechism.
It was one thing to sneer knowingly at Stalin, now long dead and anyway condemned by his own heirs.
It was quite another to acknowledge that the fault lay not in the man but the system.
And to go further, to impute responsibility for the crimes and misdemeanors of Leninism to the project of radical utopianism itself was to mine the very buttresses of modern politics.
Stationen eines Irrweges ; Wolfgang Leonhard, Child of the Revolution , first published in Cologne in 1955 as Die Revolution entlasst ihre Kinder, Victor Serge, Memoires d’un revolutionnaire ; Boris Souvarine, Stalin.
By 1973, however, that faith was under serious assault not just from critics but from events themselves.
In the wake of the Soviet invasion of Prague and its repressive aftermath, and of reports filtering out of China about the Cultural Revolution, Solzhenitsyn’s root and branch condemnation of the whole Communist project rang true—even and perhaps especially to erstwhile sympathizers.
Communism, it was becoming clear, had defiled and despoiled its radical heritage.
And it was continuing to do so, as the genocide in Cambodia and the widelypublicized trauma of the Vietnamese ‘boat people’ would soon reveal.
Even those in Western Europe—and they were many—who held the United States largely responsible for the disasters in Vietnam and Cambodia, and whose anti-Americanism was further fuelled by the American-engineered killing of Chile’s Salvador Allende just three months before the publication of The Gulag Archipelago , were increasingly reluctant to conclude as they had once done that the Socialist camp had the moral upper hand.
American imperialism was indeed bad—but the other side was worse, perhaps far worse.
At this point the traditional ‘progressive’ insistence on treating attacks on Communism as implicit threats to all socially-ameliorative goals—i.e. the claim that Communism, Socialism, Social Democracy, nationalization, central planning and progressive social engineering were part of a common political project—began to work against itself.
If Lenin and his heirs had poisoned the well of social justice, the argument ran, we are all damaged.
In the light of twentieth-century history the state was beginning to look less like the solution than the problem, and not only or even primarily for economic reasons.
That, of course, is a very ‘intellectual’ sort of conclusion, but then the impact of the retreat from the state was felt most immediately by intellectuals— appropriately enough, since it was intellectuals who had been most zealous in promoting social improvement from above in the first place.
By it very nature, modern tyranny—as Ignazio Silone noted—requires the collaboration of intellectuals.
France in the Seventies and Eighties was no longer Arthur Koestler’s ‘burning lens of Western Civilization’, but French thinkers were still unusually predisposed to engage universal questions.
Writers and commentators in Spain or West Germany or Italy in these years were much taken up with local challenges—though the terrorist threat that preoccupied them carried implications of its own for the discrediting of radical utopianism.
Intellectuals in the UK, never deeply touched by the appeal of Communism, were largely indifferent to its decline and thus kept their distance from the new Continental mood.
In France, by contrast, there had been widespread and longstanding local sympathy for the Communist project.
A new generation of French intellectuals transited with striking alacrity out of Marxism, driven by a sometimes unseemly haste to abjure their own previous engagement.
In condemning the distortions of radical utopianism, the young Parisian ‘new philosophers’ of the mid-Seventies like Andre Glucksmann or Bernard-Henri Levy were in most respects unoriginal.
There was little in Glucksmann’s Les Maitres Penseurs —published to universal acclaim in March 1977—that Raymond Aron had not said better in his Opium des Intellectuels twenty two years earlier.
And there was nothing in Levy’s Barbarie a Visage Humain , which appeared two months after Glucksmann’s essay, which French readers could not have found in Albert Camus’s VHomme revolte.
But whereas Camus’s essay was cuttingly dismissed by Jean-Paul Sartre when it came out in 1951, Levy and Glucksmann were influential bestsellers.
The parricidal quality of this local intellectual earthquake is obvious.
Its ostensible target was the calamitous Marxist detour in Western thought; but much of its fire was directed above all at those dominant figures of post-war intellectual life, in France and elsewhere, who had peered across the touchlines of History, cheering on the winners and politely averting their eyes from their victims.
Sartre, by far the best known of these fellow-travelers, himself fell from favour in these years, even before his death in 1980, his creative legacy sullied by his apologetics first for Soviet Communism, later for Maoism.
The climate change in Paris extended beyond a settling of scores across a gen3 In 1963, long after he had lost interest in Frances own Communists, the author of Les Mains Sales could still be heard in Prague enthusing about Socialist Realism to a bemused audience of Czech writers and intellectuals.
In the same year the historian Francois Furet published his path-breaking Penser la Revolution Fran$aise , in which he systematically dismantled the ‘revolutionary catechism’ through which the French had for many decades been taught to understand their country and its past.
That story, which rested upon the twin pillars of earlynineteenth century liberal optimism and a Marxist vision of radical social transformation, had now, in Furet’s account, run into the ground—not least because Soviet Communism, the revolutionary heir-presumptive in this morality tale of purposeful radical transformation, had retroactively polluted the whole inheritance.
The political implications of Furet’s thesis were momentous, as its author well understood.
The failings of Marxism as a politics were one thing, which could always be excused under the category of misfortune or circumstance.
But if Marxism were discredited as a Grand Narrative—if neither reason nor necessity were at work in History—then all Stalin’s crimes, all the lives lost and resources wasted in transforming societies under state direction, all the mistakes and failures of the twentieth century’s radical experiments in introducing Utopia by diktat , ceased to be ‘dialectically’ explicable as false moves along a true path.
Furet and his younger contemporaries rejected the resort to History that had so coloured intellectual engagement in Europe since the beginning of the 1930s.
There is, they insisted, no ‘Master Narrative’ governing the course of human actions, and thus no way to justify public policies or actions that cause real suffering today in the name of speculative benefits tomorrow.
In retrospect this may appear a rather lame conclusion to decades of intense theoretical and political debate; but for just that reason it illustrates rather well the extent of the change.
In Ma Nuit Chez Maud, Eric Rohmer’s 1969 conte moral , a Communist philosopher and his Catholic colleague argue at considerable length over the competing claims of Pascal’s wager on God and the Marxist bet on History.
What is striking in retrospect is not the conversation itself, which will be familiar to anyone old enough to remember the Sixties in continental Europe, but the seriousness with which it was taken not just by the on-screen protagonists but by millions of contemporary viewers.
The resort to History in defense of unpalatable political choices had begun to seem morally naive and even callous.
This is a little hard on Germans, who were hardly the only Europeans to abase themselves on the altar of historical necessity, though it is true that the idea had its roots in German romantic philosophy.
This was not a problem for Thatcherite radicals, who treated public policy as an extension of private interests and for whom the marketplace was a necessary and sufficient adjudicator of values and outcomes.
Nor were the times unusually troubling for Europe’s traditional conservatives, for whom the measure of good and evil in human affairs remained anchored in religious norms and social conventions, bruised but not yet altogether displaced by the cultural tsunami of the Sixties.
It was the progressive Left, still the dominant presence in European political and cultural exchanges, which was urgently in need of a different script.
What it found, to its collective surprise, was a new political vernacular—or, rather, a very old one, freshly rediscovered.
The language of rights, or liberties, was firmly inscribed in every European constitution, not least those of the Peoples’ Democracies.
But as a way of thinking about politics, ‘rights talk’ had been altogether unfashionable in Europe for many years.
But these were collective rights—the rights of nations, peoples, minorities.
Moreover, the record of collectively-asserted rights was an unhappy one.
Where the rights of more than one ethnic or religious community had clashed, usually over a conflicting territorial claim, it had been depressingly obvious that force, not law, was the only effective way to establish precedence.
Minority rights could not be protected within states, nor the rights of weak states secured against the claims of their more powerful neighbors.
As for stateless persons, they would no longer be treated as a judicial anomaly in a world of states and nations, but as individual victims of persecution or injustice.
Even though men and women were persecuted in the name of their common identity they suffered as individuals; and it was as individuals with individual rights that the new United Nations sought to protect them.
What propelled this legal rhetoric of individual rights into the realm of real politics was the coincidence of the retreat of Marxism with the international Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which had opened in Helsinki the same year that The Gulag Archipelago was published in Paris.
As one Italian observer remarked in 1977, the idea and ideal of undivided’ freedom was being openly discussed on the Left without mystification or demagogy’ for the first time since the war.
This did not necessarily translate immediately into politics—for much of the Eighties West European Labour and Socialist parties floundered quite helplessly, resorting in many cases to the illicit appropriation of their opponents’ programmes to cover their own nakedness.
But their new openness to the vocabulary of rights and liberties did give Western European scholars and intellectuals access to the changing language of political opposition in Eastern Europe and a way of communicating across the divide—just in time, for it was east of the Iron Curtain that truly original and significant change was now under way.
In 1975 the Czech reform communist Zdenek Mlynar wrote an ‘Open Letter to the Communists and Socialists of Europe’, addressed above all to Eurocommunists and appealing for support against the repression of dissent in Czechoslovakia.
But Mlynar was already in a minority, his faith in both Socialism and its Western sympathizers already regarded with bemusement by most of Communism’s domestic critics in the Soviet bloc.
These critics, not yet called ‘dissidents’ (a term generally disfavoured by those it described), had for the most part turned away from the regime and the ‘Socialist’ language it espoused.
In the aftermath of 1968 that language, with its wooden embrace of ‘peace’ and ‘equality’ and ‘fraternal goodwill’ rang peculiarly false— especially to the Sixties activists who had taken it seriously.
Forced underground—quite literally in the Czech case, where many unemployed professors and writers found work as stokers and boilermen—the regime’s opponents could hardly engage in a political debate with their oppressors.
Of these, thanks to the Helsinki Accords, ‘rights’ were by far the most accessible.
All Soviet bloc constitutions paid formal attention to the rights and duties of the citizen; the package of additional and quite specific rights agreed to at Helsinki thus furnished Communism’s domestic critics with a strategic opening.
Taking seriously the letter of‘Socialist’ law was more than just a tactic, a device for embarrassing Communism’s rulers.
In closed societies where everything was political—and politics as such were thus precluded—‘rights’ offered a way forward, a first breach in the curtain of pessimism shrouding Eastern Europe in the ‘silent Seventies’, an end to the regime’s monopoly on language-as-power.
Moreover the constitutional rights of persons, by their very nature, bear formal witness to the existence of persons as such, with claims upon one another and upon the community.
They describe a space between helpless individuals and the allpowerful state.
The movement for rights , as the young Hungarian theorist Miklds Haraszti conceded, was an acknowledgement that the necessary corrective to Communism’s defects was not a better Communism but the constitution—or reconstitution—of civil society.
The irony of inverting Marxism’s agenda and seeking to replace the Socialist state with bourgeois society was not lost on intellectuals in Prague or Budapest.
Few seriously expected Husak in Prague, or Honecker in Berlin , to concede the logic of ‘rights-talk’ and take their own constitutions seriously.
To speak of rights in theory was precisely to illustrate their absence in practice, to remind observers at home and abroad of just how un-ffee these societies actually were.
Instead of engaging the Communist authorities, the new opposition was deliberately talking past them.
For those who had never been remotely drawn to Marxist debates, like Vaclav Havel, the transition was much easier.
The son of a wealthy Prague businessman whose family was dispossessed by the Communist government after 1948, Havel evinced none of the youthful revolutionary enthusiasm of his engaged contemporaries, nor did he play a very active part in their reformist efforts before 1968.
Havel’s relationship with the Communist authorities was always antagonistic, thanks in large part to his bourgeois origins, but it had never been political.
In the course of the Seventies and Eighties, as he was harassed, arrested and ultimately imprisoned for his activities, Havel was to become a supremely political figure.
It was not even primarily to tell the truth, though in a regime based on lies this was important.
The objective, as Havel explained in a 1984 essay reflecting on the goals and tactics of Czechoslovakia’s fragile intellectual opposition, should be to act with autonomy, whatever the regime tries to impose on you; to live as if one were truly free.
Ludvfk Vaculik, addressing the Fourth Congress of the Czechoslovak Writers’ Union in June 1967, had recommended a similar ‘as if’ strategy to his colleagues even then.
But in the more optimistic atmosphere of the Sixties Vaculik and others could still hope for some accommodation and adaptation from those in power.
By the time Michnik or Havel were espousing similar arguments, circumstances had changed.
The point was no longer to advise the government how to govern, but to suggest to the nation—by example—how it might live.
In the circumstances of the Seventies, the idea that Eastern European intellectuals could ‘suggest to the nation’ how it should comport itself might appear more than a little ambitious—most intellectuals were in no position to suggest much of anything even to one another, far less to their fellow citizens at large.
The intelligentsia in Hungary and Poland especially was largely ignorant of conditions and opinion in the industrial centers, and even more cut off from the world of the peasantry.
Indeed it might be said that thanks to Communism—a political system which, in the words of the Hungarian dissidents Ivan Szelenyi and George Konrad, put ‘intellectuals on the road to class power’—the old Central-European distinc568 THE POWER OF THE POWERLESS tion between ‘intelligentsia’ and ‘people’ (more applicable in aristocratic societies like Hungary and Poland than in plebeian ones like Czechoslovakia, but artificially instituted even there after 1948) had resurfaced in an acute form.
In 1976, following a series of strikes protesting at sharp increases in the price of food, the regime struck back hard, beating and arresting workers in the industrial towns of Ursus and Radom.
In a response that broke quite deliberately with the mutual indifference of worker and intellectual protests a few years before, Jacek Kurori and a few colleagues announced the formation in September 1976 of KOR, an acronym for the Committee for the Defense of Workers.
The object of KOR, and a Committee for the Defense of Human and Civil Rights founded a few months later, was to publicize the assault on workers’ civil liberties, assist in their legal defense, and form a common front.
The creation—or, rather, the assertion—of an autonomous civil sphere in Poland thus grew out of a social confrontation.
Across the border in Czechoslovakia, in even less promising political circumstances, it was born of a legal opportunity.
In January 1977 a group of Czechoslovak citizens signed a document (initially published as a manifesto in a West German newspaper) criticizing their government for its failure to implement the human rights provisions of the Czechoslovak Constitution, the Final Act of the 1975 Helsinki Accords, and United Nations covenants on political, civil, economic, and cultural rights, all of which Prague had signed—and, in the case of Helsinki Decree 120, formally incorporated into the Czech Legal Code.
They took care to emphasize that Charter 77 was not an organization, had no statutes or permanent organs, and ‘does not form the basis for any oppositional political activity,’ a stipulation intended to keep their act within the bounds of Czechoslovak law.
Retaliation and intimidation were deployed against the signatories, including dismissal from work, denial of schooling for their children, suspension of drivers’ licenses, forced exile and loss of citizenship, detention, trial, and imprisonment.
The response of the Prague regime to this latest development was to arrest six of the leading figures in VONS, including Havel, and try them for subversion the following year.
In October 1979 they were sentenced to prison terms of up to five years.
In the wake of 1968 the Communist regimes had all (with the exception of Ceau^escu’s Romania) adopted in practice the approach of Kdddr’s Hungary.
They no longer even pretended to seek the genuine allegiance of their subjects, asking only that people proffer the outward symbols of public conformity.
One goal of the Charter, like VONS—or KOR—was to overcome the resulting cynical indifference to public affairs among their fellow citizens.
Havel in particular laid stress on the need to deprive governments of the satisfaction of seeing people heedlessly abase themselves in order to pass unnoticed.
Some of the concerns of the dissenting intelligentsia were better adapted than others to this effort to overcome public apathy and fear.
The emerging environmental catastrophe, already mentioned in Chapter 15 , was one.
In Slovakia, according to the regime’s own figures, 45 percent of the 3,500 miles of rivers in Slovakia were ‘dangerously’ polluted in 1982.
Four-fifths of the well water in the eastern part of the republic was unusable for human consumption.
This was largely due to the over-use of fertilizer on the collective farms of the area, leading to soilpoisoning and crop failures like those experienced in the black soil areas of the Soviet Union.
By the early Eighties northern Bohemia had the worst air pollution in Europe, thanks to the use of brown coal in industrial and energy production there.
Of 73. billion kwh of power generated in the region, 64 billion came from plants burning this high-sulphur fuel.
As a result, by 1983 some 35 percent of all Czech forests were dead or dying, and one-third of all Czech watercourses were too pol570 THE POWER OF THE POWERLESS luted even for industrial use.
In Prague itself the government was forced to set up a special hospital service dealing with the respiratory ailments of children.
But it was society that suffered, and pollution was thus a subject about which everyone cared.
Only effective and consistently applied official sanctions could have enforced improvements, and these would have had to come from the same authority which was encouraging the wastage in the first place.
Any factory or farm manager imprudent enough to risk his ‘quotas’ by applying pollution-control measures on his own initiative would have been in serious trouble.
The Communist economic system was inherently prejudicial to its environment, as more and more people came to appreciate.
Writers and scholars, reasonably enough, were preoccupied with censorship.
The impediments to publication, or performance, varied considerably from one Communist country to another.
In Poland, by contrast, the Catholic Church and its institutions and newspapers provided a sort of semi-protected space in which a degree of literary and intellectual freedom could be practiced, albeit cautiously.
In order to secure access to an audience, intellectuals, artists or scholars were always tempted to adapt their work, to trim or hedge an argument in anticipation of likely official objections.
The professional and even material benefits of such adjustment were not to be neglected, in societies where culture and the arts were taken very seriously; but the moral cost in self-respect could be considerable.
As Heine had written a hundred and fifty years before, in terms many Eastern European intellectuals would immediately have recognized,‘these executioners of thought make criminals of us.
Silence—the internal emigration of the ‘Ketman’ in Czeslaw Milosz’s Captive Mind —was another.
But those who did speak 8 But even environmentalism had its internal dissidents.
The non-conformist, oppositional and frequently dangerous aspect of underground writing conferred on it an aura of romance and a sometimes overstated significance.
Original and radical ideas could indeed blossom and thrive in the decaying compost-heap of the Soviet bloc—the writings of Havel and Michnik are the best but by no means the only instances of this, the Fleurs du Mai of Communism.
Just because the regime didn’t like you doesn’t mean you were talented.
Thus the reputation of even some of the best known opposition intellectuals was to shrivel and shrink when exposed to a free market in ideas.
Hungary’s George Konrad—whose rather self-indulgent essays on ‘Antipolitics’ were widely admired in the Eighties—was one of many who would drop from sight after 1989.
That is one reason why many intellectuals in Communist societies preferred to forego the opportunity of emigration and exile—better to be persecuted and significant than to be free but irrelevant.
The fear of irrelevance lay behind another consideration in these years, the widespread insistence upon the urgency of ‘getting back’ to Europe.
Like censorship, this was a concern limited to intellectuals—indeed mostly to writers from the western provinces of the former Habsburg Empire, where the backwardness and under-development imposed by Soviet writ had been especially painful.
The bestknown spokesman for this sentiment was the Czech novelist and screenwriter Milan Kundera, writing from exile in Paris, for whom the tragedy of Central Europe was its takeover by an alien, Asian dictatorship.
Kundera himself was not much appreciated in his homeland, where both his exile and his success were resented by those of his peers who had chosen (in their own account) to forego both.
For Kundera, who was skeptical of citizens’ initiatives like Charter 77, the Czech condition under Communism was an extension of the older problem of national identity and destiny in Europe’s heartland, where small nations and peoples were always at risk of disappearing.
The point of intellectual opposition there and abroad, he felt, was to bring this concern to international attention, not waste time trying to change Moscow’s ‘Byzantine’ empire.
One of the paradoxes of Ostpolitik , as practiced by Brandt and his successors, was that by transferring large sums of hard currency into East Germany and showering the GDR with recognition, attention, and support, West German officials unintentionally foreclosed any chance of internal change, including reform of Eastern Germany’s polluted, antiquated industrial economy.
By‘building bridges’, twinning towns, paying their respects, and distancing themselves from Western criticism of East bloc regimes, Bonn’s statesmen afforded the leadership of the GDR a false sense of stability and security.
Moreover, by ‘buying out’ political opponents and prisoners, West Germany deprived the East German opposition of some of its best known dissenters.
No other Communist society had a Western doppelganger, speaking the same language.
But many ‘internal’ critics of the East German regime chose to abandon neither their country nor their old ideas.
Its best known dissidents all attacked Communist authority from the Left —a stance that rendered them both inaudible and irrelevant elsewhere in Eastern Europe, as the Czech writer Jir 1 Pelikan tartly observed.
Wolfgang Harich, a leading figure in GDR philosophy circles and a longtime critic of the regime’s ‘bureaucratic’ deviation, was equally vociferous in his opposition to the ‘illusions of consumerism’, against which he saw it as the task of the ruling party to re-educate the populace.
Here the new language of rights and liberties abutted that of the Christian faith, and was reinforced by association with the only surviving pre-Socialist institution.
The influence of the churches also accounts for the prominence of the ‘peace’ question in East German dissident circles.
Elsewhere in eastern Europe the Western ‘peaceniks’ and activists for nuclear disarmament were regarded with considerable suspicion.
They were seen at best as naive innocents, more likely the mindless instruments of Soviet manipulation.
Peace and disarmament under prevailing conditions would leave western Europe free and independent, while maintaining eastern Europe under Soviet control.
It was a mistake to separate the ‘peace’ question from the demand for rights and liberties.
The GDR—an accidental state with neither history nor identity—could with some shard of plausibility describe peace, or at least ‘peaceful coexistence’, as its true raison d'etre.
The tension generated by this glaring paradox found its outlet in an opposition movement which derived a large part of its support from its concentration on the issue of peace and disarmament.
Although membership of the latter could prove a handicap in later life, its mere existence meant the GDR acknowledged the fact and the legitimacy of conscientious objection.
As we have since learned, the British and West German peace movements of the time were thoroughly penetrated by Soviet and East German intelligence.
Thus when Lutheran pastors began in 1980 to offer support and protection to the early peace activists, they were able to do so to a considerable extent without incurring state disapproval.
The nascent peace movement then spread from the churches to the universities, inevitably raising not only calls for disarmament, but also the demand for the right to articulate these calls without hindrance.
In this indirect way dissenting East Germans belatedly found a way to communicate (and catch up) with the opposition elsewhere in the bloc.
The appearance of Charter 77 prompted a courageous letter of support from the writer Paul Goma and seven other Romanian intellectuals, all of whom were promptly suppressed.
But otherwise Romania remained as silent as it had been for three decades.
For this the West bore a measure of responsibility—even if a Romanian Charter 77 or a local version of Poland’s Solidarity had arisen, it is unlikely that it would have received much Western support.
No United States President ever demanded that the dictator Nicolai Ceau§escu ‘let Romania be Romania.
Even the Soviet Union allowed a tightly restricted liberty of action to certain intellectuals—mostly prominent scientists, always a privileged category.
The biologist Zhores Medvedev, whose 1960s exposure of Lysenko had long circulated in samizdat , was first harrassed and then deprived of his citizenship.
But Andrei Sakharov, the country’s best-known nuclear physicist and a longstanding critic of the regime, remained at liberty—until his public opposition to the 1979 invasion of Afghanistan rendered his presence intolerable.
Sakharov was too embarrassing to ignore but too important to send abroad.
He and his wife Yelena Bonner were forced instead into exile in the closed city of Gorky.
But Sakharov always insisted he was calling the Soviet Union to account for its shortcomings and its persecution of critics, rather than seeking its overthrow—a stance that put him somewhere between an older generation of reform Communists and the new Central European dissidents.
Others, less prominent and avowedly anti-Soviet, were treated much more harshly.
Vladimir Bukovsky, the best known of the younger radicals, spent twelve years in Soviet prisons, labour camps and psychiatric wards before international outcry at his treatment led to his exchange for Luis Corvalan, a Chilean Communist, in 1976.
It was not until 1983 that the Soviet Union withdrew from the World Psychiatric Association, when the latter—with shameful tardiness— finally began to criticize its abuses.
But with or without external prompting, the overwhelming majority of the Soviet intelligentsia was never going to follow the example being set, however tentatively, elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
The fear inspired by Stalin’s repression hung like a pall across the moral landscape three decades after his death, even if no-one actually spoke of it, and all but the most outspoken and courageous critics took care to stay within the bounds of legitimate Soviet themes and language.
They assumed, reasonably enough, that the Soviet Union was here to stay.
In contrast to the puppet regimes it had installed at its boundaries, the Soviet Union by 1983 had been in place for longer than most of its citizens could remember and appeared fundamentally stable.
The intellectual opposition in Central Europe had little immediate impact.
Most people lived in a sort of moral ‘grey zone’, a safe if stifling space in which enthusiasm was replaced by acceptance.
Active, risk-laden resistance to authority was hard to justify because—again, for most ordinary people—it appeared unnecessary.
Moreover, they were the heirs (in certain instances quite literally the children) of the ruling class of the first generation of Socialist power—education and privilege having passed reasonably efficiently down the generations, especially in Poland and Hungary.
As in the past, when they had spoken for the regimes they now opposed, they were a tiny minority of the population and represented only themselves.
Thus when George Konrad wrote somewhat sententiously that ‘no thinking person should want to drive others from positions of political power in order to occupy them for himself’, he was acknowledging a simple truth—no ‘thinking person’ was in a position there and then to do any such thing.
In the East as in the West, the Seventies and Eighties were a time of cynicism.
The energies of the Sixties had dissipated, their political ideals had lost moral credibility, and engagement in the public interest had given way to calculations of private advantage.
By forging a conversation about rights, by focusing attention on the rather woolly concept of ‘civil society’, by insistently talking about the silences of Central Europe’s present and its past—by moralizing shamelessly in public, as it were—Havel and others were building a sort of virtual’ public space to replace the one destroyed by Communism.
One thing the dissident intellectuals did not talk about very much was economics.
Ever since Stalin, economic—or, more precisely, industrial—growth had been both the goal of Socialism and the main measure of its success.
Critical discussion couched in the form of recommendations for economic reform had been the nearest thing to a licensed opposition in the revisionist decade between 1956 and 1968.
But by the middle of the 1970s it was hard for any well-informed observer of the Soviet bloc to take seriously the prospect of economic reform from within, and not only because the language of Marxist economics had collapsed after decades of unseemly abuse.
From 1973 the economies of Eastern Europe were falling sharply behind even Western Europe’s reduced growth rates.
Except for a brief blip in the finances of the oil-rich Soviet Union, brought on by the rise in energy prices, the inflation of the Seventies and the ‘globalizing’ of trade and services in the Eighties put the economies of the Soviet bloc at an insuperable disadvantage.
In 1963 the international trade of Comecon countries had been 12 percent of the world total.
The countries of the Soviet bloc could not compete on quality with the industrial economies of the West; nor did any of them except the USSR itself have a sustainable supply of raw materials to sell to the West, so they could not even compete with undeveloped countries.
The closed Comecon system precluded participation in the new trading networks of Western Europe and GATT, and Com11 During the 1980s Poland and Czechoslovakia both slipped into negative economic growth—their economies actually shrinking.
The crippling defect of Communist economies by this time was endemic, ideologically-induced inefficiency.
Because of an unbending insistence upon the importance of primary industrial output for the ‘construction of socialism’, the Soviet bloc missed the switch from extensive to intensive, high-value production that transformed Western economies in the course of the Sixties and Seventies.
Instead it remained reliant upon a much earlier model of economic activity, redolent of Detroit or the Ruhr in the 1920s, or late nineteenth-century Manchester.
Thus Czechoslovakia—a country with very limited resources in iron—was by 1981 the world’s third largest exporter of steel.
To the bitter end, the GDR was planning ever-expanded production of obsolete heavy industrial goods.
In effect, Soviet-style economies were now subtracting value—the raw materials they imported or dug out of the ground were worth more than the finished goods into which they were transformed.
Even in areas of comparative advantage the Soviet economy took its toll.
Just as Hungary was Comecon’s chosen manufacturer of trucks and buses, so the GDR in the 1980s was assigned the task of manufacturing computers.
But not only were the machines produced in East Germany unreliable and outdated; the centralized system was simply unable to make enough of them.
By 1989, East Germany (with a population of 16 million) was turning out just one-fiftieth the number of computers manufactured in Austria —and as a producer of computers Austria was a negligible competitor in the international market.
Much of the responsibility for all this lay with the inherent defects of centralized planning.
By the late 1970s Gosplan, the Soviet central economic planning agency, had forty departments for different branches of the economy and twenty seven separate economic ministries.
Administrators at every level were frightened of taking risks and innovating, lest they reduce aggregate output in the short term.
Meanwhile, in order to make sure that they would meet targets set from above, factory foremen and managers took great pains to hide reserves of material and labour from the authorities.
The predictable effect of such a system was to encourage not just stagnation and inefficiency but a permanent cycle of corruption.
It is one of the paradoxes of the Socialist project that the absence of property tends to generate more corruption, not less.
Power, position and privilege cannot be directly bought, but depend instead upon mutually-reinforcing relationships of patronage and clientelism.
Legal rights are replaced by sycophancy, which is duly rewarded with job security or advancement.
To achieve even modest and legitimate objectives—medical treatments, material necessities, educational opportunities—people are required to bend the law in a variety of minor but corrupting ways.
This accounts in large measure for the marked increase in cynicism in these years.
Tractor plants, or truck manufacturers, did not bother to make sufficient spare parts because they could more easily meet their ‘norms’ by building large machines—with the result that when these large machines broke down, there were no replacement parts available.
Official data published only the total number of machines of all sorts produced in a given sector; they did not say how many were still in working order.
Many workers, especially the less-skilled, had a stake in these arrangements, which—in return for political quiescence—offered social security and a low level of pressure at the workplace.
The only parts of a typical Communist economy that worked relatively efficiently by 1980 were the high-technology defense industries and the so-called ‘second economy’—the black market in goods and services.
The importance of this second economy—whose very existence could not be officially acknowledged—was testimony to the sad state of the official one.
In Hungary, by the early eighties, it is estimated that a mere 84,000 artisans—operating exclusively in the private sector— were meeting nearly 60 percent of local demand for services, from plumbing to prostitution.
Economic stagnation was in itself a standing rebuke to Communism’s claims to superiority over capitalism.
And if not a stimulus to opposition, it was certainly a source of disaffection.
For most people living under Communism in the Brezhnev era, from the late Sixties through the early Eighties, life was no longer shaped by terror or repression.
Adults had fewer and fewer children; they drank more—the per capita annual consumption of alcoholic spirits in the Soviet Union quadrupled in these years—and they died young.
Public architecture in Communist societies was not only aesthetically unappealing, it was shoddy and uncomfortable, a faithful mirror of the shabby authoritarianism of the system itself.
Apartments, like much else in the Soviet bloc, were cheap (rent averaged 4 percent of a typical household budget in the USSR), because the economy was regulated not by price but by scarcity.
This had its advantages for the authorities—the arbitrary allocation of scarce commodities helped maintain loyalty—but it carried with it a serious risk, which most Communist leaders understood very well.
Ever since it had become clear by the end of the Sixties that the future promise of‘Socialism’ could no longer be counted upon to bind citizens to the regime, Communist rulers had opted instead to treat their subjects as consumers and replace utopia tomorrow with material abundance today.
This was not the same as Khrushchev’s famous 1959 ‘kitchen debate’ with Nixon, when he assured the American Vice-President that Communism would outperform capitalism in the foreseeable future.
He was content for Communism to be a pale imitation of capitalism, so long as the goods on offer kept consumers happy.
The standard of living in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland improved through the 1970s, at least when measured by retail consumption.
By the end of the eighties there were four televisions for every ten people in Hungary; the figures for Czechoslovakia were similar.
If buyers were willing to accept poor quality, indifferent styling and little choice, they could usually find what they wanted, in official shops or through the ‘private’ sector.
In the Soviet Union, however, such ‘optional’ goods were harder to find—and relatively more expensive.
A similar basket would ‘cost’ 21. work-hours in London, but 42. work-hours in Moscow, despite high levels of subsidy.
Moreover the Soviet or East European consumer had to spend many more hours finding and purchasing foods and other goods.
Measured in time and effort, if not in rubles or crowns or forints, life under Communism was expensive as well as exhausting.
The problem with defining Communism by its success in satisfying private consumers was that the whole economy was geared, as noted above, to the high-volume manufacture of industrial machinery and raw materials.
The only way around this impediment was to import consumer goods from 14 1 am grateful to Dr Paulina Bren for this reference.
The European Community subsidized its farmers too, and in approximately the same proportions.
In practice, the only way to stock the shelves in the East was to borrow money from the West.
In the course of the 1970s alone Czechoslovakia’s hard currency debt rose twelve-fold.
Poland’s hard currency debt increased some 3,000 percent, as First Secretary Gierek and his colleagues sucked in subsidized Western goods, introduced expensive new social insurance programs for peasants and froze food prices at 1965 levels.
Communist economists in Prague recommended phasing out subsidies and introducing ‘real’ prices, but their political masters feared the social consequences of such a retreat and preferred to increase their debts instead.
As in the inter-war years, the fragile little states of eastern Europe were once again borrowing capital from the West to finance their autarkic economies and avoid hard choices.
Miklos Nemeth, the last Communist prime minister of Hungary, was to acknowledge as much a few years later.
By 1986 Hungary’s official deficit on current account was $ 1. billion per annum.
Between 1971 and 1980 Poland’s hard currency debt had risen from $1 billion to $20. billion, with worse to come.
By its own reckoning the GDR in its last years was spending over 60 percent of its yearly export earnings just to cover the interest on its Western debts.
Yugoslavia, always a favored client (from 1950 through 1964 the United States had covered three-fifths of Belgrade’s annual deficits) received generous loans and stand-by arrangements on the basis of official data that bore not even a passing relationship to reality.
Taken as a whole, eastern Europe’s hard currency debt, which stood at $6. billion in 1971, grew to $66. billion in 1980.
These figures did not include Romania, where Ceau§escu had paid off his country’s for16 Hungary joined the IMF in May 1982, to mutual self-congratulation.
Only in 1989 did it emerge that its government had seriously understated its internal and external debt for the previous decade.
Sooner or later it would be necessary to make painful and socially disruptive economic adjustments.
In years to come Markus Wolf, the East German spymaster, would claim that by the late 1970s he had already concluded that the GDR ‘wouldn’t work’ and he was certainly not alone.
Economists like Hungary’s Tam&s Bauer and his Polish contemporary Leszek Balcerowicz knew perfectly well how fragile the Communist house of cards had become.
But so long as the capitalists would underwrite it, Communism could survive.
Leonid Brezhnev’s ‘era of stagnation’ (Mikhail Gorbachev) fostered many illusions, and not only at home.
In 1978, when a World Bank Report actually determined that the GDR had a higher standard of living than Great Britain, Prince Potemkin must surely have smiled in his far-off grave.
But Communists understood something that the bankers of the West had missed.
Economic reforms of even the most localized and micro-efficient kind would have immediate political ramifications.
The economic arrangements of socialism were not an autonomous zone; they were thoroughly integrated into the political regime itself.
It was not by chance that the East European satellite states were all run by ageing, conservative time-servers.
In a new age of realism Edward Gierek in Warsaw , Gustav Husak in Prague , Erich Honecker in Berlin (born 1912), Janos Kadar in Budapest and Todor Zhivkov in Sofia (born 1911)—not to speak of Enver Hoxha in Tirana and Josip Broz Tito in Belgrade —were the most realistic of all.
Like Leonid Brezhnev—born 1906, Seven Orders of Lenin, four-time Hero Of The Soviet Union, winner of the Lenin Peace Prize, General Secretary and, since 1977, Head of State—these men had grown old in the old ways.
The fact that ‘real existing Socialism’ was dysfunctional and discredited did not in itself seal its fate.
The nakedness of Soviet violence had long since been revealed—and would be ex17 Moreover, like Brezhnev himself, they were among the leading consumers of the age.
In a Soviet joke from the time, the Soviet leader is showing his mother his dacha, his cars and his hunting lodges.
The Communist system might corrode indefinitely at the periphery; but the initiative for its final collapse could only come from the centre.
In the story of Communism’s demise, the remarkable flowering in Prague or Warsaw of a new kind of opposition was only the end of the beginning.
The emergence of a new kind of leadership in Moscow itself, however, was to be the beginning of the end.
Vdclav Havel, Presidential Address, January 1st 1990 The conventional narrative of Communism’s final collapse begins with Poland.
On October 16th 1978, Karol Wojtyla, Cardinal of Crakow, was elected to the Papacy as John Paul II, the first Pole to hold the office.
The expectations aroused by his election were unprecedented in modern times.
Some in the Catholic Church regarded him as a likely radical—he was young (just fifty-eight when elected pope in 1978, having been appointed Archbishop of Crakow while still in his thirties) but already a veteran of the Second Vatican Council.
Energetic and charismatic, this was the man who would complete the work of Popes John XXIII and Paul VI and who would lead the Church into a new era, a pastor rather than a Curial bureaucrat.
Conservative Catholics, meanwhile, took comfort in WojtyZa’s reputation for unbending theological firmness and the moral and political absolutism born of his experience as a priest and prelate under communism.
This was a man who, for all his reputation as a ‘pope of ideas’, open to intellectual exchange and scholarly debate, would not compromise with the Church’s enemies.
By the time of his election he was already an administrative as well as a doctrinal conservative.
Karol Wojtyla’s Polish origins and his tragic early life help to explain the unusual strength of his convictions and the distinctive quality of his papacy.
Following his mother’s death he was taken by his father to the Marian sanctuary at Kalwaria Zebrzydowska and made frequent pilgrimages there in following years—Zebrzydowska, like Czestochowa, is an important center of the cult of the Virgin Mary in modern Poland.
The new Pope’s Christian vision was rooted in the peculiarly messianic style of Polish Catholicism.
In modern Poland he saw not only the embattled eastern frontier of the True Faith, but also a land and a people chosen to serve as the example and sword of the Church in the struggle against Eastern atheism and Western materialism alike.
Together with his long service in Crakow, isolated from Western theological and political currents, this probably explained his tendency to embrace a parochial and sometimes troubling Polish-Christian vision.
But it also explains the unprecedented enthusiasm for him in the country of his birth.
From the outset, the pope broke with his predecessors’ cosmopolitan Roman acquiescence in modernity, secularism, and compromise.
His campaign of international appearances—complete with carefully staged performances in huge open arenas, accompanied by oversized crucifixes and a paraphernalia of light, sound, and theatrical timing—was not undertaken without design.
Abandoning the cautious ‘Ostpolitik’ of his predecessors, John Paul II arrived in Warsaw on June 2nd 1979 for the first of three dramatic ‘pilgrimages’ to Communist Poland.
His presence affirmed and reinforced the influence of the Catholic Church in Poland; but the Pope was not interested in merely endorsing Christianity’s passive survival under Communism.
To the occasional discomfort of his own bishops he began explicitly discouraging 'It is of course the business of the Catholic Church to inveigh against material idols and the sin of pride.
In his 1975 Lenten Exercises at the Vatican, three years before becoming Pope, he explicitly announced that of the two threats to the Church, consumerism and persecution, the former was by far the graver danger and thus the greater enemy.
His thoughtless description of Poland under martial law as a ‘vast concentration camp’ reflects a similar limitation.
In part this was because Poles remained overwhelmingly and enthusiastically Catholic; in large measure it was because of the man himself.
But there was very little they could do—to forbid the Pope to visit Poland or to speak there would only have strengthened his appeal and further alienated millions of his admirers.
Even after the imposition of martial law, when the Pope returned to Poland in June 1983 and spoke to his ‘compatriots’ in St John’s Cathedral in Warsaw of their ‘disappointment and humiliation, their suffering and loss of freedom’, the Communist leaders could only stand and listen.
Ever since the workers’ revolts of 1970, and again in 1976, both prompted by sharp increases in the price of food, First Secretary Edvard Gierek had tried hard to avert domestic discontent—mostly, as we have seen, by borrowing heavily abroad and using the loans to supply Poles with subsidized food and other consumer goods.
Thanks to the emergence of Jacek Kurori’s KOR, the intellectual opposition and workers’ leaders now cooperated far more than in the past.
The predictable response of the authorities was to arrest intellectual activists and sack the offending workers—among them the then-unknown electrician Lech Walesa and fourteen other employees at Elektromontaz in Gdansk.
Whether the semi-clandestine movement for workers’ rights would have continued to grow is not clear.
Its spokesmen were certainly emboldened by the Pope’s recent visit and their sense that the regime would be reluctant to strike back violently for fear of international disapproval.
In the next three weeks protest strikes spread from the Ursus tractor plant to every major industrial city in the country, reaching Gdansk and its Lenin Shipyard on August 2nd.
There the shipbuilders occupied the yard and formed themselves into an unofficial trade union, Solidarnosc (‘Solidarity’)—led by Walesa, who on August 14th 1980 climbed over the shipyard wall and into the leadership of a national strike movement.
The authorities’ instinctive response—to arrest ‘ringleaders’ and isolate the strikers—having failed, they opted instead to buy time and divide their opponents.
In an unprecedented move, representatives of the Politburo were sent to Gdansk to negotiate with ‘reasonable’ workers’ leaders, even as Kurori, Adam Michnik and other KOR leaders were temporarily detained for questioning.
On September 1st the police released all remaining detainees, and two weeks later the Polish Council of State officially conceded the strikers’ chief demand, the right to form and register free labor unions.
At its founding national Congress the following September Walesa was elected president.
From November 1980 until December 1981 Poland lived in an excited, uneasy limbo.
Walesa’s advisers—mindful of past mistakes and wary of provoking a backlash from the humiliated Communist leadership—urged caution.
Seen from Warsaw, and especially from Moscow, the country was adrift and the regime was losing control.
Despite the best efforts of its cautious leaders, Solidarity was doomed to arouse the ghosts of Budapest and Prague.
General Wojciech Jaruzelski had risen from defense minister to prime minister in February 1981, replacing the now-disgraced Gierek.
Ensured of the support of the army, and with the Soviet leadership encouraging firm action to halt Poland’s drift out of control, he moved swiftly to put an end to a situation that both sides knew could not last indefinitely.
On December 13th 1981—just as US-Soviet nuclear disarmament talks were getting under way in Geneva—Jaruzelski declared martial law in Poland, ostensibly to forestall a Soviet intervention.
In post-’89 retrospect the rise of Solidarity appears as the opening fusillade in the final struggle against Communism.
They were not in themselves a harbinger of the downfall of Communist power.
As Michnik, Kurori and others continued to insist, before the imposition of martial law and after, Communism might be progressively eroded from within and from below, but it could not be overthrown.
Open confrontation would be catastrophic, as history had convincingly demonstrated.
The developments in Poland were a stirring prologue to the narrative of Communisms collapse, but they remained a sideshow.
The clamp-down in Poland further contributed to the steady cooling of East-West relations that began in the late 1970s.
With the conclusion of the Helsinki Accords it seemed to Washington and Moscow that the Cold War was ending to their own advantage.
Indeed, the situation in Europe suited both great powers, with the United States now comporting itself rather like czarist Russia in the decades following Napoleon’s defeat in 1815:e. as a sort of continental policeman whose presence guaranteed that there would be no further disruption of the status quo by an unruly revolutionary power.
No-one, least of all the leaders of Western Europe whose countries would have been the first to suffer in a nuclear exchange, had any illusions about the value of nuclear missiles.
As instruments of war such weapons were uniquely unhelpful— in contrast to spears, they really were only good for sitting on.
Nonetheless, as a deterrent device a nuclear arsenal had its uses—if your opponent could be convinced that it might, ultimately, be used.
There was, in any case, no other way to defend Western Europe against a Warsaw Pact that by the early 1980s boasted more than fifty infantry and armored divisions, 16,000 tanks, 26,000 fighting vehicles and 4,000 combat aircraft.
That is why British Prime Ministers (both Margaret Thatcher and before her 4 Though early in his presidency, in November 1981, Reagan did let slip the thought that a nuclear war in Europe need not lead to a strategic exchange.
Washington’s West European allies were at least as alarmed as Moscow and both protested vociferously.
The ‘new’ Cold War re-opened a prospect of terror out of all apparent proportion to the issues at stake—or the intentions of most of the participants.
In Western Europe the anti-nuclear peace movement underwent a revival, strengthened by a new generation of green activists.
In Britain an enthusiastic and decidedly English assortment of feminists, environmentalists and anarchists, together with their assembled friends and relations, mounted a prolonged siege of the cruise missile site at Greenham Common—to the bewilderment of its long-suffering American garrison.
The opposition was greatest in West Germany, where the Social Democratic Chancellor Helmut Schmidt was forced to step down after the left wing of his own party voted against the new missiles—which were then approved and installed by his Christian Democratic successor Helmut Kohl.
The mirage of a de-nuclearized, neutral zone in central Europe was still dear to many Germans, and prominent West German Greens and Social Democrats added their voices to official East German appeals against nuclear weapons—at a demonstration in Bonn in October 1983 former Chancellor Willy Brandt urged a sympathetic crowd of 300,000 people to demand that their government unilaterally renounce any new missiles.
The socalled ‘Krefeld Appeal’ against the deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles in the Federal Republic gathered 2. million signatures.
As for the ‘peaceniks’, they were far less troubled by repression in Warsaw than by the bellicose rhetoric emanating from Washington.
Although NATO’s decision to deploy new missiles had been accompanied by the offer of negotiations to reduce such weapons , it seemed increasingly obvious that the United States under its new president had adopted a new and aggressive strategy.
The same president, after all, was initiating talks on nuclear arms reduction and offering to withdraw his own intermediate-range missiles if the Soviets dismantled theirs.
But the United States was indeed embarking upon a major program of rearmament.
In August 1981 Reagan announced that the United States would stockpile neutron bombs.
The MX missile system, in breach of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties, was announced in November 1982, followed five months later by the Strategic Defense Initiative (‘Star Wars’), prompting a Soviet protest on the credible grounds that it breached the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
Official military aid and clandestine support to Afghanistan and Central America was steadily augmented.
In 1985 United States defense spending rose by 6 percent, an unprecedented peacetime increase.
Back in September 1981 Reagan had warned that without a verifiable nuclear arms agreement there would be an arms race and that if there were an arms race the United States would win it.
In retrospect, the American defense buildup would come to be seen as the cunningly crafted lever that bankrupted and ultimately broke the Soviet system.
The Soviet Union could ill afford the armaments race upon which it had begun to embark as early as 1974.
The Second Cold War, and America’s public belligerence, undoubtedly increased the strains on a creaking and dysfunctional system.
The Soviet Union had built a military machine that defeated Hitler, occupied half of Europe and matched the West weapon for weapon for forty years—but at a terrible price.
It was already obvious to many Soviet experts that their country could not indefinitely maintain such a burden.
In the long run the economic bill for this generations-long military build-up must come due.
But in the short run at least, foreign tensions probably helped shore up the regime.
The Soviet Union might be a continent-size Potemkin village—‘Upper Volta with missiles’ in Helmut Schmidt’s pithy description—but it did, after all, have those missiles and they conferred a certain status and respect upon their owners.
Moreover the ageing Soviet leaders, KGB director Yuri Andropov in particular, took the American threat very seriously.
Like their counterparts in Washington they really believed the other side was contemplating pre-emptive nuclear war.
The real military dilemma facing the Soviet leaders was neither in Europe nor in Washington, but rather in Kabul.
Pace Jimmy Carter’s late-found sensitivity to Soviet strategic ambitions, the 1979 invasion of Afghanistan did not open a new front in Communism’s strategic struggle with the free world.
The 1979 Soviet census revealed an unprecedented increase in the population of Soviet Central Asia.
In Soviet Kazakhstan and the republics abutting the Afghan frontier—Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan—the numbers were up by over 25 percent since 1970.
Over the course of the following decade, whereas the Ukrainian population would grow by just 4 percent, that of Tajikistan increased by nearly half.
Had the occupation of Afghanistan succeeded in installing a secure, friendly regime in Kabul, the Soviet leaders could have chalked up a double success.
They would have re-affirmed Moscow’s faltering presence in the Middle East while sending a ‘clear message’ to a new generation of Soviet Muslims tempted by dreams of independence.
Brezhnev, Gromyko and their generals ignored not just the lessons of Vietnam, repeating many of the Americans’ errors; they also forgot czarist Russia’s own failures in the same region eighty years earlier.
Instead, the USSR’s disastrous attempt to sustain a puppet regime in unfamiliar, hostile territory aroused an intransigent opposition of guerrillas and zealots , armed and financed from abroad.
Its traumatic impact upon a generation of conscripted soldiers would emerge only later.
By the early1990s it was estimated that one in five veterans of the Afghan wars were confirmed alcoholics; in post-Soviet Russia many of the others, unable to find regular work, drifted into far-right nationalist organizations.
But long before then even the Soviet leaders themselves could see the scale of their mis-step.
In addition to the cost in men and materiel, the decade-long war of attrition in the Afghan mountains constituted an extended international humiliation.
But the disaster in Afghanistan, like the cost of the accelerating arms race of the early ‘80s, would not in itself have induced the collapse of the system.
Sustained by, fear, inertia and the self-interest of the old men who ran it, Brezhnev’s ‘era of stagnation’ might have lasted indefinitely.
Certainly there was no countervailing authority, no dissident movement—whether in the Soviet Union or its client states—that could have brought it low.
The guiding premise of the Communist project was its faith in the laws of history and the interests of the collectivity, which would always trump the motives and actions of individuals.
It was thus ironically appropriate that its destiny should in the end have been determined by the fate of men.
On November 10th 1982, at the age of 76, Leonid Brezhnev finally gave up the ghost, having long since come to resemble it.
In just over a year, before he could implement any of the reforms that he planned, Andropov died and was replaced as General Secretary by Konstantin Chernenko, himself aged 72 and in such poor health that he could hardly complete his speech at Andropov’s funeral in February 1984.
Born in a village of the southern Stavropol region in 1931, he had been elected to the Central Committee at the age of 41.
His rapid rise had been encouraged and facilitated by Andropov and he was widely seen as a likely reformer.
But like all the reform Communists of his generation, Gorbachev was first a Communist and only then a reformer.
As he explained to the French Communist newspaper L’Humanite in a February 1986 interview, the Communism of Lenin remained for him a fine and unsullied ideal.
But Gorbachev certainly believed it, and the reforms he initiated were quite consciously Leninist—or ‘Socialist’—in intent.
To the extent that hopes were vested in Gorbachev, this reflected more than anything the absence of any domestic opposition in the Soviet Union.
Impressed by what he saw during travels in Western Europe during the seventies, the new leader intended from the outset to devote his main efforts to an overhaul of the Soviet Union’s moribund economy and the intertwined inefficiencies and corruption of its top-heavy institutional apparatus.
The starting point for ‘reform’ in such a system, as Hungarian and other Communist economists had long appreciated, was decentralization of pricing and decision-making.
Even after a 1986 Law on Individual Labour Activity authorized limited private enterprise, there were surprisingly few takers.
In the short-run there would be more shortages and bottlenecks, not fewer, as everyone retreated to regional self-sufficiency and even to a local barter economy.
But such an approach was foredoomed by its operating premise—that the authorities could create efficient businesses by administrative fiat.
Meanwhile farm managers and local directors, uncertain of the way the wind was blowing, hedged their bets against the return of planned norms and stockpiled anything they could lay their hands on lest centralized controls tighten up again.
Every Soviet reform program since 1921 began the same way and ran out of steam for the same reasons, starting with Lenin’s New Economic Policy.
Serious economic reforms implied the relaxation or abandonment of controls.
Everything else was dialectics, and dialectics—as a veteran Communist explained to the young Jorge Semprun in Buchenwald—‘is the art and technique of always landing on your feet’ 10 It soon became obvious to Gorbachev that to land on his feet as he wrestled with the Soviet economy he must accept that the Soviet economic conundrum could not be addressed in isolation.
The Soviet Union was run by men who had a vested interest in the political and institutional levers of a command economy; its endemic minor absurdities and quotidian corruption were the very source of their authority and power.
This, too, was hardly a new idea—the periodic purges under Lenin and his successors had typically proclaimed similar objectives.
The Soviet Union, however repressive and backward, was no longer a murderous totalitarian tyranny.
Thanks to Khrushchev’s monumental housing projects most Soviet families now lived in their own apartments.
The age of terror was over for most people and, for Gorbachev’s generation at least, a return to the time of mass arrests and party purges was unthinkable.
By making people more aware of impending changes and heightening public expectation, Gorbachev would forge a lever with which he and his supporters might pry loose official opposition to his plans.
But for Gorbachev the urgency of the need for official openness was brought home to him by the catastrophic events of April 26th 1986.
The plume of atomic fallout was carried north-west into Western Europe and Scandinavia, reaching as far as Wales and Sweden and exposing an estimated five million people to its effects.
The reactor at Cheliabinsk was from the first generation of Soviet atomic constructions and had been built by slave labour in 1948-51.
These and other ecological disasters were all the direct result of indifference, bad management and the Soviet ‘slash and burn’ approach to natural resources.
The Cheliabinsk-40 explosion was not officially acknowledged for many decades, even though it occurred within a few kilometers of a large city—the same city where, in 1979, several hundred people died of anthrax leaked from a biological weapons plant in the town centre.
Moscow’s first acknowledgement that anything untoward had happened came fully four days after the event, and then in a two-sentence official communique.
And just as his fellow citizens were thus made publicly aware for the first time of the scale of official incompetence and indifference to life and health, so Gorbachev was forced to acknowledge the extent of his country’s problems.
The bungling, the mendacity and the cynicism of the men responsible both for the disaster and the attempt to cover it up could not be ""This was the subject of a book by Zhores Medvedev, Nuclear Disaster in the Urals, published in exile in 1979.
In December of that year Andrei Sakharov, the world’s best-known dissident, was liberated from house arrest in Gorky , a harbinger of the large-scale release of Soviet political prisoners that began the following year.
In the course of 1987-88 the General Secretary was, almost despite himself, forging a national constituency for change.
Initially taken aback at their own very existence—the Soviet Union, after all, was still a one-party dictatorship—they soon flourished and multiplied.
In October 1988 he demoted some of his leading opponents—notably Yegor Ligachev, a longstanding critic—and had himself elected President of the Supreme Soviet (i.e. head of state), displacing Andrei Gromyko, last of the dinosaurs.
The elections of May/June 1989 were the first more or less free vote in the Soviet Union since 1918.
From the outset Gorbachev made clear his determination to unburden the USSR at the very least of its more onerous military encumbrances.
Within a month of coming to power he had halted Soviet missile deployments and gone on to offer unconditional negotiations on nuclear forces, starting with a proposal that both superpowers halve their strategic arsenals.
By May 1986, after a surprisingly successful ‘summit’ meeting with Reagan in Geneva (the first of an unprecedented five such encounters), Gorbachev agreed to allow United States ‘forward-based systems’ to be excluded from strategic arms talks, if that would help get these under way.
There followed a second, Reykjavik, summit in October 1986 where Reagan and Gorbachev, while failing to reach agreement on nuclear disarmament, nonetheless laid the basis for future success.
By late 1987 Shevardnadze and United States Secretary of State George Schultz had drafted an Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, signed and ratified the following year.
This Treaty, by endorsing Ronald Reagan’s earlier ‘zero option’ proposal, constituted Soviet acceptance that a nuclear war in Europe was un-winnable—and served as the prologue to an even more important treaty, signed in 1990, strictly limiting the presence and operation of conventional forces on the European continent.
Gorbachev himself finally switched off Sakharov’s microphone, but too late.
But for Gorbachev, whose priorities were domestic, securing a more stable international environment was a victory in itself.
These views reflected the advice he was beginning to get from a new generation of Soviet foreign affairs experts, notably his colleague Aleksandr Yakovlev, to whom it had become clear that the USSR could exercise more control over its foreign relations by well-calculated concessions than by fruitless confrontation.
In contrast to the intractable problems he faced at home, foreign policy was an arena in which Gorbachev exercised direct control and could thus hope to effect immediate improvements.
His focus upon ending the arms race and the stockpiling of nuclear weapons was closely tied to a new approach to the Soviet Union’s role as a distinctively European power.
It is time for the two military alliances to amend their strategic concepts to gear them more to the aims of defense.
Five months later he announced the withdrawal of some 6,000 Soviet troops, a redeployment completed in November of the same year.
To secure their fiefdom these men were understandably drawn to identify with their ‘own’ people, particularly once fissures began to appear in the central apparatus.
In a continental empire of over one hundred ethnic groups from the Baltic to the Sea of Okhotsk, most of whom had longstanding grievances that glasnost now encouraged them to air, this was to prove a serious miscalculation.
The inadequacy of Gorbachev’s response to demands for autonomy at the Soviet empire’s far-flung margins should not come as a surprise.
The idea that it was the Leninist project itself that might be at fault remained alien to the Soviet leader until very late—only in 1990 did he finally permit the domestic publication of overtly antiLeninist writers such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn.
Necessary reforms would be undertaken and appropriate freedoms granted, but there was to be no unregulated licence—as late as February 1988 the government was still clamping down firmly on independent publishing houses and printers.
But partial reform or reform of one sector in isolation from others was inherently contradictory.
In an authoritarian system power is indivisible— relinquish it in part and you must eventually lose it all.
Gorbachev and his controlled revolution were in the end swept aside by the scale of the contradictions they aroused.
Gorbachev did not achieve his objective, a reformed and efficient Communism, shorn of its dysfunctions.
By introducing first one element of change and then another and then another, Gorbachev progressively eroded the very system through which he had risen.
No-one could have predicted it in 1984, when Chernenko died, and no-one did.
But he surely had no idea what he was doing and would have been horrified had he known.
On the other hand, Gorbachev never had the unconditional support of radical reformers, who grew increasingly frustrated with his apparent indecisiveness.
These vacillations, Gorbachev’s seeming reluctance to press the logic of his initiatives, and his insistence on not going too far or too fast left many of his early admirers feeling let down.
He was thus obliged to forge tactical alliances and trim between the extreme positions of others.
This is a familiar if uncomfortable necessity for democratic politicians; but in the eyes of a nation accustomed to seventy years of dictatorship such maneuverings simply made Gorbachev appear weak.
From the early months of 1989 onwards the Soviet President fell steadily in opinion polls.
By the autumn of 1990 Gorbachev would have the support of just 21 percent of the public.
Long before his fall from power, then, Gorbachev had decidedly fallen from grace.
On his increasingly frequent visits abroad Gorbachev was feted by west European politicians and cheered by enthusiastic crowds.
Seen from Eastern Europe this might have been thought a little premature; but there too Mikhail Gorbachev was wildly popular.
In the ‘peoples’ democracies’ the Soviet leader’s domestic travails, though duly noted, counted for less than his foreign pronouncements, notably a widely reported speech to the United Nations on December 7th 1988.
After announcing unilateral cuts in Soviet conventional forces in Europe, Gorbachev went on to advise his audience that ‘Freedom of choice is a universal principle.
This was more than just a renunciation of the ‘Brezhnev Doctrine’, an acknowledgement that Moscow would not use force to impose its version of ‘Socialism’ upon fraternal states.
What Gorbachev was conceding—and was immediately understood to have conceded—was that the citizens of the satellite states were now at liberty to go their own way, Socialist or not.
Under Mikhail Gorbachev’s leadership, the Soviet Union since 1985 had progressively removed itself from direct oversight of its client states.
Their police and intelligence services remained closely bound and beholden to the Soviet Unions own security apparatus and continued to operate semi-independently of local authorities.
And while the rulers in Prague or Warsaw or East Berlin were starting to appreciate that they could no longer count on Moscow’s unconditional support, neither they nor their subjects had a clear sense of what this meant.
On the other hand, the suppression of Solidarity and the silencing of its leaders did nothing to ease the country’s underlying problems.
Poland was still in debt, but now—thanks to international condemnation of the repression—its rulers could no longer extricate themselves from difficulty by further borrowing abroad.
In effect, Poland’s rulers were facing the same dilemma they had tried to address in the 1970s, but with even fewer options.
Meanwhile, the opposition might have been criminalized but it had not evaporated.
Clandestine publishing continued, as did lectures, discussions, theatrical performances and much else.
But Jaruzelski and most of his colleagues already understood that such provocations and confrontations would no longer work.
Popieluszko’s funeral drew a crowd of 350,000; and far from frightening off opposition the incident merely publicized the scale of popular support for the Church and for Solidarity, legal or no.
By the mid-‘8os Poland was fast approaching a stand-off between a recalcitrant society and an increasingly desperate state.
In 1986 Jaruzelski, now state President, released Adam Michnik and other Solidarity leaders from prison and through a newly installed ‘Ministry of Economic Reform’ offered a modest raft of economic changes designed, among other objectives, to attract renewed foreign funding of Poland’s national debt, now fast approaching $40 billion.
Unsurprisingly, the public’s response was, in essence, ‘none of the above’ The question—and the decision to pose it—nicely illustrated the political as well as the economic bankruptcy of Poland’s Communist rulers.
Indeed, it says something about the authorities’ crumbling credibility that Poland’s membership of the IMF was made possible in part by the consent of Solidarity itself.
Despite being banned, the union had managed to maintain its organization abroad and it was Solidarity’s Brussels office that advised the IMF Managing Director in September 1985 to admit Poland—while insisting that Jaruzelski’s partial improvements were foredoomed and that only a package of thoroughgoing reforms could address the country’s troubles.
The ‘counter-society’ theorized by Michnik and others a decade earlier was emerging as a de facto source of authority and initiative.
After 1986, debate within the Polish opposition turned not so much on teaching society to be free as on how much the opposition should agree to engage with the regime, and to what end.
A group of young economists at Warsaw’s School of Planning and Statistics, led by Leszek Balcerowicz, was already drawing up plans for an autonomous private business sector freed from central planning—i.e. a market; these and other proposals were intensely debated among ‘unofficial’ Poles and widely discussed abroad.
In 1987 consumer prices were raised by some 25 percent; in 1988 by a further 60 percent.
In the past, lacking any leverage over the workforce, the Communist authorities had either abandoned efforts to raise prices or else resorted to force—or both.
On this occasion they had a third option—appealing to the workers’ own leaders for help.
In August 1988 General Czeslaw Kiszczak, the Interior Minister, urged Lech Walesa—nominally a private citizen, the unacknowledged leader of an unrecognized organization—to meet him and negotiate an end to the country’s labor protests.
On December 18th 1988—symptomatically if coincidentally just one week after Gorbachev’s seminal UN speech—a Solidarity ‘Citizens Committee’ was formed in Warsaw to plan for full-scale negotiations with the government.
Jaruzelski, his options seemingly exhausted, at last conceded the obvious and forced a somewhat reluctant Central Committee to agree to talks.
On February 6th 1989 the Communists officially recognized Solidarity as a negotiating partner and opened ‘round table’ negotiations with its representatives.
On that day (once again a week after major Soviet developments, this time the open elections to the Congress of Peoples’ Deputies), all sides agreed to the legalization of independent trade unions, far-reaching economic legislation and, above all, a new elected Assembly.
In hindsight the outcome of the round-table talks was a negotiated termination of Communism in Poland, and at least to some of the participants this much was already clear.
And by scheduling the elections so soon, the government hoped to capitalize on the disorganization and inexperience of its opponents.
Backed by Adam Michnik’s impromptu new daily‘Election Gazette’ , Solidarity won 99/100 seats for the Senate and all the seats it was allowed to contest for the Sejm.
Meanwhile only two of the Communist candidates standing for ‘reserved’ seats secured the 50 percent of the vote required to take up their places.
Faced with a complete rout and unprecedented public humiliation, the Communist rulers of Poland had the option of ignoring the vote; declaring martial law once again; or else accepting defeat and relinquishing power.
Put thus, the choice was clear—as Gorbachev made quite explicit to Jaruzelski in a private phone conversation, the election must stand.
Jaruzelski’s first thought was to secure a face-saving compromise by inviting Solidarity to join him in a coalition government, but this was rebuffed.
Meanwhile, in a shrewd political move, the Solidarity parliamentary group simultaneously voted to make Jaruzelski Head of State, effectively co-opting the Communist ‘moderates’ into the ensuing transition and easing their embarrassment.
The following month Mazowiecki’s government announced plans to institute a ‘market economy’, presented in a stabilization program—the so-called ‘Balcerowicz Plan’—that was approved by the Sejm on December 28th.
The helter-skelter quality of the last months of Communist Poland should not blind us to the long and quite slow build up that went before.
Most of the actors in the drama of 1989—Jaruzelski, Kiszczak, Walesa, Michnik, Mazowiecki—had already been on the stage for many years.
The country had passed from a brief flourish of relative liberty in 1981 into martial law, followed by a lengthy, uncertain purgatory of repressive semi-tolerance that finally unraveled in a re-run of the previous decade’s economic crises.
For all the strength of the Catholic Church, the countrywide popularity of Solidarity, and the Polish nation’s abiding loathing of its Communist rulers, the latter clung to power for so long that their final fall came as something of a surprise.
In Hungary, a comparable caution was born of very different experience.
Two decades of ambiguous tolerance had obscured the precise limits of officially condoned dissent.
Hungary, after all, was the Communist state where Hilton opened its first hotel behind the Iron Curtain, in December 1976; where Billy Graham undertook not one but three public tours in the course of the Eighties; and which was visited (and implicitly favored) by two United States secretaries of State and Vice-President George Bush in that same decade.
Dissimulation and maneuver seemed the better part of valor, especially to anyone who remembered 1956; and life in Janos Kadar’s Hungary was tolerable, if drab.
To be sure, the ‘black’ or parallel economy enabled many people to get by on a standard of living somewhat higher than that of Hungary’s neighbors.
In May 1988, at a special Communist Conference called for the purpose, they at last succeeded in removing the 76-year-old Kadar from the leadership and replacing him with Karoly Grdsz, the Prime Minister.
Janos Kddar had ruled Hungary ever since the revolution of 1956, in whose suppression he played the major part.
K&dar was also the living embodiment of the conspiracy of silence surrounding Imre Nagy ever since his kidnapping, secret trial and even more secret execution and burial three decades before.
The removal of Kadar thus seemed to suggest that something fundamental had shifted in Hungarian public life—an impression confirmed when his successors not only allowed a group of dissident young Communists and others to form Fidesz , but in November 1988 officially condoned the appearance of independent political parties.
On June 16th 1989—the thirty-first anniversary of his death—the remains of Imre Nagy and four of his colleagues were ceremoniously reburied as national heroes.
An estimated 300,000 Hungarians lined the streets, with millions more watching the proceedings live on television.
Among the speakers at the graveside was Viktor Orban, the young leader of the Young Democrats, who could not help noting that some of the Communists present at Nagy’s reburial were the same who, just a few years before, had so strenuously falsified the very revolution whose praises they were now singing.
It was a curiosity of the Hungarian exit from Communism that it was conducted by Communists themselves—only in June were round-table talks convened with opposition parties, in conscious imitation of the Polish precedent.
But it would be wrong to underestimate the symbolic force of the reburial of Nagy.
When Janos Kadar died just three weeks later—on the very day that the Hungarian Supreme Court pronounced Nagy’s full rehabilitation—Hungarian Communism died with him.
The first, as we have seen, is that it was the only passage from a Communist regime to a genuine multi-party system effected entirely from within.
The second point of note is that whereas in Poland, as later in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere, the events of 1989 were largely self-referential, the Hungarian transition played a vital role in the unraveling of another Communist regime, that of East Germany.
To outside observers, the German Democratic Republic appeared among the least vulnerable of Communist regimes, and not only because it was universally assumed that no Soviet leader would ever allow it to fall.
But the East German economy was widely believed to be in better shape than that of its socialist neighbors.
The GDR’s most enthusiastic admirers were to be found in the Federal Republic.
The apparent success of Ostpolitik in defusing tensions and facilitating human and economic communications between the two halves of Germany had led virtually the entire political class to invest their hopes in its indefinite prolongation.
West German public figures not only encouraged illusions among the nomenklatura of the GDR, they deluded themselves.
Simply by repeating that Ostpolitik was having the effect of easing tensions to the east, they came to believe it.
Preoccupied with ‘peace,’ ‘stability,’ and ‘order,’ many West Germans thus ended up sharing the point of view of the Eastern politicians with whom they were doing business.
In later years it would emerge that on more than one occasion national leaders of the SPD made confidential and decidedly compromising statements to highranking East Germans visiting the West.
In 1987 Bjorn Engholm praised the domestic policies of the GDR as ‘historic’, while the following year his colleague Oskar Lafontaine promised to do everything in his power to make sure that West German support for East German dissidents remained muted.
But they were shared with almost equal fervour by many Christian Democrats too.
At the Moscow funeral of Yuri Andropov in February 1984 he met and spoke with Erich Honecker—and did so again at the burial of Chernenko the following year.
Agreements were reached between the two sides over cultural exchange and the removal of mines on the interGerman border.
In September 1987 Honecker became the first East German leader to visit the Federal Republic.
Flush with West German sponsorship, confident of Moscow’s backing and at liberty to export to the West its more troublesome dissidents, the East German regime might have survived indefinitely.
In September 1988 Honecker, on a visit to Moscow, publicly praised Gorbachev’s perestroika —only to make a point of studiously avoiding its implementation upon his return home.
Notwithstanding the unprecedented developments then unfolding in Moscow, Warsaw and Budapest, the East German Communists were still rigging votes in a manner familiar from the 1950s.
In May 1989 the official outcome of the GDR municipal elections—98.85 percent for government candidates—was so egregiously fabricated that it aroused nationwide protests from priests, environmental groups and even critics within the ruling party.
They no longer had to accept the status quo, risk arrest or else essay a hazardous escape to the West.
On May 2nd 1989, in the course of relaxing the control of movement and expression within Hungary itself, the authorities in Budapest had removed the electrified fence along the country’s western frontier, although the border itself remained formally closed.
By July 1st 1989 some 25,000 of them had made their way to ‘vacation’ there.
Thousands more followed, many of them seeking temporary refuge in West German embassies in Prague and Budapest.
A few made their way across the still-closed Austro-Hungarian frontier without being stopped by border guards, but most just stayed in Hungary.
Asked on a Hungarian television news program on September 10th what his government’s response would be if some of these people started walking west, the Hungarian Foreign 2I It appears that Honecker had calculated, reasonably enough, that Gorbachev would not last and could safely be ignored.
The East German authorities protested furiously—the Hungarian move implied a breach of the longstanding agreement between Communist governments not to allow their countries to be used as escape routes from fraternal neighbors.
But the authorities in Budapest merely insisted that they were bound by their signature to the Helsinki Final Act.
In the course of the next three weeks the GDR authorities confronted a public-relations disaster as tens of thousands of their fellow citizens tried to get out through the new exit route.
In an attempt to take control of events the GDR rulers offered East German refugees in the embassies in Prague and Warsaw safe passage back through their own country and on to West Germany in a sealed train.
An estimated five thousand people tried to clamber aboard when the refugee train stopped briefly in Dresden; when the police beat them back a riot ensued—all under the eyes of the world’s media.
On Monday October 2nd, in Leipzig, a crowd of 10,000 demonstrated in frustration at the Honecker regime’s refusal to reform itself—the largest public gathering in East Germany since the ill-fated Berlin uprising of 1953.
Encouraged by the Soviet leader’s visit—not to speak of developments abroad—demonstrators in Leipzig and other cities began holding regular demonstrations and ‘vigils’ for change.
The following week the numbers had grown again; an increasingly agitated Honecker was now proposing to use force to put down any further show of opposition.
On October 18th some of his colleagues, led by Egon Krenze, staged a coup and removed the old man from power, after 18 years.
Krenze’s first act was to fly to Moscow, endorse (and seek the endorsement of) Mikhail Gorbachev and return to Berlin to prepare a cautious East German perestroika.
At the most recent Leipzig demonstration, an estimated 300,000 people had come together to press for change; on November 4th half a million East Germans gathered in Berlin to demand immediate reforms.
Meanwhile, on that same day, Czechoslovakia opened its border; in the next fortyeight hours 30,000 people left through it.
On November 5th, the GDR government hesitantly proposed a mildly liberalized travel law, only to have it dismissed by critics as pitifully inadequate.
The East German cabinet then dramatically resigned, followed by the Politburo.
The following evening—November 9th, anniversary of both the Kaiser’s abdication and Kristallnacht —Krenze and his colleagues proposed yet another travel law to head off the stampede.
At a news conference carried live on German television and radio, Gunter Schabowski explained that the new provisions, in immediate effect, authorized foreign travel without advance notice and permitted transit through the border crossings into West Germany.
Before the broadcast was even finished people were in the streets of East Berlin and heading for the border.
As anyone could see, the Wall had been breached for good and there could be no return.
Four weeks later the Brandenburg Gate, straddling the East-West border, was reopened; over the Christmas holidays of 1989, 2. million East Germans visited the West.
It seems likely that he was at least contemplating a German re-play of the Tiananmen Square massacre—one reason why his colleagues took the decision to oust him.
In 1961 this desperate ploy had succeeded; in 1989, too, it worked after a fashion—surprisingly few East Germans remained permanently in West Berlin or emigrated to West Germany once they were reassured that if they returned they would not find themselves imprisoned again.
But the price of that reassurance was the fall of more than just the regime.
The old Communist leadership (including both Honecker and Krenze) was expelled from the party; round table discussions were begun with representatives of Neues Forum (by general consent the most visible of the opposition groups), and free elections were scheduled.
East Germans, after all, had an option that was not available to other subject-peoples—there was no ‘West Czechoslovakia’, or ‘West Poland’—and they were not about to forego it.
Because the death of German Communism would thus entail, as we shall see in the next chapter, the death of a German state—by January 1990 the point had become not just to get out of Socialism but to get into West Germany—it is not clear in retrospect how to interpret the hopes of the crowds who brought down the GDR in the autumn of 1989.
On November 28th Stefan Heym, Christa Wolf and other East German intellectuals issued an appeal ‘For Our Land’, to save socialism and the GDR and stand firm against what Heym described as the ‘glittering rubbish’ of the West.
As events were to show, this was at least as unrealistic as Erich Honecker’s fantasy of a return to neo-Stalinist obedience.
Neues Forum thus condemned itself to political irrelevance, its leaders reduced to carping resentfully at the improvidence of the masses.
As in Hungary, so in Czechoslovakia, Communist rule rested uneasily upon the silent memory of a stolen past.
But whereas in the Hungarian case Kadar had semisuccessfully distanced himself and his party from their Stalinist inheritance, the leaders of Czechoslovakia had managed no such transition.
The Warsaw Pact invasion of 1968 and the subsequent ‘normalization’ lived on in Gustav Husak, in power since 1969.
The Czechoslovak Communists were actually rather successful at maintaining total control to the very end.
Neither the Catholic Church (always a minor player in Czech, if not Slovak affairs) nor the intellectual opposition gained significant support in society at large.
Thanks to the brutally efficient management of the purges, most of the country’s intelligentsia, from playwrights to historians to Sixties-era reform Communists, had been expunged not just from their jobs put from public visibility.
Until 1989 some of Czechoslovakia’s most outspoken domestic critics of Communism, beginning with Vaclav Havel himself, were betterknown abroad than in their own country.
As we saw in the last chapter, Havel’s own civic organization, Charter 77, managed fewer than two thousand signatories in a population of 15 million.
Of course, people were afraid to take the risk of openly criticizing the regime; 23 To be fair, the East German dissidents genuinely misread the courage of the crowds in November 1989 as the basis for a renewed socialist republic.
On the other hand, the source of that misreading was their blind failure to understand what ‘socialism’ had come to mean—and their own investment in its survival.
The Czechoslovak economy, like most other Eastern European economies since the early Seventies, had been deliberately geared to supplying basic consumer goods, and in the Czech case something more.
Indeed, Communist Czechoslovakia consciously mimicked aspects of Western consumer society—notably television programming and popular leisure pursuits—albeit in a mediocre key.
Life in Czechoslovakia was dull, the environment was deteriorating and younger people especially chafed at the omnipresent and censorious authorities.
But in return for avoiding confrontation with the regime and paying lip service to its turgid rhetoric, people were left to their own devices.
Demonstrators in Prague and elsewhere who came out to mark the twentieth anniversary of the invasion in August 1988 were arrested; unofficial efforts to hold an ‘East-West’ seminar in Prague were quashed.
None of these tiny and easilycontained bubbles of civic initiative posed any threat to the police or the regime.
But in August, just as Mazowiecki was finalizing plans for his government in Warsaw and shortly before the Hungarian borders were flung open, demonstrators filled the streets of the Czech capital to commemorate, once again, the overthrow of the Prague Spring.
On this occasion, however, the Czech police were decidedly more restrained.
The Jakes regime had decided to trim a little, offering at least the appearance of acknowledging the change of mood in Moscow, while altering nothing of substance in its rule.
But there was still no great public pressure upon the Communist leadership—even the announcement on November 15th that exit visas would no longer be required for travel to the West was less a concession to demand than a strategic imitation of changes elsewhere.
On November 17th the Prague police officially approved a student march through the inner-city to commemorate yet another gloomy date, the 50th anniversary of the Nazi murder of a Czech student, Jan Opletal.
But when the marching students began to chant antiCommunist slogans the police attacked, scattering the crowd and beating up isolated victims.
The police themselves then encouraged the rumour that—in a replay of Opletal’s own murder—one of the students had been killed.
This was later acknowledged to be a false report; but meanwhile it had the predictable effect of provoking anger among the students themselves.
In the course of the next forty eight hours tens of thousands of students were mobilized, the universities were occupied and huge crowds began to gather in the streets to protest.
But their successors had absolutely no popular credibility and were in any case immediately submerged by the speed of events.
On November 19th Vaclav Havel, who had been consigned to virtual house arrest in rural northern Bohemia, returned to a capital city in turmoil, where the Communists were rapidly losing power but there was as yet no-one around to take it out of their hands.
Installing himself—appropriately enough—in a Prague theater, Havel and his friends from Charter 77 formed Obcanske Forum , an informal and fluid network that metamorphosed within days from a debating society to a civic initiative and thence into a shadow government.
The discussion in Civic Forum was driven partly by the longstanding goals of its best-known participants, but mostly by the spectacularly accelerating course of events in the streets outside.
The first thing the Forum did was to demand the resignation of the men responsible for the invasion of ’68 and its aftermath.
That same night Havel was granted an unprecedented interview on Czech television.
The following day he addressed a crowd of 250,000 in Wenceslas Square, sharing a platform with the Communist Prime Minister Ladislav Adamec—and Alexander Dubcek.
By now it had become clear to the emerging leadership of Civic Forum that they were, despite themselves, running a revolution.
These contained a brief summary of the general objectives of the Forum and are an instructive guide to the mood and priorities of the men and women of 1989.
A state of law.: Free elections.: Social justice.: A clean environment.: An educated people.: Prosperity.: Return to Europe.
The mixture of boilerplate political demands, cultural and environmental ideals, and the invocation of‘Europe’ is characteristically Czech and owed much to various Charter 77 pronouncements over the previous decade.
One week later Civic Forum and Public Against Violence had been legalized and were negotiating with the government.
At this point the Adamec government proposed a new governing coalition as a compromise but the representatives of Civic Forum—boosted by large and determined crowds now in permanent occupation of the streets—rejected it out of hand.
Discredited and disqualified by their own paymasters, the remaining members of the Husak group of Czech and Slovak Communists, including Prime Minister Adamec, resigned.
Jir i Dienstbier of Charter 77 was to be foreign minister; the Catholic lawyer Jan £arnogursky of PAV was to be Deputy Prime Minister; Vladimir Kusy of Civic Forum was information minister; and the hitherto obscure ffee-market economist Vaclav Klaus was to direct the Ministry of Finance.
But as soon as he began to make public speeches it became embarrassingly clear that poor Dubdek was an anachronism.
His vocabulary, his style, even his gestures were those of the reform Communists of the Sixties.
He had learned nothing, it seemed, from his bitter experiences, but spoke still of resurrecting a kinder, gentler, Czechoslovak path to Socialism.
To the tens of thousands of young people in the streets of Prague, or Brno, or Bratislava he was at first a historical curiosity; soon he became an irritating irrelevance.
By way of compromise Dubcek was elected chairman of the Federal Assembly.
By December 7th, however, the playwright had come around to the view that his acceptance of the post might be the best way to facilitate the country’s exit from Communism; on December 28th 1989 the same Communist Assembly which had dutifully rubber-stamped the legislation that had hitherto consigned Havel and others to years of imprisonment now elected him President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
On New Year’s Day 1990 the new President amnestied 16,000 political prisoners; the following day the political police itself was disbanded.
Czechoslovakia’s remarkably expeditious and peaceful exit from Communism— the so-called ‘velvet revolution’—was made possible by a confluence of circumstances.
But the role of Havel was equally crucial—no one individual of comparable public standing emerged in any other Communist country, and while most of the practical ideas and even the political tactics of Civic Forum might have been forthcoming in his absence, it was Havel who caught and channeled the public mood, moving his colleagues forward while keeping the expectations of the crowds 26 A cartoon in one of the ephemeral Prague student newspapers of December 1989 perfectly captures the generation gap.
A paunchy middle-aged man in an undershirt stares with distaste into his shaving mirror at a blowsy woman in the doorway, a dirty nightgown draped over her shoulders, her hair in rollers, a cigarette dangling from her lips.
Like Tomas Masaryk, with whom he came increasingly to be compared, the improbably charismatic Havel was now widely regarded by many as something akin to a national saviour.
It was not in spite of his theatrical preoccupations that his fellow-citizens turned to Havel, it was because of them.
It was the enduring presence of this sizeable core of Communist supporters— together with the much larger penumbra of apolitical citizens not sufficiently dissatisfied to protest their condition—that had led dissident writers like Ludvik Vacullk to question the likelihood of great changes in the immediate future.
Thus, when the people themselves finally seized the initiative in November 1989, the ensuing velvet revolution appeared almost too good to be true.
Hence the talk of police plots and manufactured crises, as though Czechoslovak society had so little self confidence that even the initiative to destroy Communism must have come from the Communists themselves.
Such skepticism was almost certainly misplaced—all the evidence that has since emerged suggests that on November 17th the Czech security police simply went too far.
In 1989 the people of Czechoslovakia really did take charge of their destiny.
Under Ceau§escu, Communism had degenerated from national Leninism to a sort of neo-Stalinist satrapy, where Byzantine levels of nepotism and inefficiency were propped in place by a tentacular secret police.
Compared with Dej’s vicious dictatorship of the Fifties, Ceau§escu’s regime got by with relatively little overt brutality; but the rare hints of public protest—strikes in the Jiu mining valley in August 1977, for example, or a decade later at the Red Star tractor works in Bra§ov—were violently and effectively suppressed.
By taking his distance from Moscow—we have seen how Romania abstained from the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia—Ceau§escu bought himself freedom of maneuver and even foreign acclaim, particularly in the early stages of the ‘new’ Cold War of the 1980s.
Because the Romanian leader was happy to criticize the Russians , Americans and others kept quiet about his domestic crimes.
Romanians, however, paid a terrible price for Ceau§escu’s privileged status.
Doctors in districts with a declining birth rate had their salaries cut.
Over the ensuing twenty-three years the 1966 law resulted in the death of at least ten thousand women.
The real infant mortality rate was so high 28 At least until the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev, after which the West had no further use for an antiSoviet maverick.
By the time Ceau§escu was overthrown the death rate of new-born babies was twenty-five per thousand and there were upward of 100,000 institutionalized children.
The setting for this national tragedy was an economy that was deliberately turned backward, from subsistence into destitution.
In the early Eighties, Ceau§escu decided to enhance his country’s international standing still further by paying down Romania’s huge foreign debts.
The agencies of international capitalism— starting with the International Monetary Fund—were delighted and could not praise the Romanian dictator enough.
To pay off his Western creditors, Ceau§escu applied unrelenting and unprecedented pressure upon domestic consumption.
In contrast to Communist rulers elsewhere, unrestrainedly borrowing abroad to bribe their subjects with well-stocked shelves, the Romanian Conducator set about exporting every available domestically-produced commodity.
Romanians were forced to use 40-watt bulbs at home so that energy could be exported to Italy and Germany.
Meat, sugar, flour, butter, eggs, and much more were strictly rationed.
Horse-drawn carts became the main means of transport and the harvest was brought in by scythe and sickle.
Romania did indeed pay off its international creditors, albeit at the cost of reducing its population to penury.
But there was more to Ceau§escu’s rule, in his last years, than just crazy economics.
The better to control the country’s rural population—and increase still further the pressure on peasant farmers to produce food for export—the regime inaugurated a proposed ‘systematization’ of the Romanian countryside.
Had Ceau^escu been granted the time to carry through this project it would utterly have destroyed what little remained of the country’s social fabric.
The rural ‘systemization’ project was driven forward by the Romanian dictator’s mounting megalomania.
Under Ceau§escu the Leninist impulse to control, centralize and plan every detail of daily life graduated into an obsession with homogeneity and grandeur surpassing even the ambitions of Stalin himself.
This project for the ‘renovation’ of Bucharest was to be aborted by the coup of December 1989; but enough was done for Ceau§escu’s ambition to be indelibly etched into the fabric of the contemporary city.
A historic district of central Bucharest the size of Venice was completely flattened.
Behind the gleaming white frontages of the boulevard were run up the familiar dirty, grim, pre-cast concrete blocks.
But the facade itself was aggressively, humiliatingly, unrelentingly uniform, a visual encapsulation of totalitarian rule.
The House of the People, designed by a twenty-fiveyear-old architect as Ceau§escu’s personal palace, was indescribably and uniquely ugly even by the standards of its genre.
Fronted by a vast hemicycle space that can hold half a million people, its reception area the size of a football pitch, Ceau§escu’s palace was a monstrous lapidary metaphor for unconstrained tyranny, Romania’s very own contribution to totalitarian urbanism.
Romanian Communism in its last years sat uneasily athwart the intersection of brutality and parody.
The Architect; The Creed-shaper; The Wise Helmsman; The Tallest Mast; The Nimbus of Victory; The Visionary; The Titan; The Son of the Sun; A Danube of Thought; and The Genius of the Carpathians.
What Ceau§escu’s sycophantic colleagues really thought of all this they were not saying.
But so long as he had the backing of the secret police, the Securitate, Ceau§escu appeared untouchable.
Appropriately enough, then, it was the Securitate who precipitated the regime’s fall when, in December 1989, they tried to remove a popular Hungarian Protestant pastor, Lazslo Tokes, in the western city of Timisoara.
The Hungarian minority, a special object of prejudice and repression under Ceau§escu’s rule, had been encouraged by developments just across the border in Hungary and were all the more resentful at the continuing abuses to which they were subject at home.
The following day, as the vigil turned unexpectedly into a demonstration against the regime, the police and the army were brought out to shoot into the crowd.
Exaggerated reports of the ‘massacre’ were carried on Voice of America and Radio Free Europe and spread around the country.
To quell the unprecedented protests, which had now spread from Timisoara to Bucharest itself, Ceau§escu returned from an official visit to Iran.
At first the army had appeared to back the dictator, occupying the streets of the capital and firing on demonstrators who tried to seize the national television studios.
But from December 22nd the soldiers, now directed by a ‘National Salvation Front’ that took over the television building, switched sides and found themselves pitted against heavily armed Securitate troops.
Found guilty of ‘crimes against the state’ they were hastily executed on Christmas Day, 1989.
Iliescu, like his colleagues in the Front, was a former Communist who had broken with Ceau§escu some years before and who could claim some slight credibility as a ‘reformer’ if only by virtue of his student acquaintance with the young Mikhail Gorbachev.
But Iliescu’s real qualification to lead a post-Ceau§escu Romania was his ability to control the armed forces, especially the Securitate, whose last hold-outs abandoned their struggle on December 27th.
Indeed, beyond authorizing on January 3rd 1990 the re-establishment of political parties, the new President did very little to dismantle the institutions of the old regime.
As later events would show, the apparatus that had ruled under Ceau§escu remained remarkably intact, shedding only the Ceau§escu family itself and their more egregiously incriminated associates.
Rumours of thousands killed during the protests and battles of December proved exaggerated—the figure was closer to one hundred—and it became clear that for all the courage and enthusiasm of the huge crowds in Timisoara, Bucharest and other cities the real struggle had been between the ‘realists’ around Iliescu and the old guard in Ceau§escu’s entourage.
The victory of the former ensured for Romania a smooth—indeed suspiciously smooth— exit out of Communism.
Iliescu did nothing to prevent riots in Tirgu Mures on March 19th, where eight people were killed and some three hundred wounded in orchestrated attacks on the local Hungarian minority.
In 1984 it was officially announced that the Turks of Bulgaria were not ‘Turks’ at all but forcibly-converted Bulgarians who would now be restored to their true identity.
Muslim rites were restricted and criminalized; the use of the Turkish language in broadcasting, publications and education was proscribed; and in a particularly offensive move, all Bulgarian citizens with Turkish names were instructed henceforth to assume properly ‘Bulgarian’ ones instead.
There was considerable Turkish resistance—which in turn aroused some opposition among Bulgarian intellectuals.
The international community protested loudly; Bulgaria was condemned at the UN and in the European Court of Justice.
Things were brought to a head by the exodus to Turkey, during the summer of 1989, of an estimated 300,000 ethnic Turks—another public relations calamity for the regime, and an economic one too, as the country began to run short of manual laborers.
When the police over-reacted on October 26th to a small gathering of environmentalists in a Sofia park—arresting and beating activists from the Ecoglasnost group for circulating a petition—party reformers led by foreign minister Petar Mladenov decided to act.
In Bulgaria the political ‘opposition’ had emerged largely after the fact and as in Romania there were suggestions that it was in some measure fabricated for their own purposes by dissident Communist factions.
By 1991, a mainly Turkish party, the Movement for Rights and Freedom, had secured enough electoral backing to hold the balance of seats in the country’s national Assembly.
We should not indulge the sirens of retrospective determinism, however seductive.
Even if Communism was doomed by its inherent absurdities, few predicted the timing and the manner of its going.
To be sure, the ease with which the illusion of Communist power was punctured revealed that these regimes were even weaker than anyone supposed, and this casts their earlier history in a new light.
Once Communist leaders started falling in one place their legitimacy elsewhere was fatally impaired.
The credibility of Communism rested in part upon its claim to embody necessity, to be the logical product of historical progress, a fact of political life, an inevitable presence on the modern landscape.
We have already seen that the example of others clearly weighed in the balance.
Nevertheless, the striking aspect of Communism’s collapse in Europe was not contagion per se. all revolutions spread in this way, corroding the legitimacy of established authorities by cumulative example.
As late as October 1989 Imre Pozsgay in Hungary, or Egon Krenze in East Germany, fondly supposed that they could control and manage their version of perestroika.
Most of their opponents tended to agree and continued to look for some interim compromise.
Back in 1980 Adam Michnik had written that a hybrid society is conceivable, one where totalitarian organization of the state will co-exist with democratic institutions of society’; well into the summer of 1989 he had little reason to expect anything else.
Hungarians, Czechs and Germans in particular were able to see their own revolution on the television news each evening.
As a consequence, Communism’s crucial asset, its control and monopoly of information, was lost.
The fear of being alone—the impossibility of knowing whether your own feelings were shared by others—was dissipated for ever.
Even in Romania the take-over of the national television studios was the determining moment in the uprising.
Not for nothing was the gruesome fate of the Ceau§escus filmed for broadcast to a national audience.
This was not a new pattern, of course— throughout the twentieth century radio stations and post offices were the first objectives of revolutionary crowds, from Dublin to Barcelona.
The second marked characteristic of the revolutions of 1989 was their pacific quality.
Romania was the exception, of course; but given the nature of Ceau§escu’s regime this was to be expected.
The real surprise was that even in Timisoara and Bucharest the scale of bloodshed was far less than everyone feared.
With the whole population—not to speak of much of the rest of the world—observing their every move, the Communist regimes were stymied.
To be observed in this way was itself a loss of authority and severely restricted their range of options.
To be sure, such considerations did not inhibit the Communist authorities in China, who shot down hundreds of peaceful demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on June 4th of that same year.
Nicolae Ceau§escu would not have hesitated to em3, Such considerations did not always apply in remote rural communities and small provincial towns, where the police continued to the very end to operate unhindered by television cameras or public disapproval.
And we have seen that Erich Honecker at least contemplated something similar.
At some crucial moment all dying authoritarian regimes vacillate between repression and compromise.
In the case of the Communists, confidence in their own capacity to rule was evaporating so rapidly that the chances of clinging to power by force alone began to seem slim—and the benefits of doing so by no means clear.
In the calculus of self-interest the balance of advantage to most Communist bureaucrats and party apparatchiks was rapidly swinging the other way—better to swim with the current than be washed away in a tidal wave of change.
That calculation might have looked different had the crowds been angry or their leaders belligerently determined to wreak revenge upon the old order.
But for many reasons—including the example of Tiananmen itself, unfolding on television the very day of the Polish elections—the men and women of 1989 consciously eschewed violence.
With decades of violence to their discredit, and all the guns and bullets on their side, the Communist regimes had very effectively taught their own subjects the impropriety and imprudence of resorting to force.
Distaste for violence was all that many of the revolutionaries of 1989 had in common.
They were an unusually motley group, even by the standards of most previous insurrections.
The balance varied from place to place but typically ‘the people’ included a mix of reform Communists, social democrats, liberal intellectuals, free-market economists, Catholic activists, trade unionists, pacifists, some unreconstructed Trotskyists and others besides.
At least one significant fault line—that separating liberal democrats from populist nationalists—could already be detected, distinguishing Mazowiecki from Walesa, for example, or Hungary’s left-leaning Free Democrats (led by Janos Kis and other dissident intellectuals) from old-line nationalists in the Democratic Forum.
In the image of its 26-year-old leader Viktor Orban, Fidesz in Hungary was originally designated as a political party exclusively for people under thirty.
The new generation was less concerned with engaging its rulers in debate, or offering radical alternatives to their rule, than in simply getting out from under it.
This contributed to the carnival-like aspect of 1989 remarked upon by some observers in Poland and Czechoslovakia; it also contributed to the unconcern with violent retribution.
This can be seen best in the language in which the objectives of 1989 were commonly expressed.
Long before Communism, the continent’s eastern half had been the Europe that sought recognition and acknowledgement; Western Europe was the Europe that ‘knew’ itself and from whom the acknowledgement was so longingly sought.
With the coming of the Soviet bloc, the sense that their part of Europe was severed from its roots had become a leitmotif of intellectual dissent and opposition across the region.
Talk of‘Europe’ became less abstract and therefore, among other things, more interesting to young people.
No longer just a lament for the lost culture of old Prague or Budapest, it now represented a concrete and attainable set of political goals.
Whereas the old Communist cadres could convincingly point to the depredations of an abstraction called ‘capitalism’, they had nothing to offer in place of‘Europe’— because it represented not an ideological alternative but simply the political norm.
Sometimes the thought was inflected as ‘the market economy’, sometimes as ‘civil society’; but in either case ‘Europe’ stood—squarely and simply—for normalcy and the modern way of life.
Communism was now no longer the future—its insistent trump card for six decades—but the past.
And some of them were perhaps less interested in freedom and individual rights than others.
It may be appropriate here, however, to offer an observation concerning the place of the United States in this story.
Eastern Europeans, especially East Berliners, were perfectly well aware of the US’s role in containing the Soviet Union.
Solidarity was financed largely from the United States and it was the United States that gave the most insistent official encouragement to protesters in Berlin and elsewhere—once it was clear that they would probably win.
American; much less that it was American encouragement or support that precipitated or facilitated their liberation.
The United States played a remarkably small part in the dramas of 1989, at least until after the fact.
And the American social model itself—the ‘free market’—was only occasionally posited as an object of admiration or emulation by the crowds or their spokesmen.
For most people who had lived under Communism, liberation by no means implied a yearning for untrammeled economic competition, much less the loss of free social services, guaranteed employment, cheap rents or any of Communism’s other attendant benefits.
It was, after all, one of the attractions of ‘Europe’, as imagined from the East, that it held out the prospect of affluence and security, liberty and protection.
In the marketplace of alternative models, the American way of life was still a minority taste and America, for all its global clout, was a long way away.
The satellite states of eastern Europe were all colonies of the Communist empire based in Moscow.
Accordingly, there is only so much about the changes of 1989 that can be attributed to indigenous social or political forces—whether they were underground Catholic organizations in Slovakia, rock-music groups in Poland or free-thinking intellectuals everywhere.
At a conference of eastern bloc leaders in Bucharest on July 7th 1989, the Soviet leader affirmed each socialist state’s right to follow its own trajectory without external interference.
Five months later, in a stateroom on the SS Maxim Gorky off Malta, he assured President Bush that force would not be used to keep Eastern Europe’s Communist regimes in power.
Once an imperial metropole had so publicly acknowledged that it would not, could not hang on to its colonial periphery—and had been universally acclaimed for saying so—its colonies were lost and with them the empire’s indigenous collaborators.
All that remained to be determined was the manner and direction in which they fell.
Their colleague Rezso Nyers also spoke with him in Bucharest on July 7th 1989, the day after Kadar’s death, by which date it was already clear that their cause was lost.
In 1849 Russian intervention had sealed the fate of the Hungarian and other revolutions of that year; in 1989 Russian abstention helped assure their success.
As this last example suggests, Gorbachev was letting Communism fall in east632 THE END OF THE OLD ORDER ern Europe in order to save it in Russia itself—just as Stalin had built the satellite regimes not for their own sake but as a security for his western frontier.
Tactically Gorbachev miscalculated badly—within two years the lessons of Eastern Europe would be used against the region’s liberator on his home territory.
No other territorial empire in recorded history ever abandoned its dominions so rapidly, with such good grace and so little bloodshed.
Gorbachev cannot take direct credit for what happened in 1989—he did not plan it and only hazily grasped its long-term import.
Milan Kundera Liberated from Communism, eastern Europe underwent a second and even more striking transformation.
In the course of the 1990s four established states disappeared from the map of the continent and fourteen countries were born—or resuscitated.
The six westernmost republics of the Soviet Union—Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova—became independent states, together with Russia itself.
Czechoslovakia became two separate countries—Slovakia and the Czech Republic.
Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia-Montenegro and Macedonia.
This making and breaking of nations was comparable in scale to the impact of the Versailles treaties that followed World War One—and in certain respects more dramatic.
The emergence of nation-states at Versailles was the culmination of a long drawn-out process with its roots in the mid-nineteenth century or before; it came as no surprise.
But the prospect of something similar occurring in the late twentieth century was anticipated by almost no-one.
Indeed, three states that were to disappear in the course of the 1990s—Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and the USSR—were themselves of post-1918 vintage.
The territorial fission of the Nineties accompanied the extinction of the last of Europe’s four continental empires—that of Russia.
But the logic of imperial break-up would not in itself have triggered the institutional re-arrangement of Eastern Europe.
As so often in the past, the fate of the region was determined by events in Germany.
Credit for German re-unification—a unique case of fusion in a decade of fission— must go in the first instance to Helmut Kohl.
The West German Chancellor was initially as hesitant as everyone else—on November 28th 1989 he presented to the Bundestag a five-year program of cautious steps toward German unity.
But after listening to East German crowds (and assuring himself of the support of Washington) Kohl calculated that a unified Germany was now not merely possible but perhaps urgent.
It was clear that the only way to staunch the flow west (2,000 people a day at one point) was to bring West Germany east.
In order to keep East Germans from leaving their country, the West German leader set about abolishing it.
As in the 19th century, German unification was in the first instance to be achieved by a currency union; but political union inevitably followed.
Talk of a ‘confederation’, which the West Germans had initially encouraged and Hans Modrow’s GDR cabinet had eagerly pursued, was precipitately dropped and in the hastily called East German elections of March 1990 Christian Democrat candidates ran on a unification ticket.
The first act of the new majority in the GDR Volkskammer, represented by a CDU-SPD-Liberal coalition led by Lothar de Maiziere, was to commit their country to German unity.
On May 18th 1990 a ‘monetary, economic and social union’ was signed between the two Germanies, and on July 1st its crucial clause—the extension of the Deutschmark to East Germany—came into force.
East Germans could now exchange their virtually useless East German marks—up to the equivalent of DM 40,000—at a hugely advantageous rate of 1:1.
However in Berlin the SPD did much better in the elections of 1990, winning 35 percent of the vote.
On August 23rd, by pre-agreement with Bonn, the Volkskammer voted to accede to the Federal Republic.
A week later a Treaty of Unification was signed, by which the GDR was absorbed into the FRG—as approved by its voters in the March elections and permitted under Article 23 of the 1949 Basic Law.
The division of Germany had been the work of the victors of World War Two and its reunification in 1990 would never have come about without their encouragement or consent.
East Germany was a Soviet satellite state, with 360,000 Soviet troops still stationed there in 1989.
West Germany, for all its independence, was not free to act autonomously on this matter.
As for Berlin, until a final peace settlement was reached it remained a city whose fate formally depended upon the original occupying powers—France, Britain, the United States and the Soviet Union.
Neither the British nor the French were in any particular hurry to see Germany reunited.
To the extent that West Europeans even thought about a unified Germany they assumed—reasonably enough—that it would come at the end of a long process of change in Eastern Europe, not right at the outset.
It seemed to me that although we had not discovered the means, at least we both had the will to check the German juggernaut.
But the British, for all their anxieties, had nothing to offer by way of an alternative to the course of events then unfolding in Germany and they duly acquiesced.
More than anyone else, the French were truly disturbed by the collapse of the stable and familiar arrangements in Germany and in the Communist bloc as a whole.
He declined Helmut Kohl’s invitation to attend a ceremony to mark the re-opening of the Brandenburg Gate, and tried to convince Soviet leaders that, as traditional allies, France and Russia had a common interest in blocking German ambitions.
Indeed, the French were banking on Gorbachev to veto German unity—as Mitterrand explained to his advisers on November 28th 1989, T don’t have to do anything to stop it, the Soviets will do it for me.
But once it became clear that this was not so—and following Kohl’s decisive victory in the East German elections—the French President adopted a different tack.
There must be no question of an enhanced Germany taking an independent path, much less reverting to its old middle-European priorities.
The Germans agreed readily enough to all the French conditions (though the maladroit character of France’s diplomatic maneuvers chilled relations for a while)—an echo of earlier days, when Bonn agreed after 1955 to confine ‘Europe’ to the original six countries in order to assuage French anxiety over the restoration of full sovereignty to Germany.
Kohl even concurred in the coming months over a range of minor concessions designed to reward Paris for its forbearance.
Unification was well worth some appeasement of Germany’s nervous European neighbours.
In any case Kohl—born in Ludwigshafen and like his fellow Rhinelander Adenauer instinctively disposed to look west—was not unduly troubled at the idea of tying Germany ever more closely to the European Community.
Like everyone else, the administration of President George Bush initially supposed along with its allies that German unification could only come at the end of the series of unpredictable changes unfolding in the USSR and Eastern Europe, and then only with Soviet consent.
But Washington was quicker to catch the prevailing mood, especially after a February 1990 poll 5 It is not a little ironic that Mitterrand’s successors are now having to grapple with the budgetary constraints and social consequences of that same treaty.
After spending millions refurbishing a prestigious building for himself—but very little on the bank’s putative beneficiaries—Attali was ignominiously removed.
The experience did no discernible damage to his considerable self-esteem.
The United States thus committed itself wholeheartedly to support for Kohl’s objectives, to ensure that Germans were never required to choose between unity and the Western alliance.
Under pressure from Washington, the French and British accordingly agreed to sit down with the Soviet Union and representatives of the two Germanies and thrash out the terms of the emergence of a new Germany.
These so-called ‘4+2’ talks, conducted by foreign ministers from February to September 1990, culminated in a Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany, signed in Moscow on September 12th.
With this treaty, which formally recognized the borders of a future Germany as those of the two present German states, the four-power status of Berlin was brought to an end, expiring at midnight on October 2nd 1990.
Moscow—like London, Paris and Washington—had become comfortable with a divided Germany and had long since abandoned Stalin’s post-war goal of extricating Bonn from the Western alliance.
And unlike the French and the British, the Soviet leadership was still in a position to block the process of unification, at least in principle.
No-one, in East or West, had a plan telling them what to do if the GDR disintegrated; and there were no blueprints for Germap unification.
But the Soviet leader, unlike his western counterparts, had no good options.
He could not realistically hope to prevent German unity except by reversing his benign public announcements of recent years and seriously damaging his own credibility.
But when that promise was later broken Gorbachev was helpless to intervene.
What he was able to do was extract, quite literally, a price for his concessions.
Gorbachev tried at first to hold the unification negotiations hostage for a ransom of $20 billion, before finally settling for approximately $8 billion, together with some $2 billion more in interest-free credits.
Helmut Kohl also agreed to alleviate Soviet fears of German irredentism by pledging, as we have seen, to accept as permanent his country’s eastern boundaries, a commitment enshrined the following year in a Treaty with Poland.
Playing Sidney Greenstreet to Washington’s Bogart, the Soviet Union made the best of a bad hand and relinquished its diminutive, resentful East German sidekick with the requisite protestation but few real regrets.
It made more sense to build a strategic relationship with a friendly and appreciative new Germany than to make an enemy of it, and from the Soviet perspective a united Germany, firmly grasped— and contained—in the Western embrace, was not such a bad outcome.
In addition to West German intellectuals like Gunter Grass and Jurgen Habermas who feared for the soul of a reunited ‘greater’ Germany 8 , many East Germans who had known no other homeland had mixed feelings when ‘their’ Germany was swept away from under them.
They might not have believed its more egregiously absurd self-descriptions, but they could not be entirely deaf to official propaganda.
We should not be surprised to learn that long after 1989 children in eastern German secondary schools continued to believe that East German troops had fought alongside the Red Army to liberate their country from Hitler.
This inculcated misperception was part of the GDR’s core identity and did nothing to ease its disoriented former citizens’ transition ‘back’ into Germany, particularly as ‘their’ Germany was systematically excised from the official record.
The names of towns, streets, buildings and counties were changed, often reverting to pre-1933 usage.
This was not the recovery of history, however, but rather its erasure—it was as though the GDR had never been.
When Erich Mielke was prosecuted and sentenced for murder it was not for crimes he authorized as head of the Stasi but rather for a political assassination committed in the 1930s, the evidence provided by Nazi interrogation records.
It was not just its institutions that were falling apart—much of its material infrastructure was decrepit.
Two dwellings in five were built before 1914 (in West Germany in 1989 the figure was less than one in five); a quarter of all houses lacked a bath, one third had only an outdoor toilet, and more than 60 percent lacked any form of central heating.
As in its dealings with Moscow, Bonn’s response was to throw very large sums of money at the problem.
In the three years following unification total transfers from Western into Eastern Germany amounted to the equivalent of 1,200 billion euros; by the end of 2003 the cost of absorbing the former GDR had reached 1. trillion euros.
In the short run this worked—confirming East Germans’ faith not so much in the free market as in the unplumbed resources of the West German exchequer.
But after the first flush of reunion, many ‘Ossies’ were actually put off by the patronizing triumphalism of their Western cousins—a sentiment on which the former Communists would trade with some success in future elections.
Meanwhile, to avoid upsetting West German voters—by no means all of whom had greeted unification with unalloyed enthusiasm—Kohl chose not to raise taxes.
Instead, in order to meet its vast new commitments the Federal Republic—which had hitherto run substantial current account surpluses—had no choice but to go into deficit.
The Bundesbank, aghast at the inflationary impact of such a policy, accordingly began steadily to raise interest rates, starting in 1991—at precisely the moment when the Deutschmark was being locked for ever into a planned European currency.
The knock-on effect of these interest rates—increased unemployment and slower economic growth—would be felt not just in Germany but throughout the European Monetary System.
In effect, Helmut Kohl exported the cost of his country’s unification and Germany’s European partners were made to share the burden.
Mikhail Gorbachev’s concessions on Germany surely contributed to the decline in his domestic standing—indeed he had warned James Baker that a united Germany inside NATO might ‘be the end of perestroika.
To lose the other east European satellite states could be attributed to misfortune; but to relinquish Germany as well looked like carelessness.
The Soviet Defense Minister, Marshall Sergei Akhromeyev, was convinced that Gorbachev could have got better terms from the West had he paid attention to the problem in time; and he was not alone.
The Russian empire had grown by conquest and accretion over the centuries and much of what had once been foreign territory was now intimately associated with the homeland.
The Baltic republics of the Union—Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania—were distinctive in three significant respects.
In the first place they were more exposed to the West than any other region of the Soviet Union proper.
Estonians especially were in touch with the Scandinavian countries, watching Finnish television since the 1970s and ever-conscious of the contrast between their own condition and that of their prosperous neighbours.
Lithuanians, whose primary historical and geographical affinity was with neighbouring Poland, could hardly fail to notice that even under Communism Poles were decidedly freer and better off than them.
Secondly, and despite the unflattering comparison with foreign neighbours, the Baltic states were nonetheless prosperous by Soviet standards.
They were the major Soviet producers of a large number of industrial products—railroad cars, radio sets, paper goods—as well as a leading source of fish, dairy produce and cotton.
Between the commodities that they produced and those that passed through their docks Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians had at least a passing acquaintance with a way of life and a standard of living of which most of the rest of the Soviet Union could but dream.
But the third distinguishing feature of the Baltic republics, and by far the most significant, was that they alone had a recent history of genuine independence.
After initially winning their freedom in 1919 following the collapse of the Czarist Empire they had been forcibly re-absorbed twenty years later by the Romanovs’ Soviet heirs, in the secret clauses of the August 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
In the Baltics, Gorbachev’s glasnost —which elsewhere in the Soviet Union prompted demands for greater civil or economic rights—inevitably re-opened the question of independence.
Samizdat in this region was always and necessarily nationalist in tone.
In 1945 the population of all three Baltic republics was quite homogenous, with most residents belonging to the dominant national group and speaking the local language.
But by the early 1980s, thanks to forced expulsions during and after the war and a steady inflow of Russian soldiers, administrators and workers, the population was far more mixed, especially in the northern republics.
On August 23rd 1987, there were simultaneous demonstrations in Vilnius, Riga and Tallinn to mark the anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, followed three months later in Riga alone by a public meeting to commemorate the anniversary of the 1918 declaration of Latvian independence.
Emboldened by their success—or, more precisely, by the authorities’ unprecedented tolerance of such public expressions of implied dissent— independent groups and gatherings started to emerge across the region.
Thus on March 25th 1988 in Riga hundreds gathered to commemorate the Latvian deportations of 1949, followed by a demonstration in June to mark the expulsions of 1940.
A few weeks later, under the auspices of the ostensibly a-political ‘Environmental Protection Club’ , the Latvian National Independence Movement was born.
The most dramatic aspect of these nascent political movements in Estonia and Latvia was their mere existence—and their unusually subversive nomenclature.
But it was in Lithuania, where the Russian presence was far less obtrusive, that the challenge to Soviet power was made explicit.
By February 1989 Sajudis had been transformed into a nationwide political party.
The following month, in the elections to the Soviet Congress of People’s Deputies, it won 36 of Lithuania’s 42 seats.
The elections in all three republics were a marked victory for independent candidates and triggered a growing awareness of a common Baltic trajectory.
With the Estonian and Latvian independence movements now echoing their Lithuanian counterpart and openly proclaiming national independence as their goal, confrontation with Moscow seemed inevitable.
The Baltic independence movements spent 1989 pressing against the frontiers of the permissible.
When the newly independenceminded Supreme Soviets of first Lithuania and then Latvia tried to imitate an Estonian law of November 1988 authorizing the privatization of local state enterprises, Moscow voided the decrees, as it had earlier voided the Estonian initiative; but otherwise the government refrained from any involvement.
When, on October 8th 1989 (the day after Gorbachev’s public warning in East Berlin that ‘life punishes those who delay’), the Latvian Popular Front proclaimed its intention to move towards full independence, the Soviet authorities were too preoccupied with the escalating crisis in Germany to take any action.
However—and not for the first time—his own example was working against him.
Even the boycott itself was abandoned in June, in return for a Lithuanian agreement to ‘suspend’ the full implementation of its declaration of independence.
After a hectic six months during which virtually every other major Soviet republic asserted its ‘sovereignty’ if not yet its full independence, Gorbachev’s position was becoming untenable.
His efforts to rein in the Baltic initiatives had substantially weakened his image as a ‘reformer’, while his failure to suppress talk of autonomy, sovereignty and independence was stirring up resentment among his colleagues and—more ominously—in the army and security forces.
On December 9 Note that just eight weeks earlier Gorbachev had adamantly refused to consider any such change.
A week later troops from the same units stormed the Latvian Ministry of the Interior in Riga, killing four people.
The bloodshed in the Baltics signaled the opening of the endgame in the Soviet Union.
Within a week over 150,000 people had gathered in Moscow to demonstrate against the shootings.
Boris Yeltsin, erstwhile First Secretary of the Moscow City Committee and—since May 1990—Chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet, traveled to Tallinn to sign a mutual recognition of‘sovereignty’ between Russia and the Baltic Republics, bypassing altogether the Soviet authorities.
In March 1991 referenda in Latvia and Estonia confirmed that electors there too overwhelmingly favored full independence.
Gorbachev, who had half-heartedly started to repress the recalcitrant republics, now reverted to his earlier stance and vainly sought a modus vivendi with them instead.
Yeltsin in March 1991 publicly denounced Gorbachev’s ‘lies and deceptions’ and called for his resignation, defying official pressure to remain silent or face impeachment.
So long as the overarching structures of Soviet power remained secure, Communist rulers from Ukraine to Kazakhstan had confined their ‘reforms’ to cautious mimicry of Gorbachev himself.
But following the debacle in the Baltics the same well-honed antennae that attuned them to perestroika now signaled that the Union itself might well be doomed; in any case they could see for themselves that in certain ruling circles the Soviet President was a marked man.
Thus whereas the new politics of the Baltic republics reflected a genuine and widespread national renaissance, moves towards ‘sovereignty’ in many of the other republics were typically a more variable mixture of national feeling and nomenklatura self-preservation.
By far the most important of the would-be ‘sovereign’ republics now asserting their distinctive claims was Ukraine.
Like the Baltic republics, Ukraine had a history of independence , last asserted and promptly lost in the aftermath of World War One.
But of more immediate and practical consideration were the material resources of the region.
Sitting squarely athwart Russia’s access routes to the Black Sea (and the Mediterranean) as well as to central Europe, Ukraine was a mainstay of the Soviet economy.
With just 2. percent of the land area of the USSR it was home to 18 percent of its population and generated nearly 17 percent of the country’s Gross National Product, second only to Russia itself.
In the last years of the Soviet Union Ukraine contained 60 percent of the country’s coal reserves and a majority share of the country’s titanium ; its unusually rich soil was responsible for over 40 percent of Soviet agricultural output by value.
The disproportionate importance of Ukraine in Russian and Soviet history was reflected in the Soviet leadership itself.
Konstantin Chernenko was the son of Ukrainian ‘kulaks’ deported to Siberia, while Yuri Andropov had risen to the top as a consequence of occupying the strategically central post of KGB head in Ukraine.
But this close association between the Ukrainian republic and the Soviet leadership did not imply any special regard for its inhabitants.
Ukrainian products—notably food and ferrous metals—were shipped to the rest of the Union at heavily subsidized prices, a practice that continued almost to the end.
Most of the rest of the population were Russians , with the remainder comprising small numbers of Moldovans, Poles, Magyars, Bulgarians and the country’s surviving Jews.
Perhaps more to the point the only significant minority—the Russians—was concentrated in the industrial east of the country and in the capital Kiev.
Central and Western Ukraine, notably around Lviv, the second city, was predominantly Ukrainian in language and Eastern Orthodox or else Uniate (Greekrite Catholic) in religion.
Thanks to the relative tolerance of the Habsburgs, Ukrainians in Galicia had been allowed to preserve their native tongue.
Depending upon district, anything from 78 percent to 91 percent of the local inhabitants used it as their first language in 1994, whereas in the territories once ruled by the Czar even those who identified themselves as Ukrainians often spoke Russian more readily.
The Soviet constitution, as we have seen, ascribed national identities to the residents of its separate republics and indeed defined all its citizens by ethnic-national categories.
As elsewhere, so in Ukraine—particularly the recently-annexed Western Ukraine—this had self-fulfilling consequences.
In earlier times, when the local language was mostly confined to the remote countryside, and the cities were Russian-speaking and Soviet-dominated, the theoretically decentralized and federal character of this union of national republics was of interest only to scholars and Soviet apologists.
It gathered considerable support, notably in the major cities and from ‘6os-era reform Communists; but in marked contrast to independence movements in the Baltic it could not automatically count on mass backing and did not reflect any groundswell of national sentiment.
In elections to the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet in March 1990 the Communists secured a clear majority; RUKH won less than a quarter of the seats.
Thus it was not Ukrainian nationalists who were to seize the initiative but rather the Communists themselves.
The Communists in the Ukrainian Soviet voted, on ""But mostly unpredicted.
This pattern was repeated in the smaller western Soviet republics as well, varying according to local circumstances.
Byelorussia , to the north of Ukraine, had no comparable national identity or traditions.
The ephemeral independent ‘Belarusan National Republic’ of 1918 never secured external recognition and many of its own citizens felt closer allegiance to Russia, or else Poland or Lithuania.
After World War Two, with the annexation of parts of eastern Poland, the Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republic contained a significant minority of Russians, Poles and Ukrainians.
Belarussians themselves—though by far the largest linguistic community in the republic—showed no sign of wanting or expecting sovereignty of any kind; nor could their country, heavily dependent on Russia, hope to sustain genuine independence.
A poor, marshy region better suited to livestock-rearing than large scale agriculture, Belarus had been devastated by the war.
Its most significant contribution to the post-war Soviet economy was in chemicals and flax—and in its strategic position athwart major gas lines and communication links from Moscow to the Baltic Sea.
In Belarus as in Ukraine, the Soviet elections of 1990 saw the Communists returned in a clear majority; and when the Ukrainian Soviet declared itself‘sovereign’ in July 1990 its northern neighbour duly followed suit two weeks later.
In Minsk as in Kiev, the local nomenklatura was moving prudently, waiting upon events in Moscow.
Soviet Moldavia, squeezed between Ukraine and Romania, was a different and rather more interesting case.
The territory in question—‘Bessarabia’ as it was better-known under the Czars—had see-sawed back and forth between Russia and Romania over the course of the century and the fortunes of war.
Its four and a half million residents were predominantly Moldavian, but with large Russian and 12 And should not be confused with historical Moldavia just across the Prut river in Romania.
On the one hand many of its people, especially in the capital Chisinau , spoke Russian well and thought of themselves as Soviet citizens; on the other hand the Romanian connection provided a bridge to Europe and a basis for burgeoning demands for increased autonomy.
When a ‘Popular Front’ movement emerged in 1989 its primary objective was the demand that Romanian become the official language of the republic, a concession that the local Communist authorities granted that same year.
There was also some incendiary talk, mostly speculative and actively discouraged from Bucharest, of Moldova ‘rejoining’ Romania itself.
Following the 1990 elections, in which the Popular Front won a majority, the new government proceeded first to change the name of the republic from the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic to the ‘Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova’ (later plain ‘Republic of Moldova’) and then, in June, to declare itself sovereign.
These largely symbolic moves caused rising anxiety and talk of pre-emptive separatism among Russian-speakers as well as the tiny Gagauz community.
Following a referendum on autonomy in the autumn of 1990 the Communist leadership in Tiraspol—the main town in eastern Moldova, across the Dniester river, where Russians and Ukrainians formed a local majority—declared a Transnistrian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, echoing a similarly ‘autonomous’ Gagauz Soviet Socialist Republic in the southeast.
But whereas the Gagauz republic never got beyond proclaiming its existence (the future Moldovan state would re-incorporate it peacefully, against a right to secede should Moldova ever ‘rejoin’ Romania), Transnistrian ‘independence’ was underwritten by the presence of the Soviet XIVth Army, which helped its clients fight off initial Moldovan attempts to recover the territory.
But the scission in tiny Moldova offered a foretaste of more serious troubles to come a few hundred kilometers further east, in the Caucasus.
There the longstanding antagonisms between Armenians and Azeris, complicated in particular by the presence in Azerbaijan of a substantial Armenian minority in the region of Nagorno-Karabakh, had already resulted in violent clashes both with each other and with Soviet troops in 1988, with hundreds of casualties.
In the Azerbaijan capital of Baku there were further clashes in January of the following year.
In neighbouring Georgia, twenty demonstrators were shot during clashes in the capital Tbilisi between nationalists and soldiers in April 1989, as tensions rose between crowds demanding secession from the Union and authorities still committed to preserving it.
But Soviet Georgia, like the neighbouring Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan, was too geographically vulnerable and ethnically complex to be able to contemplate with equanimity the insecurity that must accompany Soviet collapse.
By the spring of 1991, then, everyone at the peripheries was waiting to see what would happen at the centre.
The key, of course, was Russia itself—by far the dominant republic of the Union, with half the country’s population, three-fifths of its Gross National Product and three-quarters of its land mass.
Spread across eleven time zones and encompassing dozens of different peoples, ‘Russia’ had always been too big to be reduced to a single identity or common sense of purpose.
But the Russian people had never been assigned ‘nationhood’ in the way that Kazakhs or Ukrainians or Armenians were officially ‘nations’ in So13 The Azeris being of Turkic origin, part of the background to these tensions can be traced to the Armenian massacres of World War One in Ottoman Turkey.
The boundaries between ‘Russia’ and ‘the Soviet Union’ were thus kept blurred.
By the time of Gorbachev there was a marked increase in the emphasis on ‘Russianness’, for some of the same reasons that the East German state had begun to take a very public pride in Frederick the Great and to exalt the properly German qualities of the German Democratic Republic.
In the declining years of the peoples’ republics, patriotism re-emerged as a serviceable substitute for socialism.
For just this reason it was also the easiest and least threatening form of political opposition.
In Russia or the GDR, as in Hungary, intellectual critics might suffer persecution but muted expressions of nationalism were not necessarily repressed or even discouraged—they could be channeled to the authorities’ advantage.
The revival of‘Great Russian chauvinism’ in Soviet publications and the media should be understood in this light.
It was also, of course, an additional source of anxiety for vulnerable national minorities.
The Soviet leader’s failings were becoming ever more painfully evident—and his popularity was sinking fast, as Yeltsin could not fail to observe.
Gorbachev’s major tactical mistake in domestic affairs had been to encourage the emergence of a national legislature with national visibility, real powers and 15 That is one reason why the end of the Soviet Union was and is a source of genuine regret among many Russians.
Yeltsin and his Russian supporters were much quicker than Gorbachev himself to appreciate that this new, openly-elected Soviet would be a natural forum for the expression of discontents of all sorts; and Yeltsin became particularly adept at aligning Russia’s own interests with those of the various nations and republics.
Thus while Gorbachev was still ‘triangulating’ between the desirable and the possible, arguing for a ‘controlled federalism’ (a characteristically Gorbachevian compromise), Yeltsin was passionately and very publicly defending the struggles for Baltic independence.
In April 1991 Gorbachev reluctantly conceded to republics the right of secession in a new Union constitution; but this bow to reality merely weakened him further, convincing his conservative foes that Gorbachev would have to be removed if order was to be restored.
Meanwhile, on June 12th 1991, Yeltsin, who had long since overtaken Gorbachev in national popularity polls, was elected President of the Russian Soviet Republic—the first ever democratically chosen leader of Russia.
Together with the popular election of the now openly antiCommunist Yeltsin, this finally tipped the scales.
That something of the sort was brewing was by now an open secret in Moscow—as early as June 20th the American ambassador had actually warned Gorbachev of a conspiracy, to no avail.
The 1991 plotters were thus unabashedly reverting to earlier Soviet practices.
When he refused, the Emergency Committee announced on August 19th that the President was unable to exercise his authority‘for health reasons’ and that the Committee would thus assume full powers.
The Soviet Vice-President Gennady Yanaev signed a decree stripping Gorbachev of his authority and a six-month ‘state of emergency’ was declared.
But although Gorbachev was helpless, for all practical purposes a prisoner in his Black Sea villa at the southern promontory of the Crimea, the plotters were not l6 Yeltsin received 57 percent of the vote in a turnout of 74 percent.
In the first place, the mere fact that they had had to declare an emergency and announce virtual martial law merely in order to replace one Communist leader with another demonstrated how far the traditional structures of the Soviet Union had unraveled.
The plotters did not have the unanimous support of their own agencies—crucially a majority of senior KGB officers refused to back Kryuchkov.
And while there was no doubt about what the plotters were against , they were never able to offer any clear indication of what it was they were for.
In times past when such men as these schemed in the Kremlin they were hidden from public view, their only appearances confined to distant viewing stands at public ceremonies.
Now, however, they were constrained to appear on television and to the press to explain and defend their actions—and the public was given ample opportunity to observe close-up the physiognomy of official Socialism in its dotage.
His standing had been further elevated by a personal meeting with George Bush, during the American President’s visit to the USSR just three weeks before.
Now, on August 19th, he publicly denounced the Kremlin takeover as an illegal coup d’etat and placed himself at the head of the resistance to it, directing operations from his headquarters in the Russian Parliament and mobilizing the crowds surrounding it to defend democracy against the tanks.
At the same time, in the full glare of the assembled international media, Yeltsin engaged in lengthy conversations and negotiations with world leaders—all but one of whom offered him their full public support and studiously withheld any recognition from the increasingly isolated conspirators.
But the leaders of the coup—having lost the public initiative—now began to lose their nerve.
On August 21st one of the coup leaders, Boris Pugo , committed suicide; at Yeltsin’s behest his colleagues were arrested.
That same day an exhausted and anxious Gorbachev was flown back to Moscow.
Gorbachev, who seemed dazed and uncertain when seen in public, was understandably slow to grasp the import of these developments.
This approach still played well in the West, where it was widely assumed (and hoped) that after the abortive coup things would carry on much as before.
But in the Soviet Union itself Gorbachev’s anachronistic reiterations of failed goals, and his apparent ingratitude to his rescuers, were a revelation.
By the time a chastened Gorbachev got the point, suspended the CPSU and (on August 24th) resigned as its General Secretary, it was too late.
Of course, the former General Secretary was still President of the Soviet Union.
Between August 24th and September 21st Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Georgia, Tajikistan and Armenia followed the Baltic republics and declared themselves independent of the Soviet Union—most of them making the announcement in the confused and uncertain days that followed Gorbachev’s return.
When the national referendum was held on December 1st, 90. percent voted to leave the Soviet Union.
Meanwhile, a few hundred yards away, Boris Yeltsin and the Russian parliament were establishing an independent Russia.
By November Yeltsin had taken under Russian control virtually all financial and economic activity on Russian territory.
The Soviet Union was now a shell state, emptied of power and resources.
When Gorbachev proposed a new ‘Treaty on the Economic Community of Sovereign States’ most of the independent republics simply refused to sign.
At the October sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR the western republics were absent.
Finally, on December 8th, the presidents and prime ministers of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus—the core Slav states of the Soviet empire—took it upon themselves to meet near Minsk and denounce the Union Treaty of 1922, in effect abolishing the Soviet Union.
Twenty-four hours later Gorbachev announced his intention to resign as Soviet President.
Mikhail Gorbachev ceded his prerogatives as Commander-inChief to President Yeltsin of Russia and stepped down from his post.
Within fortyeight hours Gorbachev had vacated his office and Yeltsin moved in.
At midnight on December 31st 1991 the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ceased to exist.
The disappearance of the Soviet Union was a remarkable affair, unparalleled in modern history.
There was no foreign war, no bloody revolution, no natural catastrophe.
The unraveling of the USSR was not altogether free of violence, as we have seen in Lithuania and the Caucasus; and there would be more fighting in some of the independent republics in the coming years.
But for the most part the world’s largest country departed the stage almost without protest.
To describe this as a bloodless retreat from Empire is surely accurate; but it hardly begins to capture the unanticipated ease of the whole process.
But if this accounts for the futility of Communist authority in the satellite states, held in place by nothing more than the shadow of the Red Army, it does not quite suffice to explain what happened in the imperial homeland itself.
Even if the society that Communism claimed to have built was essentially fraudulent, the Leninist state, after all, was decidedly real.
But—and this is the second aspect of the explanation—the Soviet state did not in fact disappear.
The USSR shattered, rather, into a multiplicity of little successor states, most of them ruled by experienced Communist autocrats whose first instinct was to reproduce and impose the systems and the authority they had hitherto wielded as Soviet managers.
There was no ‘transition to democracy’ in most of the successor republics; that transition came—if it came at all—somewhat later.
Autocratic state power, the only kind that most denizens of the domestic Soviet empire had ever known, was not so much dethroned as downsized.
From the outside this was a dramatic change; but experienced from within its implications were decidedly less radical.
Moreover, whereas the local Communist secretaries who metamorphosed so smoothly into national state presidents had every reason to act decisively to secure their fiefdom, the Soviet authorities at the center had no territorial fiefdom of their own to protect.
All they could offer was a return to the decrepit structures that Gorbachev had so enthusiastically cut down; unsurprisingly, they lacked the will to battle on.
Thus the efflorescence of successor states should not be interpreted as evidence that the Soviet Union collapsed under the weight of a hitherto quiescent, newly reawakened nationalism in its constituent republics.
With the exception of the Baltic countries, whose trajectory more closely resembled that of their western neigh19 The will, but not the means.
Had Gorbachev—or the August plotters—chosen to use the army to crush all opposition, it is by no means sure that they would have failed.
Even in the newlyindependent states there were many vulnerable minorities (especially the omnipresent Russians)—erstwhile Soviet citizens with good reason to regret the loss of ‘imperial’ protection and who would prove distinctly ambivalent about their new circumstances.
When President George Bush visited Kiev on August ist 1991 he made a point of publicly recommending to Ukrainians that they remain in the Soviet Union.
This rather hamfisted attempt to shore up the increasingly vulnerable Soviet President was not quite tantamount to an endorsement of the Soviet Union . . . but it came perilously close.
The American President’s publicly-aired caution is a further salutary reminder of the limited part played by the USA in these developments.
Pace the selfcongratulatory narrative that has entered the American public record, Washington did not ‘bring down’ Communism—Communism imploded of its own accord.
Meanwhile, if his Ukrainian audience ignored Bush’s advice and voted overwhelmingly a few months later to quit the Union for good, it was not out of a sudden access of patriotic enthusiasm.
Independence in Ukraine, or Moldova, or even Georgia, was not so much about self-determination as self-preservation—a sound basis for state-making, as it turned out, but a poor foundation for democracy.
Much the same was true of the break-up of Czechoslovakia, the ‘velvet divorce’ between Slovaks and Czechs that was peaceably and amicably consummated on January 1st 1993.
And that, of course, is how it was advertised by many of the local protagonists.
But on closer inspection the division of Czechoslovakia into two separate states—Slovakia and the Czech Republic—illustrates once again, on a provincial scale and at the heart of Europe, the limitations of such an interpretation.
Czechs and Slovaks, however indistinguishable they might appear to perplexed outsiders, had markedly different pasts.
Bohemia and Moravia—the historical territories comprising the Czech lands—could boast not merely a remarkable medieval and Renaissance past at the heart of the Holy Roman Empire but also a pre-eminent share in the industrialization of central Europe.
Their major city, Prague—one of the aesthetic glories of the continent—was by 1914 a significant center of modernism in the visual arts and literature.
Ruled for centuries from Budapest they lacked any distinctive national story—within the Hungarian half of the Empire they were regarded not as ‘Slovaks’ but as slav-language-speaking peasants of rural northern Hungary.
Only with the independence of Czechoslovakia in 1918, and the Slovaks’ somewhat reluctant incorporation therein, did it become the second city of the new state under the name Bratislava.
The inter-war Republic of Czechoslovakia was democratic and liberal by prevailing regional standards, but its centralized institutions strongly favored the Czechs, who occupied almost all positions of power and influence.
Slovakia was a mere province and a poor and rather disfavored one at that.
The same impulse that led many of the country’s three million German-speaking citizens to listen to proNazi separatists thus also drove a certain number of Czechoslovakia’s two and a half million Slovaks to look with sympathy upon Slovak populists demanding autonomy and even independence.
In March 1939, when Hitler absorbed the Czech regions into the ‘Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia’, an authoritarian, clericalist Slovak puppet state was established under Father Jozef Tiso.
The first ever independent state of Slovakia thus emerged at Hitler’s behest and over the corpse of the Czechoslovak Republic.
Just how popular Slovakia’s wartime ‘independence’ ever was is hard to know after the fact.
In the post-war years it was discredited both by its own record (Slovakia deported to death camps virtually all of its 140,000 pre-war Jewish population) and by its intimate dependence upon its Nazi patron.
After its liberation, Czechoslovakia was re-established as a single state and expressions of Slovak nationalism were frowned upon.
Indeed in the early Stalinist years, ‘Slovak bourgeois nationalism’ was one of the accusations levied at putative defendants in the show trials then being prepared—Gustav Husak spent six years in prison on the charge.
But in time the Communists in Czechoslovakia, as elsewhere, came to see the advantage of encouraging a moderate degree of national feeling.
With fewer cars or televisions and worse communications than the more advanced western provinces, Slovaks appeared less vulnerable to foreign influence than Prague-based radicals and dissidents with their access to foreign media.
Accordingly they suffered far less in the repression and purges of the seventies.
In the three years separating the end of Communism from the final split, every public opinion poll showed that some form of common Czecho-Slovak state was favored by a majority of Czechs and Slovaks.
And the new President, Vaclav Havel, was a firm and very public believer in maintaining Czechs and Slovaks in the same country.
The initial unimportance of the ‘national’ question can be seen from the results of the first free elections, in June 1990.
In Bohemia and Moravia Havel’s Civic Forum secured half of the vote, with most of the remainder divided between Communists and Christian Democrats.
Civic Forum’s sister party Public Against Violence emerged as the largest group, but a sizeable share of the vote was split between Christian Democrats, Communists, Hungarian Christian Democrats and Greens.
Less than one Slovak voter in seven opted for the only party which favored dividing the country into its separate ethnic constituencies.
Communism was gone and Havel was the President of the Republic, ostensibly above the political fray.
Political differences between erstwhile colleagues now came to the fore, with doctrinal free-marketeers led by Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus increasingly influential.
On a visit to Prague in 1985 the present author was regaled by liberal Czechs with accounts of the privileges accorded by the regime to the Slovak minority.
Schoolteachers from Slovakia—recruited to teach in Prague’s elementary schools and deemed by parents to be hopelessly provincial and inadequate to the task—were a particular target of resentment.
But whereas there was a real constituency in the Czech lands for such an objective this was not the case in Slovakia.
Privatization, the free market and a reduced state sector held little appeal for most Slovaks, who depended far more than Czechs upon jobs in unprofitable, outdated state-owned factories, mines and mills— ‘enterprises’ for whose products there was no longer a protected market and that were unlikely to attract foreign capital or private investors.
In the eyes of certain business and political circles in Prague, Slovakia was a burdensome inheritance.
Meanwhile Public Against Violence also broke apart, for analogous reasons.
Its most effective public figure was now Vladimir Meciar, an ex-boxer who played a relatively minor role in the events of 1989 but had since proved far more adept than his colleagues at maneuvering through the shoals of democratic politics.
Following the June election he had formed a government in the Slovak National Council, but his rebarbative personal style produced a split in his coalition and Meciar was replaced by the Catholic politician Jan £arnogursky.
Meciar duly departed PAV, forming instead his own Movement for a Democratic Slovakia.
From the Fall of 1991 into the summer of 1992 representatives from the Czech and Slovak administrations conducted lengthy negotiations, seeking an agreed basis for a decentralized, federal constitution—the preference of the clear majority of politicians and voters on both sides.
But Me&ar, in order to establish a constituency for himself and his party, now took up the cause of Slovak nationalism—a subject in which he had not previously evinced great interest.
Buoyed by such rhetoric and his kitschy but charismatic public style, Meciar led his new party to a clear victory at the Federal elections of June 1992 with nearly 40 percent of the vote in Slovakia.
With Klaus now prime minister of the Czech region, both autonomous halves of the federal republic were in the hands of men who—for different but complementary reasons—would not be sorry to see the country fall apart.
Only the Federal President himself now stood, in constitutional form and in his own person, for the ideal of a united, federal Czechoslovakia.
But Vaclav Havel was no longer as popular—and therefore as influential—as he had been less than two years before.
Zantovsky’s assertion was not altogether mistaken, but in context it would prove more than a little self-fulfilling.
Like other former Czech dissidents, Havel and his colleagues were not always inclined to think well of Slovaks.
Ironically, Klaus did not share such liberal prejudices, nor did he care one way or the other about Slovakia’s past.
The two men, now the most powerful politicians in their respective regions, spent the next few weeks ostensibly negotiating the terms of a state treaty for a federal Czechoslovakia.
Meciar demanded currency-issuing and borrowing rights for a virtually sovereign Slovak republic; a moratorium on privatization; the restoration of Communist-era subsidies; and a raft of other measures all of which were anathema to Klaus, doggedly pursuing his plan for a forced march to the unrestricted market.
Klaus purported to be surprised and upset by Meciar’s demands, but these were hardly a secret in view of Meciar’s many speeches on the subject.
In practice it was Klaus who was maneuvering the Slovak leader towards a break, rather than the other way around.
In consequence, even though the majority of Slovak deputies in the Slovak National Council and in the Federal Assembly would have been quite content to approve a state treaty affording each half of the country full autonomy and equal status in a federal state, they found themselves instead facing a fait accompli.
Since we appear to be unable to reach an agreement, we might as well abandon these fruitless efforts and go our separate ways.
The Slovaks, faced with the apparent fulfillment of their own wishes, were trapped into assent—in many cases against their own better judgment.
A week later Klaus and Meciar, the latter still a trifle dazed by his own ‘success’, agreed to divide their country with effect from January 1st 1993.
On that day Czechoslovakia disappeared and its two republics re-emerged as separate states, with Klaus and Meciar as their respective Prime Ministers.
Vaclav Havel, whose efforts to bind the country together had been increasingly forlorn—and altogether ignored in the final months—ceased “Quoted in Mlada Fronta dnes 12th March 1991.
Whether divorce was good for the two partners remained unclear for some time—neither the Czech Republic nor Slovakia flourished in the initial postCommunist decade.
Klaus’s ‘shock therapy’ and Meciar’s national-Communism both failed, albeit in different ways.
But although Slovaks came to regret their dalliance with Vladimir Meciar, and Klaus’s star waned in Prague, nostalgia for Czechoslovakia was never much in evidence.
The Czechoslovak divorce was a manipulated process in which the Czech Right brought about what it claimed not to seek while Slovak Populists achieved rather more than they had intended; not many people were overjoyed at the result, but nor was there lasting regret.
The division of Czechoslovakia was a product of chance and circumstances.
With other people in control—with different outcomes at the elections of 1990 and 1992—the story would not have been the same.
Had a federal state treaty been agreed upon by 1992—had Czechoslovakia endured for a few years longer—it is highly unlikely that anyone in Prague or Bratislava would have seen much point in pursuing their quarrels, with the prospect of admission to the European Union absorbing their attention and the bloody massacres in nearby Bosnia concentrating their minds.
G W Hegel The peaceful fragmentation of Czechoslovakia contrasts dramatically with the catastrophe that befell Yugoslavia in the same years.
Between 1991 and 1999 hundreds of thousands of Bosnians, Croats, Serbs and Albanians were killed, raped or tortured by their fellow citizens; millions more were forced out of their homes and into exile.
Struggling to account for massacres and civil war on a scale not seen since 1945—i n a country long regarded by Western radicals as something of a model socialist society—foreign commentators have typically proposed two contrasting explanations.
One view, widely circulated in Western media and taken up in the public statements of European and American statesmen, presents the Balkans as a hopeless case, a cauldron of mysterious squabbles and ancient hatreds.
It consisted, in the words of a much-cited bon mot, of six republics, five nations, four languages, three religions and two alphabets, all held together by a single party.
According to this account, ‘age-old’ conflicts—in what the Marquis de Salaberry had described in 1791 as ‘the unpolished extremities’ of Europe—bubbled over much as they had done in centuries past.
Thanks to outside intervention and imperial ambition, the territory of former Yugoslavia had over the course of the past two centuries been occupied, divided and exploited to the advantage of others—Turkey, Britain, France, Russia, Austria, Italy and Germany.
If there was bad blood between the peoples of the region it should be traced to imperial manipulation rather than to ethnic hostility.
Whatever one thinks of these two readings of Balkan history, it is striking to note that despite their apparent incompatibility they have one important feature in common.
Both diminish or ignore the role of the Yugoslavs themselves, dismissed as victims either of fate or the manipulations and mistakes of others.
To be sure, there was a lot of history buried in the mountains of the former Yugoslavia, and many bad memories too.
And outsiders did indeed contribute crucially to the country’s tragedy, though mostly through irresponsible acquiescence in local crimes.
But the break up of Yugoslavia—resembling in this respect the dismantling of other former Communist states—was the work of men, not fate.
And the overwhelming responsibility for Yugoslavia’s tragedy lay not in Bonn or any other foreign capital, but with the politicians in Belgrade.
When Josip Broz Tito died in 1980, at the age of 87, the Yugoslavia he had reassembled in 1945 had a real existence.
Its constituent republics were separate units within a federal state whose presidency comprised representatives from all six republics, as well as two autonomous regions within Serbia.
Slovenia and Croatia in the north were primarily Catholic and had once been part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire as too, albeit for a shorter time, had Bosnia.
The southern part of the country was for centuries under Ottoman Turkish rule, which accounts for the large number of Muslims in addition to the predominantly Orthodox Serbs.
But these historical differences—though genuine enough and exacerbated by the experience of World War Two—had been attenuated in subsequent decades.
Economic change brought hitherto isolated rural populations into sometimes uneasy contact in towns like Vukovar or Mostar; but the same changes also accelerated integration across old social and ethnic boundaries.
The rising post-war generation was encouraged to think of itself as ‘Yugoslav’, rather than ‘Croat’ or ‘Macedonian’; and many—especially the young, the better educated and the burgeoning number of city-dwellers—had adopted the habit.
Younger intellectuals in Ljubljana or Zagreb were no longer much interested in the heroic or troubled past of their ethnic forebears.
Bosnia had always been the most ethnically variegated region of Yugoslavia and was thus perhaps not typical.
But the whole country was an interwoven tapestry of overlapping minorities.
The 580,000 Serbs living in Croatia in 1991 were some 12 percent of the population of that republic.
Bosnia in the same year was 44 percent Muslim, 31 percent Serb and 17 percent Croat.
Residents of ethnically mixed regions often had little sense of their friends’ or neighbors’ nationality or religion.
Indeed the ‘ethnic’ fault-lines within Yugoslavia were never very well defined.
The linguistic distinctions can serve as a representative illustration.
But the differences between the ‘Serb’ and ‘Croat’ forms of ‘Serbo-Croatian’ as spoken by the overwhelming majority of the population were, and are, small indeed.
Serbs use the Cyrillic alphabet and Croats the Latin alphabet; but beyond some literary and scholarly terms, occasional spelling variations and a different pronunciation of the letter ‘e’ (‘ye’ in the ‘Iekavian’ or Croat form, ‘e’ in the ‘Ekavian’ or Serb variant) the two ‘languages’ are identical.
Moreover, Montenegrins write in Cyrillic but pronounce in theTekaviari manner, like Croats and Bosnians—as do the Serb residents of Bosnia.
Only the historical inhabitants of Serbia proper use the ‘Ekavian’ variant—and when Bosnian Serb nationalist leaders sought after 1992 to impose official ‘Serbian’ pronunciation on their fellow Bosnian Serbs in the zone they had carved out of Bosnia, they encountered overwhelming resistance.
The same was true of certain Serb writers’ obsession with preserving or re-affirming ‘pure’ Serbian.
It seems fair to conclude that—in contrast to conventional differences between dialects of a single national language, where indigenous usage varies widely but educated elites tend to share a common ‘correct’ form—in former Yugoslavia it was the mass of the population who actually spoke an interchangeable single language, while a minority of nationalists sought to differentiate themselves by accentuating the narcissism of small differences.
The distinction between Catholic Croats and Orthodox Serbs, for example, mattered far more in earlier centuries—or in World War Two, when the Ustashe in Zagreb wielded Catholicism as a weapon against Serbs and Jews alike.
By the 1990s religious practice in the fast growing cities of Yugoslavia was on the wane and only in the countryside did the correspondence between religion and national sentiment still count for something.
Thus while there is no doubt that the old Ottoman practice of defining nationality by religion had left its mark, mostly by exaggerating the place of Orthodox Christianity among the southern Slavs, the evidence of this was increasingly attenuated.
Although an older generation of Yugoslavs continued to hold many of the prejudices of an earlier time—the future Croatian President Franjo Tudjman was notoriously ecumenical in his prejudices, despising Muslims, Serbs and Jews alike—probably the only generalized discrimination in recent years was the one directed at the Albanian minority in the south, castigated by many Slovenes, Croats, Serbs, Macedonians and Montenegrins as criminal and shiftless.
By 1991, thanks to their far higher birthrate , the estimated 1,728,000 Albanians in Yugoslavia constituted 16. percent of the federal total.
Most of the Albanian citizens of Yugoslavia lived in Serbia, in the autonomous region of Kosovo, 2< We shall kill some Serbs, deport others, and oblige the rest to embrace Catholicism’—thus the Ustashe Minister of Religion in Zagreb, July 22nd 1941.
Kosovo had historic significance for Serb nationalists as the last holdout of medieval Serbia against the advance of the Turks and the site of a historic battlefield defeat in i389.
The local Albanian predominance was thus regarded by some Serb intellectuals and politicians as both demographically troubling and historically provocative—especially since it echoed the Serbs’ displacement by Muslims as the largest minority in the adjacent Bosnian republic.
Serbs, it appeared, were losing out—to hitherto subservient minorities who had benefitted from Tito’s rigorous enforcement of federal equality.
Whereas Serb dislike of Albanians fed on proximity and insecurity, in the far north of Yugoslavia the growing distaste for feckless southerners was ethnically indiscriminate and based not on nationality but economics.
As in Italy, so in Yugoslavia, the more prosperous north was increasingly resentful of impoverished southerners, sustained—as it seemed—by transfers and subsidies from their more productive fellow citizens.
Thus while Slovenia, Macedonia and Kosovo all had approximately the same share of the national population, in 1990 tiny Slovenia was responsible for 29 percent of Yugoslavia’s total exports while Macedonia generated just 4 percent and Kosovo 1 percent.
As best one can glean from official Yugoslav data, per capita GDP in Slovenia was double that of Serbia proper, three times the size of per capita GDP in Bosnia and eight times that of Kosovo.
In Alpine Slovenia the illiteracy rate in 1988 was less than 1 percent; in Macedonia and Serbia it was 11 percent.
In Slovenia by the end of the 1980s the infant mortality rate was 11 deaths per 1,000 live births.
In neighbouring Croatia the figure was 12 per 1,000; in Bosnia, 16 per 1,000.
But in Serbia the figure was 22 per 1,000, in Macedonia, 45 per 1,000 and in Kosovo, 52 per 1,000.
What these figures suggest is that Slovenia and Croatia already ranked alongside the less prosperous countries of the European Community, while Kosovo, Macedonia and rural Serbia more closely resembled parts of Asia or Latin America.
If Slovenes and Croats were increasingly restive in their common Yugoslav home, then, this was not because of a resurfacing of deep-rooted religious 4 This was not, of course, the way things appeared to Croats and others, who could point to Serb domination of the national army (60 percent of the officer corps was Serb by 1984, a fair reflection of Serb presence in the population at large but no more reassuring for that) and Belgrade’s disproportionate share of investment and federal expenditure.
It was because they were coming to believe that they would be a lot better off if they could manage their own affairs without having to take into account the needs and interests of underachieving Yugoslavs to their south.
Tito’s personal authority and his vigorous repression of serious criticism kept such dissenting opinion well out of public view.
During the Sixties and early Seventies, when the West European boom was sucking in Yugoslav labor and sending back substantial hard currency remittances, over-population and under-employment in the south posed less of a problem.
From the end of the Seventies, however, the Yugoslav economy started to unravel.
Through the course of the 1980s the country moved steadily into hyper-inflation.
The economic mistakes were being made in the capital, Belgrade, but their consequences were felt and resented above all in Zagreb and Ljubljana.
Many Croats and Slovenes, Communists and non-Communists alike, believed that they would be better off making their own economic decisions free of the corruption and nepotism of the ruling circles in the Federal capital.
These sentiments were exacerbated by a growing fear that a small group of apparatchiks around Slobodan Milosevic, the hitherto obscure President of the League of Communists in his native Serbia, was making a bid for power in the political vacuum that followed Tito’s death—by arousing and manipulating Serb national emotions.
Milosevic’s behavior was not inherently unusual for Communist leaders in these years.
In the GDR the Communists, as we have seen, sought to curry favor by invoking the glories of eighteenth-century Prussia; and national Communism’ had been on display for some years in neighboring Bulgaria and Romania.
In the era of Gorbachev, with the ideological legitimacy of Communism and its ruling party waning fast, patriotism offered an alternative way of securing a hold on power.
But whereas in the rest of eastern Europe this resort to nationalism and the attendant invocation of national memories only risked arousing anxiety among foreigners, in Yugoslavia the price would be paid at home.
But to preserve and strengthen Serbia’s influence over Yugoslavia as a whole he needed to transform the federal system itself.
The carefully calculated balance of influence between the various constituent republics had been fostered first by Tito’s charismatic leadership and then by a revolving presidency.
By forcing through an amendment to Serbia’s own constitution he ‘absorbed’ the hitherto autonomous provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina into Serbia proper— while allowing them to retain their two seats in the federal presidency.
Since Milosevic’s goal was to forge a more unitary state, something that the other four republics would naturally resist, the federal system of government was effectively stalemated.
Survival depended upon re-calibrating one’s public allegiances with the conventional party alignments of a liberal political culture.
However implausible the transition in many individual cases, it worked.
Just because its various populations were so very intermingled (and had not undergone the genocides and population transfers that had re-arranged places like Poland or Hungary in earlier decades), the country offered fertile opportunities for demagogues like Milosevic, or Franjo Tudjman, his Croat counterpart.
In fashioning their exit from Communism around a new political constituency they could play an ethnic card no longer available elsewhere in Europe—and substitute it for a concern with democracy.
In the Baltic states, or Ukraine, or Slovakia, post-Communist politicians could resort to national independence as a route out of the Communist past—building a new state and a new democracy all at once—without having to worry unduly about the presence of national minorities.
Under these circumstances, once one republic declared itself independent, others would feel bound to follow suit.
In short, Yugoslavia now faced the same intractable issues that Woodrow Wilson and his colleagues had failed to resolve at Versailles seventy years earlier.
Throughout the 1980s there had been sporadic Albanian demonstrations and protests at Belgrade’s mistreatment of them, notably in the local capital Pristina.
Their institutions had been closed down, their leaders dismissed, their daily routines constrained by harsh policing and, from March 1989, by a curfew.
Hitherto, thanks to their leaders and politicians and their vassal mentality felt guilty before themselves and others.
A few months later, following bloody clashes between police and demonstrators with many dead and injured, Belgrade shut down the provincial Kosovo Assembly, placing the region under direct rule from Belgrade.
The course of events in the far south of the country directly affected decisions made in the northern republics.
At best mildly sympathetic to the Albanians’ plight, Ljubljana and Zagreb were far more directly concerned at the rise of Serbian authoritarianism.
At the Slovene elections of April 1990, although a majority of the voters still favoured remaining in Yugoslavia they gave their backing to nonCommunist opposition candidates openly critical of existing federal arrangements.
The following month, in neighboring Croatia, a new nationalist party won an overwhelming majority and its leader, Franjo Tudjman, took over as President of the republic.
The last straw, revealingly, came in December 1990 when—under Milosevic’s direction—the Serbian leadership in Belgrade seized without authorization 50 percent of the entire drawing rights of the Yugoslav federation to cover back pay and bonuses for federal employees and state enterprise workers.
The Slovenes—whose 8 percent of the population contributed one-quarter of the federal budget—were especially incensed.
The following month the Slovene Parliament announced that it was withdrawing from the federal fiscal system and proclaimed the republic’s independence, though without initiating any moves to secede.
But Slovenia’s distance from Belgrade, and the presence of less than 50,000 Serbs in the republic, gave grounds for hope that a peaceful exit might be engineered.
Washington, which had suspended all economic aid to Yugoslavia because of the Serbian measures in Kosovo, nevertheless publicly opposed any moves to secede.
Five days after Baker spoke both Slovenia and Croatia took control over their frontiers and initiated unilateral secession from the federation, with the overwhelming support of their citizens and the tacit backing of a number of prominent European statesmen.
The Yugoslav attack on Slovenia in 1991 lasted just a few weeks, after which the army withdrew and allowed the secessionist state to depart in peace.
There then followed a far bloodier war between Croatia and its rebellious Serb minority (backed by the army of ‘Yugoslavia’—in practise Serbia and Montenegro) that lasted until an unsteady cease-fire brokered by the UN early the following year.
After the Croats and Muslims of Bosnia voted for independence in March 1992, the Serbs of Bosnia declared war on the new state and set about carving out a ‘Republika Srpska’, again with the backing of the Yugoslav army, laying siege to a number of Bosnian towns—notably the capital, Sarajevo.
Meanwhile, in January 1993, a separate civil war broke out between the Croats and Muslims of Bosnia, with some Croats attempting to carve out an ephemeral statelet in the Croat-dominated region of Herzegovina.
In each of these conflicts there was both an internal dynamic and external engagement.
Slovenian and Croatian independence was driven forward by wellfounded domestic considerations, as we have seen.
But it was the hasty German—and subsequently European Community—recognition of the two new states that confirmed their official existence for friend and foe alike.
In Bosnia, where Serbs were present in far larger numbers, the prospect of an independent Bosnia with a Croat-Muslim majority aroused similar anxieties.
After 1991 the Croats and Muslims of Bosnia were bound to prefer sovereign independence to minority status in what remained of Milosevic’s Yugoslavia, and they voted accordingly in a referendum at the end of February 1992.
However the Serbs of Bosnia, now exposed for some months to talk from Belgrade not merely of Ustashe massacres but of a coming Muslim jihad, were no less understandably disposed to prefer union with Serbia, or at least their own autonomous region, to minority status in a Muslim-Croat state ruled from Sarajevo.
Once Bosnia (or rather its Muslim and Croat leaders—the Serbs boycotted both the referendum and the parliamentary vote) declared itself independent in March 1992 its fate was sealed.
The following month Bosnian Serb leaders declared the Republika Srpska and the Yugoslav army marched in to help them secure territory and ‘cleanse’ it.
The Serb-Croat and Serb-Bosnian wars wrought a terrible toll on their peoples.
Although there was initially some open warfare between more or less regular armies, particularly in and around strategic cities like Sarajevo or Vukovar, much of the fighting was conducted by irregulars, notably Serb irregulars.
These were little more than organized bands of thugs and criminals, armed by Belgrade and led either by professional felons like ‘Arkan’ , whose ‘Serb Volunteer Guard’ massacred hundreds in eastern districts of Croatia and Bosnia; or else by former Yugoslav Army officers like Lt.
Colonel Ratko Mladic , who placed himself in charge of the Bosnian Serb forces from 1992 and helped organize the first attacks on Croat villagers living in majority-Serb communities in the Krajina.
The primary strategic objective was not so much the defeat of opposing forces as the expulsion of non-Serb citizens from their homes, land and businesses in the territories claimed for Serbs.
This ‘ethnic cleansing’—a new term for a very old practice—was engaged in by all sides, but Serb forces were far and away the worst offenders.
In the first year of the wars in Croatia and Bosnia there were 3 million people from Yugoslavia (one in eight of the pre-war population) seeking refuge abroad.
The international community was thus hardly unaware of the Yugoslav tragedy—which in any case was unfolding in real time on the television screens of the world, with harrowing pictures of starving Muslims in Serb prison camps and worse.
The Europeans were the first to try and intervene, sending an EC ministerial team to Yugoslavia in June 1991—it was on this occasion that the unfortunate Jacques Poos, foreign minister of Luxembourg, unburdened himself of the deathless claim that ‘the hour of Europe’ had dawned.
But despite establishing high-level commissions to enquire and arbitrate and propose, the European Community and its various agencies proved quite helpless—not least because its members were divided between those, like Germany and Austria, who favored the seceding republics and others, led by France, who wanted to retain existing borders and states and who for this reason among others were not altogether unsympathetic to Serbia.
Since the United States remained resolutely above the fray, that left only the United Nations.
But beyond imposing sanctions on Belgrade, there appeared little the UN could do.
The only practical achievement of the international community before 1995 was to install a 14,000-strong UN Protection Force in Croatia to separate Croats and Serbs after the fighting there had subsided, followed by the insertion into selected towns in Bosnia—designated as ‘Safe Areas’—of a few hundred uniformed UN peacekeepers to protect the growing numbers of refugees herded into these areas.
Of greater long-term significance, perhaps, was the setting up in The Hague, in May 1993, of an International Tribunal for War Crimes.
The mere existence of such a court confirmed what was by now obvious—that war crimes, and worse, were being perpetrated just a few score miles south of Vienna.
Until then all talk of foreign intervention had been stymied by the claim—energetically propounded by French and British officers in and out of the UN forces—that the Bosnian Serbs were strong, determined and well armed.
Thus accorded a virtual free hand 6 , the Bosnian Serbs proceeded nevertheless to overplay it.
Even though it was broadly agreed by the international community that a ‘Muslim-Croat’ Federation (formed in March 1994 in a ceremony in Washington that put an end to Croat-Muslim fighting) should receive 51 percent of a newly federal Bosnia, with the Serbs getting 49 percent, the Serb leaders based in the town of Pale took no notice and continued their attacks.
In February 1994 their forces had lobbed a mortar shell from the surrounding mountains into the marketplace of Sarajevo, killing sixty-eight people and wounding hundreds more.
Following this NATO—with UN backing—threatened air strikes in the event of further attacks and there was a temporary lull.
But in May of 1995, in retaliation for some Bosnian military advances and Croatia’s successful recapturing of the Krajina (putting the lie to the myth of Serbian military prowess), Serbian shelling of Sarajevo resumed.
Terrified for the fate of their soldiers, Western governments importuned the UN and NATO to desist.
The international presence, far from constraining the Serbs, now offered them additional cover.
Bolstered by this evidence of Western pusillanimity, on July 11th Bosnian Serb forces under Mladic brazenly marched into one of the so-called UN ‘Safe Areas’, the eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica, by then overflowing with terrified Muslim refugees.
But when Mladic’s men arrived the Dutch battalion laid down its arms and offered no resistance whatsoever as Serbian troops combed the Muslim community, systematically separating men and boys from the rest.
In the course of the next four days nearly all of them—7,400—were killed.
Within days the news of what appeared to have taken place at Srebrenica was broadcast worldwide.
Yet the only immediate response was an official warning from NATO to the Serbs that there would be a resumption of air strikes if other ‘safe areas’ were attacked.
Overcoming a lingering reluctance on the part of the UN leadership, certain European leaders and even some of his own military, President Clinton authorized a serious and sustained bombing campaign designed to reduce and ultimately eliminate the Serbian capacity to cause further harm.
Faced with a prolonged, open-ended assault on their positions and with no backing from Milosevic (who now took great care to emphasize his distance from the men of Pale) the Bosnian Serbs folded.
With the Serbs out of the picture and the United States now very much in, it proved surprisingly easy to introduce peace—or at least the absence of war—into the Balkans.
On November 1st the talks began, at a United States Air Force base in Dayton, Ohio.
Three weeks later they concluded with an agreement signed in Paris on December 14th 1995/ Tudjman represented Croatia, Alija Izetbegovic spoke for the Bosnian Muslims and Slobodan Milosevic signed on behalf of both Yugoslavia and the Bosnian Serbs.
The objective of Dayton, from the American perspective, was to find a solution to the Yugoslav wars that did not entail a partition of Bosnia.
Instead, a complicated tripartite system of governance was established, in which the Serbs, Muslims and Croats of Bosnia all had a degree of administrative and territorial autonomy but within a single Bosnian state whose external boundaries would remain unaltered.
But the effects of terror and ex7 It was at French insistence that the signing ceremony was held in Paris—an exercise in ceremonial overcompensation that only drew attention to Frances previous reluctance to act against the Serbs.
Most of those expelled from their homes (Muslims, above all) never returned, despite assurance and encouragement from local and international authorities.
Indeed there were to be further ‘cleansings’—this time of Serbs, systematically expelled by Zagreb from the newly retaken Krajina or else pressured by their own armed militias to leave their homes in Sarajevo and elsewhere and‘resettle’ in predominantly Serb areas.
But on the whole the peace was kept and Bosnia held together—by a 60,000-strong NATO army acting as an Implementation Force and a civilian High Representative empowered to administer the country until it could assume responsibility for its own affairs.
Both the High Representative and the international troops are still in Bosnia and continue to oversee its affairs at the time of writing —an indication of the calamitous condition of the country following the war and of the continuing ill-feeling and lack of cooperation among the three communities.
Indeed the Bosnian economy after 1995 depended almost entirely upon the presence and expenditures of these agencies.
A World Bank estimate of January 1996 suggested that in order to recover Bosnia would need $5. billion over three years.
Once the Bosnian war ended, and with the various international agencies in place to help secure the peace, international interest subsided.
The European Union, as usual, was transfixed by its own institutional concerns; while Clinton, taken up first with domestic election issues and then with NATO expansion and the instability of Yeltsin’s Russia, ceased to focus on the Balkan crisis.
But even though Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia were now ostensibly independent states, the Yugoslav problem had not been resolved.
Slobodan Milosevic was still in control of what remained of his country and the issue on which he had ridden to power in the first place was about to explode.
The Albanians of Serbia had continued to suffer discrimination and repression—indeed, with international attention deflected to the crisis farther north they were more vulnerable than ever.
And so, with a series of defeats to his name and Serb nationalist politicians in Belgrade criticizing him for compromising with Serbia’s ‘enemies’, Milosevic turned back to Kosovo.
Its tactics— consisting mostly of guerilla attacks on isolated police stations—offered Milosevic an opportunity to condemn all Albanian resistance as ‘terrorist’ and authorize a campaign of increasing violence.
In March 1998, after Serb forces—armed with mortars and backed with combat helicopters—killed and wounded dozens of people in massacres at Drenica and other Albanian villages, the international community at last responded to pleas from Rugova and began to pay closer attention.
By now all the Kosovo Albanian leadership—most of it in exile or in hiding— had decided that only complete separation from Serbia could save their community.
Meanwhile the United States and the ongoing ‘Contact Group’ countries continued to try to mediate between Milosevic and the Albanians—partly to broker a ‘just’ solution, partly to head off a broader war in the south Balkans.
Newly independent Macedonia, known at Greek insistence as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 9 , was a historically sensitive zone.
Its frontiers with Bulgaria, Greece and Albania had all been disputed before and after both World Wars.
It was looked upon with suspicion by all its neighbors—on whom the landlocked little state is utterly dependent for trade and access to the outside world.
And its survival following the break-up of Yugoslavia was by no means a sure thing.
But if Macedonia were to collapse, then Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and even Turkey might be drawn into the conflict.
Thus Milosevic’s continued mistreatment—massacres—of the Albanians in Kosovo was bound to bring down upon him the disapproval and ultimate inter9 The ageing Greek Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, manipulating nationalist sentiment for electoral advantage, claimed that the term ‘Macedonia’ was part of his country’s ancient heritage and could apply to only the northernmost region of Greece itself.
If the Slav state carved out of southern Yugoslavia called itself by that name it must harbour irredentist ambitions.
What Papandreou could not acknowldge was that many of the ‘Greeks’ of Greek Macedonia were themselves of Slav descent—albeit officially Hellenized for patriotic ends.
Curiously, he seems never fully to have grasped this, despite serial warnings through the summer of 1998 from the United States Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , President Jacques Chirac of France, and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana.
Like Saddam Hussein a few years later, Milosevic was isolated and insulated from Western opinion and over-confident of his own ability to manipulate foreign statesmen and maneuver between them.
Flattered by frequent visits from certain American diplomats—vaingloriously over-confident of their negotiating prowess—Milosevic had good reason to think that he was seen in the West not as an intransigent foe but as a privileged interlocutor.
And the Yugoslav dictator was well aware of the international community’s overarching concern to avoid any further redrawing of international boundaries.
As late as July 1998, despite clear evidence that the situation in Kosovo was now desperate, the Contact Group of foreign ministers publicly ruled out independence as a solution.
What Milosevic quite failed to grasp was the transformative impact of the Bosnian catastrophe upon international opinion.
Human rights—ethnic cleansing in particular—were now high on everyone’s agenda, if only out of a gnawing collective guilt at the world’s previous failure to act in time.
Not only were hundreds of Albanian ‘terrorists’ now being killed by special police units drafted in from Serbia, but there was growing evidence that under the cover of this conflict Belgrade was planning to ‘encourage’ the departure of the Albanian population, forcing them to flee their land and livelihoods in order to save their lives.
Throughout the winter of 1998-99 there were reports of Serb police actions—sometimes in response to KLA attacks, more typically involving mass executions of one or more extended families—intended to terrorize whole communities into abandoning their villages and fleeing across the borders into Albania or Macedonia.
The United States and most of its NATO partners openly favored some form of military intervention on behalf of the besieged Albanians as early as October 1998.
But at the UN (which would have had to authorize such intervention in the ostensibly ‘domestic’ affairs of a sover10 In the winter of 1996, following palpably fraudulent results in local elections, Serb students demonstrated for three months in the streets of Belgrade, protesting Milosevic’s dictatorship and demanding change.
Within the EU and NATO itself Greece, for its own reasons, opposed any intervention in Yugoslav affairs.
Meanwhile Ukraine and Belarus offered ‘unconditional solidarity’ and ‘moral support’ to their fellow Slavs in Serbia.
The apparent stalemate might have continued indefinitely had Belgrade not upped the ante with a series of brutal mass murders in early 1999, first on January 15th at the village of Racak in southern Kosovo and then in March all across the province.
The Racak attack, in which 45 Albanians were killed (23 of them apparently executed), served finally—like the marketplace massacre in Sarajevo—to stimulate the international community to action.
After fruitless negotiations at Rambouillet between Madeleine Albright and a Yugoslav delegation, which ended with a predictable refusal by Belgrade to withdraw its forces from Kosovo and accept a foreign military presence there, intervention became inevitable.
On March 24th, and despite the absence of formal UN approval, NATO ships, planes and missiles went into action over Yugoslavia, in effect declaring war on the Belgrade regime.
But in spite of President Clinton’s imprudently public insistence that there should be no NATO ground troops engaged—obliging the alliance to conduct a war from the air with inevitable mishaps that played into Yugoslav propaganda and the Serb cult of victimhood— the outcome was a foregone conclusion.
The occupation of Kosovo marked the end of the decade-long cycle of Yugoslav wars—and also the beginning of the end for Milosevic himself.
His credibility undermined by this latest and worst setback for the Serb nationalist project, Milosevic was overwhelmingly defeated in the Yugoslav presidential election of September 2000 by an opposition candidate, Vojislav Kostunica.
When Milosevic cynically conceded that Kostunica had more votes, but declared that the margin was so close that a runoff was needed, he at last aroused a storm of popular protest among the longsuffering Serbs themselves.
Tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets of Belgrade and on October 5th Milosevic finally conceded defeat and stepped down.
Six months later the government of Serbia, increasingly desperate for West""And as with the Sarajevo atrocity, Belgrade and its apologists insisted either that it never happened or, when that became untenable, that it was a staged ‘provocation’ by the victims themselves.
The United Nations showed little initial concern—its inadequate and unconcerned Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, described Bosnia as ‘a rich man’s war’—and when its representatives did arrive in the Balkans they spent most of their time blocking any decisive military action against the worst offenders.
France in particular displayed a distinct reluctance to place any blame for the course of events upon Serbia—and indeed a marked disinclination to get involved at all.
Thus when, in September 1990, Washington sought to place Yugoslavia on the agenda of an upcoming OSCE summit in Paris, Francois Mitterrand accused the Americans of ‘over-dramatizing’ and refused.
As for the Dutch government, it went so far as to veto any NATO strikes on Bosnian Serb strongholds until all Dutch soldiers were safely out of the country.
Since there was no British embassy in Sarajevo to issue such visas, the only way a Bosnian family could secure them was by making its way to a British embassy in a third country ... at which point the UK government would and did claim that since they had found asylum somewhere else, Britain need not admit them.
Thus whereas Germany, Austria and the Scandinavian countries played generous host to hundreds of thousands of Yugoslav refugees between 1992 and 1995, the UK actually saw a decline in the number of asylum seekers in these same years.
Although it took Washington an extraordinarily long time to focus upon events in the Balkans, once the United States did engage there its record is distinctly better.
But the US, too, dragged its feet—for the most part because the American defense establishment was reluctant to take any risks and because many United States politicians continued to believe that their country had £ no dog’ in this war.
The idea of deploying NATO in these novel circumstances—or that the United States might unilaterally intervene in the domestic affairs of a sovereign state with which it had no quarrel—was not an easy sell.
The failure of the Yugoslav federal system was precipitated by Belgrade, but Ljubljana and Zagreb were not sorry to see it go.
Bosnian Muslims, it is true, had only restricted opportunities to commit war crimes of their own—for the most part they were on the receiving end of other people’s aggression.
Theirs is the saddest loss of all—and the destruction of Sarajevo a particular source of grief.
Armed Croats, on the other hand, were responsible for innumerable acts of violence against civilians—under direction from Zagreb and on their own initiative.
In Mostar, a town in western Bosnia with an unusually high percentage of interfaith marriages, Croat extremists deliberately set about expelling Muslims and mixed families from the western half of the city.
They then replaced them with Croat peasants driven into the town and radicalized by their own experience of ethnic cleansing in the villages, and set siege to the Muslim eastern districts.
In the meantime, in November 1993, they systematically destroyed the sixteenth-century Ottoman bridge across the Neretva river, a symbol of the town’s integrated and ecumenical past.
The Croats, then, had little to boast of—and of all the post-Communist leaders who emerged from the rubble, Franjo Tudjman was one of the more egregiously unattractive.
Only after Tudjman’s death could the Croat state he had founded begin credibly to re-position itself as a candidate for membership of the international community.
But in the end the primary responsibility for the Yugoslav catastrophe must rest with the Serbs and their elected leader Slobodan Milosevic.
It was Milosevic whose bid for power drove the other republics to leave.
It was Milosevic who then encouraged his fellow Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia to carve out territorial enclaves and who backed them with his army.
And it was Milosevic who authorized and directed the sustained assault on Yugoslavia’s Albanian population that led to the war in Kosovo.
They lost their land in the Krajina region of Croatia; they were forced to accept an independent Bosnia and abandon plans to carve from it a sovereign Serb state; they were defeated in Kosovo, from which most of the Serb population has since fled in justified fear of Albanian retribution; and in the rump state of Yugoslavia (from which even Montenegro has sought to secede) their standard of living has fallen to historic lows.
This course of events has further exacerbated a longstanding Serb propensity for collective self-pity at the injustice of history and it is true that in the longer run the Serbs may well be the greatest losers in the Yugoslav wars.
It says something about the condition of their country that today even Bulgaria and Romania rank above Serbia in present living standards and future prospects.
The appalling ferocity and sadism of the Croat and Bosnian wars—the serial abuse, degradation, torture, rape and murder of hundreds of thousands of their fellow citizens—was the work of Serb men, mostly young, aroused to paroxysms of casual hatred and indifference to suffering by propaganda and leadership from local chieftains whose ultimate direction and power came from Belgrade.
There is no doubt that in Bosnia especially there was a history upon which Serb propaganda could call—a history of past sufferings that lay buried just beneath the misleadingly placid surface of post-war Yugoslav life.
But those wars did not just break out from spontaneous ethnic combustion.
Yugoslavia was the worst case, but post-Communism was difficult everywhere.
The path from authoritarianism to democracy in Portugal or Spain accompanied the accelerated modernization of a backward agrarian economy—a combination with which the rest of Western Europe was familiar from its own past.
The much-anticipated passage from capitalism to socialism had been theorized ad nauseam in academies, universities and coffee bars from Belgrade to Berkeley; but no-one had thought to offer a blueprint for the transition from socialism to capitalism.
Of Communism’s many encumbering legacies, the economic inheritance was the most tangible.
The obsolescent industrial plant of Slovakia, or Transylvania, or Silesia, coupled economic dysfunction with environmental irresponsibility.
Before there could be investment in new industries the old ones would need to be dismantled and someone would have to make good the damage they had wrought.
In the eastern Lander of Germany the bill for undoing the damage of Communism was assumed by the Federal government.
The Treuhand spent billions of Deutschmarks over the next four years buying up and selling off obsolete industrial plants and factories, paying off their redundant employees and making good—so far as possible—the consequences of their activities.
Elsewhere the cost of reinventing economic life had to be borne by the victims themselves.
The first strategy conformed best to the free-market theorems beloved of an emerging generation of post-Communist economists and businessmen; the second was more politically prudent.
It was in Poland, under the determined supervision of Leszek Balcerowicz (first as finance minister, later as head of the country’s central bank), that the ‘big bang’ approach was applied earliest and with the greatest consistency.
Obviously, Balcerowicz argued, his country—insolvent in all but name—could not recover without international aid.
But that aid would not be forthcoming unless Poland put in place credible structures of the kind that would reassure Western bankers and lending agencies.
It was not the International Monetary Fund that was forcing harsh measures on Poland; rather, by anticipating IMF strictures, Poland would merit and receive the help it needed.
And the only way to do this was fast , during the postCommunist honeymoon and before people realized how painful the process would be.
At the other extreme stood men like Slovakia’s Meciar, Romania’s Iliescu or Ukraine’s Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma.
Wary of upsetting their constituents they delayed the introduction of change as long as possible—Ukraine’s first ‘economic reform program’ was announced in October 1994—and proved singularly reluctant to liberalize domestic markets or reduce the state’s share in the economy.
After passing through a slough of economic despond in the early 1990s the first tier of former Communist states re-emerged on a more secure foundation, able to attract Western investors and envisage an eventual ascent into the European Union.
The relative success of the Polish or Estonian economic strategies when compared to the fortunes of Romania or Ukraine is obvious to any visitor—indeed, at the level of small business activity or even public optimism, the more successful eastern European countries have fared better than former East Germany, for all the latter’s apparent advantages.
It is tempting to conclude that the more ‘advanced’ post-Communist states like Poland—or the Czech Republic, Estonia, Slovenia and perhaps Hungary—were thus able in the course of a few uncomfortable years to bridge the gap from state socialism to market capitalism, albeit at some cost to their older and poorer citizens; meanwhile a second tier of countries in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union was left to struggle in their wake, held back by an incompetent and corrupt ruling elite unable and unwilling to contemplate the necessary changes.
And of course the miracles of economic transformation on offer in the capital cities of certain countries—in Prague or Warsaw or Budapest, for example—are not always replicated in their distant provinces.
Rather more revealing than the differences between the post-Communist experiences of these lands are their similarities.
In every country, after all, the new ruling elites faced the same strategic choices.
The ‘market-economic romance’, as Russian Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin termed it dismissively in January 1994, was universal.
These were outcomes that almost everyone sought—and in any case there was, as it seemed to most informed opinion, no alternative.
If there were deep differences in public policy in post-Communist societies, then, it was not because of any widespread division of opinion over where these countries had to go or how to get there.
These were the people who would be in charge of their countries after 1989 no less than before—at least until a new, post-Communist generation could emerge.
When the state sold its interest in everything from drilling rights to apartment blocks, these were the men (and they were mostly men, Ukraine’s future prime minister Yulia Timoshenko being a notable exception) who would do the selling—and the buying.
Capitalism, in the gospel that spread across post-Communist Europe, is about markets.
The fire-sale of publicly owned commodities in post-1989 eastern Europe had no historical precedent.
The cult of privatization in western Europe that had gathered pace from the late Seventies (see Chapter 16) offered a template for the helter-skelter retreat from state ownership in the East; but otherwise they had very little in common.
In many postCommunist countries such laws and institutions were quite unknown—and dangerously underestimated by neophyte free-marketers there.
At its most shameless, in Russia under the rule of Boris Yeltsin and his friends, the post-transition economy passed into the hands of a small number of men who became quite extraordinarily rich— by the year 2004 thirty-six Russian billionaires had corralled an estimated $110 billion, one quarter of the country’s entire domestic product.
Public assets and institutions were pulled apart and re-allocated to one another by officials extracting and securing quite literally anything that moved or could be legally re-assigned to private parties.
Public goods, state loans or subsidies passed directly from the hands of government to the pockets of a few clans, much of it then transiting on to private accounts overseas.
The new ‘capitalists’ in these countries did not actually make anything; they merely laundered public assets for private benefit.
In Romania and Serbia, state assets suffered a similar fate or else were not sold off at all, local political chieftains riding out the initial talk of privatization and preferring to maintain their power and influence the old way.
Like Albanians at about the same time, Romanians seeking instant market gratification were offered pyramid schemes instead, promising huge short-term gains without risk.
At its peak one such operation, the ‘Caritas’ scam, which ran from April 1992 to August 1994, had perhaps four million participants—nearly one in five of the Romanian population.
Elsewhere in Central Europe the balance of risk favoured foreign investors, if only because the prospect of EU membership was accelerating the necessary institutional reform and legislation.
Even so, much of the initial privatization in Hungary or Poland consisted either of the transformation of Communist-era black market activities into legitimate business; or else a quick sale of the more obviously viable bits of state enterprises to local entrepreneurs backed by foreign cash.
Three years after the revolution only 16 percent of Poland’s state-owned businesses had been sold into private hands.
One reason for the distortions attendant upon privatization in post-Communist Europe was the virtual absence of Western engagement.
To be sure, Moscow or Warsaw was initially awash in young American economists offering to teach their hosts how to build capitalism, and German firms in particular showed an early interest in relatively upscale Communist companies like the Czech car manufacturer Skoda.
As in the past, therefore, eastern Europeans have had to compete with the West on a markedly uneven playing field, lacking local capital and foreign markets and able to export only low-margin foods and raw materials or else industrial and consumer goods kept cheap thanks to low wages and public subsidy.
In 1992, when it left the ruble zone, 92 percent of Estonia’s trade was with the former Soviet Union.
Five years later over three quarters of that trade was with the West, much of it across the Baltic.
Unemployment remained endemic in many places—and with the loss of a job went the cheap facilities and other benefits that had traditionally accompanied work in these countries.
With prices rising steadily, whether from inflation 17 or in anticipation of European entry, anyone on a fixed income or a state pension (which meant most of the teachers, doctors and engineers who had once been the pride of Socialism) had good cause to wax nostalgic for the past.
Many people in Eastern Europe—above all those over forty—complained bitterly of what they had lost in material security and cheap board, lodging and services; but this did not mean that they were necessarily longing to return to Communism.
Opinion polls of Latvians, who would be horrified to imagine a return to Russian rule, nevertheless suggest that peasants especially are convinced they were better off in Soviet times.
In the late Eighties, before the revolutions, East Europeans were avid cinemagoers.
The same was true everywhere—in Bulgaria it was down 93 percent, in Romania it was down by 94 percent, in Russia it had fallen 96 percent.
Interestingly, cinema attendance in Poland in the same years was only down by 77 percent, in the Czech Republic by 71 percent, in Hungary by 51 percent.
These data suggest a direct relationship between prosperity and film-going and confirm the explanation offered in one Bulgarian poll for the decline in local cinema at16 And inefficiency—one irony of ritualized privatization in eastern Europe was that once collective farms were broken up into tiny plots they could no longer be worked by tractor but only by hand.
In the circumstances, the difficult and incomplete economic transformation of Eastern Europe prompts the Johnsonian observation that though it was not done well, one is surprised to find it done at all.
With the exception of Czechoslovakia, none of the formerly Communist societies between Vienna and Vladivostok had any living memory of genuine political freedom and many local commentators were pessimistic about the chances for pluralist politics.
If capitalism without legal restraints descends readily into theft, then—in the absence of agreed and understood boundaries to public rhetoric and political competition—democracy, it was feared, risks slipping into competitive demagogy.
By concentrating power, information, initiative and responsibility into the hands of the party-state, Communism had given rise to a society of individuals not merely suspicious of one another and skeptical of any official claims or promises, but with no experience of individual or collective initiative and lacking any basis on which to make informed public choices.
It was older people who were least equipped to negotiate the transition to an open society.
The younger generation had better access to information—from foreign television and radio and, increasingly, from the internet.
But while this made many young voters in these countries more cosmopolitan and even sophisticated, it also opened a breach with their parents and grandparents.
A survey of young Slovaks taken a decade after their country’s independence revealed a clear generation gap.
This generation gap would have political consequences everywhere, with older and poorer voters proving periodically susceptible to the appeal of parties offering nostalgic or ultra-nationalist alternatives to the new liberal consensus.
Predictably, this problem was worst in parts of the former Soviet Union, where the disruption and dislocation was worst and democracy hitherto unknown.
Grindingly poor, insecure, and resentful at the conspicuous new wealth of a tiny minority, elderly— and not-so-elderly—voters in Russia and Ukraine especially were easily attracted to authoritarian politicians.
Thus while it proved easy enough in post-Communist lands to invent model constitutions and democratic parties it was another matter altogether to forge a discriminating electorate.
This transformation of the old nomenklatura was less bizarre than it might have appeared to outside observers.
If nothing else, Soviet Communism and traditional nationalists had a common foe— capitalism, or ‘the West’—and their heirs would prove adept at manipulating a widespread envious egalitarianism into blaming post-Communist woes on foreign interference.
In the presidential elections of December 2000, one Romanian voter in three opted for Tudor over the only available alternative, the former Communist apparatchik Ion Iliescu.
Even when nationalist politicians began as critics of Communism—as in the case of the Russian ‘national-patriotic’ movement Pamyat —they slipped comfortably enough into a symbiotic sympathy for the Soviet past, blending a sort of nationalist ressentiment with nostalgia for the Soviet heritage and its monuments.
Although recycled Communists made alliances everywhere with genuine nationalists 19 , the appeal of outright nationalism proved strongest and most enduring in Russia.
Its disintegration was a source of deep humiliation to older Russians, many of whom shared the resentment of the Soviet military at NATO’s absorption of the Russian l8 But Romania is perhaps unique.
The wish to recover some international ‘respect’ drove much of Moscow’s post-Soviet foreign policy and accounts both for the nature of the presidency of Vladimir Putin and the broad support on which Putin could draw, despite his increasingly illiberal domestic policies.
For obvious reasons the citizens of Russia’s former empire in central Europe were not disposed to nostalgia in this form.
But the lost world of Communism held some appeal even in East Germany, where polls in the mid-’90S showed a widespread belief that, except for travel, the electronic media and freedom of expression, life had been better before 1989.
In the Balkans especially, ‘antiAmericanism’ or ‘anti-Europeanism’ was typically a code for anti-capitalism, a cover for ex-Communists who could not openly express nostalgia for the old days but traded on it just the same in their disguised public pronouncements.
On these goals there was little to distinguish the major competing parties, all of which would win elections by criticizing the ‘failed’ policies of their opponents and then proceed to implement a strikingly similar program.
The result in Central and Eastern Europe was a new ‘wooden’ language of public policy—‘democracy’, ‘market’, ‘budget deficit’, ‘growth’, ‘competition’—of very little meaning or concern to many citizens.
Voters who wished to register their protest or express their pain were thus drawn to the margins.
In the early Nineties observers saw in the rise in post-Communist Europe of national-populist fringe parties and their demagogic leaders a dangerously anti-democratic reaction, the atavistic retreat of a backward region imprisoned for half a century in a time-warp.
In more recent years, however, the success of Jorg Haider in Austria, Jean-Marie Le Pen in France and their close counterparts everywhere from Norway to Switzerland has tended to dilute the patronizing tone of Western European commentary.
The success of political democracy in many former Communist countries had ambiguous consequences for the intellectuals who had done so much to bring it about.
Some, like Adam Michnik in Poland, maintained an influential voice through journalism.
Others, like Janos Kis in Hungary, passed from intellectual dis694 THE RECKONING sent into parliamentary politics only to move back into academic life after a few turbulent years in the public eye.
But most of the opposition intellectuals of earlier years did not make a successful conversion into post-Communist politicians or public figures, except as transitional figureheads, and many who tried proved sadly inept.
Most of them were quite unprepared for the messy political and technical issues of the coming decade.
They were also quite unprepared for the dramatic fall in the public status of intellectuals in general, as reading habits changed and a younger generation turned away from traditional sources of guidance and opinion.
By the mid-Nineties some of the once-influential periodicals of an older intellectual generation had become sadly marginal.
Barbara Toruriczyck’s Zeszyty Literackie, a widely admired literary journal published from Paris by a ’68 generation Polish exile, had played a major role in sustaining Polish cultural debate before 1989.
Now, after its triumphant establishment in the capital of its liberated homeland, it struggled to maintain a readership of 10,000.
Literdrni Novitiy , the oldest and most influential Czech cultural weekly, did barely better, with a circulation of less than 15,000 by 1994.
These figures, pro-rated to population, would not have seemed so unworthy to the publishers of literary magazines and periodicals in most Western countries; but in Central Europe their increasingly marginal place represented a traumatic shift in cultural priorities.
One of the reasons for the decline of the intellectuals was that their much remarked-upon emphasis on the ethics of anti-Communism, the need to construct a morally aware civil society to fill the anomic space between the individual and the state, had been overtaken by the practical business of constructing a market economy.
Within a few short years ‘civil society’ in Central Europe had become an archaic notion, of interest only to a handful of foreign sociologists.
Something rather similar had happened after World War Two in western Europe (see Chapter 3), when the high moral tone of the wartime Resistance had been dispelled and displaced first by the practical business of reconstruction and then by the Cold War.
But whereas French or Italian writers in those years still had a sizeable audience— thanks in part to their loudly advertised political engagement—their Hungarian or Polish counterparts were not so fortunate.
The intellectuals who did make a successful leap into democratic public life were usually‘technocrats’—lawyers or economists—who had played no conspicuous part in the dissenting community before 1989.
Not having performed a hitherto heroic role they offered more reassuring models for their similarly un-heroic fellow citizens.
Allusions to bad conscience raised the troubling question of retribution—of what people had done in the Communist past and what should happen to them now.
This was to prove a traumatic dilemma for almost every postCommunist regime.
On the one hand there was broad agreement, and not just among moralizing intellectuals, that political crimes committed in the Soviet-era should be brought to light and their perpetrators punished.
On the other hand, Communists had been in government for over forty years in all these countries—fifty years in the Baltic states, seventy in the Soviet Union itself.
Its laws, its institutions and its police had been the only force in the land.
They had certainly been recognized as such by foreign governments, and no international court or tribunal had ever declared Communism to be a criminal regime.
Moreover, some of those who were most prominent in early calls for vengeance against Communist tyranny were of doubtful provenance themselves—anticommunism in the confused mood of the early ’90s often overlapped with a certain nostalgia for the regimes the Communists had replaced.
Separating condemnation of Communism from rehabilitation of its Fascist predecessors was not always going to be easy.
Such matters, it was felt, were best left for historians, who would now have access to archives and could get the story right for the benefit of future generations.
Czech Communist leaders who had collaborated in the overthrow of the Prague Spring; Polish policemen responsible for the assassination of Father Popieluszko ; East German authorities who ordered the shooting of anyone trying to scale the Berlin Wall, and so on.
These questions were broadly comparable to those faced by Allied occupiers of post-war Germany trying to apply their program of de-Nazification—except that after 1989 the decisions were being taken not by an army of occupation but by the parties directly concerned.
The second was in some ways more complicated still, and only emerged over the course of time.
The Communist regimes did not merely force their rule upon a reluctant citizenry; they encouraged people to collude in their own repression, by collaborating with the security agencies and reporting the activities and opinions of their colleagues, neighbours, acquaintances, friends and relations.
The scale of this subterranean network of spies and informers varied from country to country but it was present everywhere.
The consequence was that while the whole society thus fell under suspicion— who might not have worked for the police or the regime at some moment, even if only inadvertently?—by the same token it became hard to distinguish venal and even mercenary collaboration from simple cowardice or even the desire to protect one’s family.
The price of a refusal to report to the Stasi might be your children’s future.
The grey veil of moral ambiguity thus fell across many of the private choices of helpless individuals.
And it is striking that many of those same former dissidents—Adam Michnik prominent among them—were the most vigorously opposed to any retribution for their fellow citizens.
For all that these difficulties were common to every post-Communist state, each country dealt with them in its own way.
In places where there never really was a transition—where Communists or their friends remained in power under a new nomenclature and with freshly laundered ‘Western’ agendas—the past remained untouched.
In Germany, on the other hand, revelations concerning the size and reach of the state security bureaucracy had astonished the nation.
It turned out that in addition to its 85,000 full-time employees the Stasi had approximately 60,000 ‘unofficial collaborators’, 110,000 regular informers and upwards of half a million ‘part-time’ informers, many of whom had no means of knowing that they even fell into such “Though not, perhaps, across the self-serving moves of certain prominent writers—who would have risked little by declining their services:g.
Husbands spied on wives, professors reported on students, priests informed on their parishioners.
There were files on 6 million residents of former East Germany, one in three of the population.
The whole society had in effect been infiltrated, atomized and polluted by its self-appointed guardians.
To lance the boil of mutual fear and suspicion, the Federal Government in December 1991 appointed a Commission under the former Lutheran minister Joachim Gauck to oversee the Stasi files and prevent their abuse.
Individuals would be able to ascertain whether they had a ‘file’ and then, if they wished, come and read it.
People would thus learn—sometimes with devastating domestic consequences—who had been informing on them; but the material would not be open to the public at large.
There was no way to undo the human damage, but because the Gauck Commission was trusted not to abuse its powers the information it controlled was hardly ever exploited for political advantage.
It was fear of just such exploitation that inhibited similar procedures elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
In Poland, accusations of past collaboration became a familiar way of discrediting political opponents—in 2000, even Lech Walesa was accused of collaborating with the former special services, though the charge never stuck.
One post-Communist Interior Minister even threatened to publish the names of all his political opponents who were tarnished by the brush of collaboration; it was in anxious anticipation of just such behaviour that Michnik and others had favoured simply drawing a final line under the Communist past and moving on.
Consistent with this view, Michnik even opposed efforts in 2001 to try the former Communist President Jaruselski for giving orders back in 1970 to shoot striking workers.
In 1989 the recent memory of martial law and its aftermath had made it seem unwise to open up the past and assess guilt; by the time it was safe to do so the opportunity had passed, popular attention was elsewhere and the quest for belated retroactive justice looked more like political opportunism.
In Latvia it was decreed that anyone with a record of KGB involvement would be barred from public office for ten years.
From 1994 Latvian citizens were at liberty, following the German model, to see their own Communist-era police files; but the contents were made public only if a person ran for office or sought employment in law enforcement.
In Bulgaria the new government, drawing on the practice of post-Vichy France, established tribunals with the authority to impose ‘civic degradation’ upon those guilty of certain offenses associated with the previous regime.
In neighbouring Romania, where there were indeed ample recent grounds for retribution, efforts to mount a local version of the Gauck Commission foundered for some years on the firm opposition of the post-Communist political elite, many of whose luminaries would certainly be implicated in any serious interrogation of the Ceau§escu regime’s activities.
Eventually a ‘National College for the Study of the “Securitate” Archives’ was inaugurated, but it could never aspire to the authority of the German original.
In none of these countries was the problem of coming to terms with the Communist past resolved to everyone’s satisfaction or with complete fairness.
But in Czechoslovakia the solution that was adopted aroused controversy reaching well beyond the country’s borders.
Stalinism here had come later and lasted longer than elsewhere, and the ugly memory of‘normalization’ was still very much alive.
At the same time Communism had a firmer political basis in the Czech region than anywhere else in Eastern Europe.
Finally, there was a certain national discomfort at the memory of Czechoslovakia’s apparent serial failure to resist tyranny—in 1938, in 1948 and after 1968.
For one reason or another, the whole country—as it seemed to its more uncompromising domestic critics—suffered from a bad conscience.
But it was followed by a ‘lustration’ 22 law (renewed for five years in 1996 and renewed again when it expired early in the twenty-first century) whose purpose was to vet all public officials or would-be public officials for links to the old security services.
This legitimatesounding objective led, however, to widespread opportunities for abuse.
They included a number of the best-known Czech writers, some of them not even resident in the country.
The secret police lists soon found their way into the press, published and publicized by politicians and parliamentary candidates hoping to discredit their opponents.
In the course of the mud-slinging even Havel was mentioned as a one-time candidate for recruitment into the police network of spies.
And, as some critics had warned, while the secret police files furnished copious data about those they sought to recruit they were all but silent on the identities of the policemen doing the recruiting.
More seriously, perhaps, it was from the outset an overtly political device.
It is noteworthy that Vladimir Mediar in Slovakia also opposed the lustration law, not least because of his own widely rumored links to the former secret police—though once he had taken his country into independence he made copious use of the information in police files for his own political ends.
In the first twelve years of its application, the lustration law did relatively little direct damage.
But the more lasting impact of the legislation was the bad taste it left behind, contributing to a widespread cynicism in Czech society about the way in which the ‘velvet revolution’ had played itself out.
Far from discrediting Communism and legitimizing its overthrow, the law merely reinforced the skeptical detachment of the public at whom it was directed.
Beatrice Webb The fissile political temper of the Nineties was not confined to the countries of the former Communist East.
The same urge to escape the bonds of centralized rule— or else to relinquish responsibility for impoverished fellow citizens in distant provinces—was felt in the West.
From Spain to the United Kingdom the established territorial units of Western Europe were subjected to extensive administrative decentralization, though they all managed more or less to retain at least the form of the conventional national state.
In some places this centrifugal propensity had already surfaced decades earlier, as we saw in Chapter 16.
In Spain, where the longstanding demand for autonomy in Catalonia or the Basque region had been recognized by the new constitution, Catalonia especially had emerged within a generation as virtually a state-withina-state, with its own language, institutions and governing councils.
Thanks to a 1983 Law of Linguistic Normalization , Catalan was to become the ‘dominant language of instruction’; ten years later the Generalitat decreed the exclusive use of Catalan in kindergarten and infant schools.
Over a quarter of all foreign investment in Spain came to Catalonia, much of it to the flourishing provincial capital, Barcelona; per capita income in the province as a whole was more than 20 percent above the national average.
If Catalonia were an independent country it would count among the more prosperous states on the European continent.
One reason for the rise of a distinctive Catalan identity was an easily stoked resentment at the substantial contribution Catalans were expected to make to the national exchequer, thanks in part to the setting up in 1985 of an Inter-Territorial Compensation Fund to assist Spain’s poorest regions.
Franco had exploited to exhaustion the traditional gamut of national claims—the glory of Empire, the honour of the military, the authority of the Spanish Church—and after his fall many Spaniards had scant interest in the rhetoric of heritage or tradition.
Moreover, whereas the six million Catalans were prospering, the old industrial districts of the Basque country were in decline.
Unemployment was endemic and income levels in the region were lower than in Catalonia, hovering close to the national average.
If Basque nationalists failed to capitalize on these problems it was in large measure because many of the region’s two million inhabitants were new to the area— by 1998 only one person in four could even speak Euskera, the Basque language.
As for Herri Batasuna, the political wing of ETA, it was losing votes to moderate autonomists and even mainstream Spanish parties.
By the end of the decade it had declined into an all-purpose outsiders’ party for disaffected Greens, feminists, Marxists and anti-globalizers.
In Spain, the splintering of the nation-state was driven by past memories.
Such regions also benefitted from a range of regional subsidies and other encouragements from the European Union in Brussels.
Their place, however, had been taken by a decidedly more threatening form of regional separatism.
Piedmont, or Umbria, or Emilia had at least as strong a claim to historical distinction as Catalonia or Galicia, and although the regional linguistic distinctions that had been so striking just a few decades before were now fading, they had not yet completely disappeared.
But the new regions of Italy—in contrast to those of Spain—were largely an administrative fiction.
For all that they boasted their own elected councils and authorities—and employed large numbers of people—the regional units of Italy could neither overcome the ultra-local identification of Italians with their native village or town nor break the political and above all the financial reach of the capital.
What the establishment of regions did achieve, however, was to remind Italians of the fundamental and continuing rift between the prosperous North and the dependent South—and to offer political expression to the resentments to which this gave rise.
The Italian north—especially the industrial and entrepreneurial towns and cities of Piedmont and Lombardy, and the thriving farms and small businesses of Bologna and its hinterland—had for decades been markedly richer than the rest of the country and the gap was getting larger.
The poverty rate in the Mezzogiorno at the end of the Eighties was three times that of northern Italy.
Whereas north and northcentral Italy were comparable in wealth and services to France or Britain, the South had fallen ever further behind, opening a gap that was only made good in part by substantial cash transfers.
The solution, according to the League’s charismatic founder and leader Umberto Bossi, was to gut Rome of its fiscal powers, separate the North from the rest, and ultimately secure independence for Lombardy and its neighbours, leaving the impoverished, ‘parasitic’ rump of the country to fend for itself.
The resemblance to Catalonia (or Slovenia, or indeed the Czech Republic under Vaclav Klaus) will be clear.
In national elections of the 1990s the Northern League was able to command enough of the vote in Lombardy and the Veneto to ensure itself a foothold in conservative governing coalitions.
In spite of these mutual antipathies, then, and the illusions of Bossi’s more reckless supporters, there was never any serious question of Italy breaking apart or any of its provinces becoming independent.
Much the same was true of France, where the Mitterrand presidency undertook limited administrative decentralization and initiated some rather desultory efforts to disperse institutions and resources to the provinces.
Of the country’s newly established regional units not even Alsace or the French Basque districts evinced much interest in cutting their ties to Paris, despite their distinctive historical identities.
Only the island of Corsica saw the rise of a movement for national separation, based on a genuine sense of linguistic and historical uniqueness and the implausible assertion that the island would flourish with independence from the mainland.
But, like ETA, the Corsican nationalists’ taste for violence (and interfamilial score-settling) confined their appeal to a minority.
What was distinctive about France was that whereas elsewhere in Europe politicians and commentators now paid formal homage to the virtues of autonomy and local self-government, even the faintest stirrings of regional separatism triggered in Paris an avalanche of neo-Jacobin disdain across the political spectrum.
Moreover, the provinces of France with the strongest sense of difference—Brittany, for example, or the depopulated mountains of the upper Languedoc—had also for many decades been those most dependent upon government largesse.
Everything from infrastructural spending on high-speed railway lines to tax benefits for inward investment came from Paris and there was never much support for the few remaining Breton or Occitan separatists, mostly ageing militants left stranded by the retreat from Sixties-era enthusiasms.
Across the English Channel in Britain, however, the Celtic fringes—despite their heavy economic dependence upon London—had undergone something of a national revival.
Only in the more mountainous and underpopulated areas of north Wales did demands for full independence, as articulated by the nationalist party Plaid Cymru, actually find a sympathetic response.
As a result, although candidates from Plaid Cymru made an initial breakthrough in the national elections of 1974 and maintained a small but visible presence thereafter, they were never able to convince their compatriots of the nationalist case.
Of the minority of Welsh voters who turned out in a March 1979 vote on devolution to regional assemblies, most were opposed.
When devolution eventually came to Wales two decades later, it was not at the behest of local nationalists but as part of an administrative overhaul by the first New Labour government of Tony Blair— who calculated, shrewdly enough as it transpired, that the limited powers assigned to a new Welsh parliament in Cardiff would almost certainly fall into the hands of the same people who were now exercising it at Westminster.
The outcome—a Welsh Assembly with considerable symbolic value but little real power—appeared nevertheless to satisfy whatever demand there was in the principality for a separate national identity.
Wales, after all, had been absorbed into and under England in 1536 during the reign of Henry VIII—himself scion of a Welsh dynasty—and while the recent revival of interest in its language and history was real enough, it should not be mistaken for a full-scale recovery of national consciousness.
If there was anger or resentment under the surface of Welsh public life it derived from economic woes, not thwarted national aspirations.
Offered the choice between an independent Wales and the recovery under English rule of the mining valleys and villages and ports devastated by de-industrialization and unemployment, very few Welshmen would have hesitated.
Within two decades of its breakthrough as a ‘single-issue’ party at the 1974 elections—where it returned eleven members to parliament—the SNP had overtaken the Conservatives and was placing serious pressure upon traditional Labour strongholds.
Unlike the Welsh, the voters of Scotland did favour devolution of power; and although they had to wait for it until 1997, the Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh indisputably speaks for a country which thinks of itself as a distinct and separate nation, if not quite a state.
Scottish nationalism benefited both from the fortuitous discovery of North Sea oil and gas—which brought prosperity to Aberdeen and the north-east—and from EC regional policies, which allowed Scottish administrators and businessmen to bypass London and forge direct links to Brussels.
Its sense of self rested less on linguistic or religious distinctions, which—though real enough— had grown tenuous for most of its residents, than on a curious admix of superiority and ressentiment.
Thus, in the same way that so many of the classics of modern English literature are in fact Irish, so some of the greatest achievements of English-language political and social thought since the Enlightenment, from David Hume to Adam Smith and on to John Stuart Mill and beyond, were actually Scottish.
Not only was Edinburgh in some ways the intellectual capital of early industrial Britain and Glasgow the radical core of the British labour movement in the early years of the twentieth century; but Scottish businessmen, Scottish managers—and Scottish emigres— were responsible for establishing, settling and administering much of England’s empire.
An independent Scotland, then, was a perfectly plausible proposition— particularly in a European Union in which it would have been by no means the smallest or the poorest nation-state.
Whether the majority of the Scottish population, having secured much of the appearance and some of the substance of independence, would ever wish to go further is less certain.
The limitations of geography, demography and resources which have kept Scotland dependent upon the UK are still there; and by the end of the Nineties there seemed reason to suppose that in Scotland as elsewhere the engine of nationalism was running out of steam.
Whether the same was true amongst the descendants of the Scottish emigrants who had crossed into Ireland was less clear.
The channel separating Scotland from Northern Ireland is less than fifty miles wide, but the gulf between the sensibilities of the two communities remains immense.
If by the last years of the century both the Unionists and the Provisionals were finally forced into compromise, this was not for lack of determination on the part of extremists on both sides.
Whether the Good Friday Agreement, signed in April 1998, could resolve the national question in Ireland remained unclear.
The interim solution on which both sides reluctantly concurred left much unresolved.
Indeed, the terms of the accord brokered by the Prime Ministers of Ireland and the UK, with assistance from President Clinton—local self-government by an Assembly based in Ulster, with guarantees of representation for the Catholic minority, an end to the Protestant monopoly of police and other powers, confidence-building measures across the two communities and a standing Inter-Governmental Conference to oversee implementation—contained much that could have been imagined, with good will on all sides, twenty years earlier.
But as an armistice in Irelands Hundred Years War the agreement seemed likely to hold for a while.
Not for the first time in such matters, the ageing radicals at the head of the insurgency appeared to have been won over by the prospect of office.
Moreover the Republic of Ireland itself underwent an unprecedented socioeconomic transformation in the course of the 1990s and now bore little discernable resemblance to the ‘Eire’ of nationalist imaginings.
To anyone familiar with their earlier history, the new politics of sub-national particularism in the larger states of western Europe might appear simply as the reversion to type following the centralizing detour of the previous century.
Germany, the largest European state west of the former Soviet Union, did not experience a comparable separatist resurgence.
This was not because of any peculiarities of its history but because post-Nazi Germany was already a truly federal republic.
To the limited extent that territorially-defined identity politics might have appealed to Germans—and here Germany’s distinctive past probably did play an inhibiting role—the Lander thus offered a serviceable surrogate.
Belgium, a country the size of Wales with a population density exceeded only by the adjacent Netherlands, was the one West European state whose internal schisms bore some resemblance to contemporary developments in the post-Communist east.
Its story may thus cast light on why, after the separatist wave of the late twentieth century had receded, the national states of Western Europe remained intact.
By the 1990s the towns and valleys of Wallonia were sunk into post-industrial decline.
Belgian coal production in 1998 was less than two million tons per year, down from twenty-one million tons in 1961.
In what was once Europe’s most profitable industrial region there remained only the decrepit mills of the Meuse valleys above Liege and the gaunt, silent mining installations around Mons and Charleroi.
Most of the former miners, steel-workers and their families in these communities now depended upon a welfare system administered from the country’s bi-lingual capital and paid for—as it seemed to Flemish nationalists—out of the taxes of gainfully employed northerners.
In 1947 over 20 percent of the Flemish workforce was still in agriculture; fifty years later fewer than 3 percent of Dutch-speaking Belgians derived their income from the land.
In the decade from 1966 to 1975 the Flemish economy grew at the unprecedented rate of 5. percent per annum; even during the economic trough of the late Seventies and early Eighties it continued to grow, at a rate nearly twice that of Wallonia.
Unencumbered by old industry or an unemployable workforce, towns like Antwerp and Ghent flourished with the growth of services, technology and commerce, aided by their location athwart Europe’s golden banana’, running from Milan to the North Sea.
There were now more Dutch speakers than French speakers in the country , and they produced and earned more per capita.
The Belgian north had overtaken the south as the privileged, dominant region—a transformation accompanied by a crescendo of demands from the Flemish for political gains to match their newfound economic dominance.
Flemish nationalism had been shaped by resentment at the obligation to use French, at the French-speakers’ apparent monopoly of power and influence, at the francophone elite’s arrogation to itself of all the levers of cultural and political authority.
Flemish nationalists, then, had traditionally taken for themselves a role comparable to that of Slovaks in pre-divorce Czechoslovakia—even to the extent of actively collaborating with the occupiers during World War Two in the forlorn hope of some crumbs of separatist autonomy from the Nazi table.
Flanders was now presented by its nationalist politicians not in the image of backward, under-privileged Slovakia but rather as Slovenia : a dynamic modern nation trapped in an anachronistic and dysfunctional state.
These two self-ascribed identities—repressed linguistic minority and frustrated economic dynamo—were now both woven into the fabric of Flemish separatist politics, such that even after the old injustices had been swept away and the Dutchspeaking provinces of the north had long since won the right to the use of their own language in public affairs, the remembered resentments and slights simply attached themselves to new concerns instead, bequeathing to Belgian public policy debates an intensity—and a venom—which the issues alone could never explain.
The dramatic events at Leuven—a curiously parochial and chauvinist echo of contemporary student protests elsewhere—brought down a government and led directly to a series of constitutional revisions over the course of the ensuing thirty years.
Although devised by moderate politicians as concessions to satisfy the demands of the separatists, the institutional re-arrangements of Belgium were always understood by the latter as mere stepping stones on the road to ultimate divorce.
In the end neither side quite achieved its aims, but they did come close to dismantling the Belgian unitary state.
The regions and the linguistic communities don’t exactly correspond—there are German speakers in Wallonia and a number of French-speaking towns (or parts of towns) within Flanders.
Special privileges, concessions, and protections were established for all of these, a continuing source of resentment on all sides.
Two of the regions, Flanders and Wallonia, are effectively unilingual, with the exceptions noted.
Brussels was pronounced officially bilingual, even though at least 85 percent of the population speaks French.
Linguistic equality on the Cour d’Arbitrage was similarly mandated, with the presidency alternating annually across the language barrier.
In Brussels, the four members of the executive of the capital region would henceforth sit together (and speak in the language of their choice) to decide matters of common concern; but for Flemish or Francophone ‘community’ affairs they would sit separately, two by two.
As a consequence Belgium was no longer one, or even two, states but an uneven quilt of overlapping and duplicating authorities.
The politics of this constitutional upheaval were just as convoluted as the institutional reforms themselves.
On the Flemish side, extreme nationalist and separatist parties emerged to press for the changes and benefit from the new opportunities to which they gave rise.
Similarly, in Wallonia and Brussels, politicians from the French-speaking mainstream parties adopted a harder ‘communitarian’ line, the better to accommodate Walloon voters who resented Flemish domination of the political agenda.
It was not by chance that by the end of the twentieth century Belgium had the highest ratio of public debt to gross domestic product in Western Europe—it is expensive to duplicate every service, every loan, every grant, every sign.
By the end of the century‘Belgium’ had taken on a decidedly proforma quality.
But visitors could hardly miss the colorful placard informing them of the province (Liege, say, or West-Vlaanderen) that they had just entered, much less the information board indicating that they were in Flanders or Wallonia.
There are three factors that help account for Belgium’s improbable survival, and more broadly for the persistence of all the states of Western Europe.
In the first place, with the passing of generations and the implementation of constitutional reforms, the separatist case lost its urgency.
The old communitarian ‘pillars’— hierarchically organized social and political networks that substituted for the nation-state—were already in decline.
A younger generation of Belgians was prov2 The main newspapers, Le Soir and De Standaard, have almost no readers outside the Frenchand Dutch-speaking communities respectively.
As a result, neither takes much trouble to report news from the other half of the country.
Even the automatic information boards on interregional trains switch back and forth between Dutch and French as they cross the regional frontiers.
It is only pardy a jest to say that English is now the common language of Belgium.
The decline in religious practice, the accessibility of higher education, and the move from countryside to town loosened the grip of the traditional parties.
Like the new Basques, these people have pressing concerns of their own and little interest in the dusty agendas of ageing separatists.
Opinion polls through the Nineties indicated that most people, even in Flanders, no longer put regional or language issues at the head of their concerns.
The obvious difference between Belgium and other, less fortunate parts of Europe where nationalists were able successfully to exploit communal sensibilities is that for the vast majority of residents of modern Belgium life was both tranquil and materially sufficient.
The country is at peace—if not with itself then at least with everyone else—and the same prosperity that underwrote the ‘Flemish miracle’ also attenuated the politics of linguistic resentment.
This observation applies with equal force to Catalonia or even to parts of Scotland, where the more extreme exponents of the case for national independence saw their arguments steadily defanged by the demobilizing effects of unaccustomed affluence.
The third reason for the survival of Belgium—and of Western Europe’s other internally fragmented nation-states—has less to do with economics than with geography, though the two are closely related.
If Flanders—or Scotland—could in the end remain comfortably part of Belgium or the UK it was not because they lacked the intensity of national sentiment that appeared to have re-surfaced in former Communist lands.
What made the difference was the fact that the states of Western Europe were no longer free-standing national units with a monopoly of authority over their subjects.
The formal mechanism for a move towards full European Union was set out in the Single European Act of 1987; but what really drove the process forward was the end of the Cold War.
The SEA had committed the twelve members of the Community to achieving by 1992 the full and free circulation of goods, services, capital and people—hardly a breakthrough, since these same objectives were already envisaged in principle decades before.
It was the Maastricht Treaty of that year, and its successor Treaty of Amsterdam five years later, that propelled the Union’s members into a truly novel set of institutional and financial arrangements, and these were the direct outcome of radically changed external circumstances.
The German negotiators—wary of the profligate tendencies of ‘Club Med’ countries like Italy or Spain—imposed draconian conditions for membership of the new currency, with the European Commission authorized to impose fines upon reprobate governments.
These terms, designed to insure that the new euro would be as inflation-proof as the Deutschmark itself, were not universally popular—in the poorer member states it was widely and rightly feared that they would constrain public policy and perhaps even prevent growth.
Jacques Delors, the Commission President, all but bribed the finance ministers of Greece, Spain, Portugal and Ireland, promising large increases in EU structural funds in return for their signatures on the Treaty.
The UK and Denmark, meanwhile, signed the main body of the Treaty but opted out of the proposed common currency—partly in anticipation of its economically restrictive impact; partly because of its symbolic resonance in nations already more reluctant than most to abandon the trappings of sovereignty to transnational agencies; and in the case of the UK because—as so often in the past—the march to Union was regarded with acute misgivings as a further step towards a European super state.
Under the restrictive terms of the Treaty it was clear (as the French at least had intended) that the newly liberated countries of eastern Europe could not possibly join the European Union in the immediate future—neither their fragile legal and financial institutions nor their convalescent economies were remotely capable of operating under the strict fiscal and other regulations the Union’s members had now imposed upon all present and future signatories.
The symbolic value of extending NATO in this way was obviously considerable, which is why it was immediately welcomed in the new candidate member-states.
But because Washington had reasons of its own for favouring the expansion of the North Atlantic Defense community, a first group of central European nations was duly admitted to NATO a few years later.
The Maastricht Treaty provoked an unprecedented level of interest in what had hitherto been the obscure workings of the European Union and its anonymous bureaucracy.
Even though the Treaty was approved in every country where it was put to a national vote it aroused sufficient opposition to place the question of ‘Europe’ on domestic political agendas, often for the first time.
For four decades, the institutions and rules of a new continental system had been quietly designed and decided in obscure Benelux towns with no reference to public wishes or democratic procedure.
The third consequence of Maastricht was that it cleared the way for the coming together not, indeed, of Europe, but at least of its western half.
The end of the Cold War, and the EU’s commitment to a single market, removed the impediments to membership for the remaining members of the old European Free Trade Area.
Sweden, Finland and Austria all duly applied, no longer constrained by their commitment to neutrality (or, in the Finnish case, by the need to maintain good relations with Moscow) and increasingly nervous at being left out of the common European space.
The accession negotiations with the new applicants were completed in just three 4 Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic joined in 1999, just in time to be committed to NATO’s engagement in Kosovo.
Bulgaria, Romania, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia and Slovenia were admitted in 2004.
The same would have been true of the last remaining hold-outs, Norway and Switzerland.
But despite considerable enthusiasm on the part of local business leaders the populations of both countries voted against membership— fearful of losing their autonomy and initiative in a supranational federation and skeptical of the benefits of participation in the new currency.
A comparable skepticism marked the closeness of the vote in Sweden in November 1994, when EU membership was put to a referendum.
Gahrton’s feelings were shared by many northern Europeans, including some who nonetheless voted in favour of membership.
In Sweden—or Norway, or even Denmark and the UK—the EU (not to speak of its newly integrated currency) was seen as a choice, not a necessity.
In Central and Eastern Europe however, membership of‘Europe’ was the only possible option.
Whatever their reasoning—whether it was to modernize their economies, secure new markets, obtain foreign aid, stabilize their domestic politics, lock themselves into ‘the West’ or simply head off the temptation of a retreat into national Communism—the new rulers from Tallinn to Tirana looked to Brussels.
The prospect of joining the EU, with its promise of affluence and security, was dangled temptingly before the liberated electorates of post-Communist Europe.
Don’t be seduced by those who tell you it was better under the old system, they were warned.
East European countries lost between 30 and 40 percent of their national income in the years after 1989.
Each new agreement and treaty had further complicated the requirements placed upon memberstates in return for binding them into the ‘European’ family; and these regulations and rules had the cumulative result of building ever-higher fences to keep out countries and peoples who could not meet the tests.
Thus the Schengen Treaty was a boon for the citizens of participating states, who now moved unhindered across open borders between sovereign states.
But residents of countries outside the Schengen club were obliged to queue—quite literally—for admission.
Maastricht, with its rigid requirements for a common currency and its insistence that all aspiring member-states integrate into their systems of governance the acquis communautaire , the rapidly burgeoning code of European practices, was the ultimate bureaucratic exclusion zone.
It posed no impediment to Nordic applicants or Austria, but presented an awesome hurdle for would-be candidates from the East.
Committed by the terms of its own charter to welcoming the new Europeans into its fold, the EU in practice sought to keep them out as long as possible.
Even the wealthiest of the new hopefuls— Slovenia, say, or the Czech Republic—were distinctly poorer than any existing EU member, and most of them were very poor indeed.
The life expectancy of males in Hungary was eight years short of the EU average; in Latvia, eleven years.
If Hungary, or Slovakia or Lithuania—much less Poland, with its 38 million inhabitants—were admitted to the Union on the same terms as its present members the cost in subsidies, regional assistance, infrastructure grants and other transfers would surely break the EU budget.
In December 1994 the Bertelsmann Foundation in Germany published a study suggesting that if the six countries of Central Europe then seeking entry (Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Romania and Bulgaria) were admitted on the same terms as existing members, the cost in structural funds alone would exceed thirty billion Deutschmarks a year.
In any case, the recipient countries in the East were in no position to put up even the minimum matching funds required under existing EU regulations.
What post-Communist Europe really needed was a Marshall Plan, but no-one was offering it.
There was talk of western Europe being overrun’—a distant but unmistakable echo of Herder’s fears of the rumbling of the ‘wild peoples’ of eastern Europe.
With these concerns in mind, the western Europeans duly procrastinated.
In the immediate aftermath of 1989 the German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher initially proposed that the European Union absorb all the countries of Eastern Europe as soon as possible, as a prophylactic measure against a nationalist backlash.
But he was soon brought to heel; and although Margaret Thatcher continued to press enthusiastically for early enlargement (calculating that an enlarged Union would inevitably be diluted into the pan-European free trade area of British dreams) it was the French approach that came to dominate EU strategy.
Francois Mitterrand’s first response had been to propose a loose-knit‘European Confederation’—a sort of outer tier of associate membership, open to all-comers with no conditions and few material benefits.
In later years French diplomats would bemoan the lack of support for this suggestion, regretting the lost opportunity for ‘calm collaboration’ towards an enlarged Union.
But at the time it was rightly seen as a transparent ploy, to corral the newly liberated Eastern European states into an ersatz ‘European community’ that would justify keeping them out of the real thing indefinitely.
Instead, relations between eastern and western Europe remained for the next few years stuck at the level of bilateral exchanges and trade accords, with certain countries—Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia—accorded a strictly limited ‘associationaP status vis-a-vis the EU but nothing more.
The transition to a new common currency and the translation into practice of the Maastricht plans for institutional integration were the dominant preoccupation in every Western European capital.
Meanwhile the Yugoslav catastrophe—which at first had served to remind Western statesmen of the risks of underestimating postCommunist problems in general—had now become a full-time obsession.
The gaze of prominent intellectuals—a sure barometer of passing political fashions—had moved away.
Prague and Budapest, their miraculous transition out of tyranny already a fading memory, had been left to tourists and businessmen.
Bernard-Henri Levy and Susan Sontag were more likely to be found in Sarajevo.
Central Europe’s fifteen minutes of fame had passed and with it any public pressure to expedite its absorption into Western institutions.
Under the EU’s own rules it could not deny countries the right to apply for membership.
The European Commission was accordingly constrained to accept applications from Hungary and Poland in 1994, Romania, Slovakia, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania and Bulgaria in 1995, and Slovenia and the Czech Republic in 1996.
All of these candidate countries were now parked in a rather crowded ante-room, awaiting the Union’s attention.
In 1997 the Treaty of Amsterdam added a series of important technical amendments to the original Rome Treaty, filling out the goals of Maastricht and putting teeth into the Union’s stated intention to develop a program of European citizenship and Europe-wide institutions to address employment, health, the environment and the glaring absence of a common foreign policy.
At this point, with the common currency scheduled to come into effect in 1999, the Union had completed a decade of internal integration that had absorbed all its bureaucratic energies.
There was no longer any excuse for postponing the far thornier issue of expansion.
But it soon became clear that this might be politically imprudent—left out in the cold Romania, or Poland, could drift into dangerously undemocratic waters—and so, beginning in 1998, the European Union officially initiated the accession process of all ten eastern European applicants together with Cyprus.
From this point the enlargement took on a dynamic of its own, notwithstanding continuing misgivings on the part of a number of existing EU members and, to judge from opinion polls, widespread lack of enthusiasm among their populations.
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland and Slovenia; and then, a year later, with the rest: Bulgaria, Romania, Slovakia, Latvia, Lithuania and Malta.
Poland’s presence in the first group, in spite of the economic difficulties it posed, was explained by its size and prominence.
Slovakia, conversely, was ‘relegated’ to the second tier in response to the stagnation and corruption wrought there by Meciar’s authoritarian rule—and as a warning and example to others.
There followed five years of intense and sometimes acrimonious negotiations.
The applicants, in turn, pressed as hard as they dared for assurances that they would have free access to EU consumers, while defending their domestic market from being overwhelmed by more attractive and efficient goods and services from the West.
Whereas the EU was the longstanding and openly avowed object of Eastern desires, the putative new members could offer little in return except the promise of good behaviour.
And thus it was agreed that while the new members would be accorded a few limited concessions—among them temporary restraints upon foreign purchases of land, a sensitive political issue—they would have to accept that the EU, despite its commitment to a single market, was going to impose considerable restrictions upon their own export of goods and, especially, people.
In response to wildly exaggerated estimates of likely population flows (one European Commission report published in 2000 prophesied an annual exodus of 335,000 from the ten eastern accession states if the frontiers were opened without restriction), most of the Western member-states insisted on quotas being placed on the number of eastern Europeans who could move to the West—in blatant disregard of the spirit and indeed the letter of a decade of proclamations and treaties.
Only the UK and Ireland declared their willingness to conform to the ‘open door’ principles of the Union—while announcing that welfare benefits for work-seekers from Eastern Europe would be kept to a minimum.
The eastward extension of agricultural subsidies and other benefits was also placed within strict limits.
But the main reason was simply to hold down the cost of enlargement and minimize competition for Western producers.
Not until 2013 would East European farmers get the same subsidies as those already being paid out in the West— by which time, it was hoped, most of them would have retired or gone out of business.
By the time the negotiations were complete, the terms agreed and the 97,000 pages of the Union’s acquis communautaire duly incorporated into the governing codes of the applicant states, the actual enlargement itself came as something of an anti-climax.
Having waited fifteen years to join, most of the new states could be forgiven for lacking the enthusiasm they might have exhibited a decade earlier.
In any case, many of the practical benefits of Western engagement had already been discounted—notably in car manufacturing, where former Communist states had a ready supply of cheap, skilled labour and in which companies like Volkswagen, Renault and Peugeot-Citroen invested heavily during the Nineties.
Between 1989 and 2003 the cumulative total of foreign direct investment for Eastern Europe as a whole had reached $117 billion.
By the early twenty-first century, foreign investment in former Communist Europe was actually tailing off.
Once they were inside the Union it would certainly be easier to do business in and with countries like Poland or Estonia.
Poland expected to double its food exports to the EU within three years of joining.
Once they were inside the EU, wages and other costs in the countries of Eastern Europe would begin to rise to Western levels.
The region’s cost advantage over factories in India, or Mexico, would be lost.
Profit margins—at least in the manufacturing sector—would start to fall.
In Poland it was just 41 percent, in Latvia, the poorest new member, 33 percent.
Even if the economies of the new EU states kept growing on average 2 percent faster than those of the exist722 THE OLD EUROPE-AND THE NEW ing members 7 , it would take Slovenia twenty-one years to catch up with France.
The citizens of formerCommunist states had no access to such data, of course.
Nonetheless, for all the justified skepticism of the beneficiaries, the formal implications of the EU’s ‘big-bang’ enlargement were real enough.
Its population increased by one-fifth (though its economy was expanded by less than 5 percent); its land mass by almost as much.
Its economic troubles were perhaps the most familiar and in the end the least serious of its concerns.
With or without the new member states the EU continued to spend—as it had done from the outset—hugely disproportionate sums of money on its farmers.
Forty percent of the Union’s budget—or $52 billion in 2004—went on politically motivated ‘farm support payments’, many of them to large mechanized agri-businesses in France or Spain that hardly needed the help.
Even after agreement had been reached to reduce these subsidies and cut the Common Agricultural Program it was anticipated that farm price supports would still constitute over a third of the EU’s total expenditure well into the second decade of the new century, placing an intolerable burden upon the budget.
The European Union had started out, half a century before, as a customs union—a ‘common market’—bound together by not much more than a common external tariff.
Its pattern of expenditure was driven and then constrained by ne7 A highly optimistic assumption.
In the years following their accession to the EC in 1986, the economies of Spain and Portugal grew on average between 1 percent and 1. percent faster than the rest of the Community.
Over the years its ambitions had expanded into the realms of culture, law, government and politics and it had taken on—in Brussels and elsewhere—many of the external trappings of a conventional government.
But whereas conventional governments are free to raise money to meet their anticipated costs, the European Union had and has very few revenue-raising capacities of its own.
Thus very little of the EU’s income is under the direct control of the Union’s own administration—and all of it is vulnerable to political pressures within the separate member-states.
Most of the latter are recipients of EU largesse rather than contributors to its budget.
In 2004, following its enlargement to the East, nineteen of the Union’s member countries received from Brussels more than they paid in.
Ominously for the Union’s future prospects, all six countries petitioned the Commission in December 2003 to have national contributions to the EU budget reduced in future from 1.24 percent of GNI to just 1 percent.
The Union’s budget, tiny in comparison to that of even the smallest memberstate and mostly spent on structural funds, price supports and the EU’s own costly administration, is thus a permanent hostage to the interests of its contributors and recipients alike.
The levers of the Union’s economic machinery depend for their efficiency upon the consent of all its constituent parts.
Where everyone more or less concurs on the principle and benefits of a given policy—on open internal borders, or unrestricted markets for goods and services—the EU has made remarkable progress.
After two decades of Brussels-driven efforts to eliminate state subsidies for favoured national ‘champions’ and thereby secure a level playing field in intra-European economic competition, the EU’s single market commissioner expressed his surprise in July 2004 at watching France and Germany revert to the ‘protectionist’ policies of the Seventies in defense of threatened local firms.
But then both Berlin and Paris, unlike the unelected commissioners in Brussels, have tax-paying voters whom they simply cannot ignore.
These paradoxes of union are nicely captured in the tribulations of the euro.
Countries wishing to join the euro were obliged to hold their public debt down to no more than 60 percent of Gross Domestic Product, and were expected to run budget deficits of no more than 3 percent of same.
Any country that failed these tests would be subject to sanctions, including substantial fines, imposed by the Union.
The point of these measures was to ensure that no euro-zone government would let down its fiscal guard, overrun its budget at will and thus place unfair strains on the economies of other euro-zone members who would have to bear the burden of ensuring the stability of the common currency.
To everyone’s surprise the traditionally spendthrift southern tier proved surprisingly disciplined.
Even Italy managed to pass the Teutonic tests (which many Italians rightly suspected had been set up to keep them out), albeit with more than a little juggling of figures and the one-time sale of public assets.
By 2003 the euro-zone encompassed twelve countries, ranging from Ireland to Greece.
But—as many skeptics had predicted—the strains of a ‘one size fits all’ currency soon began to tell.
The newly established European Central Bank in Frankfurt maintained from the outset a relatively high interest rate, to support the new currency and secure it against inflation.
But the economies of the euro-zone states differed with respect both to their level of development and their point in the economic cycle.
Some, like Ireland, were booming; others—notably Portugal— lagged far behind and could have used the boost to domestic activity as well as exports that would traditionally have been achieved by lowering interest rates and ‘softening’ the currency.
Shorn of the power to implement such measures, the government of Portugal was obliged by the terms of the ‘pact’ to reduce government expenditure—or else face substantial fines—just when it ought, in conventional economic theory, to have been spending its way out of recession.
Given the size of their respective economies, the fact that neither France nor Germany was adhering to its own rules represented a significant challenge to the whole agreement.
But this time, when the Commission set in motion the penalty proceedings, Paris and Berlin made it clear that they regarded the ‘temporary’ deficits as economically unavoidable and had no intention of paying fines or even committing themselves to doing significantly better the following year.
The Union’s smaller states—both those like Greece or Portugal which had striven mightily and at some cost to meet the pact’s terms and those such as the Netherlands and Luxembourg which feared for the stability of what was now their currency too—duly cried foul, but the lesson was clear.
Within less than a decade of its appearance, the growth and stability pact was dead.
Just how much the euro would actually suffer if the participating countries were allowed more flexibility in their domestic budgets was by no means clear.
There were many who felt that the real problem lay not with national governments but rather with the rigid and seemingly unresponsive Central Bank, immovably insistent upon its complete independence and still fighting the anti-inflationary battles of the 1970s.
Jean Monnet and his heirs had deliberately eschewed any effort to imagine, much less implement, a democratic or federal system.
To the extent that other concerns ever arose, they were serially postponed.
By the 1990s, then, the European Union was still run along lines that had been laid down decades before and mostly for managerial convenience.
The unelected Commission in Brussels administered a substantial bureaucracy, initiating policies and implementing agendas and decisions subject to the approval of a Council of Ministers from the member-states.
An unwieldy European Parliament, sitting variously in Strasbourg and Brussels and directly elected since 1979, exercised a slowly expanding oversight role (in the original Rome Treaty its function had been strictly consultative) but no power of initiative.
Uncontentious decisions were typically made in Brussels by experts and civil servants.
Policies likely to affect significant electoral constituencies or national interests were hammered out in the Council of Ministers and produced complicated compromises or else expensive deals.
The dominant member states—Britain, Germany and above all France—could not always count on getting what they wanted; but whatever they truly did not want did not come to pass.
It bore no relation to the condition of the separate states of North America in 1776, all of which had emerged as satellites of a single country—Britain—whose language, culture and legal system they shared.
The member-states of the European Union, by contrast, remained completely independent and separate units in a voluntary association to which they had, over time, conceded a randomly accumulated set of powers and initiatives without ever saying what principle lay behind the arrangement and how far this common undertaking was to go.
What brought matters to a head was not the inherently complicated and incremental nature of the Union’s system of rule, but the impossibility of maintaining it with twenty-five members.
Hitherto the chairmanship of the Council of Ministers rotated every six months, with each country getting to host a self-promoting bi-annual European conference—a system already much disliked by the Union’s full-time administrators.
The prospect of such a circus shambling around through twenty-five different capitals, from Lisbon to Ljubljana, was plainly absurd.
Moreover, a decision-taking system designed for six member-states and already cumbersome for twelve, much less fifteen, would simply grind to a halt with fifty European Commissioners , or a European Council representing twenty-five member-states—each with a power of veto.
The likely difficulties were all too well foreshadowed at a meeting in Nice in December 2000.
Ostensibly called to lay the groundwork for enlargement and to devise a new voting system in the EU Council of Ministers—one that would weight member-states’ votes by population while still ensuring that majority decisions could be reached—the conference ended in acrimonious and deeply embarrassing horse trading.
The unseemly scramble for influence at Nice, as leading European statesmen like Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac and Gerhard Schroeder spent sleepless nights bargaining and bickering for status and influence in their common European home, illustrated the price that was now being paid for previous neglect of constitutional niceties.
Following a certain amount of lobbying from Paris, the presidency of the Convention was assigned to the ageing but ever-vainglorious Valery Giscard d’Estaing.
After two years of deliberations, the Convention emitted something more than a draft but decidedly less than a constitution.
Shorn of its portentous Giscardian preamble (immediately and unfavourably contrasted with the elegant brevity of its Jeffersonian predecessor) the Convention’s document offered little by way of classic constitutional proposals—no sweeping definitions of individual liberty, no clear statement concerning the division of powers, etc.
Above all, the proposed constitution would have served to reduce—over time— the top-heavy system of national representation in the Commission; and it devised a system for voting in the European Council that proved, after a certain amount of haggling, to be acceptable to all parties as well as demographically equitable.
If the technocrats who built the institutions of the new ‘Europe’ had shown a haughty unconcern for the opinions of the public at large, this sentiment was now being repaid in kind and in earnest.
With each direct election to the European parliament the turnout fell; the only exceptions to this rule were those occasions where national and European elections coincided and voters who had been mobilized around local or national issues took the occasion to vote in the European polls as well.
Otherwise the decline was unbroken—in France it fell from 60 percent in 1979 to 43 percent in 2004; in Germany from 66 percent to 43 percent; in the Netherlands from 58 percent to 39 percent.
The contrast between the level of interest that electors exhibited for national politics and their growing unconcern for the parliament in Strasbourg is especially revealing.
Moreover— and with more serious implications for the Union’s future—it was closely replicated in the new member-states of the East, even though this was their first opportunity to vote in an election to the parliament of Europe that they had waited so long to “Quoted in Kenneth Harris, Attlee , 63. u The decline in the Dutch vote may be especially ominous.
Once the kernel of European enthusiasm and a generous contributor to EC and EU funds, the Netherlands in recent years has been retreating into itself—a development both illuminated and accelerated by the rise of Pirn Fortuyn and his subsequent assassination.
In Hungary the turnout in the June 2004 European elections fell short of the last national elections by 32 percentage points; in Estonia by 31 points; in Slovakia, where the latest national elections had seen a 70 percent turnout, the share of the electorate that bothered to come and vote in the European elections was 17 percent.
In Poland the turnout of just 20 percent represented a 26-point decline from the national elections of 2001 and was the lowest since the fall of Communism.
In large part because of a widespread belief that they had no influence over them.
Most European governments had never held a vote to determine whether or not they should join the EU or the euro-zone—not least because in those countries where the issue had been put to a national referendum it was rejected, or else passed by the narrowest of margins.
So the Union was not ‘owned’ by its citizens—it seemed somehow to stand apart from the usual instruments of democracy.
Real power lay with a Commission appointed by national governments and a Council of Ministers comprising their representatives.
National elections, in short, were where the crucial choices were to be made.
On the other hand, as was becoming increasingly clear to even the most casual citizen, the ‘faceless’ men and women in Brussels now wielded real power.
Everything from the shape of cucumbers to the color and wording of a person’s passport was now decided in Brussels.
And every national government had at one time or another over the past two decades found it convenient to blame ‘Brussels’ for unpopular laws or taxes, or economic policies which it tacitly favoured but for which it was reluctant to take responsibility.
It was not by chance that in the same European elections of 2004 that saw such a sharp falling off in voter interest, many of those who did bother to turn up at the polls gave their support to overtly—sometimes rabidly—anti-EU candidates.
In Belgium the Vlaams Blok, in Denmark the Dansk Folkeparti , and in Italy the Northern League all played on a similar register— as they had done in the past, but with rather more success on this occasion.
In France, Jean-Marie Le Pen’s Front National took a similar position; but French doubts over European enlargement were not confined to the political extremes.
Mitterrand, Chirac and their diplomatic representatives had all worked hard to postpone the inevitable for as long as possible.
The economic benefits of the single market have been real, as even the most ardent British Euroskeptics had come to concede, particularly with the passing of the passion for ‘harmonizing’ that marked the Commission Presidency of Jacques Delors.
The newfound freedom to travel, work and study anywhere in the Union was a boon to young people especially.
In recent years the citizens of Europe had even acquired their own court.
The European Court of Justice , set up in 1952 under the same Treaty of Paris that established the European Coal and Steel Community, had started out with the lim12 It is perhaps worth adding that in January 2004 only one French adult in fifty could name the ten new EU member states.
But by the end of the century its judges—originally one from each member-state—were authorized to settle legal disputes between member-states and EU institutions, as well as to hear cases brought against lower court decisions or even against national governments.
The ECJ had, in effect, assumed many of the powers and attributes of a pan-European Court of Appeals.
As the example of the Court suggests, the rather indirect and often unintentional manner in which the Union’s institutions emerged had its advantages.
Very few lawyers or legislators in even the most pro-European states of the European ‘core’ would have been willing to relinquish local legal supremacy had they been asked to do so at the outset.
Similarly, if a clearly articulated ‘European project’, describing the goals and institutions of the Union as they later evolved, had ever been put to the separate voters of the states of western Europe it would surely have been rejected.
The advantage of the European idea in the decades following World War Two had thus lain precisely in its imprecision.
Like ‘growth’ or ‘peace’—with both of which it was closely associated in the minds of its proponents—‘Europe’ was too benign to attract effective opposition.
And yet, for all its faults as a system of indirect government, the Union has certain interesting and original attributes.
Decisions and laws may be passed at a transgovernmental level, but they are implemented by and through national authorities.
Finally, while the European Union has neither means nor mechanisms to pre14 The ECJ should not be confused with the European Court of Human Rights, set up under the auspices of the Council of Europe to enforce the 1953 Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The lesson that war was too high a price to pay for political or territorial advantage had already been brought home to the victors after World War One, though it took a second war to convey the same lesson to the losing side.
But just because a third intra-European war would have been catastrophic and perhaps terminal does not mean it could not have happened, at least in the early postwar years.
By the end of the century, however, the elites and institutions of the European Union were so intertwined and interdependent that armed conflict, while never impossible, had become somehow inconceivable.
That is why‘Europe’ was such an object of desire to aspirant members like Latvia or Poland, an escape route out of their past and an insurance policy for the future.
But it is also, ironically, why the EU’s own leaders proved so fatuously helpless when confronted with the reality of war in the Balkans.
Its humiliation over Yugoslavia 17 is a reminder that the European Union cannot escape the defects of its virtues.
But because it is not a state—because its citizens’ primary loyalties remain to the country in which they find themselves, whose laws they obey, whose language they speak and whose taxes they pay—the EU has no mechanism for determining or enforcing its own security interests.
On the contrary, the European Community and its successor the EU have for many decades been extremely effective in advancing and defending their interests in international forums and against foreign competitors.
But those interests have from the outset been defined in overwhelmingly economic—or more precisely, protectionist— terms.
European economics ministers and trade commissioners have engaged in open combat with Washington over tax breaks for American exporters or import restrictions on European products.
More controversially, the EU has also fought very effectively to maintain high external tariffs in defense of Europe’s subsidized farmers—restraining open trade in commodities like sugar, for example, to the detriment of farmers in Africa or Central America.
But whereas the separate member states of the EU—even the most powerful ones—have been pleased to pass on to Brussels responsibility for 17 Mordantly predicted at the time by the United States Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, who foresaw that the Europeans ‘will screw up and this will teach them a lesson’. l8 The EU was not alone in subsidizing its own farmers to the detriment of others.
Norway, Switzerland, Japan and the United States all pay out more in per capita terms.
While Brussels preaches virtue to the world at large, its own practice is often quite selective.
East Europeans, instructed to incorporate and adopt a veritable library of European Union regulations, could hardly fail to notice the frequency with which West European governments exempted themselves from those same rules.
In the early 1950s there were many who thought that in future the Western Europeans could and should organize their military affairs collectively—at an August 1950 meeting of the Council of Europe’s Consultative Assembly, Paul Reynaud of France even argued the case for a European Minister of War.
But the defeat of the proposal for a European Defense Force , and the incorporation of West Germany into NATO, put an end to such ideas for a generation; instead Western Europe snuggled comfortably under the American nuclear umbrella.
Following the end of the Korean War and the retreat from empire, every Western European country cut its defense budget.
In the late Eighties the average share of defense spending in NATO members’ budgets had already declined to 3. percent of GNP; by 2003 Denmark was spending just 1. percent of GNP on defense; Italy 1. percent; Spain a mere 1. percent.
Only the French and British spent substantially more, though in neither case did spending now exceed 5 percent—negligible by historical standards.
Although there had for some years been a European Commissioner for External Relations, since the Treaty of Amsterdam his functions were duplicated by a High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, answerable only to the EU Council of Ministers.
And neither the Commissioner nor the High Representative had any authority to initiate his own policy, despatch armed forces or speak for the foreign policies or ministers of the member-states unless previously instructed.
Henry Kissinger’s sardonic question of an earlier decade—‘If I want to phone Europe, what number do I call?’—had lost none of its force.
But these limitations—the fact that in spite of its size and wealth the EU was not a state, much less a great power—paradoxically served to enhance its image, at home and abroad.
If the values and norms of this new Europe were under pressure at the end of the twentieth century it was not from the established nation-states against which the European idea had been traditionally but misleadingly juxtaposed.
It wasn’t even unprecedented—the impact on the world economy of new and rapid networks of transport and communications at the end of the nineteenth century was at least as dramatic as the transformation wrought by the Internet and the deregulation and liberalization of financial markets a century later.
Nor was there anything new about the unequal global distribution of the benefits of liberalized trade— particularly when, at the end of the twentieth century no less than in the years before 1914, international trade regimes were so consistently accommodating to the interests of the powerful and wealthy.
But from the European perspective the latest transformations in the world economy were distinctive in one important respect.
Government expenditure—financed out of new, progressive taxes—would increase dramatically, partly to pay for wars but increasingly for the purpose of servicing social and welfare needs for which the state was now assuming responsibility.
The European state was now in retreat—first in Britain, then much of Western Europe and finally in the formerCommunist East—a process further abetted by the implementation after 1987 of the Single European Act, with its provisions for open competition within and across borders.
Through mergers, acquisitions and the internationalization of their operations, companies and corporations now operated on a global scale.
The production and distribution of goods was often beyond the control of individual countries.
As for money, it was beginning to multiply and migrate in ways that would have been unthinkable a few years before.
In 1980 the sum of all international bank lending was $324 billion a year; by 1991 that figure had grown to $7. trillion—a 2,000 percent increase in just over a decade.
Controls on the movement of capital—eliminated by most European states in the course of the early Eighties—now appeared as antiquated as food rationing.
The ‘crash’ of September 1992—when first the UK and then Italy were forced out of the European Monetary System and obliged to devalue by private speculators and institutional investors whose activities they were powerless to prevent—was a highly symbolic moment.
The advantages of this revolution in the international economy were selfevident.
Investment capital, no longer restrained by national frontiers, exchange736 THE OLD EUROPE-AND THE NEW rate regimes or local currency regulation, flowed unchecked wherever it was needed —by 1990 foreigners already held 34 percent of German debt.
European manufacturers, their profit margins constrained by the high wages and overhead costs of employing skilled labor in Germany or France or Sweden, were now at liberty to seek out not only international investors but also a more malleable and inexpensive foreign workforce.
Instead of importing into Europe cheap workers from poor countries—as in the past—German or British or French firms now found it more efficient to export their factories instead, installing them in Brazil or Nigeria, Portugal or Romania and then directly selling the finished product to markets all over the world.
This further accelerated the de-industrialization of Western Europe, adding to the already chronic unemployment in many regions—and increasing the burden on stateprovided unemployment compensation and other social services.
When the last coalmine in France—at Creutzwald in the Moselle—closed in April 2004, no-one even pretended that the former miners would ever find regular work again.
Unemployment in the Moselle district hovered around 10 percent of the active population; further north, in the former mining towns along the Belgian border, it was 15 percent.
France as a whole had lost 1. million industrial jobs in the last three decades of the century, most of them since 1980.
Spain, which very quickly lost any comparative advantage that accrued to it from being one of Western Europe’s more backward economies, shed 600,000 jobs in the twenty years following the transition to democracy.
At the height of the recession of the mid1990s, 44 percent of the country’s under-25 workforce was unemployed.
But what was distinctive about the social costs of economic disruption in the last years of the twentieth century was that they were taking place in a time of plenty.
Privatization and the opening of the financial markets had created great wealth, albeit for a relative few; in certain places—London, say, or Barcelona—its consequences were strikingly visible.
And thanks to the shrinking of distances and the increased speed of communications— via computers and the electronic media—information about the way other people lived was immediately and copiously available to all.
It was this sense of glaring contrasts between wealth and poverty, prosperity and insecurity, private affluence and public squalor, that drove a growing skepticism in Europe about the loudly touted virtues of unregulated markets and untrammeled globalization—even as many Europeans were themselves the indirect beneficiaries of the changes they deplored.
In the last years of the century, even as the rest of the European energy market was deregulated, EdF remained in state ownership.
But the CGT, once the dominant blue-collar union in France, was a shadow of its former self—the French union movement as a whole had lost two-thirds of its members since 1980—and the workers it represented were no longer typical of the laboring population in France or elsewhere.
Then came a second tier, a protected core of traditional employees—in factories, service industries or the public sector—their jobs reasonably secure and many of their traditional benefits and guarantees still intact.
To these should be added the very sizeable and typically family-based ‘grey’ economy in Southern Europe.
In Italy, where everything from shoes to textiles to machine parts was often produced and distributed below the radar of officialdom, it was estimated in 1997 that the ‘informal’ sector contributed at least one quarter of the country’s Gross Domestic Product.
In Portugal the national figure—inevitably an estimate—was 22 percent; but in some regions—like the town of Braga in the far north of the country—‘unofficial’ workers constituted as much as 45 percent of the local labour force.
But many of those who no longer figured on unemployment rolls—women and young people especially— were now doing low-paid, part-time work without benefits; or else were employed on fixed-term contracts in job programmes subsidized or under-written by the state.
Those whose wages were too low to support them and their families could still turn to the welfare state, and many did.
One person in six depended upon Income Support or Family Credit programmes to keep them above the poverty line.
Within a few miles of some of the most expensive real estate in the world parts of the British capital were beginning to resemble the ‘Outcast London’ of late-Victorian notoriety.
Whereas, in the past, economic upswings had tended to lift many of the poor into better paid and more secure employment, this was no longer happening.
Europe, in other words, was developing an under-class in the midst of plenty.
As the French sociologist Andre Gorz had predicted back in the 1960s, the end of the industrial era would see the birth of a new caste of casual, temporary workers—a ‘non-class of non-workers’—at once marginal to modern life and yet somehow right at its heart.
The poor, like Europe as a whole by the end of the century, were strikingly multinational—or ‘multicultural’ as it had become custom to describe it, in acknowledgement of the fact that many dark-skinned Dutchmen or Germans or Brits were the native-born children or even grandchildren of the original Moroccan or Turkish or Pakistani immigrants.
Towns like Rotterdam or Leicester were now multi-lingual and multi-colored in a way that would have amazed anyone returning after an absence of even just two decades.
In 1998, white children were a minority in the local authority secondary schools of inner London.
If the high-paying city jobs were still going to white Europeans nearly all the low-paying work, from street-cleaning to child-care, was now done not by traditional ‘second-class’ Europeans from the Alentejo or the Mezzogiorno but by ‘minorities’, often black or brown, many of them without working papers.
These were frequently the offspring of refugees, asylum-seekers’ in the jargon of the day, whose numbers had ballooned in the wake of the Yugoslav wars; but also of migrant workers from Central and South-East Asia, the Middle East and much of Africa—many of them illegal and thus undocumented.
In Germany, whose asylum facilities were by far the most generous in Europe 22 but where it was traditionally very difficult for immigrants to obtain full citizenship, it was estimated that there were five million such people—counting families and dependants—by the end of the century.
The majority of asylum applications to Germany by the beginning of the new century came from Iraq, Turkey and the countries of former Yugoslavia, but there were also growing numbers from Iran, Afghanistan, Russia and Vietnam.
The fear that Western Europe might be ‘overrun’ by ‘economic refugees’, illegal immigrants, asylum-seekers and the like contributed to a widespread lack of enthusiasm for EU enlargement.
Already by the 1980s undocumented workers from Poland were present in large numbers in the British and German building trades.
But the problem was not so much Poland, or Hungary, or the other would-be accession states of Central Europe, but rather the lands to their east.
In 1992 Poland itself had 290,000 ‘irregular’ immigrants, mostly from Bulgaria, Romania and the former USSR; Hungary, with a population of just 10 million, was home to over 100,000 asylum-seekers.
Whereas life there—or in Slovakia or the Czech Republic— was hard, it was not intolerable and the gap separating these countries from their Western neighbours was already being bridged, however slowly.
The gulf between Central Europe and the rest of post-Communist Europe, however, yawned far greater.
Thus whereas by the late-Nineties the average monthly wage in Poland and the Czech Republic was already approaching $400, in Belarus, Ukraine and Romania it hovered around $80; in Bulgaria at under $70; and in Moldova at just $30—itself a misleading average, since outside of the capital, Chisinau, incomes were lower still, in a population of whom 48 percent still worked on the land.
In such circumstances the only hope for Moldovans—or Ukrainians, or indeed “In 1992 alone, the Federal Republic opened its doors to nearly a quarter of a million Yugoslav refugees.
Involuntary Moldovan and Ukrainian guest-workers’ thus joined the Roma (Gypsies) at the bottom of the continent’s multi-cultural heap.
The victims of the sex trade were largely invisible—like earlier generations of white migrants from Europe’s fringes they blended easily enough into the local majority, which is why they proved so hard for police and social services to trace.
But most of the people whom French sociologists and critics had taken to describing as les exclus were perfectly visible.
In 2004, a study by the French interior ministry concluded that some two million such people lived in urban ghettos blighted by social exclusion, racial discrimination and high levels of domestic violence.
In some of these quartiers chauds youth unemployment had reached 50 percent; the worst affected were young people of Algerian or Moroccan descent.
All too often this under-class was distinguished not just by colour but by creed.
For in addition to being multi-cultural the European Union was now increasingly multi-religious.
Christians remained in the overwhelming majority, albeit nonpracticing in most cases.
Jews were now a small minority, their numbers significant only in Russia, France and to a much lesser extent the UK and Hungary.
But Hindus and above all Muslims were now a substantial and visible presence in the UK, Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany, as well as in the main cities of Scandinavia, Italy and Central Europe.
And—uniquely among the major world religions in Europe—the number of adherents to Islam was rising rapidly.
Together with the nearly two million Muslims in the UK and a significant presence in the Benelux countries and Italy, these figures suggested a total of perhaps fifteen million Muslims in the Union as a whole.
Official policy in France advocated cultural integration and forbade the display of signs of faith in school; elsewhere, notably in Britain and the Netherlands, there was a broader tolerance for cultural distinction and assertive religious selfidentification.
If such questions had risen rapidly to the top of national political agendas, and were increasingly entangled in debates over immigration and asylum, it was because of growing anxiety all across the continent at the rise of a new generation of xenophobic parties.
Some of these parties had roots in an earlier age of sectarian or nationalist politics; others—like the surprisingly successful Dansk Folkeparti or the List Pirn Fortuyn in the Netherlands—were of very recent provenance.
But all of them had proven unexpectedly adept at exploiting ‘anti-immigrant’ sentiment.
On the one hand slower growth combined with vulnerability to global economic forces was exposing many working people to a level of economic insecurity unprecedented in living memory.
The presence in increasing numbers of a visible and culturally alien minority in their midst—and the prospect of even more foreigners feeding at the welfare trough or taking ‘our’ jobs once the floodgates from the East were opened—was icing on the cake for the new Right.
Charging that the ‘boat is full’—or that their governments had abandoned control of its frontiers to ‘cosmopolitan interests’ or the ‘bureaucrats of Brussels’—populist demagogues promised to stop immigration, repatriate ‘foreigners’ and return the state to its embattled white citizenry, outsiders in their own country.
Gunter Grass pointed accusingly to the self-centered indifference of West German political culture and the country’s myopic enthusiasm for an ‘unmerited’ unity, arguing that responsibility for the racist violence (especially in the festering, defunct industrial towns of the former GDR where anti742 THE OLD EUROPE-AND THE NEW foreigner feeling was most intense) should be placed squarely at the feet of the country’s complacent and amnesiac political elite.
But even if the level of violence was contained, the scale of public support for the new Right was cause for serious concern.
To avoid falling foul of the law, Haider was generally careful to avoid behaviour that would tar him too obviously with the brush of Nazi nostalgia.
For the most part the Austrian revealed his prejudices only indirectly— for example, by naming, as instances of whatever it was in public life that offended him, people who just happened to be Jewish.
Even more ominously, Haider had bitten deep into the traditionally Socialist electorate of working-class Vienna.
Considering that one Austrian in three believed with Haider that ‘guest-workers’ and other foreigners in Austria had too many benefits and privileges, this was hardly surprising.
Once in government, exposed to the wear and tear of office and constrained to share responsibility for unpopular policies, it would soon lose its appeal.
After winning 17 percent of the vote in 2002, in the wake of its leader’s assassination, the List Pirn Fortuyn rose briefly into the ranks of Dutch government only to see its support collapse to just 5 percent at the subsequent election and its parliamentary representation fall from 42 to 8.
In Italy the Lega Nord’s ascent into government under the wing of Berlusconi precipitated a steady fall in its support.
In Denmark, the Dansk Folkeparti had risen from obscure beginnings in 1995 to become by 2001 the country’s third-largest parliamentary group.
By staying out of office and focusing almost exclusively on the immigration issue, the party and its leader Pia Kjaersgaard were able to leverage their influence out of all proportion to size.
Both the leading Danish parties—Liberals and Social Democrats—now competed to outbid the other in their newfound ‘firmness’ on laws governing asylum and foreign residents.
Traditionally marginal—its best recent performance had been 7 percent of the vote in 1997 in an East London district where Bengalis had replaced Jews as the local ethnic minority—the BNP won 11,643 votes (14 percent) four years later in two districts of Oldham, a former mill town in Lancashire where race riots had broken out shortly before the elections.
These were negligible figures compared with developments on the Continent and the BNP came nowhere near winning a parliamentary seat.
But because (according to opinion polls) its concerns appeared to reflect a widespread national unease, the hard Right was able to frighten Prime Minister Tony Blair into tightening still further the UK’s already ungenerous provisions for would-be immigrants and refugees.
There the Front National had an issue—immigrants; mass backing—2. million voters at the general elections of 1986; and a charismatic leader brilliantly adept at converting generalized public dissatisfaction into focused anger and political prejudice.
Despite Le Pen’s own links to an older tradition of far-Right politics—through his youthful support for the Poujadists, his passage through the shadowy organizations of the far-Right during the Algerian war, and his carefully phrased defense of Vichy and the Petainist cause—his movement, like its counterparts all across the continent, could not be dismissed as simply an atavistic, nostalgic regurgitation of Europe’s Fascist past.
Indeed both took care to emphasize their desire to preserve their countries’ traditional tolerance—under threat, they asserted, from the religious fanaticism and retrograde cultural practices of the new Muslim minorities.
On the contrary, he took ostentatious care to emphasize his post-war credentials.
In Austria as in France it was the fear and hatred of immigrants (in France from the south, in Austria from the east, in both cases from lands over which they once ruled) that has replaced the old obsessions—anti-semitism especially—as the tie that binds the far Right.
In Italy, where ever since the war the Christian Democrats had enjoyed a cozy and profitable relationship with bankers, businessmen, contractors, city bosses, state employees and—it was widely rumored—the Mafia, a new generation of young magistrates began courageously to chip away at decades of barnacled public silence.
The party was disgraced and its leader, the former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi, was forced to flee across the Mediterranean into exile in Tunisia.
But the Socialists’ affairs were inextricably intertwined with those of the Christian Democrats, their long-time coalition partner.
Both parties were further discredited by the wave of arrests and charges that followed, and they took down with them the whole web of political arrangements and accommodations that had shaped Italian politics for two generations.
In the elections of 1994, all the country’s leading political parties except the former-Communists and the ex-Fascists were virtually wiped out—though the only lasting beneficiary of this political earthquake was a former lounge singer, the louche media magnate Silvio Berlusconi, who entered politics not so much to further the national house-cleaning as to ensure that his own business dealings remained safely unaffected.
In view of ETA’s reputation, this might not have sufficed to discredit the charismatic Gonzalez—thanks to the cynical public mood of the late Franco years many of his contemporaries had grown up with a distinctly instrumental view of the state and its laws—were it not for parallel revelations of graft and influence-peddling by Gonzalez’s Socialist colleagues that echoed the Italian example and aroused widespread anxiety over the moral condition of a Spanish democracy still in its infancy.
In France—or Germany, or Belgium—the spate of scandals that disfigured public life in the Nineties suggested not so much the fragility of institutions and mores as the rising cost of practicing democracy under modern conditions.
Public cash for political parties was strictly limited in Europe by law and tradition and usually made available only for the purpose of standing at elections.
Perhaps understandably, in any case more or less universally, the major political parties of Western Europe began to seek out alternative ways to attract funding—just at the time when, thanks to the abolition of controls and the globalization of business, there was a whole lot more money around.
At the end of the 1980s, the Belgian government contracted to purchase forty-six military helicopters from the Italian firm Agusta and to give the French company Dassault the job of refitting its F-16 aircraft.
In itself this was not unusual, and the fact that three countries were involved even lends an ecumenically pan-European quality to the affair.
Shortly thereafter, one leading Socialist politician who knew too much, Andre Cools, was killed in a parking lot in Liege in 1991; another, Etienne Mange, was arrested in 1995; and a third, Willy Claes, a former prime minister of Belgium, sometime secretary-general of NATO and foreign minister when the deals were made, was found guilty in September 1998 of taking bribes for his party.
A fourth suspect, the former army general Jacques Lefebvre who was closely involved in the affair, died in mysterious circumstances in March 1995.
If this is a peculiarly Belgian story (‘La Belgique' according to Baudelaire, ‘est sans vie, mais non sans corruption ’) it is perhaps because the duplication and dilution of constitutional authority there had led not just to the absence of government oversight but to the near-collapse of much of the apparatus of the state, including the criminal justice system.
Elsewhere, with the exception of Italy as noted above, there was strikingly little evidence of personal corruption—most of the crimes and misdemeanors were undertaken quite literally for the good of the party 26 —but a number of very prominent men were nevertheless forced abruptly out of public life.
Had he not been protected by his office, French President Jacques Chirac—mayor of Paris during a time when the city was awash in party-political graft and favourpeddling—would surely have joined their ranks.
What is perhaps most striking about these developments is how relatively little discredit they seem to have brought upon the political system as a whole.
The decline in turnout at elections certainly bespeaks a general loss of interest in public affairs; but this could already be detected decades earlier in rising abstention rates and the diminished intensity of political argument.
The real surprise is not the rise of a new cohort of right-wing populist parties but their consistent failure to do even better than they have, to capitalize on the disruption and discontent since 1989.
Europeans may have lost faith in their politicians, but at the core of the European system of government there is something that even the most radical anti-system parties have not dared to attack head on and which continues to attract near-universal allegiance.
That something is certainly not the European Union, for all its manifold merits.
Let us, instead of gazing wildly into the obscure distance, look calmly around us, for a little, on the perplexed scene where we stand’ Thomas Carlyle ‘The Creator of Europe made her small and even split her up into little parts, so that our hearts could find joy not in size but in plurality’ Karel Capek ‘In Europe we were Asiatics, whereas in Asia we, too, are Europeans’ Fyodor Dostoevsky When Communism fell and the Soviet Union imploded, they took with them not just an ideological system but the political and geographical coordinates of an entire continent.
For forty-five years—beyond the living memory of most Europeans—the uneasy outcome of World War Two had been frozen in place.
The accidental division of Europe, with all that it entailed, had come to seem inevitable.
In retrospect the post-war decades took on a radically altered significance.
With the disappearance of the world of 1945-1989, its illusions came into better focus.
The much-heralded ‘economic miracle’ of post-war Western Europe had returned the region to the standing in world trade and output that it had lost in the course of the years 1914-45, with rates of economic growth subsequently settling back into levels broadly comparable to those of the late nineteenth century.
This was no small achievement, but it was not quite the breakthrough into infinitely incremental prosperity that contemporaries had once fondly supposed.
Moreover, the recovery had been achieved not in spite of the Cold War but because of it.
Like the Ottoman threat in an earlier time, the shadow of the Soviet empire shrank Europe but imposed upon the surviving rump the benefits of unity.
After the collapse of Communism and the break-up of the Soviet empire, it could no longer be sustained.
The happy cocoon of post-war Western Europe—with its economic communities and free-trade zones, its reassuring external alliances and redundant internal frontiers—seemed suddenly vulnerable, called upon to respond to the frustrated expectations of would-be ‘Euro-citizens’ to its East and no longer anchored to a self-evident relationship with the great power across its western ocean.
Constrained once again to acknowledge their continent’s broad eastern marches when sketching a common European future, Western Europeans were perforce drawn back into the common European past.
But from 1945 to 1989 inter-state war disappeared from the continent of Europe.
Two generations of Europeans grew up under the hitherto inconceivable impression that peace was the natural order of things.
As an extension of politics, war was outsourced to the so-called Third World.
But compared with what had gone before, Eastern Europe too had lived through an age of unusual, albeit involuntary, calm.
Whether the post-World War Two era, now fast retreating into memory with the onset of new world orders, would become an object of nostalgic longing and regret depended very much on where and when you were born.
From both sides of the Iron Curtain the children of the Sixties—i.e. the core cohort of the babyboomer generation, born between 1946 and 1951—certainly looked back with affection upon ‘their’ decade and continued to harbour fond memories and an 'Even taking into account the Yugoslav wars of the Nineties, the number of war-related deaths in Europe in the second half of the century was less than one million.
And in the West, at least, their parents remained grateful for the political stability and material security of the era, contrasted with the horrors that had gone before.
But those too young to recall the Sixties were often resentful of the solipsistic self-aggrandizement of its ageing memorialists; while many older people who had lived out their lives under Communism recalled not just secure jobs, cheap rents and safe streets but also and above all a grey landscape of wasted talents and blighted hopes.
And on both sides of the divide there were limits to what could be recovered from the rubble of twentieth-century history.
Peace, prosperity and security, to be sure; but the optimistic convictions of an earlier age were gone for good.
Sixty years later, at the end of the twentieth century, almost everything else had been recovered or rebuilt.
Inter-war Europeans recalling the Belle Epoque might murmur ‘if only’; but in the aftermath of World War Two the overwhelming sentiment among anyone reflecting on the continent’s thirty-year catastrophe had been ‘never again’ 2 In short, there was no way back.
Communism in Eastern Europe had been the wrong answer to a real question.
After 1989, however, prosperous, post-political Western Europe was faced once again with its eastern twin and ‘Europe’ had to be rethought.
But that ‘old world order’—the familiar stasis of the past four decades—was gone forever.
Europeans were now confronted not just with an uncertain future but also with a rapidly changing past.
What had recently been very straightforward was now, once again, becoming rather complicated.
The ‘Idea of Europe’—itself a much debated topic—has a long history, some of it quite reputable.
But although a certain‘idea’ of Europe—reiterated in assorted conventions and treaties—informs the Union to which most Europeans now belong, it offers only a very partial insight into the life they lead there.
In an age of demographic transition and resettlement, today’s Europeans are more numerous and heterogeneous than ever before.
Any account of their common condition at the dawn of the twenty-first century must begin by acknowledging that variety, by mapping the overlapping contours and fault-lines of European identity and experience.
But whether those long-established boundary lines are any guide to the whereabouts of Europe always depended upon where you happen to stand.
But for enlightened Austrians,‘Asia’ nevertheless began at the Landstrasse, the high road leading east out of Vienna.
When Mozart headed west from Vienna en route for Prague in 1787, he described himself as crossing an oriental border.
East and West, Asia and Europe, were always walls in the mind at least as much as lines on the earth.
From the Baltic to the Balkans, such regions and their inhabitants have for centuries understood themselves as the outer guard of civilization, the vulnerable and sensitive point where the familiar world ends and barbarians are kept at bay.
The same is true of competing Hungarian and Romanian narratives, or the insistence of both Croats and Serbs that it is their southern border that constitutes the vital outer defensive line of civilized Europe.
What this confusion shows is that the outer boundaries of Europe have for centuries been sufficiently significant for interested parties to press with great urgency their competing claims to membership.
Over the centuries it came increasingly to serve as a source of collective identity.
At the end of the twentieth century, writers and politicians in places like Moldova, Ukraine or Armenia asserted their ‘Europeanness’ not on historical or geographical grounds but precisely as a defense against history and geography alike.
The implications of exclusion were already clear to even the most casual visitor by the early years of the new century.
It was about asserting a claim, however flimsy and forlorn, upon a common future.
The fear of being left out of Europe was not confined to the continent’s outer perimeter.
From the perspective of Romanian-speaking Moldovans, their neighbors 3 Many Poles, it should be noted, also insist upon their country’s place at the centre of Europe—a revealing confusion.
Liberated by NATO from Serbian oppression, they aspire to independent statehood less from nationalistic ambition than as a surety against the risk of being left in Serbia—and out of Europe.
Unlike Moldova they were seen by the West as legitimate if under-performing contenders for EU membership and were thus assured of a properly European future.
While the former Romanian Prime Minister, Adrien Nastase, was describing for readers of Le Monde in July 2001 the ‘added value’ that Romania brings to Europe, his fellow Romanians constituted over half the total number of aliens apprehended while illegally crossing the Polish-German border.
This sense of being on the periphery of someone else’s centre, of being a sort of second-class European, is today largely confined to former Communist countries, nearly all of them in the zone of small nations that Tomas Masaryk foresaw coming into being, from North Cape to Cape Matapan in the Peloponnese.
Within recent memory the continent’s other margins were at least as peripheral—economically, linguistically, culturally.
The poet Edwin Muir described his childhood move from the Orkneys to Glasgow in 1901 as ‘one hundred and fifty years covered in a two days’ journey’; it is a sentiment that would not have been out of place half a century later.
Well into the 1980s the highlands and islands at Europe’s edges—Sicily, Ireland, northern Scotland, Lapland—had more in common with one another, and their own past, than with the prosperous metropolitan regions of the centre.
Even now—indeed above all now—fault lines and boundaries cannot be counted upon to follow national frontiers.
This symbolic reassertion of ancient trading affinities was much appreciated by one-time Hanseatic cities like Hamburg or Liibeck—and even more welcome to the city managers of Tallinn and Gdansk, eager to position themselves at the centre of a re-invented (and Western-accented) Baltic community and take their distance from their continental hinterland and recent past.
But in other regions of some of the participating countries, notably Germany and Poland, the Baltic means little.
Munich and Vienna, though competing for cross-border industrial investment, have rediscovered nonetheless a common ‘Alpine’ heritage facilitated by the virtual disappearance of the boundary separating southern Bavaria from Salzburg and the Tyrol.
Regional cultural distinctions, then, clearly matter—though economic disparities matter even more.
Like Catalonia, Italy’s Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna, France’s Rhone-Alpes region and the Ile-de-France, Southern Germany and Austria— together with Switzerland, Luxembourg and parts of Belgian Flanders—constitute a common zone of European economic privilege.
Although absolute levels of poverty and economic disadvantage were still highest in the former Eastern bloc, the sharpest contrasts were now within countries rather than between them.
In the UK, too, the gap between the wealthy regions of the south-east and the former industrial districts farther north had grown in recent years.
Despite keeping its distance from the euro zone, the British capital was now the unchallenged financial center of the continent and had taken on a glitzy, high-tech energy that made other European cities seem dowdy and middle-aged.
In the inflated housing market of Europe’s most overcrowded metropolis, the bus drivers, nurses, cleaners, schoolteachers, policemen and waiters who serviced the cosmopolitan new Britons could no longer afford to live near them and were constrained to find housing farther and farther away, commuting to work as best they could along the most crowded roads in Europe, or else on the country’s expensive and dilapidated rail network.
Beyond the outer limits of Greater London, now extending its tentacular reach deep into the rural south-east, there was emerging a regional contrast unprecedented in recent English history.
At the end of the twentieth century, of England’s ten administrative regions only three reached or exceeded the national average wealth per capita.
All the rest of the country was poorer, sometimes very much poorer indeed.
The North East of England, once the heartland of the country’s mining and shipping industries, had a gross domestic product per head just 60 percent that of London.
In Germany, however, comparable disparities were a direct if unintended consequence of a political decision.
The absorption of the eastern Lander into a unified Germany had cost the Federal Republic more than one thousand billion euros in transfers and subsidies between 1991 and 2004.
But far from catching up to the West, the eastern region of Germany by the late Nineties had actually begun to fall further behind.
Private German firms had no incentive to locate in the East—in Saxony or Mecklenburg—when they could find better workers for lower wages (as well as a superior transportation infrastructure and local services) in Slovakia or Poland.
Ageing populations, poor education, low purchasing power, the westward departure of skilled workers and an entrenched hostility to foreigners on the part of those left behind meant that eastern Germany was distinctly unappealing to outside investors who now had many other options.
In 2004, unemployment in the former West Germany was 8. percent; in the east it exceeded 19 percent.
Germans, like everyone else in the new Europe, were increasingly divided by a novel set of distinctions that cut athwart conventional geographical or economic divides.
High incomes, low airfares, open frontiers and an integrated rail network favoured easy and frequent mobility.
These men and women, the villeins in Europe’s new medieval landscape, could not so readily benefit from the EU’s single market in goods, services and labour.
Instead they remained bound to their country or their local community, constrained by unfamiliarity with distant possibilities and foreign tongues and often far more hostile to ‘Europe’ than their cosmopolitan fellow citizens.
There were two notable exceptions to this new international class distinction that was starting to blur the old national contrasts.
For jobbing artisans and laborers from Eastern Europe, the new work opportunities in London or Hamburg or Barcelona blended seamlessly with older-established traditions of migrant labour and seasonal overseas employment.
There was nothing uniquely European about that, and Slovak house-painters—like Turkish car-workers or Senegalese peddlers before them—were not likely to be found dining out in Brussels, vacationing in Italy or shopping in London.
The second exception was the British—or, rather, the notoriously Euroskeptic English.
The irony of this juxtaposition of popular English disdain and mistrust for the institutions and ambitions of‘Europe’ with a widespread national desire to spend their spare time and money there was not lost on Continental observers, for whom it remained a perplexing oddity.
But then the British—like the Irish—did not have to learn foreign languages.
Elsewhere in Europe linguistic resourcefulness (as noted above) was fast becoming the continent’s primary disjunctive identity tag, a measure of personal social standing and collective cultural power.
In small countries like Denmark or the Netherlands, it had long been accepted that monolingualism in a tongue spoken by almost no-one else was a handicap the nation could no longer afford.
It helped that in Denmark and the Netherlands, as in many small European countries, students and bank clerks alike would long since have become at least passively fluent from watching un-dubbed English-language programmes on television.
In Switzerland, where anyone who completed a secondary education often mastered three or even four local languages, it was nonetheless thought easier, as well as more tactful, to resort to English when communicating with someone from another part of the country.
In Belgium, too, where—as we have seen—it was far less common for Walloons or Flemings to be comfortably conversant with the other’s language, both sides would resort readily to English as a common communications medium.
In countries where regional languages—Catalan, for example, or Basque—were now officially taught, it was not uncommon for young people (‘Generation E’— for Europe—as it was popularly known) dutifully to learn the local language but to spend their spare time—as a gesture of adolescent revolt, social snobbery and enlightened self-interest —speaking English.
The loser was not the minority language or dialect—which anyway had scant local past and no international future— but the national tongue of the surrounding state.
With English as the default medium of choice, major languages were now being forced into the shadows.
As a distinctively European language Spanish, like Portuguese or Italian, was no longer widely taught outside its homeland; it was preserved as a vehicle of communication beyond the Pyrenees only thanks to its status as an official language of the European Union.
German, too, was fast losing its place in the European language league.
A reading knowledge of German had once been mandatory for anyone participating in 7 As the common language of many tens of millions of people in the Americas, from Santiago to San Francisco, the international standing of Spanish was nevertheless secure.
The same was true of Portuguese, at least in its quite distinctive Brazilian form.
Together with French, German had also been a universal language of cultivated Europeans—and until the war it had been the more widespread of the two, a language in active daily use from Strasbourg to Riga.
But with the destruction of the Jews, the expulsion of the Germans and the arrival of the Soviets, central and eastern Europe was turned abruptly away from the German language.
An older generation in the cities continued to read and—infrequently—speak German; and in the isolated German communities of Transylvania and elsewhere it limped on as a marginal language of limited practical use.
The association of the Russian language with Soviet occupation considerably restricted its appeal, even in countries like Czechoslovakia or Poland where linguistic contiguity made it accessible.
Although citizens of the satellite states were obliged to study Russian, most people made little effort to master the language, much less speak it except when forced to do so.
Within a few years of the fall of Communism it was already clear that one paradoxical effect of occupation by Germany and the Soviet Union had been to eradicate any sustained familiarity with their languages.
In the lands that had for so long been trapped between Russia and Germany there was now only one foreign language that mattered.
To be ‘European’ in eastern Europe after 1989, especially for the young, was to speak English.
For native German speakers in Austria, Switzerland or Germany itself, the steady provincializing of their language—to the point where even those whose own language derived closely from German, like the Dutch, no longer widely studied or understood it—was an accomplished fact and there was no point mourning the loss.
In the course of the Nineties, major German firms like Siemens made a virtue of necessity and established English as their corporate working language.
German politicians and business executives became notable for the ease with which they moved in anglophone circles.
As a language of commonplace daily use French had not played a significant role in Europe since the decline of the imperial aristocracies of the old regimes.
Outside of France, only a few million Belgians, Luxemburgers and Swiss, together with pocket communities in the Italian Alps and the Spanish Pyrenees, used French as their native tongue—and many of them spoke it in dialect forms disparaged by the official guardians of the Academie Fran$aise.
In strictly statistical terms, when compared to German—or Russian— French had long been on the European linguistic periphery.
But ever since the decline of Latin, French had been the language of cultivated cosmopolitan elites—and thus the European language par excellence.
When, in the 8 With the exception of Romania, where the situation was reversed and French had by far the broader constituency.
Well into the middle years of the century, comparable assumptions were still widely made—if not quite so boldly articulated—in academies and embassies everywhere.
The present author can vouch for both the necessity and the sufficiency of French as a medium of communication among students from Barcelona to Istanbul as recently as 1970.
By the year 2000, French had ceased to be a reliable medium of international communication even among elites.
Only in the UK, Ireland and Romania was it the recommended choice for schoolchildren embarking on a first foreign language—everyone else learnt English.
In some parts of former Habsburg Europe, French was no longer even the second foreign language offered in schools, having been displaced by German.
Even at the European Commission in Brussels, where French had been the dominant official language in the Community’s early years and where native French speakers in the bureaucracy thus exercised a significant psychological and practical advantage, things had changed.
It was not so much the accession of Britain itself that brought about the shift—the seconded civil servants from London were all fluent in French—as the arrival of Scandinavians, who were fluent in English; the expansion of the German-speaking community, now shedding its post-war reticence; and the prospect of new members from the East.
Despite the use of simultaneous translators , communication in one of the Union’s three core languages was indispensable for anyone wishing to exercise real influence on policy and its implementation.
Unlike the Germans, however, the French authorities did not respond by switching to English in order to ensure their commercial and political effectiveness.
French governments of every political persuasion were all too happy to oblige, if only pour le forme.
Toubon’s target—what he contemptuously dubbed the ‘mercantile English’ that was displacing French (‘the primary capital, the symbol of the dignity of the French people’)—was already moving out of reach even as he took aim.
Intellectuals like Michel Serres might complain portentously that the streets of Paris during the Occupation had fewer names in German than they had today in English, but a younger generation reared on films, television shows, video games, internet sites and international pop music—and speaking a mobile French slang full of borrowed and adapted words and phrases—could not have cared less.
Legislation intended to oblige the French to speak French to one another was one thing—albeit honored largely in the breach.
By the turn of the new century the truth had sunk in and most French public figures and policy makers had resigned themselves to the harsh realities of twenty-first-century Europe.
The best illustration of the c ever-closer union’ into which Europeans had bundled themselves—or, more accurately, been bundled by their enlightened political leaders—was to be found in the ever-denser network of communications to which it gave rise.
The infrastructure of intra-European transportation—bridges, tunnels, roads, trains and ferries—had expanded quite beyond recognition in the course of the last decades of the century.
Europeans now had the fastest and (with the exception of the justly maligned British rail network) the safest system of railways in the world.
In a crowded continent whose relatively short distances favored ground transportation over air travel, railways were an uncontroversial object of sustained public investment.
The same countries that had come together in Schengen now cooperated—with significant EU backing—to lay an extended network of improved high-speed tracks reaching from Madrid and Rome to Amsterdam and Hamburg, with plans for its further extension north into Scandinavia and eastwards through central Europe.
Even in those regions and countries that might never be favored with TGV, ICE or ES trains 10 , Europeans could now travel throughout their continent—not necessarily much faster than a century before but with far less impediment.
As in the nineteenth century, railway innovation in Europe came at the expense of those towns and districts not served by it, which risked losing markets and population and falling behind their more fortunate competitors.
But now there was an extensive network of high-speed roads as well—and outside of the former Soviet Union, the southern Balkans and the poorest provinces of Poland and Romania, most Europeans now had access to a car.
Together with hydrofoil ferries and deregulated airlines, these changes made it possible for people to live in one city, work in another and shop or play somewhere else—not always cheaply, but with unprecedented efficiency.
It became quite common for young European families to contemplate living in Malmo and working in Copenhagen , for example; or commuting from Freiburg to Strasbourg or even across the sea from London to Rotterdam; or from Bratislava to Vienna , reviving a once-commonplace Habsburg-era link.
Increasingly mobile, Europeans now knew one another better than ever before.
But some Europeans re10 Respectively the French, German and Italian flagship expresses.
Two and a half centuries after Voltaire drew the contrast between a Europe that ‘knows’ and a Europe that ‘waits to be known’, that distinction retained much of its force.
Power, prosperity and institutions were all clustered into the continent’s far western corner.
When knowledge flowed in the opposite direction, however, it was not always in very flattering ways.
It is not just that impoverished eastern and southern Europeans travelled north and west to sell their labour or their bodies.
By the end of the century certain eastern European cities, having exhausted their appeal as rediscovered outposts of a lost central Europe, had begun to reposition themselves in a profitable niche market as cheap and tawdry vacation spots for down-market mass tourism from the West.
Tallinn and Prague in particular established an unenviable reputation as the venue for British ‘stag flights’—low-cost package weekends for Englishmen seeking abundant alcohol and cheap sex.
Travel agents and tour organizers whose clientele would once have settled for Blackpool or Benidorm now reported rapturous enthusiasm for the exotic treats on offer in the European east.
But then the English, too, were peripheral in their way—which is why Europe remained for so many of them an exotic object.
Thanks to unification, immigration and the arrival of the Federal government, Greater Berlin was now six times the area of Paris—a symbol of the relative standing of the Union’s two leading members.
Two-thirds of the Union’s net income came from the Federal Republic alone.
And despite being its primary paymasters—or maybe for that reason—Germans remained among the EU’s most committed citizens.
If Germany—to pursue the Voltairian image a little further—was the country that ‘knew’ Europe best, it was appropriate that at the beginning of the twenty-first century two other former imperial states should have been most insistently seeking to be ‘known’ by it.
Like Germany, Russia and Turkey had once played an imperial role in European affairs.
In the late 1990s it was estimated that more than one hundred million Russians lived outside of Russia in the independent countries of eastern Europe.
Preoccupied with violent rebellions in the Caucasus, it was maintained at a distance from the rest of Europe by the new buffer states of Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova as well as by its own increasingly illiberal domestic politics.
In any event, Russian authorities were more interested in building pipelines and selling gas to the EU than in joining it.
Nevertheless, Russia had been a ‘hands-on’ European power for three hundred years and the legacy remained.
A Lithuanian president, Rolandas Paksas, was forced out of office in 2003 under suspicion of close links with the Russian mafia.
In the Vojvodina region of northern Serbia, Hungarians who had lived there for centuries were periodically assaulted and their properties vandalized by Serb youths.
In a series of measures in the spring and summer of 2004 the authorities significantly curtailed both the rights of the press and the already restricted opportunities for public protest.
Russia’s brief window of freedom—actually disarray and the absence of constraint rather than genuine constitutionally protected liberty—was fast closing.
In 2004, Russian observers estimated that KGBtrained officials occupied one in four of civilian administrative posts in the country.
In the short run, Russia was thus a decidedly uncomfortable presence on Europe’s outer edge.
The Russian military was otherwise engaged and anyway in dilapidated condition.
The health of the Russian population was a matter of serious concern—life expectancy for men especially was falling precipitately and international agencies had for some time been warning that the country had seen a revival of tuberculosis and was on the verge of an AIDS epidemic—but this was primarily a source of concern for Russians themselves.
For the immediate future Russia was decidedly preoccupied with its own affairs.
In the longer run, the simple fact of Russia’s proximity, its sheer size and unmatched fossil-fuel reserves, must inevitably cast a shadow on the future of an energy-poor European continent.
Already in 2004, half of Poland’s natural gas and 95 percent of its oil came from Russia.
For Russians, the European West remained what it had been for centuries, a contradictory object of attraction and repulsion, of admiration and ressentiment.
Russia’s rulers and people alike remained markedly sensitive to outside opinion while evincing deep suspicion of all foreign criticism or interference.
History and geography had bequeathed to Europeans a neighbour they could neither ignore nor accommodate.
For nearly seven hundred years the Ottoman Turks had been Europe’s ‘other’, supplanting the Arabs who had occupied the role for the previous half millennium.
For many centuries ‘Europe’ began where the Turks ended (which was why Cioran was so depressed to be reminded of Romania’s long years under Ottoman rule); and it was commonplace to speak of Christian Europe being periodically‘saved’—whether at the gates of Vienna, or Budapest, or at the 1571 Battle of Lepanto—from the jaws of Turkish Islam.
From the mid-eighteenth century, as Ottoman Turkey slipped into decline, the ‘Eastern Question’—how to manage the Ottoman Empire’s decline and what to do with the territories now emerging from centuries of Turkish rule—was the most pressing challenge facing European diplomats.
Turkey’s defeat in World War I, the overthrow of the Ottomans, and their replacement by Kemal Ataturk’s ostentatiously secular, modernizing state, had taken the Eastern Question off the European agenda.
Had it not been for Turkey’s strategic location athwart the Soviet Union’s sea route to the Mediterranean, the country might well have disappeared altogether from Western consciousness.
Instead, Ankara became for the duration of the Cold War an accommodating participant in the Western alliance, contributing to NATO a rather significant contingent of soldiers.
Meanwhile, Turkish ‘guest workers’, like the rest of the Mediterranean basin’s surplus rural population, migrated in large numbers to Germany and other Western European lands in search of jobs.
With the end of the Cold War, Turkey’s distinctive location took on a different significance.
The country was no longer a frontier outpost and barrier state in an international geopolitical confrontation.
Instead it was now a conduit, caught between Europe and Asia, with ties and affinities in both directions.
Although Turkey was formally a secular republic, most of its seventy million citizens were Muslims.
Many older Turks were not especially orthodox, but with the rise of radical Islam there were growing fears that even Ataturk’s ruthlessly imposed secular state might prove vulnerable to a new generation rebelling against their secularized parents and looking for roots in an older heritage of Ottoman Islam.
But Turkey’s educated professional and business elites were disproportionately located in the European city of Istanbul and identified enthusiastically with Western dress, culture and practices.
Like other ambitious eastern Europeans they saw Europe—European values, European institutions, European markets and careers— as the only possible future for them and their ambivalently situated country.
Moreover, this was one objective they shared with the traditionally influential officer corps, who identified wholeheartedly with Ataturk’s dream of a secular state and expressed open irritation at creeping Islamisation in Turkish public life.
Turkey’s application to join the European Union lay unaddressed for many years.
Turkey’s prisons, its treatment of domestic critics and its inadequate civil and economic codes were just some of many issues that would need to be addressed before it could hope to get beyond a strictly trading relationship with its European partners.
The implications for national immigration policies, as well as for the EU’s budget, could hardly be ignored.
If Turkey entered the EU, the Union would have an external frontier abutting Georgia, Armenia, Iran, Iraq and Syria.
Whether or not it made geographical sense to take ‘Europe’ to within one hundred miles of Mosul was a legitimate question; in the circumstances of the time it was unquestionably a security risk.
And the further Europe stretched its frontiers, the more it was felt by many—including the drafters of the constitutional document of 2004—that the Union should explicitly state what it was that defined their common home.
This, in turn, induced a number of politicians in Poland, Lithuania, Slovakia and elsewhere—not to mention the Polish Pope in Rome—to try unsuccessfully to insert into the preamble to a new European constitutional text a reminder that Europe was once Christian Europe.
The irony was that precisely for this reason—because they could not define themselves as Christian (or ‘Judeo-Christian’)—would-be European Turks were even more likely than other Europeans to emphasize the secular, tolerant and liberal dimensions of European identity.
They were also, and with increasing urgency, trying to invoke European values and norms as a lever against reactionary influences in Turkish public life—a goal that the member-states of Europe itself had long encouraged.
But although in 2003 the Turkish parliament finally removed, at European bidding, many longstanding restrictions on Kurdish cultural life and political expression, the lengthy hesitation-waltz performed by governments and officials at Brussels had begun to exact a price.
Turkish critics of EU membership pointed insistently to the humiliation of a once-imperial nation, now reduced to the status of a supplicant at the European door, importuning support for its application from its former subject nations.
Moreover, the steady growth of religious sentiment in Turkey not only produced an electoral victory for the country’s moderate Islamist party but encouraged the national parliament to debate a motion to make adultery, once again, a criminal offence.
Opponents of Turkish membership—and there were many, in Germany 16 and France as well as closer to home in Greece or Bulgaria—could point once again to its unsuitability.
In 2004 the retiring Dutch EU Commissioner Frits Bolkestein warned of the coming Tslamisation’ of Europe.
Meanwhile, the cost of future rejection or further delays—to Turkish pride and the political stability of Europe’s vulnerable edge—ratcheted up another notch.
That history should have weighed so heavily upon European affairs at the start of the twenty-first century was ironic, considering how lightly it lay upon the shoulders of contemporary Europeans.
The problem was not so much education—the teaching or mis-teaching of history in schools, though in some parts of southeastern Europe this too was a source of concern—as the public uses to which the past was now put.
In authoritarian societies, of course, this was an old story; but Europe, by its self-definition, was post-authoritarian.
Governments no longer exercised a monopoly over knowledge and history could not readily be altered for political convenience.
In eastern Europe, nostalgia drew directly upon regret for the lost certainties of Communism, now purged of its darker side.
The exhibition attracted many older people for whom the grey sameness of the shoddily-made items on display must have been a recent memory.
And yet the response of visitors suggested a degree of affection and even regret that caught the curators quite by surprise.
Ostalgie, as it was known in Germany, drew on a similar vein of forgetful remembering.
Considering that the GDR—to adapt Mirabeau’s description of Hohenzollern Prussia—was little more than a security service with a state, it demonstrated in the glow of retrospect a remarkable capacity to evoke affection and even longing.
But Germans and Czechs, like other central Europeans, have had all too much experience of sudden, traumatic national re-starts.
Eine Deutsche Chronik attracted an average of nine million West German viewers per episode when it was televised in 1984.
The obsession with nostalgia that swept across the rest of Western Europe in the last years of the old century, giving rise to heritage industries, memorials, reconstructions, reenactments and renovations, is not so readily accounted for.
But the creative re-imagining of the national past in France and the UK at the end of the twentieth century was of another order altogether.
It was not by chance that history-as-nostalgia was so very pronounced in these two national settings in particular.
Having entered the twentieth century as proud imperial powers, both countries had been stripped of territory and resources by war and decolonization.
The confidence and security of global empire had been replaced by uneasy memories and uncertain future prospects.
What it meant to be French, or British, had once been very clear, but no longer.
The alternative, to become enthusiastically ‘European’, was far easier in small countries like Belgium or Portugal, or in places—like Italy or Spain—where the recent national past was best left in shadow.
But after the Thatcherite revolution of the Eighties even this element of continuity was lost.
In the course of that decade the Britain—more precisely the England—that could feel a certain warm glow of recognition when looking back to the ’40s, or even to 1913, was quite swept away.
The past was not abused or exploited; it was sanitized and given a happy face.
Barnsley, at the heart of the defunct South Yorkshire coalfield, was a case in point.
Once an important mining hub, Barnsley in the post-Thatcher era had been transformed beyond recognition.
Its town center was eviscerated, its civic core ripped up and replaced by tawdry pedestrian malls encased in concrete parking garages.
All that remained were the town hall and a handful of neighbouring buildings, architectural relics of Barnsley’s nineteenth-century municipal glory, to which visitors were directed by fake-ancient, ‘olde-worlde’ signposts.
A few miles from Barnsley, near the village of Orgreave, the ‘Battle of Orgreave’ was rerun for television in 2001.
The June 1984 confrontation there between striking miners and police was the most violent and desperate of the clashes that marked Margaret Thatcher’s confrontation with the National Union of Miners that year.
Since then many of the miners had been unemployed—some of them took part in the re-enactment, dressed in appropriate ‘period’ clothing.
This ‘performing’ of famous battles was an established English pastime.
But that Orgreave should have been getting the ‘heritage’ treatment was illustrative of the accelerated historicizing now under way.
After all, it took three hundred years before the English got around to re-enacting the Civil War Battle of Naseby a couple of hours to the south; Orgreave was being rerun for television just seventeen years after the fact.
The town of Barnsley figured prominently in The Road to Wigan Pier , where George Orwell wrote unforgettably of the tragedy of inter-war unemployment in Britain’s industrial working class.
Seventy years on, in Wigan itself, there was now not only a pier but also a signpost on the nearby motorway encouraging people to visit it.
Next to the cleaned-up canal there had been constructed ‘The Way We Were’ museum and ‘The Orwell at Wigan Pier’, a generic modern pub selling burgers and chips.
Memories of Wigan 1930-1970 , a guide on sale at the museum, offered pretty sepia pictures of demure salesgirls and quaint, forgotten shops.
But of the pits and the workers whose condition drew Orwell there and gave Wigan its dubious fame, there was not a word.
In England’s West Midland potteries district, tourists and local schoolchildren were encouraged to learn how Josiah Wedgwood, the eighteenth-century ceramics manufacturer, fashioned his famous wares.
And such examples—where the way things ought to have been was substituted for the way they were —could be multiplied hundredfold.
Industry, poverty, and class conflict have been officially forgotten and paved over.
And even the most recent and contested past is available only in nostalgic plastic reproduction.
This countrywide bowdlerization of memory was the signal achievement of the nation’s new political £lite.
The English capacity to plant and tend a Garden of Forgetting, fondly invoking the past while strenuously denying it, is unique.
France’s otherwise comparable obsession with the nation’s heritage —le patrimoine —took a different form.
In France, the fascination with identifying and preserving worthy objects and places from the national past went back many decades, beginning between the wars with agrarian exhibitions already nostalgic for the lost world of pre-1914 and accelerated by the Vichy regime’s efforts to replace the inconvenient urban present with an idealized rural past.
But by the last decades of the century France—the France of Presidents Mitterrand and Chirac—was changing beyond recognition.
Now it was not the continuities with past glory—or past tragedy—that attracted comment, but rather the discontinuities.
The past—the revolutionary past, the peasant past, the linguistic past, but above all the recent past, from Vichy to Algiers—offered little guidance for the future.
Overtaken by demographic transformation and two generations of socio-geographic mobility, France’s once-seamless history seemed set to disappear from national memory altogether.
One was an increase in the range of the official patrimoine , the publicly espoused body of monuments and artifacts stamped ‘heritage’ by the authority of the state.
In 1988, at the behest of Mitterrand’s Culture Minister Jack Lang, the list of officially protected items in the patrimoine culturel of France—previously restricted to UNESCO-style heirlooms such as the Pont du Gard near Nimes, or Philip the Bold’s ramparts at Aigues-Mortes—was dramatically enlarged.
So the preservation of a building which never even appeared in the film could be seen—according to taste—either as a subtle French exercise in post772 THE VARIETIES OF EUROPE modern irony, or else as symptomatic of the unavoidably bogus nature of any memory when subjected thus to official taxidermy.
Mitterrand’s own distinctive contribution to the national patrimoine was not so much to preserve or classify it as to manufacture it in real time.
No French ruler since Louis XIV has marked his reign with such a profusion of buildings and ceremonials.
No comparable publication has ever been conceived for any other nation, and it is hard to imagine how it could be.
For Nora’s Lieux de Memoire captures both the astonishing confidence of French collective identity—the uncontested assumption that eight hundred years of national history have bequeathed France a singularity and a common heritage that lend themselves to mnemonic representation in this manner—and the anxious sense, as the editor makes explicit in his introduction, that these commonplace collective symbols of a shared past were about to be lost forever.
This is nostalgia as Angst the fear that one day—quite soon—the earth-colored information panels clustered along France’s magnificently engineered, impeccably landscaped autoroutes will cease to hold any meaning for the French themselves.
The heritage industry in England suggests an obsession with the way things weren't —the cultivation, as it were, of genuine nostalgia for a fake past.
In contrast, the French fascination with its spiritual patrimoine has a certain cultural authenticity.
It was thus altogether appropriate that regret for the keys to a lost Frenchness was focused upon a formal body of symbols, whether physical or intellectual.
These assumptions were shared by politicians, intellectuals and people of all political persuasions—which is why Les Lieux de memoire was so successful, encapsulating for tens of thousands of readers an evanescent Frenchness already eluding them in daily French life.
There was no assigned corner for Islam in the French memory palace and it would have run counter to the purpose of the undertaking to create one after the fact.
But the omission nevertheless illustrated the trouble that France, like its neighbours, was going to have in accommodating the millions of new Europeans in its midst.
Like the rest of the continent’s political elite, from Portugal to Poland, they represented above all white, Christian Europe.
Although the varieties of Christianity within Europe remained many—from Ukrainian Uniates to Welsh Methodists, from Trans-Carpathian Greek Catholics to Norwegian Lutherans—the number of Christians who actually practiced their faith continued to shrink.
In France, only one adult in seven acknowledged even attending church, and then on average just once a month.
Christianity was on the wane even in Poland, where the citizenry was increasingly deaf to the moral exhortations of the once-powerful Catholic hierarchy.
By the turn of the century well over half of all Poles (and a much larger majority of those under thirty) favoured legalized abortions.
Islam, in contrast, was expanding its appeal—particularly among the young, for whom it served increasingly as a source of communal identity and collective pride in countries where citizens of Arab or Turkish or African provenance were still widely seen and treated as ‘foreigners’ Whereas their parents and grandparents had made strenuous efforts to integrate and assimilate, young men and women in Antwerp or Marseille or Leicester now vociferously identified both with the land of their birth—Belgium or France or Britain —and with the religion and region of their family’s roots.
Girls, especially, took to wearing traditional clothing and reli774 THE VARIETIES OF EUROPE gious symbols—sometimes under family pressure, but often in rebellion against the compromises of an older generation.
But this move, undertaken in February 2004 and targeted at the voile —the headgear of observant Muslim girls—must be understood in a broader and more troubling context.
Racial prejudice in many places was being turned to political advantage by the far Right; and anti-Semitism was on the rise in Europe, for the first time in over forty years.
Seen from across the Atlantic, where it became a staple in the speeches of Europhobic politicians and neo-conservative pundits, anti-Semitism in France or Belgium or Germany was immediately identified as a return to the continent’s dark past.
Anti-Jewish feelings were largely unknown in contemporary Europe —except among Muslims and especially Europeans of Arab descent, where they were a direct outcome of the festering crisis in the Middle East.
Arab television stations, now available via satellite throughout Europe, regularly broadcast reports from Gaza and the Occupied West Bank.
The attacks on Jews and Jewish institutions—concentrated in the first years of the new century—aroused concern not because of their scale, or even on account of their racist character, but because of their implicitly inter-communal nature.
Racially motivated attacks on Arabs—or, varying by country, on Turks, Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Senegalese and other visible minorities—were far more numerous than assaults on Jews.
Elsewhere the public authorities worried more about the growing alienation of their Arab and other Muslim communities than they did about any putative revival of Fascism.
In contrast to the United States, which continued to treat ‘Islam’ and Muslims as a distant challenge, alien and hostile, best addressed by heightened security and ‘pre-emptive war’, Europe’s governments had good reason to see the matter very differently.
The transmigration of passions and frustrations from persecuted Arabs in Palestine to their angry, dispirited brethren in Paris should not have come as a surprise—it was, after all, another legacy of empire.
Aneurin Bevan ‘We want the people at Nokia to feel we all are partners, not bosses and employees.
Jorma Ollila (CEO, Nokia} ‘Europeans want to be sure that there is no adventure in the future.
Alfons Verplaetse 1996 ‘America is the place to come when you are young and single.
The end of the twentieth century in Europe lacks the homogeneity implicit in confident descriptions of the previous fin-de-siecle.
In high culture—the performing arts in particular—the state had retained its subventionary role, at least in Western Europe.
Museums, art galleries, opera companies, orchestras and ballet troupes all depended heavily, in many countries exclusively, on generous annual grants from public funds.
The egregious exception of post-Thatcherite Great Britain, where the national lottery had relieved the Treasury of some of the burden of cultural support, was misleading.
The high cost of such public funding had raised doubts about the possibility of sustaining lavish grants indefinitely, particularly in Germany, where during the Nineties some of the Lander governments began to question the generous scale of their outlays.
Public subsidies in Germany typically defrayed over 80 percent of the cost of running a theatre or opera house.
But culture at this level was closely bound up with status and with regional identity.
Frankfurt, Munich, Stuttgart, Hamburg, Diisseldorf, Dresden, Freiburg, Wurzburg and many other German cities continued to support first-rate international ballet or opera companies, paying annual salaries with full benefits and state pensions to performers, musicians and stage hands.
In France, too, the arts flourished in far-flung provincial towns—thanks in the French case to direct aid distributed from central funds by a single Culture Ministry.
In addition to building his eponymous library and other monuments, President Mitterrand spent sums unprecedented since the reign of Louis XIV not just on the Louvre, the Opera de Paris and the Com£die Franchise but also on regional museums, regional arts centres, provincial theatre companies, as well as a nationwide network of cinematheques to store and show classic and modern films.
Whereas in Germany the high arts were proudly cosmopolitan (Vladimir Derevianko, the Russian director of Dresden’s Opera-Ballet, commissioned works from William Forsythe, an American choreographer, for enthusiastic German audiences), much of the point of artistic subsidies in France was to preserve and display the riches of the nation’s own heritage—France’s exception culturelle.
High culture in France retained a broadly acknowledged pedagogical function, and the canon of French theatre in particular was still rigorously inculcated in the national curriculum.
Jane Brown, the London headmistress who in 1993 forbade a school 2 Britain was not unique.
In one week in September 2004 the Spanish national lottery, El Gordo, took in 5,920,293 euros.
The scale of public funding was perhaps most striking in France and Germany, but the state was the main—and in most cases the only—source of funding for the arts all across Europe.
Indeed ‘culture’ was the last important area of public life in which the national state, rather than the European Union or else private enterprise, could play a distinctive role as a near-monopoly provider.
Even in Eastern Europe, where the older generation had good reason to recall with trepidation the implications of allowing government a controlling say in cultural life, the impoverished public treasury was the only alternative to the baleful impact of market forces.
But after Communism, while there was considerable lowbudget experimentation—Sofia in particular became a hotbed of recherche postmodern experiments in choreography and staging—there were almost no resources and many of the best musicians, dancers and even actors headed west.
The new caste of transnational clercs who communicated readily across frontiers and languages had the means and the time to travel freely in pursuit of entertainment and edification no less than clothing or careers.
Reviews of an exhibition, a play or an opera would appear in the press of many different countries.
A successful show in one city—London, say, or Amsterdam— could hope to attract audiences and visitors from as far afield as Paris, or Zurich or Milan.
Whether the newly cosmopolitan audiences were genuinely sophisticated—as distinct from merely well-heeled—was a point of some contention.
Longestablished events such as the annual Salzburg Festival or the periodic Ring cycle performances at Bayreuth still attracted an older audience, familiar with not just the material being performed but also the attendant social rituals.
But the trend was towards energetic efforts to popularize traditional material for younger audiences, whose acquaintance with the classics could not be taken for granted—or else to commission novel, accessible works for a new generation.
This was not as unprecedented a situation as cultural pessimists were wont to assert—the exploitable anxieties of under-cultivated nouveaux riches had been a theme of literary and theatrical mockery at least since Moliere.
What was new, however, was the continental scale of the cultural shift.
The composition of audiences from Barcelona to Budapest was now strikingly uniform, and so, too, was the material on offer.
Whether the ever-closer Union of Europeans rendered its beneficiaries more cosmopolitan or simply blended their separate parochialisms was not just a question for the high-arts pages of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung or the Financial Times.
The FAZ, the FT, Le Monde and to a lesser extent Italy’s La Repubblica were now genuinely European papers, universally available and read all across the continent.
The mass-circulation tabloid press, however, remained firmly circumscribed by national languages and frontiers.
In eastern Europe and Iberia, the long absence of a free press meant that many people, especially outside of the large cities, had missed out altogether on the newspaper era—transiting directly from pre-literacy to the electronic media.
The latter—television above all—were now the main source of information, ideas and culture for most Europeans.
The traditional state-owned television stations faced competition from both terrestrial commercial companies and satellite channels; but they had retained a surprisingly large audience share.
They had also for the most part followed the lead of the daily press and sharply reduced their foreign news coverage.
As a consequence, European television at the close of the twentieth century presented a curious paradox.
The presentational style—in news broadcasts, for example—was remarkably similar, borrowing in many cases from the model of American local news.
On the other hand, television remained a distinctly national and even insular medium.
Thus Italian television was unmistakably Italian —from its curiously dated variety shows and stilted interviews to the celebrated good looks of its presenters and the distinctive camera angles deployed when filming scantily clad younger women.
In neighbouring Austria an earnest moral seriousness informed locally produced talk shows, contrasting with Germany’s near-monopoly of the rest of the programming.
In Switzerland each region of the country had its own television channels, employing different languages, reporting different events and operating in sharply contrasting styles.
The BBC, as its critics bitterly observed, had abandoned the aesthetics and ideals of its earlier days as the nation’s moral arbiter and benevolent pedagogue in the drive to compete with its commercial rivals.
But in spite of being dumbed-down it was even more unmistakably British than ever.
The intellectual or political concerns, the contrasting attitudes to authority and power, were as distinctive and different as they had been half a century before.
In an age when most other collective activities and communal organizations were in decline, television was what the mass of the population of every country had in common.
And it served very effectively to reinforce national distinctions and a high level of mutual ignorance.
For except during major crises, television channels showed remarkably little interest in events in neighbouring countries—rather less, if anything, than in television’s early years, when fascination with technology and curiosity about the near-abroad led to numerous documentaries and ‘outside broadcasts’ from exotic towns and seascapes.
Election results elsewhere in Europe were reported by national mass media only if they had shock value or trans-continental implications.
For the most part, Europeans had very little idea what was going on in neighbouring countries.
Their singular lack of interest in European elections did not derive just from suspicion or boredom in the face of the elucubrations emanating from Brussels; it was a natural by-product of the largely un-European mental universe of most Europeans.
A satellite television channel—‘Eurosport’—was devoted to broadcasting a wide-range of sports events in various European languages.
Every national television station from Estonia to Portugal devoted considerable blocks of airtime to sporting competitions, many of them inter-European and frequently not even involving the local or national team.
Even cricket, the iconic summer game of the English, had slipped to a niche position in entertainment terms, in spite of efforts to render it more colourful, more eventful—and to put an end to leisurely but commercially disastrous five-day games.
The game was played in every European country, but in the initial post-war decades players stayed close to home.
Spectators watched domestic league football; the relatively infrequent international games were treated in some places as vicarious, emotionally charged re-runs of military history.
But even though many other Europeans watched her funeral on television, they lost interest soon enough.
Well into the late 1960s it would have been highly unusual for a club player to find a foreigner on his team, except in Italy where innovative managers were just starting to poach talented outsiders.
The glorious Real Madrid team of the 1950s did indeed boast the peerless Hungarian Ferenc Puskas, but Puskas was hardly a representative case.
The captain of Hungary’s national team, he had fled Budapest following the Soviet invasion and taken Spanish citizenship.
A generation later, Juventus, Leeds, Real Madrid and just about every major European football club had a cosmopolitan roster of players drawn from many different countries.
Arsenal, the leading British football team at the start of the twenty-first century, was managed by a Frenchman.
The north London club’s first-team squad comprised players from France, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, Brazil, Ivory Coast and the USA—as well as a few from England.
Football was a game without frontiers, for players, managers and spectators alike.
Fashionable clubs like Manchester United parlayed their competitive success into an ‘image’ that could be marketed with equal success from Lancashire to Latvia.
A handful of individual football stars—not necessarily the most talented, but those boasting good looks, beautiful wives and an animated private life—assumed a role in European public life and popular newspapers hitherto reserved for movie starlets or minor royalty.
When David Beckham (an English player of moderate technical gifts but an unsurpassed talent for self-promotion) moved from Manchester United to Real Madrid in 2003, it made headline television news in every member-state of the European Union.
Beckham’s embarrassing performance at the European Football Championships in Portugal the following year—the England captain missed two penalties, hastening his country’s ignominious early departure—did little to dampen the enthusiasm of his fans.
Despite the heightened fervor of international games, with colours flying, lions rampant and competitive anthemsinging, the common obsession with watching the game—any game—outweighed most partisan loyalties.
At peak, the BBC broadcasts of the matches played in Portugal that summer attracted twenty five million viewers in the UK alone.
Requiring no equipment beyond a ball of some sort, football could be played anywhere by anyone—unlike tennis or swimming or athletics, which required a certain level of income or else the sort of public facilities not widely available in many European countries.
There was no advantage to being unusually tall or burly—quite the contrary—and the game was not especially dangerous.
As a job, football had long been a low-paid alternative for working-class boys in industrial towns; now it was a path into the upper reaches of suburban prosperity and more besides.
Moreover, however talented and popular they might be, individual footballers were of necessity part of their team.
They could not readily be transubstantiated, like the ever-unsuccessful French cyclist Raymond Poulidor, into symbols of unrequited national endeavour.
Football was also far too straightforward to be turned to the metaphorical and quasi-metaphysical uses to which baseball in America was sometimes put.
And the game was open to Everyman (and, increasingly, Everywoman) in a way that was no longer true of the professional team sports played in North America, for example.
As an object of European public attention, football, it was sometimes suggested, now substituted not just for war but also for politics.
It certainly occupied far more space in newspapers; and politicians everywhere were careful to pay their respects to sporting heroes and demonstrate due familiarity with their accomplishments.
But it did make it harder to describe political choices and allegiance in traditional party terms.
Anti-capitalism—recast somewhat implausibly as anti-globalization, as though strictly domestic capitalism were somehow a different and less offensive breed—was attractive to nativist reactionaries and internationalist radicals alike.
As for the political mainstream, the old differences between parties of center-Right 5 The notorious exception was a tiny but very hard core of German and English fans who travelled to international games explicitly in search of a fight, to the utter mystification of everyone else.
On a broad range of contemporary issues, Swedish Social Democrats and French neo-Gaullists, for example, might well have more in common with each other than with their respective ideological forebears.
The political topography of Europe had altered dramatically over the previous two decades.
Although it remained conventional to think in terms of‘Left’ and ‘Right’, what they distinguished was unclear.
The old-style political party was one victim of these changes, with declining membership and falling turnout at the polls, as we have seen.
Another casualty was an almost equally venerable European institution, the public intellectual.
On the European scene a century later their would-be successors were, if not entirely absent, then increasingly marginal.
In central and eastern Europe, the issues which had once mobilized the political intelligentsia— Marxism, totalitarianism, human rights or the economics of transition—now elicited a bored and indifferent response from younger generations.
Ageing moralists like Havel—or one-time political heroes like Michnik—were irrevocably associated with a past which few cared to revisit.
What Czeslaw Milosz had once described as the ‘irritation of East European intellectuals’ at the American obsession with purely material products was now increasingly directed at their fellow citizens.
In western Europe, the exhortatory function of the intellectual had not altogether disappeared—readers of the German or French quality press were still periodically subjected to incandescent political sermons from Gunter Grass or Regis Debray—but it had lost its object.
There were many particular sins against which public moralists might rail, but no general goal or ideal in whose name to mobilize their followers.
Fascism, Communism and war had been expunged from the continent, together with censorship and the death penalty.
Abortion and contraception were almost universally available, homosexuality freely permitted and openly practiced.
The depredations of the unrestricted capitalist market, whether global or local, continued to attract intellectual fire everywhere; but in the absence of a self-confident anti-capitalist counter-project, this was a debate better suited to think tanks than philosophers.
The only remaining arena in which European intellectuals could still combine moral earnestness with universal policy prescriptions was in foreign affairs, free of the messy compromises of domestic policy-making and where issues of right and wrong, life and death were still very much in play.
During the Yugoslav wars intellectuals from west and east Europe strenuously took up the cudgels.
Some, like Alain Finkielkraut in Paris, identified body and soul with the Croat cause.
Most pressed the case for intervention in Bosnia or Kosovo on general principles, extending the rights-based arguments first espoused twenty years before and emphasizing the genocidal practices of the Serbian forces.
But even Yugoslavia, for all its urgency, could not return intellectuals to the centre of public life.
Bernard-Henri Levy in Paris could get invited to the Elysee Palace for consultations with the President, much as Tony Blair would occasionally host retreats with favoured British journalists and other literary courtiers.
Nor could publicly engaged intellectuals play their once-crucial role in mobilizing opinion at large, as became clear in the course of the Atlantic rift of 2003.
The European public was overwhelmingly opposed both to the American invasion of Iraq in that year and to the broader lines of United States foreign policy under President George W Bush.
But the outpouring of anxiety and anger to which this opposition gave rise, though it was shared and expressed by many European intellectuals, did not depend upon them for its articulation or organization.
Once-influential figures like Michnik and Glucksmann urged their readers to support Washington’s Iraq policy, arguing by extension from their own earlier writings on Communism that a policy of‘liberal interventionism’ in defense of human rights everywhere was justified on general principles and that America was now, as before, in the vanguard of the struggle against political evil and moral relativism.
Having thus convinced themselves that the American President was conducting his foreign policy for their reasons, they were then genuinely surprised to find themselves isolated and ignored by their traditional audiences.
But the irrelevance of Michnik or Glucksmann had nothing to do with the particular cast of their opinions.
On May 31st 2003, Jurgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida—two of Europe’s best-known writers/philosophers/intellectuals—published in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung an article entitled ‘Unsere Erneuerung.
The Rebirth of Europe’) in which they argued that America’s new and dangerous path was an urgent wake-up call for Europe: an occasion for Europeans to rethink their common identity, draw upon their shared Enlightenment values and forge a distinctive European stance in world affairs.
Umberto Eco in La Repubblica ; his Italian colleague the philosopher Gianni Vattimo in La Stampa ; the Swiss President of the German Academy of Arts, Adolf Muschg, in the Neue Zurcher Zeitungy the Spanish philosopher Fernando Savater in El Pais , and a lone American, the philosopher Richard Rorty, in the Suddeutsche Zeitung.
But the Derrida-Habermas initiative, even though it articulated sentiments shared by many Europeans, passed virtually unnoticed.
No-one implored its authors to take up their pens and lead the way forward.
The governments of a significant number of European states, including France, Germany, Belgium and later Spain, undoubtedly sympathized in general terms with the views expressed in these essays; but it did not occur to any of them to invite Professors Derrida or Eco in for consultation.
One hundred years after the Dreyfus Affair, fifty years after the apotheosis of Jean-Paul Sartre, Europe’s leading intellectuals had thrown a petition—and no-one came.
Six decades after the end of the Second World War, the Atlantic Alliance between Europe and the United States was in disarray.
In part this was the predictable outcome of the end of the Cold War—while few wished to see NATO dismantled or abandoned, it made little sense in its existing form and its future goals were obscure.
The Alliance suffered further in the course of the Yugoslav wars, when United States generals resented sharing decision-making with European counterparts who were reluctant to take the initiative and could offer little practical support in the field.
Above all, NATO was placed under unprecedented strain by Washington’s reaction to the assaults of September 11th 2001.
President Bush’s uncompromising and tactless unilateralism , the snubbing of his NATO allies’ offer of help, and the United States march to war in Iraq despite overwhelming international opposition and the absence of any UN mandate, ensured that America—no less than the ‘terror’ on which it had declared indefinite war—would now be regarded as a leading threat to world peace and security.
The ‘Old Europe-New Europe’ distinction that United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld claimed to have identified in the spring of 2003, in order to drive a wedge between Washington’s European allies, explained little about intra-European divisions and badly misread its object.
Only in Poland could America count on solid popular respect and support.
But the fact that a senior United States official could seek to divide the Europeans in this way, just a few years after they had so painfully begun to sew themselves together, led many to conclude that the United States itself was now the most serious problem facing Europe.
NATO had come into existence to compensate for Western Europe’s inability to defend itself without American help.
The continuing failure of European governments to forge an effective military force of their own was what kept it in business.
Beginning with the Maastricht Treaty of 1993, the European Union had at least acknowledged the need for a Common Foreign and Security Policy, though what that was and how it would be determined and implemented remained obscure.
But ten years on the EU was close to establishing a 60,000-strong Rapid Response Force for intervention and peace-keeping tasks.
Not only was Europe no longer in America’s shadow, but the relation was if anything reversed.
European direct investment in the United States in the year 2000 had reached $900 billion (against less than $650 billion of American direct investment in Europe); nearly 70 percent of all foreign investment in the United States was from Europe; and European multi-nationals now owned a large number of iconic American products, including Brooks Brothers, Random House, Kent cigarettes, Pennzoil, Bird’s Eye and the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball team.
Economic competition, however tense, was nonetheless a certain sort of closeness.
Seen from Europe, America—which had become superficially familiar in the course of the Cold War—was starting to look very alien.
The earnest religiosity of a growing number of Americans—reflected in their latest, ‘born-again’ president—was incomprehensible to most Christian Europeans (if not to their 6 In January 2003, at the initiative of the Spanish and British prime ministers, eight European governments signed a joint declaration of pro-American solidarity.
Within a few months the Hungarians and Czechs were privately expressing their regrets and expressing bitterness at having been ‘bullied’ into signing by the Spanish Prime Minister, Jose Maria Aznar.
A year later Aznar himself was thrown out of office by Spanish voters, in large measure for having led Spain into the ‘coalition’ to invade Iraq—something to which the nation was overwhelmingly opposed.
The American fondness for personal side arms, not excluding fully equipped semi-automatic rifles, made life in the United States appear dangerous and anarchic, while for the overwhelming majority of European observers, the frequent and unapologetic resort to the death penalty seemed to place America beyond the pale of modern civilization.
To these were added Washington’s growing disdain for international treaties, its unique perspective on everything from global warming to international law, and above all its partisan stance in the Israel-Palestine crisis.
In none of these instances did American policy completely reverse direction following the election of President George W Bush in 2000; the Atlantic gap had begun to open up well before.
The idea that America was culturally different—or inferior, or threatening—was hardly original.
In 1983 the French Culture Minister Jack Lang warned that the widely watched television series Dallas represented a serious threat to French and European identity.
Nine years later, when Jurassic Park opened in French cinemas, he was echoed to the letter by one of his conservative successors.
But this was the familiar small change of intellectual snobbery and cultural insecurity, mixed—in France as elsewhere—with more than a little chauvinist nostalgia.
What was new about the situation at the beginning of the twenty-first century was that such sentiments were becoming commonplace, and had moved from the intellectual or political fringes deep into the center of European life.
The depth and breadth of anti-American feeling in contemporary Europe far exceeded anything seen during the Vietnam War or even at the height of the peace movements of the early 1980s.
A HISTORY OF EUROPE since 1945 son of President George W Bush, in contrast to the affection in which Bill Clinton, his predecessor, had been held.
But many Europeans had been angry at President Lyndon Johnson in the late Sixties; yet their feelings about the war in South-East Asia had not typically mutated into dislike of America or Americans in general.
Forty years later there was a widespread feeling, all across the continent (and very much including the British, who angrily objected to their Prime Minister’s enthusiastic identification with his American ally) that there was something wrong with the kind of place that America was becoming—or, as many now insisted, had always been.
Indeed, the presumptively ‘un-American’ qualities of Europe were fast becoming the highest common factor in European self-identification.
In the immediate post-Communist years Prague, like the rest of eastern Europe, would doubtless have pleaded guilty to a longing for all things American, from individual freedom to material abundance.
And no-one visiting eastern European capitals, from Tallinn to Ljubljana, could miss the aggressive new elite of snappily dressed young men and women, zipping busily to appointments and shopping expeditions in their expensive new cars, enjoying the deadly liberal utopia of Clement’s nightmares.
In countries like Bulgaria or Hungary it was now an indirect, politically acceptable way of expressing nostalgia for national Communism—and, as so often in the past, a serviceable surrogate for anti-Semitism.
But even among mainstream commentators and politicians it was no longer commonplace to hold up American institutions or practices as a source of inspiration or an object to be emulated.
But as one Hungarian who had worked for some years in California explained to an inter8 The new business class in Eastern Europe, it should be noted, ate, dressed, phoned and drove European.
But if it is time to grow up, you should return to Europe’ The image of America as the perennial land of youth and adventure—with twentyfirst-century Europe cast as an indulgent paradise for the middle-aged and riskaverse—had wide currency, especially in America itself.
The birth rate in many European countries was well below replacement levels.
In Spain, Greece, Poland, Germany and Sweden, fertility rates were below 1. children per woman.
In parts of Eastern Europe they were closer to 1.1, the lowest in the world.
Projected forward through 2040 these data suggested that many European countries could expect population to fall by one fifth or more.
None of the traditional explanations for fertility decline seemed to account for Europe’s incipient demographic crisis.
Poor countries like Moldova and rich ones like Denmark faced the same challenge.
In Catholic countries like Italy or Spain, young people often lived in their parents’ homes well into their thirties, whereas in Lutheran Sweden they had their own homes and access to generous levels of state-funded child-support and maternity leave.
But although Scandinavians were having slightly more children than Mediterranean Europeans, the differences in fertility were less striking than the similarities.
And the figures everywhere would have been lower still but for immigrants from outside Europe, who boosted the overall population numbers and had a much greater propensity to procreate.
In Germany in i960 the number of children born with one foreign parent was just 1. percent of the total for the year.
The demographic scene in Europe was not actually so very different from that across the Atlantic—by the start of the new millennium the indigenous American birth-rate had also fallen below replacement levels.
The difference was that the number of immigrants entering the United States was so much larger—and they were disproportionately young adults—that overall fertility in the United States looked set comfortably to outdistance that of Europe for the foreseeable future.
And although the demographic troughs meant that both America and Europe might have trouble meeting public pension and other commitments in the decades ahead, the welfare systems of Europe were incomparably more generous and thus faced the greater threat.
Another was to raise the threshold at which those benefits were paid—i.e. make people work longer before retirement.
A third alternative was to extract more taxes from the pay packets of those still in work.
A fourth option, only really considered in Britain (and then half-heartedly), was to imitate the United States and encourage or even oblige people to turn to the private sector for social insurance.
For many ffee-market critics of Europe’s welfare states, the core problem facing Europe was not demographic shortfall but economic rigidity.
It wasn’t that there weren’t, or wouldn’t be, enough workers—it was that there were too many laws protecting their salaries and their jobs, or else guaranteeing such elevated unemployment and pension payments that they lacked all incentive to work in the first place.
If this ‘labour-market inflexibility’ were addressed and costly social provisions reduced or privatized, then more people could enter the workforce, the burden on employers and taxpayers would be alleviated, and ‘Eurosclerosis’ could be overcome.
There was no question that some of the rewards of the welfare state, negotiated and locked into place at the peak of the post-war boom, were now a serious burden.
After that the monthly payments fell to 53 percent of their last wage packet—indefinitely.
Whether this safety net discouraged people from seeking paid work was unclear.
On the other hand, the fact that they were highly regulated and inflexible by American standards did not mean that Europe’s economies were necessarily inefficient or unproductive.
If America was nevertheless more productive overall—if Americans made more goods, services and money—it was because a higher percentage of them were in paid jobs; they worked longer hours than Europeans ; and they had far fewer and shorter holidays.
Whereas the British were legally entitled to 23 paid vacation days annually, the 9 In France in i960 there were four workers for every pensioner.
Europeans had made a deliberate choice to work less, earn less—and live better lives.
In return for their uniquely high taxes (another impediment to growth and innovation, in the eyes of Anglo-American critics) Europeans received free or nearly free medical services, early retirement and a prodigious range of social and public services.
They lived safer and— partly for that reason—longer lives, enjoyed better health (despite spending far less 10 ) and had many fewer people in poverty.
But for most Europeans its promise of job security, progressive tax rates and large social transfer payments represented an implicit contract between government and citizens, as well as between one citizen and another.
According to the annual ‘Eurobarometer’ polls, an overwhelming majority of Europeans took the view that poverty was caused by social circumstances and not individual inadequacy.
They also showed a willingness to pay higher taxes if these were directed to alleviating poverty.
Social responsibility and economic advantage should not be mutually exclusive—‘growth’ was laudable, but not at all costs.
What they had in common was not a discrete set of services or economic practices, or a particular level of state involvement.
It was, rather, a sense—sometimes spelled out in documents and laws, sometimes not—of the balance of social rights, civic solidarity and collective responsibility that was appropriate and possible for the modern state.
The aggregate outcomes might look very different in, say, Italy and Sweden.
But the social consensus they incorporated was regarded by many citizens as formally binding— when, in 2004, the Social Democratic Chancellor of Germany introduced changes in the country’s welfare payments, he ran into a firestorm of social protest, just as a Gaullist government had done ten years earlier when proposing similar reforms in France.
The rest was a direct burden on American businesses and their employees.
A younger generation of economists and entrepreneurs, some of whom had spent time in United States business schools or firms and were frustrated at what they saw as the inflexibility of the European business environment, had impressed upon politicians the need to ‘streamline’ procedures and encourage competition.
The aptly named ‘Gauche Americaine’ in France set out to release the Left from its anti-capitalist complex while retaining its social conscience; in Scandinavia, the inhibiting effect of high taxation was discussed even in Social Democratic circles.
The Right had been brought to acknowledge the case for welfare; the Left would now recognize the virtues of profit.
The effort to combine the best of both sides overlapped, not coincidentally, with the search for a project to replace the defunct debate between capitalism and socialism that had formed the core of Western politics for over a century.
But politics, especially post-ideological politics, is about form; and it was the form of the Third Way, modeled on Bill Clinton’s successful ‘triangulation’ of Left and Right and articulated above all by New Labour’s Tony Blair, which seduced observers.
In a post-Thatcher environment, Blair could thus sound plausibly progressive and ‘European’ merely by saying positive things about the desirability of well-distributed public services; meanwhile his much-advertised admiration for the private sector, and the business-friendly economic environment his policies sought to favour, placed him firmly in the ‘American’ camp.
The Third Way was marketed as both a pragmatic solution to economic and social dilemmas and a significant conceptual breakthrough after decades of theoretical stagnation.
Its continental admirers, heedless of the aborted ‘third ways’ in their own national pasts—notably the popular Fascist ‘third way’ of the 1930s— were keen to sign on.
Under Jacques Delors the European Commission had appeared a trifle preoccupied with devising and imposing norms and rules—substituting ‘Europe’ for the lost inheritance of Fabian-style bureaucratic socialism.
Blair’s new-look politics would not long survive the disastrous decision to embroil his country and his reputation in the 2003 invasion of Iraq—a move which merely reminded foreign observers that New Labour’s Third Way was inseparably intertwined with the UK’s reluctance to choose between Europe and the United States.
And the evidence that Britain, like the US, was seeing a dramatic rise in the numbers of the poor—in contrast to the rest of the EU where poverty was increasing modestly, if at all—severely diminished the appeal of the British model.
Thus privatization in the early 1980s had been controversial, provoking widespread discussion of the reach and legitimacy of the public sector and calling into question the attainability of social-democratic objectives and the moral legitimacy of the profit motive in the delivery of public goods.
In eastern Europe, it was a necessary condition for membership of the EU, in conformity with Brussels’ strictures against market-distorting public subsidies.
In France or Italy, the sale of publicly owned assets was now undertaken as a short-term book-keeping device to reduce the annual deficit and stay within euro-zone rules.
Even Tony Blair’s own Third Way projects—for the semi-privatization of London’s Underground, for example, or the introduction of‘competition’ into hospital services—were embarked upon as cost-efficiency calculations with side-benefits to the national budget.
To the extent that they were tied to an argument of social principle, this was tacked on as an unconvincing afterthought.
Despite cutting government expenditure, opting out of the European social charter, reducing company taxation and welcoming inward investment with all manner of sweeteners, the UK remained stubbornly unproductive.
When measured by output-per-hour it consistently underperformed its ‘sclerotic’, regulation-bound EU partners.
Moreover, a New Labour plan to avoid the coming crisis of Europe’s underfunded public pension schemes—by passing the liability on to the private sector— was already doomed to failure within less than a decade of its proud inauguration.
Most of them, it was becoming clear, would never see a full company pension ... unless the state was forced back into the pensions business to make up the shortfall.
The Third Way was beginning to look an awful lot like a game of Three-Card Monte.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the dilemma facing Europeans was not Socialism or Capitalism, Left versus Right, or the Third Way.
It was not even ‘Europe’ versus ‘America’, since that choice had now been effectively resolved in most people’s minds in favour of Europe.
It was, rather, a question —the question—which history had placed upon the agenda in 1945 and which had quietly but insistently dislodged or outlived all other claims upon Europeans’ attention.
There could be no going back to the world of the autonomous, free-standing nation-state, sharing nothing with its neighbour but a common border.
So, too, were millions of Sikhs, Bengalis, Turks, Arabs, Indians, Senegalese and others besides.
In their economic lives, everyone whose country was in the European Union—or wanted to be—was now irrevocably European.
The EU was the world’s largest internal single market, the world’s biggest trader in services, and its member-states’ unique source of authority in all matters of economic regulation and legal codes.
In a world where comparative advantage in fixed-factor endowments—energy, minerals, farmland, even location—counted for less than policies facilitating education, research and investment, it mattered hugely that the Union exercised increasing initiative in these areas.
Just as states had always been vital in the constituting of markets—making rules governing exchange, employment and movement—so it was now the EU that made those rules; thanks to its own currency it also exercised a near monopoly on the markets in money itself.
The only vital economic activity left to national rather than European initiative was taxation rates—and only because the UK insisted upon it.
For the past few hundred years those communities have been grouped, voluntarily or coercively, in states.
With economic prosperity, social peace and international stability, however, that need slowly evaporated.
In its place came suspicion of intrusive public authority and a desire for individual autonomy and the removal of constraints on private initiative.
Moreover, in the era of the superpowers, the fate of Europe seemed largely to have been taken out of its hands.
As we have seen, it took a very long time indeed for it to acquire even the rudiments of a military capacity, much less a foreign policy.
But in the aftermath of September 11th 2001 the limitations of a post-national prescription for a better European future became clear.
The traditional European state, after all, not only made war abroad but enforced the peace at home.
This, as Hobbes long ago realized, is what gives the state its distinctive and irreplaceable legitimacy.
In countries where violent political warfare against unarmed civilians had been endemic in recent years the importance of the state—its policemen, its army, its intelligence services and its judicial apparatus—was never forgotten.
In an age of ‘terrorism’, the state’s monopoly of armed power is an attractive reassurance to most of its citizens.
And there was no sign that Brussels (the European Union) would or could take on this responsibility in the foreseeable future.
In this vital respect the state remained the core legitimate representative of its citizens, in a way that the transnational union of Europeans, for all its passports and parliaments, could not hope to match.
Europeans might enjoy the freedom to appeal over the heads of their own governments to European judges, and it remained a source of wonder to many that national courts in Germany or Britain complied so readily with judgments emanating from Strasbourg or Luxembourg.
But when it came to keeping the gunman and the bomber away, responsibility and thus power remained firmly in Berlin or London.
And although the capacity of the state begins with arms it does not end there, even today.
So long as it is the state—rather than a trans-state entity—which pays pensions, insures the unemployed and educates children, then that state’s monopoly of a certain sort of political legitimacy will continue unchallenged.
Over the course of the twentieth century the European nation-state took on considerable responsibilities for its citizens’ welfare, security and well-being.
In recent years it has shed its intrusive oversight of private morality and some—but not all—of its economic initiative.
The geographical reach of the Union is quite belied by its relative unimportance in Europeans’ daily affairs when compared to the country of their birth or residence.
To be sure, the Union is a major provider of economic and other services.
Citizenship, democracy, rights and duty are intimately bound up with the state—particularly in countries with a living tradition of active citizen participation in public affairs.
Even in an age of super-fast trains and real-time electronic communication it is not clear how someone in Poimbra, say, or Rzeszow, can be an active citizen of Europe.
It is not by chance that in the modern age giant states—China, Russia, the US—have either been governed by authoritarian rule or else have remained resolutely centrifugal, their citizens more than a little suspicious of the federal capital and all its works.
The European Union in 2005 had not superceded conventional territorial units and would not be doing so for the foreseeable future.
Six decades after Hitler’s defeat, the multiple identities, sovereignties and territories that together defined Europe and its history certainly overlapped and inter-communicated more than at any time in the past.
What was new, and thus rather harder for outside observers to catch, was the possibility of being French and European, or Catalan and European—or Arab and European.
Just as the world was not converging on a single ‘American’ norm—the developed capitalist societies exhibited a wide range of social forms and very different attitudes toward both the market and the state—so Europe too contained a distinctive palate of peoples and traditions.
The illusion that we live in a post-national or post-state world comes from paying altogether too much attention to ‘globalized’ economic processes ... and assuming that similarly transnational developments must be at work in every other sphere of human life.
Seen uniquely through the lens of production and exchange, Europe had indeed become a seamless flow chart of transnational waves.
Nationalism had largely come and gone 12 ; but nations and states remained.
Considering what Europeans had done to one another in the first half of the twentieth century, this was rather remarkable.
Indeed, the re-emergence of Europe’s battered peoples and their distinctive national cultures and institutions from the wreckage of the continent’s thirty years’ war might well be thought an even greater achievement than their collective success in forging a transnational Union.
The latter, after all, had been on various European agendas well before the Second World War and was if anything facilitated by the devastation wrought by that conflict.
But the resurrection of Germany, or Poland, or France, not to speak of Hungary or Lithuania, had seemed altogether less likely.
In part this was the backwash of growing disillusion with the American alternative; but the reputation was well earned.
Whether Europe’s burnished new image, scrubbed clean of past sins and vicissitudes, would survive the challenges of the coming century, however, would depend a lot on how Europeans responded to the non-Europeans in their midst and at their borders.
In the troubled early years of the twenty-first century that remained an open question.
One must not think of this patriotism, however, as the same emotion which bears this name here in France.
A Frenchman’s patriotism means that his heart is warmed, and with this warmth it stretches and expands so that his love no longer embraces merely his closest relative, but all of France, the whole of the civilized world.
A German’s patriotism means that his heart contracts and shrinks like leather in the cold, and a German then hates everything foreign, no longer wants to become a citizen of the world, a European, but only a provincial German.
In international surveys at the end of the twentieth century, the number of Americans claiming to be Very proud’ of their country exceeded 75 percent.
But the choice posed by Heine’s two kinds of patriotism speaks quite directly to the contemporary European condition.
If the emerging Europe were to take a ‘Germanic’ turn, contracting ‘like leather in the cold’ to a defensive provincialism—an eventuality suggested by the referendums in France and the Netherlands in the spring of 2005, when clear majorities rejected the proposed European ‘Constitution’—then the opportunity would be missed and the European Union would never transcend its functional origins.
It would remain no more than the sum and highest common factor of its members’ separate self-interests.
But if patriotism for Europe could find a way to reach beyond itself, to capture the spirit of Heine’s idealized France, ‘stretching and expanding to embrace the whole of the civilized world’, then something more was now possible.
The twentieth century—America’s Century—had seen Europe plunge into the abyss.
America would have the biggest army and China would make more, and cheaper, goods.
But neither America nor China had a serviceable model to propose for universal emulation.
In spite of the horrors of their recent past— and in large measure because of them—it was Europeans who were now uniquely placed to offer the world some modest advice on how to avoid repeating their own mistakes.
Few would have predicted it sixty years before, but the twenty-first century might yet belong to Europe.
But that was in 1825, when the price for admission to the modern world was the relinquishing of an oppressive heritage of Jewish difference and isolation.
In an ironic twist that Heine—with his prophetic intimations of‘wild, dark times rumbling towards us’—would have appreciated better than anyone, those who would become full Europeans in the dawn of the twenty-first century must first assume a new and far more oppressive heritage.
In 2004 President Kwasniewski of Poland—seeking to close a painful chapter in his nation’s past and bring Poland into line with its EU partners—officially acknowledged the wartime sufferings of Polish Jews, including their victimization at the hands of Poles themselves.
To be sure, there are other criteria for full participation in the family of Europe.
It also adjudicates the moral (and in certain European countries the legal) standing of those who pronounce upon it.
To deny or belittle the Shoah — the Holocaust—is to place yourself beyond the pale of civilized public discourse.
That is why mainstream politicians shun, so far as they can, the company of demagogues like Jean-Marie Le Pen.
The Holocaust today is much more than just another undeniable fact about a past that Europeans can no longer choose to ignore.
As Europe prepares to leave World War Two behind—as the last memorials are inaugurated, the last surviving combatants and victims honoured—the recovered memory of Europe’s dead Jews has become the very definition and guarantee of the continent’s restored humanity.
That an estimated 6 million of them were put to death during the Second World War was widely accepted within a few months of the war’s end.
The handful of survivors, whether in the displaced persons’ camps or in their countries of origin, paid implicit witness to the number of dead.
In the Netherlands, where there had been 140,000 Jews before the war, 110,000 were deported—of whom fewer than 5,000 returned.
In France, of 76,000 Jews who were deported during the years 1940-44, less than 3 percent survived.
In Germany itself, in May 1945, there remained just 21,450 of the country’s 600,000 Jews.
After years of anti-Semitic propaganda, local populations everywhere were not only disposed to blame ‘Jews’ in the abstract for their own suffering but were distinctly sorry to see the return of men and women whose jobs, possessions and apartments they had purloined.
The venerable French Catholic philosopher Gabriel Marcel would doubtless not have resorted to such language.
But Jews, deported not for their politics but on account of their race, could serve no such useful purpose.
In any case De Gaulle (like Churchill) was curiously blind to the racial specificity of Hitler’s victims, understanding Nazism in the context of Prussian militarism instead.
At Nurnberg, the French prosecutor Francois de Menthon was uncomfortable with the very concept of‘crimes against humanity’—he preferred ‘crimes against peace’—and throughout the trial he made no reference to the deportation or murder of Jews.
Under legislation passed in 1948, the term ‘ deportes ’ could be applied only to French citizens or residents deported for political reasons or for resisting the occupier.
No distinction was made regarding the camp to which someone was sent or their fate upon arrival.
Indeed, in Belgium the exclusion of Jews from any post-war benefits was taken a step further.
Since 95 percent of the Jews deported from Belgium had been foreign nationals or stateless, it was determined by a post-war law that—unless they had also fought in the orThe American prosecutor Telford Taylor was struck by this in retrospect but acknowledges that he did not even notice it at the time—a revealing admission.
Only in 1992 did the local municipality erect a new plaque, more accurate if less reassuring.
In October 1944, the Belgian authorities automatically ascribed the nationality ‘German’ to any Jewish survivor in Belgium who could not prove his or her Belgian citizenship.
Such rulings had the attendant benefit of marking these Jews for eventual return to Germany, now that they were no longer threatened by Nazi persecution.
In the Netherlands, where, according to the Dutch resistance paper Vrij Nederland , the Nazis themselves had been taken aback at the alacrity with which local citizens and civic leaders cooperated in their own humiliation, the handful of returning Jews was decidedly unwelcome.
Indeed, the Dutch did suffer greatly through the ‘Hunger Winter’ of 1944-45 and the many houses vacated by deported Jews, in Amsterdam especially, were a valuable source of wood and other supplies.
But for all the enthusiastic cooperation of Dutch wartime officialdom in identifying and rounding up the country’s Jews, the post-war authorities—their own conscience clear—felt no obligation to make any particular amends to Jews.
Instead, they made a rather self-congratulatory point of refusing to distinguish among Dutch citizens on racial or any other grounds and thus froze the country’s lost Jews into retrospective anonymity and invisibility.
In eastern Europe there was of course never much question of recognizing Jewish suffering, much less compensating it.
In the immediate post-war years Jews in this region were concerned above all with merely staying alive.
In France, although new laws forbade the overt anti-Semitic rhetoric of pre-war public life, the legacy of Vichy remained.
The taboos of a later generation had not yet taken hold, and behaviour that would in time be frowned upon was still accept806 EPILOGUE able.
To be sure, many of them felt an overwhelming urge to speak and bear witness.
In Primo Levi’s words, he was driven by an ‘absolute, pathological narrative charge’ to write down what he had just experienced.
Levi’s narrative of persecution and survival, beginning with his deportation as a Jew rather than as a resister, did not conform to uplifting Italian accounts of nationwide antiFascist resistance.
Se questo e un uomo was published instead by a small press in just 2,500 copies— most of which were remaindered in a warehouse in Florence and destroyed in the great flood there twenty years later.
Gallimard, the most prestigious of the French publishing houses, for a long time resisted buying anything by Levi; only after his death in 1987 did his work, and his significance, begin to gain recognition in France.
Just as the representative concentration camp for the French was Buchenwald, with its wellorganised committees of Communist political prisoners, so in post-war Britain the iconic image of a Nazi camp was not Auschwitz but Bergen-Belsen (liberated by British troops); and the skeletal survivors recorded on film and shown in cinema newsreels at the end of the war were not typically identified as Jews.
The Holocaust of the Jews was put out of mind not only in places where there were indeed good reasons not to think about it—like Austria, say (which had just one-tenth the population of pre-war Germany but supplied one in two of all concentration camp guards), or Poland; but also in Italy—where most of the nation had no cause for shame on this score—or in Britain, where the war years were otherwise looked upon with pride and even some nostalgia.
For most Europeans, World War Two had not been about the Jews (except in so far as they were blamed for it), and any suggestion that Jewish suffering might claim pride of place was deeply resented.
Between their compromises with Fascist administrators and occupying forces, their collaboration with wartime agencies and rulers and their private humiliations, material hardships and personal tragedies, millions of Europeans had good reasons of their own to turn away from the recent past, or else mis-remember it to better effect.
What the French historian Henry Rousso would later dub the ‘Vichy syndrome’—the decades-long difficulty of acknowledging what had really happened during the war and the overwhelming desire to block the memory or else recast it in a usable way that would not corrode the fragile bonds of post-war society—was by no means unique to France.
Jews were not the first people in Britain to opt for discretion where the Holocaust was concerned.
The wartime government under Churchill chose not to deploy information about the death camps in its propaganda against Germany lest this incite an increase in anti-Semitic feelings—already quite high in some parts of London, as wartime intelligence reports had noted.
The Baltic Waffen SS had been among the most brutal and enthusiastic when it came to torturing and killing Jews on the Eastern Front; but in the novel circumstances of the Cold War they were of course ‘our’ Nazis.
Even Norway had somehow to digest the memory that more than one in five of its military officers had voluntarily joined Vidkun Quisling’s neo-Nazi Nasjonal Samling (‘National Rally’) before or after April 1940.
But whereas liberation, resistance and deportees— even heroic defeats like Dunkirk or the Warsaw Rising of 1944—could all be put to some service in compensatory national myth-making, there was nothing ‘usable’ about the Holocaust.
In certain respects it was actually easier for Germans to engage and acknowledge the scale of their crime.
History teaching in the early Federal Republic stopped with the Wilhelminian Empire.
With the rare exception of a statesman like Kurt Schumacher— who warned his fellow countrymen as early as June 1947 that they had better learn to ‘talk for once about the Jews in Germany and the world’—German public figures in the Forties and Fifties managed to avoid any reference to the Final Solution.
The American writer Alfred Kazin remarked upon the fact that for his students in Cologne in 1952 ‘the war was over.
Indeed there was considerable resentment at what Hitler had wrought—but at the harm he had brought down upon the heads of Germans rather than because of what he and Germans had done to others.
Targetting the Jews, as it seemed to many Germans in these years, was not so much Hitler’s greatest crime as his greatest error, in a 1952 survey, nearly two out of five adults in West Germany did not hesitate to inform pollsters that they thought it was ‘better’ for Germany to have no Jews on its territory.
At the same time, however, Germans—uniquely in Europe—could not deny what they had done to the Jews.
They might avoid mention of it; they might insist upon their own sufferings; they might pass the blame up to a ‘handful’ of Nazis.
But they could not sidestep responsibility for the subject by attributing the crime of genocide to someone else.
Even Adenauer, though he confined himself in public to expressions of sympathy for Jewish ‘victims’ without ever naming those who victimized them, had been constrained to sign the reparations treaty with Israel.
And whereas neither the British, nor the French, nor even his fellow Italians showed any interest in the memoirs of Primo Levi, The Diary of Anna Frank (admittedly a more accessible document) was to become the best-selling paperback in German history, with over 700,000 copies sold by i960.
The trigger for German self-interrogation, as we have seen, was a series of trials prompted by belated investigations into German crimes on the eastern front.
Beginning in Ulm in 1958 with proceedings against members of wartime ‘Intervention Groups’, followed by the arrest and prosecution of Adolf Eichmann, and culminating in the Frankfurt trials of Auschwitz guards between December 1963 and August 1965, these proceedings were also the first opportunity since the end of the war for camp survivors to speak publicly about their experiences.
Beginning in 1962, ten West German Lander announced that henceforth the history of the years 1933-1945—including the extermination of the Jews—would be a required subject in all schools.
And attention was increasingly directed to genocide and ‘crimes against humanity’, rather than the ‘war crimes’ with which National Socialism had hitherto been primarily associated.
A new generation was to be made aware of the nature—and the scale—of Nazi atrocities.
A certain public awareness of the unacceptability, the indecency of the recent German past began to take hold.
During the Sixties both a West German Chancellor and the Federal President were former Nazis—a glaring contradiction in the Bonn Republic’s self-image that younger commentators duly noted, as we saw in Chapter 12.
And it was one thing to tell the truth about the Nazis, quite another to acknowledge the collective responsibility of the German people, a subject on which most of the political class was still silent.
Moreover, while the number of West Germans who believed that Hitler would have been one of Germany’s greatest statesmen ‘but for the war’ fell from 48 percent in 1955 to 32 percent in 1967, the latter figure (albeit composed overwhelmingly of older respondents) was hardly reassuring.
A series of events—the Six-Day Arab-Israeli War of 1967, Chancellor Brandt dropping to his knees at the Warsaw Ghetto memorial, the murder of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics and, finally, the German telecast of the ‘Holocaust’ mini-series in January 1979—combined to place Jews and their sufferings at the head of the German public agenda.
The purest product of American commercial television—its story simple, its characters mostly two-dimensional, its narrative structured for maximum emotional impact—‘Holocaust’ was execrated and abominated by European cineastes from Edgar Reitz to Claude Lanzmann, who accused it of turning German history into American soap opera and rendering accessible and comprehensible that which should always remain unspeakable and impenetrable.
It ran for four consecutive nights on West German national television and was watched by an estimated twenty million viewers—well over half the adult population.
Henceforward Germans would be among the best-informed Europeans on the subject of the Shoah and at the forefront of all efforts to maintain public awareness of their country’s singular crime.
Knowing—and publicly acknowledging—what Germans had done to Jews four decades earlier was a considerable advance; but situating it in German and European history remained a difficult and unresolved dilemma, as the ‘historians’ clash’ of the Eighties was to demonstrate.
Some conservative scholars, among them the hitherto well-respected historian Ernst Nolte, were uncomfortable with the insistence on treating Hitler, his movement and his crimes as unique and sui generis.
That doesn’t diminish the crimes of Nazism, Nolte argued in a notorious article in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in June 1986; but without the Bolshevik precedent they cannot be fully explained.
It was time to reconsider the Nazi era, situating the Holocaust in a broader pattern of modern genocides.
The reaction to Nolte came above all from Jurgen Habermas, who—like Enzensberger, Gunter Grass and other members of the ‘skeptical generation’—was old enough to remember Nazism and thus intensely suspicious of any attempt to ‘limit’ German responsibilities.
Contextualization in Nolte’s sense, with the implicit relativisation of German responsibility that must inevitably ensue, was simply proscribed.
But Habermas’s uncompromising stance set a standard to which few of his countrymen (including historians, for whom comparison and context are the lifeblood of their discipline) could be expected to adhere for long.
The new salience of the Holocaust in German public discussion—culminating in the Nineties in copious displays of official remorse for past shortcomings, with Germans indulging in what the writer Peter Schneider called ‘a kind of self-righteous self-hate’—could not last indefinitely.
To ask each new generation of Germans to live forever in Hitler’s shadow, to require that they take on responsibility for the memory of Germany’s unique guilt and make it the very measure of their national identity, was the least that could be demanded—but far too much to expect.
Elsewhere in Western Europe the process of remembering and acknowledging had first to overcome self-serving local illusions—a process that typically took two generations and many decades.
In Austria—where the television ‘Holocaust’ was broadcast just two months after its German showing but with no remotely comparable impact—it was not until the country’s President, Kurt Waldheim, was revealed in the mid-Eighties to have played a role in the Wehrmacht’s brutal occupation of wartime Yugoslavia that Austrians began a serious, and still incomplete, interrogation of their country’s Nazi past.
Indeed, the fact that Waldheim had previously served as UN Secretary General without anyone in the international community troubling themselves over his war record fuelled the suspicions of many Austrians that they were being held to uniquely high standards.
Austria, after all, had had a post-war Jewish Chancellor , which was more than could be said for the Germans.
For forty years after 1945, Switzerland secured a free pass for its wartime record.
Not only was it forgotten that the Swiss had made strenuous efforts to keep Jews out; on the contrary, in popular fiction and in films everywhere the country was represented as a safe, welcoming haven for any persecuted person who could reach its borders.
The Swiss basked in their clear conscience and the envious admiration of the world.
In fact, by 1945 the Swiss had taken in just 28,000 Jews—seven thousand of them before the war began.
Wartime refugees were refused work permits—they were supported from payments levied upon wealthy Jewish residents.
If this were the extent of Swiss misbehaviour there would hardly have been much fuss—London and Washington never actually requested an identification tag on Jewish passports, but when it came to saving Jewish refugees the British and American records are hardly a source of pride.
As became painfully clear in the course of official investigations conducted through the 1990s, Switzerland not only trafficked in looted gold and made a substantial practical contribution to the German war effort , but Swiss banks and insurance companies had knowingly pocketed indecently large sums of money belonging to Jewish account holders or to the claimants of insurance policies on murdered relatives.
In a secret post-war agreement with Communist Poland—first made public in 1996—Bern even offered to assign the bank accounts of dead Polish Jews to the new authorities in Warsaw, in return for indemnity payments to Swiss banks and businesses expropriated after the Communists’ takeover.
Once this sort of evidence started to emerge, the country’s burnished reputation came apart, and no amount of amends and payments and ‘victims’ funds’ are going to put it back together very soon.
A September 13th 1996 editorial in Germany’s Die Zeit —noting that Switzerland had at last been caught by‘the long shadow of the Holocaust’—smacked more than a little of Schadenfreude.
By the mid-Sixties multi-volume official histories of the Second World War provided copious information about the what of the Netherlands’ wartime experience, including the deportations, but studiously avoided addressing in detail the who , the how and the why of the Jewish catastrophe in particular.
But in April 1965 a Dutch historian—Jacob Presser—published Otidergang, the first full history of the extermination of Dutch Jewry; it sold 100,000 copies in 1965 alone and precipitated a torrent of public interest in its subject.
It was followed in short order by an avalanche of television documentaries and other programmes about the wartime occupation—one of which, De bezetting , was to run for over two decades—and by a shift in official mood.
It was in 1965 that a Dutch government, for the first time, offered to contribute to the memorial at Auschwitz—though it took another seven years before the Netherlands at last agreed to pay to surviving Jewish deportees the pension that had been accorded resisters and other Nazi victims since 1947.
As in Germany, the trigger for Dutch interest in their occluded past was the Israeli and German trials of the early Sixties.
And in the Netherlands as elsewhere, the post-war baby-boomers were curious about recent history and more than a little skeptical of the story they had been told—or, rather, not told—by the ‘silent generation’ of their parents.
Anne and her family, after all, were betrayed to the Germans by their Dutch neighbours.
Perhaps only in the mid-Nineties, with the image of armed Dutch UN peacekeepers standing placidly aside to let Serbian militia round-up and murder seven thousand Muslims at Srebrenica, did the lesson finally strike home.
A long-postponed national debate about the price the Dutch have paid for their heritage of order, co-operation and obedience could at last begin.
In their defense, the Dutch—like the Belgians, the Norwegians, the Italians (after 10 Otidergang was published in English in 1968 as The Destruction of the Dutch Jews.
This is not as true as was once believed, and in certain places—notably territories like Slovakia or Croatia where local puppet governments pursued criminal projects of their own—it was only ever a half-truth.
But in occupied western Europe, with one outstanding exception, there were no popularly accredited local regimes, no ostensibly legitimate national governments exercising authority and thus fully responsible for their actions.
And it is the tortured, long-denied and serially incomplete memory of France’s war—of the Vichy regime and its complicitous, pro-active role in Nazi projects, above all the Final Solution—that has back-shadowed all of Europe’s post-war efforts to come to terms with World War Two and the Holocaust.
France was also by far the most influential state in continental western Europe, thanks to Charles De Gaulle’s remarkable achievement in reestablishing his country in the corridors of international power.
And it was France—French statesmen, French institutions and French interests—that drove forward, on French terms, the project for a united continent.
Until France could look its past in the face, a shadow would hang over the new Europe—the shadow of a lie.
Marshall Petain’s regime had been voted into office in July 1940 by the last parliament of France’s Third Republic; it was thus the only wartime regime that could claim some continuity, however spurious, with pre-war democratic institutions.
At least until the end of 1942, an overwhelming majority of French men and women regarded Vichy and its institutions as the legitimate authority in France.
For Vichy did more than accommodate itself and its subjects to France’s defeat and run their country for Germany’s convenience.
Following the Liberation, for all the obloquy poured upon Petain and his collaborators, his regime’s contribution to the Holocaust was hardly ever invoked, and certainly not by the post-war French authorities themselves.
It was not just that the French successfully corralled ‘Vichy’ into a corner of national memory and then mothballed it.
But ‘crimes against humanity’ were not part of the French juridical lexicon.
When the present author studied French history in the UK in the late Sixties the scholarly literature on Vichy France—such as it was—paid almost no attention to the ‘Jewish’ dimension.
There was still a respected school of French historians who argued that the Petainist ‘shield’ had protected France from ‘Polonisation’—as though Hitler ever intended to treat his western conquests with the barbarous ferocity visited upon the East.
And any questioning of the myth of a heroic, nationwide resistance was still off limits—in historiography as in national life.
The only concession French authorities in those years would make to the changing mood abroad came in December 1964 when the National Assembly belatedly incorporated the category of ‘crimes against humanity’ (first defined in the London accords of August 8th 1945) into French law and declared them imprescriptable.
It was a response to the Auschwitz Trial then under way in Frankfurt, and was intended to facilitate any future prosecution on French soil of individuals for their direct participation in the Nazis’ exterminatory schemes.
Ophuls’ film, a documentary about the wartime occupation of Clermont Ferrand in central France, was based on interviews with French, British and German subjects.
It is a point of some note that in France, uniquely, the breakthrough into a more honest engagement with wartime history was the work of foreign historians, two of whom—Eberhard Jackel in Germany and Robert Paxton in the US, both of whose major books were published between the end of the Sixties and the mid-Seventies—were the first to use German sources to demonstrate how much of Vichy’s crimes were undertaken at French initiative.
But in three short decades it suffered a shattering military defeat, a demeaning occupation, two bloody and embarrassing colonial withdrawals, and a regime change in the form of a near-coup.
La Grande Nation had accumulated so many losses and humiliations since 1914 that the compensatory propensity to assert national honour on every possible occasion had become deeply ingrained.
Vichy, after all, was not the only thing that the French were in a hurry to put behind them—no-one wanted to talk about the ‘dirty wars’ in Indo-China and Algeria, much less the torture practised there by the army.
De Gaulle’s departure changed little in this respect, even though a younger generation of Frenchmen and -women showed scant interest in national glory and had no personal investment in the myths surrounding France’s recent history.
And the 1985 documentary film Shoah, by the French director Claude Lanzmann, had a dramatic impact upon French audiences, despite being concerned almost exclusively with the extermination of Jews in the East.
Vichy may have taken place in France and been the work of certain Frenchmen.
But Vichy was an authoritarian parenthesis in the history of the French Republic.
Vichy, in other words, was not ‘France’, and thus France’s public conscience was clear.
President Mitterrand, the last French head of state to experience World War Two as an adult , had special reason to maintain this Jesuitical distinction.
A former Vichyite civil servant, Mitterrand built his subsequent political career in large measure by obscuring the compromises and ambiguities of his own biography and by projecting those ambiguities onto the country at large.
He studiously avoided any reference to Vichy on public occasions; and while he was never reluctant to speak out about the Holocaust in general—whether in Jerusalem in 1982 or at home on the fiftieth anniversary of the July 1942 round-up of 12,884 Parisian Jews—he never let slip any suggestion that this was an affair in which France had debts to pay.
The taboo that Mitterrand enforced, embodied and would surely have taken to his grave was finally broken by a series of trials.
In 1994, after nearly fifty years in hiding, Paul Touvier—an activist in Vichy’s wartime Milice—was caught and brought to trial for the murder of seven French Jews in June 1944 near Lyon.
The prosecution of Bousquet, who in 1942 personally negotiated with the German authorities for the delivery of Jews, might have provided France with an occasion to confront the truth about Vichy.
And not just Vichy, for Bousquet had lived unscathed for many decades in post-war France, protected by friends in very high places—including Mitterrand himself.
But before he could be brought to trial Bousquet was conveniently assassinated in June 1993.
In the wake of Touvier’s condemnation, and in the absence of Bousquet, the French judiciary at last found the courage to inculpate, arrest and prosecute another major figure, Maurice Papon.
A sometime government minister and police chief of Paris under De Gaulle, Papon had been employed as secretary-general of the Bordeaux administrative region during the war.
While in Bordeaux, however, Papon had been directly responsible for authorising the arrest and despatch of the region’s Jews to Paris and thence into deportation.
It was for this—now defined under French law as a crime against humanity—that he was placed on trial in 1997.
The Papon trial, which lasted six months, revealed no new evidence—except perhaps about the man himself, who displayed an astonishing absence of pity or remorse.
A number of French historians, called to testify as expert witnesses, declined to appear.
Their task, they insisted, was to recount and explain what had happened in France fifty years before, not deploy that knowledge in a criminal prosecution.
It demonstrated conclusively that the fine distinction between ‘Vichy’ and ‘France’ so carefully drawn by everyone from De Gaulle to Mitterrand had never existed.
Moreover, Papon was not alone—indeed both the man and his record were decidedly commonplace.
Like so many others, all he had done was sign the death warrants of people he never met and to whose fate he was indifferent.
The most interesting thing about Papon’s case was why it had taken official France nearly fifty years to locate them in its midst—and why, at the very end of the century, the crust of silence finally broke open.
There are many explanations, not all of them flattering to the French political class or national media.
But the passage of time, together with the psychological significance of the ending of an era, is perhaps the most pertinent.
So long as Francois Mitterrand remained in office, he incarnated in his very person the national inability to speak openly about the shame of the occupation.
His successor, Jacques Chirac, had been just eleven years old when France was liberated in 1944.
Within weeks of taking office, on the fifty-third anniversary of the same round-up of Parisian Jews about which Mitterrand had always been so circumspect, President Chirac broke a fifty-year taboo and pointedly acknowledged for the first time his country’s role in the extermination of the Jews of Europe.
By the end of the twentieth century the centrality of the Holocaust in Western European identity and memory seemed secure.
But such people were confined to the extreme political margins—and their insistence upon the technical impossibility of the genocide paid unintended homage to the very enormity of the Nazi crime.
However, the compensatory ubiquity with which Europeans now acknowledged, taught and memorialized the loss of their Jews did carry other risks.
What was perhaps more indicative of a coming cultural shift was a widespread urge, at the beginning of the twenty-first century, to re-open the question of German suffering after years of public attention to Jewish victims.
But we’ve spoken of this for decades; it has become a routine, a habit.
In the second place, the new-found salience of the Holocaust in official accounts of Europe’s past carried the danger of a different sort of distortion.
For the really uncomfortable truth about World War Two was that what happened to the Jews between 1939 and 1945 was not nearly as important to most of the protagonists as later sensibilities might wish.
If many Europeans had managed to ignore for decades the fate of their Jewish neighbours, this was not because they were consumed with guilt and repressing unbearable memories.
It was because—except in the minds of a handful of senior Nazis—World War Two was not about the Jews.
Even for Nazis the extermination of Jews was part of a more ambitious project of racial cleansing and resettlement.
The reason Vichy was acceptable to most French people after the defeat of 1940, for example, was not that it pleased them to live under a regime that persecuted Jews, but because Petainist rule allowed the French to continue leading their lives in an illusion of security and normality and with minimum disruption.
Today we may find such indifference shocking—a symptom of something gravely amiss in the moral condition of Europe in the first half of the twentieth century.
And we are right to recall that there were also those in every European country who did see what was happening to Jews and did their best to overcome the indifference of their fellow citizens.
But if we ignore that indifference and assume instead that most other Europeans experienced the Second World War the way Jews experienced it—as a Vernich tu ngskrieg, a war of extermination—then we shall furnish ourselves with a new layer of mis-memory.
In retrospect, ‘Auschwitz’ is the most important thing to know about World War Two.
To east Europeans, belatedly released after 1989 from the burden of officially mandated Communist interpretations of World War Two, the fin-de-siecle Western preoccupation with the Holocaust of the Jews carries disruptive implications.
On the one hand, eastern Europe after 1945 had much more than western Europe to remember—and to forget.
There were more Jews in the eastern half of Europe and more of them were killed; most of the killing took place in this region and many more locals took an active part in it.
It is not that the horrors and crimes of the war in the east were played down—on the contrary, they were repeatedly rehearsed in official rhetoric and enshrined in memorials and textbooks everywhere.
In East Germany, where the burden of responsibility for Nazism was imputed uniquely to Hitler’s West German heirs, the new regime paid restitution not to Jews but to the Soviet Union.
In GDR school texts, Hitler was presented as a tool of monopoly capitalists who seized territory and started wars in pursuit of the interests of big business.
Former concentration camps on East German soil—notably Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen—were converted for a while into ‘special isolation camps’ for political prisoners.
In Poland it was not possible to deny or minimize what had taken place in extermination camps at Treblinka or Majdanek or Sobibor.
But these places no longer existed—the Germans had taken extraordinary pains to obliterate them from the landscape before fleeing the advancing Red Army.
And where the evidence did survive—as at Auschwitz, a few kilometres from Crakow, Poland’s second city—it was retrospectively assigned a different meaning.
Polish schoolchildren were indeed paraded past the shocking photos; they were shown the heaps of shoes, hair and eyeglasses.
To be sure, there was the Warsaw Ghetto, whose life and death were indeed memorialized on the site where the ghetto had stood.
But the Jewish revolt of 1943 was occluded in Polish memory by the Poles’ own Warsaw uprising a year later.
In Communist Poland, while no-one denied what Germans had done to Jews, the subject was not much discussed.
Poland’s ‘re-imprisonment’ under the Soviets, together with the widespread belief that Jews had welcomed and even facilitated the Communist takeover, muddied popular recall of the German occupation.
In any case, Poles’ own wartime suffering diluted local attention to the Jewish Holocaust ,4 Quoted by Ian Buruma in ‘Buchenwald’, Granta 42,1992.
Three million Poles died in World War II; proportionately lower than the death rate in parts of Ukraine or among Jews, but a terrible figure notwithstanding.
For Poles, it was difficult to survive under German occupation, but in principle you could.
For Jews it was possible to survive under German occupation—but in principle you could not.
Where a local puppet regime had collaborated with its Nazi overlords, its victims were duly memorialized.
But scant attention was paid to the fact that they were disproportionately Jews.
There were national categories and above all social categories , but ethnic and religious tags were studiously avoided.
The Second World War, as we have seen , was labelled and taught as an anti-Fascist war; its racist dimension was ignored.
In the 1970s, the government of Czechoslovakia even took the trouble to paint over the inscriptions on the walls of Prague’s Altneuschul that gave the names of Czech Jews killed in the Shoah.
But if east Europeans paid less attention in retrospect to the plight of the Jews, it was not just because they were indifferent at the time or preoccupied with their own survival.
It is because the Communists imposed enough suffering and injustice of their own to forge a whole new layer of resentments and memories.
Between 1945 and 1989 the accumulation of deportations, imprisonments, show trials and ‘normalizations’ made almost everyone in the Soviet bloc either a loser or else complicit in someone else’s loss.
Apartments, shops and other property that had been appropriated from dead Jews or expelled Germans were all too often reexpropriated a few years later in the name of Socialism—with the result that after 1989 the question of compensation for past losses became hopelessly tangled in dates.
On each date there hung politically sensitive definitions of national or ethnic legitimacy as well as moral precedence.
In the immediate aftermath of the 1989 revolutions many thought they should.
The fall of Communism thus brought in its wake a torrent of bitter memories.
The real problem was the temptation to overcome the memory of Communism by inverting it.
What had once been official truth was now discredited root and branch—becoming, as it were, officially false.
Before 1989 every anti-Communist had been tarred with the ‘Fascist’ brush.
But if ‘anti-Fascism’ had been just another Communist lie, it was very tempting now to look with retrospective sympathy and even favour upon all hitherto discredited anti-Communists, Fascists included.
Post-Communist parliaments in a number of countries passed motions praising Marshal Antonescu of Romania or his counterparts elsewhere in the Balkans and central Europe.
The role of the Red Army and the Soviet Union could now be discussed in a different light.
The newly liberated Baltic states demanded that Moscow acknowledge the illegality of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and Stalin’s unilateral destruction of their independence.
The Poles, having at last secured Russian acknowledgement that the 23,000 Polish officers murdered in Katyn forest were indeed killed by the NKVD and not the Wehrmacht, demanded full access to the Russian archives for Polish investigators.
As of May 2005 neither request seemed likely to meet with Russian acquiescence and the memories continued to rankle.
Seen from the satellite countries, the Soviet version of recent history was palpably false; but for many Russians themselves it contained more than a grain of truth.
World War Two was a ‘Great Patriotic War’; Soviet soldiers and civilians were, in absolute numbers, its greatest victims; the Red Army did liberate vast swathes of eastern Europe from the l6 Under President Putin, Russia continues to insist that the Balts were liberated by the Red Army, after which they voluntarily joined the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
After 1989, many in Russia were genuinely taken aback at the apparent ingratitude of erstwhile fraternal nations, who had been released in 1945 from the German yoke thanks to the sacrifices of Soviet arms.
Indeed, that division took institutional form, with two civil organizations coming into existence to promote critical but diametrically opposed accounts of the country’s Communist past.
Memorial was founded in 1987 by liberal dissidents with the goal of obtaining and publishing the truth about Soviet history.
Its members’ particular concerns were with human-rights abuse and the importance of acknowledging what had been done in the past in order to forestall its recurrence in the future.
Pamiat\ formed two years earlier, also sought to recover and honour the past (its name means ‘memory’ in Russian) but there the resemblance ceases.
Within a few years Pamiaf had branched out into nationalist politics, wielding Russia’s neglected and ‘abused’ history as a weapon with which to ward off‘cosmopolitan’ challenges and interlopers.
The politics of aggrieved memories—however much these differed in detail and even contradicted one another—constituted the last remaining bond between the former Soviet heartland and its imperial holdings.
There was a shared resentment at the international community’s under-appreciation for their past sufferings and losses.
The desire to flatten out the Communist past and indict it en bloc—to read everything from Lenin to Gorbachev as an uninflected tale of dictatorship and crime, a seamless narrative of regimes and repressions imposed by outsiders or perpetrated in the people’s name by unrepresentative authorities—carried other risks.
In the first place it was bad history, eliminating from the record the genuine enthusiasms and engagements of earlier decades.
With this post-Communist re-ordering of memory in eastern Europe, the taboo on comparing Communism with Nazism began to crumble.
Indeed politicians and scholars started to insist upon such comparisons.
But the suggestion that Communism itself—before and after Stalin—should be placed in the same category as Fascism or Nazism carried uncomfortable implications for the West’s own past, and not only in Germany.
To many western European intellectuals, Communism was a failed variant of a common progressive heritage.
But to their central and east European counterparts it was an all too successful local application of the criminal pathologies of twentieth-century authoritarianism and should be remembered thus.
Europe might be united, but European memory remained deeply asymmetrical.
The Western solution to the problem of Europe’s troublesome memories has been to fix them, quite literally, in stone.
By the opening years of the twenty-first century, plaques, memorials and museums to the victims of Nazism had surfaced all across western Europe, from Stockholm to Brussels.
In some cases, as we have seen, they were amended or ‘corrected’ versions of existing sites; but many were new.
Complete with a stone wall engraved with the names of 76,000 Jews deported from France to Nazi death camps, it echoed both the United States Vietnam Memorial and— on a much reduced scale—the ambitions of the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC, or Yad Vashem in Jerusalem.
The explicit message of the latest round of memorials contrasts sharply with the ambiguity and prevarication of an earlier generation of lapidary commemorations.
There can be little doubt that Western Europeans—Germans above all—now have ample opportunity to confront the full horror of their recent past.
As the German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder reminded his audience on the sixtieth anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, ‘the memory of the war and the genocide are part of our life.
In Poland, where a newly established Institute of National Memory has striven hard to encourage serious scholarly investigation into controversial historical subjects, official contrition for Poland’s own treatment of its Jewish minority has aroused vociferous objections.
The difficulty of incorporating the destruction of the Jews into contemporary memory in post-Communist Europe is tellingly illustrated by the experience of Hungary.
Three years later Orban’s successor as prime minister, Peter Medgyessy, opened a Holocaust Memorial Centre in a Budapest house once used to intern Jews.
But much of the time this Holocaust Centre stands nearly empty, its exhibits and fact sheets seen by a thin trickle of visitors—many of them foreign.
Meanwhile, on the other side of town, Hungarians have flocked to the Terrorhaza.
It tells the story of state violence, torture, repression and dictatorship in Hungary from 1944 to 1989.
As presented to the thousands of schoolchildren and others who pass through its gloomy, Tussaud-like reproduction of the police cells, torture equipment and interrogation chambers that were once housed there (the House of Terror is in the headquarters of the former Security Police), the Terrorhaza’s version of Hungarian history draws no distinction between the thugs of Ferenc Szalasi’s Arrow Cross party, who held power there from October 1944 to April 1945, and the Communist regime that was installed after the war.
However, the Arrow Cross men—and the extermination of 600,000 Hungarian Jews to which they actively contributed—are represented by just three rooms.
The rest of the very large building is devoted to a copiously illustrated and decidedly partisan catalogue of the crimes of Communism.
For many Hungarians of an older generation, this is all the more plausible for conforming to their own experience.
Hungary, like the rest of central and eastern Europe, is still caught in the backdraft.
In Romania—despite former President Iliescu’s acknowledgement of his country’s participation in the Holocaust—the ‘Memorial of the Victims of Communism and anticommunist Resistance’ inaugurated at Sighet in 1997 (financed in part by the Council of Europe) commemorates assorted inter-war and wartime Iron Guard activists and other Romanian Fascists and anti-Semites, now recycled as martyrs to Communist persecution.
In support of their insistence upon ‘equivalence’, commentators in eastern Europe can point to the cult of the ‘victim’ in contemporary Western political culture.
Even if Nazism and Communism were utterly different in intent—even if, in Raymond Aron’s formulation, ‘there is a difference between a philosophy whose logic is monstrous, and one which can be given a monstrous interpretation’—that was scant consolation to their victims.
Human suffering should not be calibrated according to the goals of the perpetrators.
In this way of reasoning, for those being punished or killed there, a Communist camp is no better or worse than a Nazi camp.
Similarly, the emphasis upon ‘rights’ in modern international jurisprudence and political rhetoric has furnished an argument for those who feel that their sufferings and losses have passed unrecognized—and l8 In March 2004 eighty-four Hungarian writers, including Peter Esterhazy and Gyorgy Konrad, left the country’s Writers’ Union in protest at its tolerance of anti-Semitism.
The occasion for the walk out were comments by the poet Kornel Dobrentei following the award of the Nobel Prize for Literature to the Holocaust survivor Imre Kertesz.
Some conservatives in Germany, taking their cue from international condemnation of ethnic cleansing’, have re-opened the claims of German communities expelled from their lands at the end of the Second World War.
This latest twist, with its suggestion that all forms of collective victimhood are essentially comparable, even interchangeable, and should thus be accorded equal remembrance, aroused a spirited rebuttal from Marek Edelman, the last surviving commander of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, when he signed a petition in 2003 opposing the proposed Center.
Of course it is sad when you are being forced to leave your house and abandon your land.
Expulsions are about suffering, but there is so much suffering in this world.
Edelman’s reaction is a timely reminder of the risks we run by indulging to excess the cult of commemoration—and of displacing perpetrators with victims as the focus of attention.
On the one hand there is no limit in principle to the memories and experiences worthy of recall.
On the other hand, to memorialize the past in edifices and museums is also a way to contain and even neglect it—leaving the responsibility of memory to others.
So long as there were men and women around who really did remember, from personal experience, this did not perhaps matter.
Even if Europe could somehow cling indefinitely to a living memory of past crimes—which is what the memorials and museums are designed, however inadequately, to achieve—there would be little point.
The first post-war Europe was built upon deliberate mismemory—upon forgetting as a way of life.
Some measure of neglect and even forgetting is the necessary condition for civic health.
A nation has first to have remembered something before it can begin to forget it.
The same is true of Poles in their convoluted recollection of the Jews who once lived in their midst.
The same will be true of Spain, too, which for twenty years following its transition to democracy drew a tacit veil across the painful memory of the civil war.
Public discussion of that war and its outcome is only now getting under way.
Only after Germans had appreciated and digested the enormity of their Nazi past—a sixty-year cycle of denial, education, debate and consensus— could they begin to live with it:e. put it behind them.
Evil, above all evil on the scale practiced by Nazi Germany, can never be satisfactorily remembered.
Its inherent implausibility—the sheer difficulty of conceiving of it in calm retrospect—opens the door to diminution and even denial.
Impossible to remember as it truly was, it is inherently vulnerable to being remembered as it wasn’t.
Most of what it has to offer is discomforting, even disruptive—which is why it is not always politically prudent to wield the past as a moral cudgel with which to beat and berate a people for its past sins.
All the same, the rigorous investigation and interrogation of Europe’s competing pasts—and the place occupied by those pasts in Europeans’ collective sense of themselves—has been one of the unsung achievements and sources of European unity in recent decades.
It is, however, an achievement that will surely lapse unless ceaselessly renewed.
Europe’s barbarous recent history, the dark ‘other’ against which post-war Europe was laboriously constructed, is already beyond recall for young Europeans.
Within a generation the memorials and museums will be gathering dust—visited, like the battlefields of the Western Front today, only by aficionados and relatives.
If in years to come we are to remember why it seemed so important to build a 19 The last statue of Franco in Madrid was quietly removed at dawn, in front of an audience of one hundred onlookers, on March 17th 2005.
The new Europe, bound together by the signs and symbols of its terrible past, is a remarkable accomplishment; but it remains forever mortgaged to that past.
If Europeans are to maintain this vital link—if Europe’s past is to continue to furnish Europe’s present with admonitory meaning and moral purpose—then it will have to be taught afresh with each passing generation.
John Phillips/ Time Life/Getty Images; bottom (French retribution, 1944): Bettmann/Corbis.
Harry Todd/Fox Photos/Getty Images; bottom : Topical Press Agency/Getty Images.
Bettmann/Corbis; middle : Walter Sanders/Time Life/ Getty Images; bottom : AKG Images.
AFP/Getty Images; bottom : Archives familiales, Raymond Aron, Radio Free Europe.
Ronald Grant Archive; bottom (Adenauer and Berlin Wall, 1961): AKG Images.
Bettmann/Corbis; middle (car in Britain and women, 1960): Magnum/Bruce Davidson; bottom : George W Hales/Getty Images.
Haywood Magee/Getty Images; middle : Popperfoto; bottom : John Leongard/Time Life/ Getty Images.
Magnum/Bruno Barbey; middle (Italian workers’ strike, 1969): Bettmann/Corbis; bottom : Bettmann/Corbis.
Magnum/Harry Gruyaert; bottom (Belfast children, 1976): Davis Factor/Corbis.
Bettmann/Corbis; bottom (Lisbon woman newspaper vendor): Magnum/Jean Gaumy.
AKG Images; bottom (Mitterrand and Thatcher, 1984): Bryn Colton/Assignments Photographers/Corbis.
Topham Picture Library; middle (Michnik in Gdansk, 1984): Wostok Press; bottom : Peter Turnley/ Corbis.
Marc Deville/Gamma/Katz Pictures; middle : Lubomir Kotek/AFP/Getty Images; bottom : Chris Niedenthal/ Time Life/Getty Images.
Wostok Press; bottom (McDonalds in Moscow, 1990): Sergei Guneyev/Time Life/Getty Images.
Magnum/Paul Fusco; middle (Aral Sea disaster, 1997): Magnum/Francesco Zizola; bottom : Alain Nogues/Sygma/Corbis.
Wostok Press; middle (eastern European sex trade, 2002): Sasha Bezzubov/Corbis; bottom : Wostok Press.
Wostok Press; middle (Srebrenica massacre graves): Danilo Krstanovic/Reuters; bottom : David Brauchli/Getty Images.
European Press Photo Agency/Kerim Okten; bottom : Alternative Libertaire.
Viennareport/Sygma/Corbis; middle : Dean Francis/Sygma/Corbis; bottom : David Bebber/Reuters/Corbis.
A History of Europe since 1945 by Tony Judt Published in October 2005 by Penguin and Heinemann Bibliography * The literature on Europe since the Second World War is huge and like Europe itself steadily expanding.
Wherever possible I have listed books that are likely to be available for readers to consult or purchase.
For the same reason I have not included primary sources except memoirs and the occasional contemporary report, nor have I listed published works in other languages.
The first section is a list of books dealing with the history of modern Europe, together with works devoted to particular countries or regions.
In the third section I have grouped books by chapter, listing works to which I am indebted for information used in a particular chapter or that I found especially helpful.
Similarly, readers seeking to learn more about the economic history of post-war Europe might find it helpful to look under General Histories; Economics; European Union, as well as various chapters where economic history is emphasized, notably Chapters III, X, XIV, etc.
My years in the State Department [London, Hamilton, 1970) Antonov-Ovseenko, Anton, The time of Statin.
Portrait of a tyranny [Uo\n York, Harper & Row, 1981) Aron, Raymond, Memoirs.
A personal history Ginzburg, Evgeni Semenovna, Journey into the whirlwind Grundy, Trevor, Memoir of a fascist childhood: a boy in Mosley's Britain Harris, Kenneth, Attlee Healey, Denis, The Time of my Life Heath, Edward, Travels: people and places in my life Heath, Edward, The Course of my Life Horner, Helmut, and Powell, Allan Kent, A German Odyssey.
The Rehabilitation of Europe Diefendorf, J effry M., In the wake of war.
Plans for renewal, 1940-1946 Turner, Ian D., Reconstruction in post-war Germany.
The Coming of the Cold War Aman, Anders, Architecture and ideology in Eastern Europe during the Statin era.
The Germans and French from Ruhr conflict to Economic Community Hitchcock, William I., France Restored.
Cold War diplomacy and the quest for leadership in Europe, 19441954 Holloway, David, Statin and the Bomb.
European unity and disunity, 1945-1957 Young, John W., France, the Cold War, and the Western alliance, 1944-49.
Stalinist purges in Eastern Europe, 1948-1954 Kaplan, Karel, Report on the murder of the General Secretary Kenney, Padraic, Rebuilding Poland.
A The Establishment of Communist regimes in Eastern Europe, 1944-1949 [ Boulder, Colo., Westview Press, 1997) Pelikan, Jiri, The Czechoslovak political trials, 1950-1954 [ London,, Macdonald, 1971) Peteri, Gyorgy, Academia and state socialism.
Essays on the political history of academic life in post-1945 Hungary and Eastern Europe Rubenstein, Joshua, and Naumov, Vladimir Pavlovich, Statin's secret pogrom.
The postwar inquisition of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee Trial of the Leadership of the Anti-Conspiracy Centre headed by Rudolf Slansky (Prague, Ministry of J ustice, 1953) Trial of three Slovak bishops Weiner, Amir, Making sense of war.
Culture Wars Berghahn, Volker Rolf, America and the intellectual cold wars in Europe.
The CIA and the world of arts and letters (NY, The New Press, 2001) Urban, G R., Radio Free Europe and the pursuit of democracy.
The Politics of Stability Duggan, Christopher, and Wagstaff, Christopher, Italy in the Cold War: politics, culture and society 19481958 Harrison, Hope Millard, Driving the Soviets up the wall.
The making of the European settlement, 1945-1963 Zimmermann, Hubert, Money and security.
Lost I llusions Ambler, John S., The French Army in politics, 1945-1962 Ansprenger, Franz, The dissolution of the colonial empires [London, Routledge, 1989) Bekes, Csaba, Malcolm Byrne, and Janos Rainer, The 1956 Fiungarian revolution.
A history in documents Clayton, Anthony, The wars of French decolonization Connelly, Matthew J ames, A diplomatic revolution.
Algeria's fight for independence and the origins of the post-cold war era Fanon, Frantz, The wretched of the earth Ferro, Marc, Colonization.
A global history [Quebec, World Heritage Press, 1997) Haas, Ernst B., The uniting of Europe.
Britain and the sixties Luther, Kurt & Pulzer, Peter, Austria 1945-1995: Fifty Years of the Second Republic (London, Ashgate,1998) Molin, Karl, ed., Creating Social Democracy.
Martin's Press, 1976) Piekalkiewicz, J aroslaw, Public opinion polling in Czechoslovakia, 1968-69; results and analysis of surveys conducted during the Dubcek Era Raina, Peter K., Political opposition in Poland, 1954-1977 Simecka, Milan, The restoration of order.
The story of the Baader-Meinhoff Terrorist Gang Olson, Mancur, The Rise and Decline of Nations.
Economic Growth, Stagflation and Social Rigidities Sciascia, Leonardo, The Moro Affair and the Mystery of Majorana Wright, J oanne, Terrorist Propaganda.
Politics in a New Key Duchen, Claire, Women's rights and women's lives in France, 1944-1968 Garton Ash, Timothy, in Europe's name.
Changing Faces of Communism in Western Europe (London, A Deutsch, 1980) Nelson, Keith L., The making of detente.
The revolution of '89 witnessed in Warsaw, Budapest ; Berlin, and Prague Gorbachev, Mikhail Sergeevich, Conversations with Gorbachev Kenney, Padraic, A Carnival of Revolution.
Sharpe, 1994) Teitel, Ruti G., Transitional justice 28 Tismaneanu, Vladimir, Fantasies of salvation.
The Destruction of the Jewish Community in Jedwabne, Poland (Princeton, Princeton U Press, 2001) Hass, Aaron, The Aftermath.
German strategies andJewish responses Mitscherlich, Alexander and Margarete, The Inability to Mourn: principles of collective behavior [NY, Grove, 1984) Mitten, Richard, The Politics of Antisemitic Prejudice: the Waldheim phenomenon in Austria (Boulder, Westview Press, 1992) Moore, Bob, Victims and Survivors.
