B\ )ale L Smith Dale Committee Member M Ljubisa S Adamovich Committee Member TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.
Socialist Protectionism 33 Conventional or Unconventional Measures 38 ExComm Split 40 Escalation 47 3.
Priority Information Requirements 53 Soviet Conventional Forces 57 Number and Type of Weapons 63 4.
Command and Control 70 First Strike 71 Force Command 74 Missile Control 77 Spy Plane Incident 79 5.
Jon Andrew Errickson Department: Russian and East European Studies Major Professor: Dr.
New information, resulting from five recently held history conferences, has created a renewed interest in the Caribbean crisis.
Also, Soviet Glasnost and Perestroika have disclosed revealing new facts that have aided in resolving questions that have perplexed scholars for over thirty years.
Most notable of the newfound information was the discovery that the United States had not done a very good job in gathering and analyzing intelligence information.
The United States also failed to recognize the purpose for the Soviet Union's involvement with the small, isolated island-nation of Cuba.
These two miscalculations brought the world extremely close to nuclear war; closer than ever before or ever since.
From issues such as diplomacy and trade to military proliferation, both sides experienced their share of miscalculations and outright policy blunders.
With the advent of weapons of mass destruction, namely nuclear weapons, the need for calm and concise handling of Cold War discord became all important.
As the crisis unfolded, fear and apprehension were felt throughout the United States and the world in general.
While the majority of Soviet citizens were unaware of the conflict, many of the American officials present during the crisis have labeled it in ominous terms.
This fact has had a hand in keeping the accolades pouring in for the diplomatic adeptness of the Kennedy administration.
For Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., it was ""the finest hour"" for President Kennedy.
Even Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev expressed admiration for Kennedy and the panache Kennedy exhibited during the crisis.
Arthur Schlesinger recalled Kennedy's resolve and tenacity by stating that, ""It was this combination of toughness and restraint, of will, nerve and wisdom, so brilliantly controlled, so matchlessly calibrated, that dazzled the world.
Before the missile crisis people might have feared that we would use our power extravagantly or not use it at all.
Looking back at the Caribbean conflict conjures up images of diplomatic maneuvering at its best.
The world watched in stunned silence as a duel between a young, charming and popular capitalist president and a cagey, wily communist head of state unfolded.
At issue was a standoff of monumental consequence which developed out of mistrust of one another.
It was a time when many throughout the world held their collective breath in both fear and anticipation for what would undoubtedly be a superpower showdown of unparalleled proportion.
History has never before pitted two nations against one another that had the capability for total human annihilation.
Not only was the stability of the post-World War II international system called into question, but also the very future of all mankind.
The potential for egos to clash over personality differences was there, yet these two superpower leaders were able to navigate their way through this encounter without loss of life, and with very little bruising of fragile reputations.
Americans believed that the United States had stood-up to the communist attempt to intrude into the Western Hemisphere and had dealt with the aggression the same way someone would respond to a would-be burglar.
To this day, most Americans are adamant in their belief that John Fitzgerald Kennedy controlled the events in Cuba so skillfully that Khrushchev was forced into an embarrassing retreat, signalling a victory for capitalism throughout the world.
Historians are now beginning to understand how real the danger was during the crucial thirteen days in October 1962.
Recent Historical Developments Historians are just now able to study this crisis from all angles due to the recent political changes that have swept through Eastern Europe since 1989.
Important data, much in the form of previously unreleased documents, is being made available by both Russia and the United States.
Glasnost enabled Soviet historians and those directly involved in the conflict to collaborate with their American counterparts to uncover the deepest secrets of the crisis.
In addition to memoirs, a mind-boggling amount of documentation has been released concerning the events of 1962.
The final piece of the puzzle needed for an even more accurate view of the crisis had been Cuban data.
That 7 In the book Anadyr, published in the Spring of 1994, Generals Gribkov and Smith collaborate in an effort to further clarify key points of confusion about the crisis.
Edition Q Inc., 1994). too has very recently become available, due in large part to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the subsequent change in relations between Cuba and Russia.
It seems even Fidel Castro is now eager to become part of writing the history of the conflict in which he played such an integral role.
In 1987 they began to bring together former high officials from all three countries who were influential in policy making or implementation during the crisis.
The organizers were interested in bringing together only the actual leaders, so that the validity of this ""oral history"" would be unquestionable.
The discussions uncovered many misunderstandings and solved some of the riddles which had up to this point remained unsolved.
The Havana conference in particular, held in January 1992, showcased a stunning assortment of high-officials from all three states, and was far and away the most productive of the five conferences.
The participation of these principle players made it more likely that an accurate depiction of the actual events of the crisis would emerge.
Norton & Company), 120. the previous conferences, and to settle unresolved historical differences brought about by the absence of key individuals at the prior oral historical discussions.
Questionable Intelligence Analysis Among the most critical issues discussed at the conferences, and exposed in the declassified documents, was the accuracy of the intelligence gathered by the United States in the days leading up to October 1962.
The ExComm was a group of specialists President Kennedy drew on to ensure that the embarrassments of prior foreign policy blunders, such as the Bay of Pigs, would not again occur.
Dean Rusk , Robert McNamara , John McCone , Douglas Dillon (secretary of the treasury), Robert Kennedy , McGeorge Bundy (national security advisor), Theodore Sorenson , George Ball , U Alexis Johnson (deputy under secretary of 1 ' Thousands of photographs and other bits of information were gathered and analyzed within a two week period during the crisis.
Through Soviet participation in the oral history conferences, scholars are now able to see the hidden dangers that were undetected during the crisis.
From the new sources, we now know that the information received by the Kennedy administration was questionable and incomplete at best.
On the other hand, some United States scholars still believe we were no closer to a nuclear confrontation in 1962 than at any other time during the Cold War.
In his article, Cline disputed interpretations of the first three joint panel discussions.
Cline contended that the Soviets participants stood to gain stature by duping the United States participants into thinking that the confrontation was more volatile than originally believed.
To imply that men like McNamara and Bundy, who were both held in high regard by John and Robert Kennedy, could be persuaded to accept scenarios that contradicted their experiences is hard to accept.
Throughout the Havana conference, McNamara was quite vocal in his criticism of Soviet and American tactics during the crisis.
His emphasis was always focused on separating hearsay from fact, regardless of fault, and there is really no evidence that suggests either McNamara or Bundy strayed from their fact-finding purposes.
These men were not guided down memory lane and persuaded they were a part of saving all humanity, but rather they combined their own experiences with those of their Soviet and Cuban counterparts to ultimately conclude that the situation was more volatile than they originally thought.
In many cases, intricate details were intensely scrutinized by all sides until the issue was either solved or left unresolved.
Many of these issues, such as troop strength and force composition, could not have been skewed by either side due to the accurate post-crisis data both had.
The participant selection criteria for the conferences and the openness of discussion during the conferences greatly reduce the chance for deliberate misrepresentation; there was simply too much data and too many experts from both sides to allow poor information to go unquestioned.
To assume Castro and the Cuban officials present at the Havana conference were totally candid and truthful, especially in light of the fact they need to do everything possible to make themselves look heroic to their people, would probably be wrong.
Those experts who believe that war was near see the real issue as not whether nuclear war was narrowly averted this is considered a fact but rather how it was that the two superpowers came so close to launching missiles in the first place.
The overwhelming evidence surfacing over the past several years points toward United States misperceptions as being the key reason for the close call.
Specifically, the inability of the U.S. intelligence system to properly gather and interpret critical information, crucial in determining Soviet intent, which in turn caused President Kennedy to make improper assumptions, were key in the U.S. misperceptions which brought the world perilously close to nuclear war.
Basis For United States Miscalculations The fact that the high level advisors to President Kennedy quickly dismissed the possibility that the defense of Cuba was a key and critical part of the Soviet rationale for shipping the nuclear warheads to Cuba was a critical blunder.
This sort of attitude was prevalent and it was a result of the Cold 18 The five oral history conferences were instrumental in developing this idea.
This notion proved to be so strong that Kennedy never seriously considered the possibility that Khrushchev may have been content to negotiate an end to the conflict at the beginning on the basis of a non-aggression pact protecting Cuba.
While there was clearly a problem in understanding the purpose for the emplacement of the weapons, an equally important problem was in the numerous inaccuracies in gathering the priority information requirements during the crisis.
Almost all intelligence data made available to the ExComm was based on aerial photography, and very little, if any, collaboration or verification backed-up any of the photography.
The most critical mistakes dealt specifically with three areas; the question of how many missiles, specifically the nuclear warheads that made the missiles so deadly, were physically located within Cuba starting on 16 October 1962; the specific Soviet table of organization and equipment which was represented on Cuba before and during the crisis; the Soviet command and control structure on Cuba.
These three aspects were so grossly misunderstood by the Kennedy administration that the possibility of all-out nuclear confrontation was much closer than anyone at the time perceived.
Were it not for the level-headed and prompt decisions on the part of Khrushchev, the events of October may have escalated beyond anyone's control.
Through detailed analysis of the most recent information, we can conclude that President Kennedy avoided nuclear war through a universal fear of this kind of warfare and not by his superlative diplomatic performance.
From the American Revolution to the Gulf War, America has prided itself on understanding the tactical and strategic situation of the enemy.
However, further analysis proves this to be much too shortsighted an interpretation.
The difference between assuming a strategic aim over a defensive aim could very well have led to the Soviet Union opting for a different course of action, one that may have paved the way for total nuclear confrontation.
In considering the question of why the Soviet Union chose to covertly deploy nuclear weapons to Cuba in 1962, it is necessary to consider two points.
The second point deals with why the decision to deploy these weapons of mass destruction was made over a more conventional support effort which may have achieved the same goal.
Castro's Isolationism By 1962 Castro was feeling the pinch of isolation in the Caribbean.
Castro had a right to be concerned for the preservation of not only his own rule, but for that of the government that the Cuban Revolution had created.
The events leading up to the 1959 overthrow of the Batista regime indicate that Castro had reason to be uneasy with his neighbors.
Many of the OAS leadership saw this new political change as a genuine threat to their current method of governing.
Rostow wrote that there was a definite threat of ""Castroism"" in other Latin American States.
Rostow stated, ""The roots of 22 This idea assumes a much larger eventual Soviet conventional force buildup.
This action, which occurred during a session convened in Punta del Este, Uruguay in January 1962, was unprecedented.
It was the first time in OAS history the members were forced to turn on a fellow member-nation of similar origin for reasons based on individual rule.
For many years Cuba had played an important economic role among OAS nations.
Private investment in Cuba by the United States alone accounted for well over one billion dollars by 1958.25 Cuba's chief economic export then, and still today, was sugar.
The Cuban government relied quite heavily on this commodity for bringing in the needed capital to sustain their economic growth.
By 1960, in response to Castro's nationalization policy, President Eisenhower cut sugar imports by ninety-five percent, thus diminishing the total amount of Cuban exports by eighty percent.
This incident triggered the alliance between Havana and Moscow which would eventually last for three full decades and lead to a polarization of past hemispheric partners.
Castro turned to Moscow in a last ditch effort to stabilize the Cuban economy.
The Soviets, seizing the opportunity to gain a friend so geographically close to the United States, quickly announced to the world that they would replace the United States as Cuba's primary trading partner.
The Cuban and Soviet relationship actually transpired as a result of a visit by Khrushchev's close confidant and Presidium member, Anastas Mikoyan, who happened to be at the same time attempting to improve relations with Washington.
While both Che Guevara and Raul Castro were staunch communists, Fidel was somewhat more reluctant to adopt a new but already established political platform.
Once Cuba abandoned her past partners in the Americas and the Caribbean she moved into untested waters with regard to self preservation.
Never before, even when under Spanish rule, had Cuba been surrounded by so many unfriendly countries.
The Soviets considered Castro to be an ideological brother in a hostile location.
This, of course, leads to the question of how strong was Moscow's support for Cuba, and how far were they willing to go to protect this new found socialist state.
Intent There are two entirely different facets of the problem of why the Soviets chose to emplace nuclear weapons on Cuba.
On the one hand facts must be presented that show a stated Soviet concern over Cuba's defense.
Secondly, there has to be shown proof that the Soviet stated objective is indeed plausible.
An important source to help isolate the stated Soviet objective is to consider the testimony of those involved in the decision.
In his published memoirs, Nikita Khrushchev states that he and other members of the Presidium were concerned with keeping American troops off Cuban soil.
Their first concern was not to use Cuba as a bargaining chip for Berlin or to project Soviet power at the United States doorstep as the Kennedy Executive Committee thought at the time.
Khrushchev pointed out that defending Cuba was his strategic goal and, along with a combination of tactical factors, proved to be important in the final deployment decision.
He stated, ""The main thing was that the installation of our missiles in Cuba would, I thought, restrain the United States from the precipitous military action against Castro's government.
In addition to protecting Cuba, our missiles would have equalized what the West likes to call the balance of power.
The Americans had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us with nuclear weapons, and now they would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you; we'd be doing nothing more than giving them a little of their own 29 Talbott, Khrushchev, 494. 21 medicine.
At the Havana conference, McNamara questioned Castro on the specifics of the military build-up on Cuba during the Fall of 1962.
Castro contended that Khrushchev perhaps made an error in deciding to send strategic nuclear weapons as opposed to only tactical weapons.
As Castro concluded, ""I also think that if it was a matter of defending Cuba without creating an international problem, the presence of tactical weapons would not have created the same problem that the strategic weapons did.
Castro simply acknowledges potential international political ramifications certain choices would provoke in the context of defending Cuba.
Again, like Khrushchev, Castro finished this statement by saying that ""If the intent was simply to defend Cuba, a number of tactical weapons for the mechanized units would have been more 30 Talbott, Khrushchev, 494.
Castro's choice of words in this statement reflect his understanding that in addition to protecting Cuba, the missiles would project Soviet power in the region.
The statements made by Khrushchev and Castro share a common theme that of defending Cuba being the primary strategic aim.
While both leaders talk about other benefits, both subordinate these benefits to defending Cuba.
During the Havana conference, the debate over Soviet intent was heated.
Those who argued that Khrushchev was only looking out for Cuba's defense supported their arguments with Khrushchev's memoirs that repeatedly state this.
Others, like Soviet General Gribkov, speculate that Khrushchev was not only content to defend Cuba but, by virtue of this show of force, also expected to reap advantages in the ongoing disputes over Berlin and the arms race.
Rising Tensions Hostilities between the United States and Cuba increased when on 4 March 1960, a French merchant ship named the La Coubre unexplainably exploded in Havana harbor, causing a great number of casualties.
The ship was in the process of unloading very volatile explosives at the time of the explosion.
In all likelihood carelessness on the part of the Cuban stevedores was the reason for the loss of lives.
Nonetheless, Castro seized this opportunity to increase anti-American sentiment within Cuba.
In a defiant anti-American speech that immediately followed the La Coubre incident, Castro called for the complete severance of ties with the United States and went as far as providing a slogan for the Cuban Revolution, ""patria o muerte!"" .37 While this incident may not qualify as overwhelming evidence for Cuba's invasion phobia, it began a chain of events that produced by 1962 Cuba's fear of a United States attack.
Following the Guatemalan success of 1954, President Eisenhower was convinced by the CIA to begin covert actions to oust Castro from power.
Due to some poor United States intelligence, Eisenhower was convinced that Castro was an unpopular ruler who could be toppled quite easily.
The problem with this assumption is that while in reality Castro may not have enjoyed total support shortly after Batista's overthrow, most Cubans preferred him over what would be perceived as a United States puppet government if Eisenhower installed a pro-American replacement government.
Eisenhower was convinced that a small, covert action would be more than sufficient to topple Castro.
Richard Bissell, then the CIA's most highly regarded operations planner, on the other hand, was able to convince Kennedy upon taking office that a more aggressive action would be necessary to achieve success.
Bissell sent the Kennedy administration into a frenzy of decision making sessions to determine the specifics of the proposed action against Castro.
The proposals went from a small-scale covert action, to a full-scale United States led invasion, back to a smaller covert action.
By the end, it is clear that Kennedy had misgivings about the eventual plan, but he went ahead with it based upon Bissell's recommendation along with the concurrence of all the top leaders in Kennedy's Executive Committee.
Unfortunately for Kennedy, the concurrence of his advisors lacked one critical element military expertise.
In that respect, the White House staff had not relied heavily enough on the Pentagon during the planning stages of the operation.
There was disagreement immediately following this debacle between the White House and the Pentagon leadership over CIA and military coordination.
Although the Bay of Pigs created a rift between the military and President Kennedy, remedying this problem was 38 David Detzer, The Brink 32.
As General Maxwell Taylor, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, wrote in his memoirs about the Kennedy White House prior to his inclusion on the Executive Committee, ""As an old military type, I was accustomed to the support of a highly professional staff trained to prepare careful analysis of issues in advance of decisions and to take meticulous care of classified information.
I was shocked at the disorderly and careless ways of the new White House staff.
There was little perceptible method in the assignment of duties within the staff, although I had to admit the work got done, largely through the individual initiative of its members.
Although Kennedy was very cautious when considering a purely military point of view, he nonetheless recognized the importance of having military expertise when considering strategic and tactical courses of action.
It was a fiasco from the standpoint of the United States and their desire to rid the region of an anti-American regime.
It sent a clear signal for the first time that Cuba was an important part of United States foreign policy.
This was the turning point for Soviet foreign policy with regard to Cuba.
As Khrushchev put it, ""The invasion of Cuba was the work of aggressive American forces.
Nobody believes that the invasion was paid for by the counterrevolutionary Cubans.
No, it was supported by the aggressive forces of the United States and the taxpayers, who were not told about it.
If Castro was earlier searching and struggling for ways to prove to the Cuban people that the Americans were evil and he was their savior, he found the fuel he wanted to fan the fires of anti-American sentiment in Cuba.
After the Bay of Pigs, Cubans rallied behind Castro and supported his hatred of the capitalist west.
He had to swallow a bitter pill in the failure of the guerilla led invasion, while at the same time displaying continued resolve against Castro.
Ironically, while the Bay of Pigs strengthened Castro, it also proved to bring out the competitive nature of Kennedy and prompted him to formulate a new strategy to fight Castro.
The new strategy, code named ""MONGOOSE"", was designed to covertly and passively oust Castro from Cuba.
On November 30, 1961, President Kennedy sent a memorandum to Secretary of State Dean Rusk which approved a plan to use American assets to overthrow Castro.
The aim of operation MONGOOSE was spelled out by Brigadier General Edward Lansdale, an expert in counterinsurgency and guerilla operations.
Its stated purpose was to sabotage Castro in an attempt to rid Cuba of a pro-communist regime.
The Soviets were not aware of any specific covert actions, such as JM WAVE, by the United States to topple socialism on Cuba, instead they assumed the potential for United States aggression was a given.
As Nikita Khrushchev stated, ""I'm not saying we had any documentary proof that the Americans were preparing a second invasion; we didn't need documentary proof.
The teams were specifically instructed to target such areas as bridges, communication links, production plants, sugar mills, oil facilities, and any other targets that could potentially affect Cuban commerce.
Lansdale believed that by disrupting any economic stability Cuba had achieved by the end of the Cuban revolution, the United States stood a reasonably high chance of succeeding in displacing Castro.
This all seems to make perfect foreign policy sense, yet, as Sergo Mikoyan, a Latin-American specialist and the son of politburo member Anastas Mikoyan, stated in 1988 there really was no reason to go directly after Castro because if assassinated Castro would have surely been followed by the ever-popular Che Guevera.
Instead, Mikoyan correctly identified the 48 Talbott, Last Testament, 511.
Martin's Press, 1992), 189. 29 real possibility following a Castro assassination as having been a follow-on invasion by the United States.
This assumption further demonstrates the fear both the Cubans and Soviets felt for a potential United States led invasion.
In yet another example of provocative aggression, the United States publicly announced a plan for a large-scale military exercise, called Philbriglex-62, to take place close to Cuba sometime in the fall of 1962.
The scenario called for the deployment of some 7,500 marines, four aircraft carriers, twenty destroyers, and finally fifteen troop carriers designed for transporting ground troops from ships to shore.
This massive operation had the proclaimed purpose of simulating an invasionary overthrow of a ruthless dictator on the fictitious island of Vieques.
Interestingly, the Pentagon was not only overly helpful in their disclosure of the details of this operation to the media, they were also more than friendly when they disclosed the name of the fictitious dictator as Ortsac which spelled backwards is of course Castro.
With the fear of invasion came an almost frantic chain of events by Cuba to discourage such a possibility.
As Khrushchev recounted his feelings just before the failed Bay of Pigs operation, ""...there were no longer any forces left which could be organized to fight on America's behalf in Cuba.
M51 He further backed the contention that the Soviet's true concern was for defending their newfound socialist brother when he stated that after the failed invasion, ""After Castro's crushing victory over the counterrevolutionaries, we intensified our military aid to Cuba.
During an address to a number of high level Cuban and Soviet officials at the Havana conference, McNamara stated that because of the Bay of Pigs, the numerous clandestine operations against Castro that followed, and overtly aggressive rhetoric coming out of Washington at the time, he too would have been convinced that an invasion was imminent.
This revelation by Mr McNamara is significant when trying to depict the general attitude of the American policy makers during the crisis.
As previously stated McNamara was a key figure in the ExComm task force which was formed to deal with the Soviet action.
For him to admit that at the time of the crisis he, along with the other members of the ExComm, were somewhat short-sighted in their assumptions is extremely pertinent.
On an equally important note, McNamara also stated at the Havana Conference that while the appearance of invasion was there, the United States had no plans to go forward with any invasion, already planned or otherwise.
This fact was of course lost on the Cuban and Soviet leaders at the time of the crisis who had no other information to work with other than that which pointed toward an imminent invasion.
After all, even U.S. documents show that the Soviets were correct in identifying Kennedy's emphasis on ousting Castro and changing Cuba's government.
With a hostile, great power located only ninety miles off Cuba's shores, it is not only plausible that Castro felt the impending doom of a possible U.S. invasion, but probable.
These events fully shaped Soviet policy concerning Cuba and influenced the eventual decision to send nuclear weapons to the island.
He was also sent a number of memorandums and action plans dealing with possible solutions to overthrowing the Castro regime.
Socialist Protectionism While it is true that both Cuba and the Soviet Union were concerned about the defense of the Cuban homeland, a second reason for the missiles was the Soviet desire to project a powerful presence in the Caribbean region.
This is not entirely the same as equalling the global balance of forces, as was suspected by the Kennedy administration.
Instead, the Soviets were determined not to let the United States intimidate other countries in the region into refraining from adopting a socialist government.
The U.S.S.R. was instead pursuing a much more focused foreign policy, while the United States was blaming them for having much larger scale goals.
In his memoir, Khrushchev recalled the underlying reason for considering the missile option was, ""If Cuba fell, other Latin American countries would reject us, claiming that for all our might the Soviet Union hadn't been able to do anything for Cuba except to make empty protests to the United Nations.
We had to think up some way of confronting America with more than words.
We had to establish a tangible and effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean.
In this respect, it was of great importance to the Soviets not to challenge their super-power rival, but rather unwaveringly 57 Schecter, Glasnost, 172.
All this leads to the confusion that while the Kennedy administration dealt with the Soviet military involvement in Cuba as simply communist aggression, due in large part to the presence of nuclear weapons, there were other key factors which were overlooked in the process.
Kennedy treated Soviet military involvement and Soviet aggression as being one-in-the-same.
Khrushchev wanted to defend Cuba, but not at the expense of mobilizing a major portion of the military and deploying them some 11,000 miles from Russia.
Aside from the obvious security risks involved in deploying such a large force, Khrushchev was also concerned about the tremendous burden it would place on the Soviet economy.
For the Soviets, nuclear weapons proved to be a less expensive, more powerful option than a conventional deployment.
Aside from their stated goal of defending Cuba, the Soviet Union did stand to gain much from having missile locations in the Caribbean.
Judging by the recently declassified transcripts from ExComm meetings during the crisis, the comments made by the Cuban and Soviet contingents during the five historical conferences, and most importantly the aspects of United States overt aggression leading up to the crisis as outlined by Robert McNamara, Kennedy clearly considered the overall military support, not just nuclear missiles but rather all military support, by the Soviet Union as 59 Talbott, Last Testament, 512. 34 being aggressive.
This evaluation was much too simplistic and lacked clear understanding of the situation.
The notion among many Americans, including the Kennedy administration, was that Khrushchev's decision to base intermediate range ballistic missiles on Cuba was meant solely to project Soviet power in the Western Hemisphere.
Kennedy refused to entertain the notion that the Soviets could have any reason for the missiles (equipped with nuclear warheads) other than offensive because earlier he had defined ground-to-ground missiles as ""offensive"", and after saying offensive weapons against the United States could not be tolerated he found it difficult to go back on this definition.
In an ironic twist, had Kennedy's ""chest-pounding"" waited another month or so, the entire crisis would have possibly been averted.
The ExComm was adamant in their belief that the United States held the upper hand in nuclear superiority.
Neither they, nor Kennedy, were anxious to start a war with the Soviet Union and would have more than likely accepted some sort of compromise with the U.S.S.R. had the ""line in the sand"" not already been drawn.
During an ExComm meeting on 16 October 1962, Kennedy stated that with hindsight he should have implied to the Soviets a month earlier that the United States did not care about Soviet missiles on Cuba, but once the statement was made there was no turning back.
According to historian Tom Morganthau, both sides knew that the United States was far superior to the Soviets in all aspects of nuclear ability, and therefore Khrushchev's gambit was strictly strategic.
Newsweek , 36. 36 deep within her borders, and a policy that could turn the tables on the U.S. was very attractive.
This interpretation, no doubt fueled by the fear of the red tide sweeping across the planet, not only won support of the American public at large, but was the premise by which the Kennedy administration developed their strategy to combat the Soviet missile deployment.
During the five oral history conferences, this interpretation has come under fire.
It is clear from Castro's comments that placing missiles in Cuba was meant to secure Cuba from the United States threat, with a subsequent, and lesser, purpose of equalizing global nuclear advantage the United States may have achieved over the preceding decade.
While Cuba was a geographically important location, the Soviets were also guided by a sense of solidarity toward their newfound political brethren.
It is important to understand that although the crisis is most often viewed as an East-West confrontation, it did involve Cuba and Cuban views toward perceived United States aggression did impact on Soviet decision making.
During the Havana conference, Fidel Castro gave his audience an explanation of exactly how the idea of a Soviet nuclear deployment came about.
As Castro stated in May 1962, a Soviet diplomat, Sharaf Rashidov, came to meet with Castro in Havana.
The topic of Cuban protection surfaced and Castro was asked directly by Rashidov what could be done to help Cuba.
For this question, Castro, with Russian corroboration, set the record straight.
During the Havana Conference of 1992, he elaborated at great length about a series of discussions he had with a Soviet delegation headed by Mr Rashidov during the Spring of 1962.
These discussions are what led to the Soviets asking Cuba for approval to send the nuclear warheads.
Castro, after all, understood that a mere Soviet presence would cause the United States to think twice before making a decision to invade.
Additional corroboration in favor of the Soviet defensive strategy in Cuba came from another very prominent Soviet official, Oleg Troyanovsky who, during the crisis, was a junior advisor to Khrushchev for foreign matters.
As was the case with many other conference participants from all three contingents, Mr Troyanovsky called into question the accuracy of the United States' assertion that the missiles were a clever Soviet ploy to begin the dominoes toppling in Latin America and the Caribbean.
He maintained that the reason behind the missile deployment was first and foremost defense.
At the conference, Mr Troyanovsky stated that his government had numerous reasons to believe that Cuba was ripe for a second United States backed invasion, and that it was for this reason that the actual nuclear option was first formulated.
Though it seems likely he did not intend to risk Soviet security for the defense of Cuba, Khrushchev was willing to gamble that his actions would suppress U.S. aggression toward Cuba.
At the same time, the obvious benefit of having a nuclear outpost at the doorstep of the enemy did not escape Khrushchev.
ExComm Split President Kennedy and his ExComm, while assuming once again that the missiles were offensive in nature, down-played the danger of the weapons themselves.
He concentrated his policy regarding Cuba on the belief that the maintenance of credibility within the OAS depended on a strong United States response to the missiles.
Kennedy's real concern was that following the Bay of Pigs, his perceived ability to project United States power and stability in the region had been reduced.
Had Kennedy pushed the OAS into believing the Soviet intent was anything other than aggression, he would not have been as successful in garnishing the eventual support he received.
Kennedy continually referred to OAS representation in the resolution of the crisis and at one point he had his special counsel, Theodore Sorenson, draft a list of potential courses of action in handling the crisis, stipulating in all that certain Latin nations would be notified in the event of any military solution to the crisis.
Many on Kennedy's staff did not see the missiles as altering the balance of power.
This led to a split within the ExComm based on how strongly they perceived the need to counter any Soviet aggression in Cuba.
The split created two groups commonly referred to as the ""hawks"" who were in the minority and supported aggressive military action to counter the Soviets, and the ""doves"" who wanted a more guarded opposition based on their belief that Soviet missiles in Cuba would not greatly alter the United States' nuclear superiority.
A third group dubbed the ""owls"" developed out of the aforementioned groups.
It was this group that would eventually capture the attention of the president.
The owls believed, as did the hawks, that the United States definitely held the upper hand in the nuclear arena.
Similar to the doves, they thought that the risk of stumbling into nuclear war was a risk that had to be avoided at all cost.
Robert McNamara reflected the position of this group when he stated, ""The 71 Chang and Kornbluh, Cuban, 114.
While the owls were adamant in their concern over escalation, they were at the same time staunch in their support for increasing the pressure gradually on the Soviet Union, thus allowing them an opportunity to gracefully back out of the situation without losing too much credibility.
Of the three groups, the hawks were certainly the most significant in terms of using nationalistic fervor to increase conflict potential.
While the doves contended that some forty nuclear missiles in Cuba could not possibly alter the balance of power, the hawks rebutted by stating that the location of these medium range missiles was extremely important to national security.
According to the hawks, the Soviets could only expect to destroy a tiny fraction of United States strategic forces via long range missiles located on Soviet soil prior to the crisis, but once the forty missiles were in place on Cuba, they could expect to damage or destroy as much as forty percent of the Strategic Air Command bomber force.
The hawks did not believe there was any risk of the Soviets retaliating.
In fact, to the hawks it was just a question of how long it would take for the enemy to capitulate.
You have written in your retrospective in The Washington Post on October 5, '82, as I remember the 20th year that you don't recall any concern about the strategic balance, or any fear of nuclear exchange in this whole period.
The Soviets don't accept our demand; there follows an airstrike; the Soviets then feel impelled to strike the missiles in Turkey; the Turks call on NATO for support; we feel we have to do something in Europe; the Soviets then launch a nuclear exchange something like that was in some of their minds.
A major importance of the missiles, actually the nuclear warheads for the missiles, was the possibility they presented for further Soviet influence through power projection within the Latin American region.
Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon wrote in a memorandum for President Kennedy that he saw the missiles as a deliberate public trial for the United States on how they intended to act in future world matters.
He went on to write that unless the United States stood its ground and resisted an incursion by the Soviet Union, all of Latin America would soon fall to communism because the will to resist the communist propaganda would deteriorate.
Further emphasizing this idea, a Central Intelligence Agency document outlining the major consequences of certain United States courses of action on Cuba further demonstrated the general belief that Soviet aggression was an assumption the United States had to accept in dealing with the missile situation.
In this document, written on 20 October 1962, the CIA incorrectly warned that the Soviets were aware that the world balance of forces had shifted so far in their favor that there was no stopping their movement into the U.S.'s region of influence.
It went on to state that if they were not stopped immediately, the Soviet intrusion into Latin America 76 Chang and Kornbluh, Cuban, 114.
In yet another example of how the Kennedy administration disregarded the possibility of the Soviets helping defend Cuba, the ExComm looked toward the East to bolster their ideas.
While struggling to correctly identify Soviet intent ExComm explanations ranged from the Soviet desire to counter United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, to the Soviets using Cuba as a bargaining tool to gain full control over Berlin, to an assertion that the missiles were an attempt to solidify Soviet leadership in the emerging rivalry with China.
Early ExComm deliberations over Soviet intent touched upon numerous possibilities without ever advancing the defense option.
An example of this is seen in the transcript of the first ExComm meeting on 16 October 1962.
In one section of the transcript, the question of Soviet intent is bounced back and forth by ExComm members without anyone ever raising the possibility of real Cuban concern over U.S. invasion.
The New Republic, , 17. 46 wonder whether maybe Mr Khrushchev is entirely rational about Berlin.
But, uh, they may be thinking that they can either bargain Berlin or Cuba against each other, or that they could provoke us into a kind of action in Cuba which would give an umbrella for them to take action with respect to Berlin.
In essence, by factoring out this notion, the United States chose to go to battle only half-armed.
Unlike Secretary Dean Rusk's post-crisis statement that, ""the other fellow just blinked,""81 the conflict was never as simple as bullying the foe into submission.
Following the Havana conference, the debate over nuclear launch authority continues.
Much of the testimony from Soviet officers backs the contention that local commanders did not have permission from Moscow to use nuclear weapons at their discretion.
Instead, Moscow chose to decide when and where the missiles would be used.
This is much more in line with a very centralized control structure, which the Soviets are known to have used before.
While there continues to be debate on whether using nuclear weapons were an option for Soviet commanders on Cuba, the fact remains that Moscow was firm in its desire to defend and protect its forces on Cuba.
If the Soviets were willing to escalate the crisis to a military confrontation based on this contingency, it is reasonable to assume that escalation could have occurred had the U.S. provoked the Soviets.
There are numerous tell-tale signs that telegraph an invasion by an opposing force.
Pre-invasionary plans normally call for surgical airstrikes to cut and disorganize the enemy's lines of communication, logistical support, and defenses.
With that in mind, the Soviets would have undoubtedly viewed airstrikes against their forces as provocative.
As Castro saw the situation, the U-2 overflights as well as the low-level reconnaissance aircraft were a prelude to an impending United States attack.
The essence of initial United States planning for the missile crisis encompassed military action.
Even before the ExComm found itself split into groups labeled hawks, owls, and doves, the initial consensus was that a military attack, namely tactical airstrikes, was necessary to end the conflict.
President Kennedy's initial reaction, which was shared by the majority within the ExComm, was to attempt some sort of air attack on the newly constructed missile sights.
The only question during the earliest hours of the conflict seemed to be the timing of the airstrikes.
At least we're going to do that, so it seems to me we don't have to wait very long.
In a recently de-classified document submitted to the president by General Maxwell Taylor, the details of several military actions were written and planned several days into the crisis.
The three OPLANs, 312, 314, and 316, all concerned some degree of bombing.
The final OPLAN option, 316, was an abbreviated or quick-reaction variant of OPLAN 314.
It called for five days of continuos bombing followed by an invasion and removal of Castro.
Interestingly enough, the idea of a quarantine or blockade was proposed by General Taylor simply as a sub-mission to aid in one of the invasion plans.
History Today, 50 As early as 17 October 1962, Kennedy requested written recommendations by his key ExComm members asking for their approval or disapproval for the airstrike option.
Not asking the members to consider any of the other four options at that point shows that his inclination at the time was to favor airstrike as a front-running course of action.
The only reason Kennedy did not immediately approve the airstrike option was because of the United States Air Forces' insistence that any airstrike would have to be massive rather than ""surgical"", and that at best such a massive airstrike could only be sure of eliminating approximately ninety percent of the missile locations.
Had the prognosis for success been closer to one hundred percent, and had the Air Force not insisted that ""surgical"" airstrikes would have to give way to ""massive"" ones to raise the odds, the president would have probably opted for the non-invasionary, airstrike option.
With the Soviets determined to defend against airstrikes, it seems plausible that had the United States acted upon their first instinct to neutralize the missile sights, based upon the notion that Soviet intent was not linked to Cuba's defense, and had the Soviets reacted by doing everything within their power to combat the attacks as their contingency , 7.
Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years , 398. 51 instructions spelled-out, escalation would have almost certainly occurred.
Had circumstances been slightly different, or had the Kennedy administration not chosen to reevaluate a first-strike policy, the events of October 1962 could have ended much differently.
The United States must assume blame for leading the world to the brink of nuclear confrontation.
The United States had not predicted the missile deployment in advance and were scrambling to gain information as soon as it was discovered.
The difficulty in getting the information was that the deployment was not at all a typical operation for the Soviets.
The Soviets planned their deployment operation to be covert, but were not at all concerned over the possibility of United States detection.
They were sending the missiles to Cuba for defense purposes and were prepared to defend their actions if discovered.
The reason for any secrecy at all can be best understood when into account the high state of Cold War tension at the time.
The political situation was so volatile that the normal time lapse in a standard military operation between intelligence gathering, data recovery, analysis, operational planning, and military action was condensed into some thirteen days, between 16 October and 28 October 1962.
The United States attempted to retrieve as much intelligence information as possible 94 Schecter, Glasnost, 172. 53 through aerial reconnaissance to further clarify the picture.
U2 sorties were flown almost non-stop, and low level reconnaissance missions continually buzzed the island at an altitude of under two hundred feet.
Castro himself addressed the provocative nature of the United States overflights when he stated that the almost constant U2 overflights and the ever increasing low-level flights convinced all in Cuba that the United States invasion was beginning.
It is clear that the United States was forced to rely on these flights to further develop their understanding of the situation.
It is interesting to note that although the United States had no personnel directly involved in spying at the time of the crisis who could provide useful information with regard to Cuba,96 depriving them of ""hard"" intelligence, the U2 photographic imaging was so clear it was as if the United States had a photographer on Cuban soil.
At times, depending on the weather, the photo analyzers could clearly see minute details such as palm leaves on trees, or guards smoking cigarettes while on duty.
The interesting point to make about relying on photographs as the primary means of intelligence interpretation is that while they are helpful, there is the problem of corroborating the data, which in turn means that the photos oftentimes did not tell the whole story.
Charles Scribner's Sons, 1992. 54 on Cuba, Arthur Lundahl, the Director of the National Photographic Interpretation Center, was able to convince the President that one of the missile sites located in west central Cuba on the southern edge of Sierra del Rosario did not have any fencing surrounding it.
This led the Kennedy staff to conclude that there were no nuclear warheads at that location, because had there been it would have obviously have had better security.
As was later revealed, many of these sights were guarded by Soviet soldiers equipped with mobile launchers capable of nuclear strike.
Though these numbers are at times disputed by scholars, such as by Raymond Garthoff who over-estimates the number of launchers identified by the U.S.,"" the point remains that the majority of equipment was correctly identified.
The main flaw in the data regarding nuclear capable launchers was that there was never any mention of mobile launchers.
As stated previously, the assumption, based on photos showing no fencing around several launch sites, that the Soviet nuclear missiles were not yet at those sights was incorrect.
As General Gribkov, a key military planner during the crisis, stated at the Havana Conference, along with the thirty-six already confirmed IRBM nuclear launchers on Cuban soil, there were six mobile missile launchers potentially equipped with nine nuclear warheads.
The lack of precise information did not cause earth shattering diplomatic consequences since once the United States assumed there was already one nuclear missile on Cuba, any increase to that number became nothing more than a tactical consideration.
This was a critical mistake which helped to mislead the United States into thinking that Soviet aggression was the purpose for the considerable force build-up on Cuba.
While concentrating on the missiles, intelligence analysts missed the fact that there was a combined arms force massing on Cuban soil.
It was assumed early on that the Soviet soldiers on Cuba were meant to protect and operate the launchers.
The CIA estimated that the entire Soviet contingent on Cuba throughout the crisis was somewhere in the area of 20,000.
Had the intelligence estimate revealed that the force, now known to have totalled around 42,000,102 contained more of a conventional combat composition, the administration's view on Soviet intent may have been altered.
Air and Antiaircraft * The 10th and 11th antiaircraft divisions, both subdivided into three surface-to-air missile regiments of four launch complexes each.
In addition to the 72 missile launchers in each division, the 10th was augmented by a 40-plane regiment of MiG-21 fighter-interceptors.
Although there were missile detachment assigned to the infantry regiments, the Luna launchers are both nuclear and conventional capable which again raises the question of air defense versus ground defense intent.
Air defense batteries are made up primarily of antiaircraft guns and surface-to-air missile launchers while motorized rifle regiments, which are made up of an extremely maneuverable force mix, promote offensive or defensive combat operations.
While it could be argued that an infantry regiment could, within its mission essential task list, be prepared to defend a missile launch site, this seems highly unlikely in the Cuban situation.
Why, after all, draw attention to a secret operation by inundating the entire area with a force of some 42,000 soldiers.
This sort of deployment falls much more within the parameters of a ""show of force"" than a covert air defense mission.
The real reason for the four regiments deployed to Cuba, according to Soviet officials and corroborated by the Cubans, was for defense from invasion.
It is true that the infantry regiments also defended the missile locations, but this is common practice within combined arms forces.
In other words, each unit had a dual role, the missile units were in Cuba to defend United States aggression while at the same time providing a safeguard for the infantry troops; the infantry troops were on Cuba to help defend against the United States while at the same time providing protection to the missile units.
This notion is backed-up by new evidence that some twenty launchers with eighty conventionally armed cruise missiles were attached to the ground forces, yet undetected by the U.S..106 There is no way such a mass conventional stockpile of surface-to-surface missiles would be used to defend missile sights.
There is the possibility that Kennedy chose not to make the distinction between conventional maneuver forces and nuclear missile/anti-air forces in order to ensure popular support.
As Raymond Garthoff correctly states, it would have been much more difficult to argue that conventional forces, in this case defensive, would pose a threat to United States and hemispheric security.7 There is no question that Kennedy chose to ignore the possibility of the defensive nature of the forces, and that the Soviets understood Kennedy's intentions regarding Cuba.
Several documents have been recently uncovered that show Kennedy was at the very least exposed to the possibility of a Soviet defensive strategy brought on by the U.S.S.R. build-up on Cuba.
Rostow quite clearly spells this out to the president by stating, ""On the basis of existing intelligence the Soviet military deliveries to Cuba do not constitute a substantial threat to United States security.
Also, by tying the conventional forces to the nuclear weapons, Kennedy was able to avoid having to confront domestic opposition, which also helped strengthen his international reputation.
Interestingly enough, this is the one area that the Kennedy administration was sure it had identified in enough detail to pursue the conflict to its conclusion.
The answer to this question is that there never was any ""hard"" intelligence data to back the idea that the U.S.S.R. had done anything more than to erect several potential missile launch sites.
As early as 20 October 1962, the ExComm decided to ""assume"" there were nuclear warheads at the storage bunkers located by reconnaissance flights the day before.
Kennedy too adopted this assumption when briefing other domestic and international leaders despite any conclusive evidence to back the claim.
Immediately following the first aerial missions over Cuba, French President Charles de Gaulle was notified of the Soviet missile deployment.
Due to the numbers of known conventional missiles, they were of relatively little threat to the United States or any other country in the Americas.
This known, Kennedy was forced to use the nuclear warheads as a means to rally public support.
As stated previously with the conventional forces on Cuba argument, any loss of focus concerning the ""evil"" intent of the U.S.S.R. to eventually surround the free world with her military might would have been fatal to JFK's attempts to make this crisis a moral fight.
The CIA carefully monitored the dismantling operation following the conclusion of the crisis, yet no evidence surfaced to support earlier claims that the Soviets already had a number of offensive, tactical nuclear warheads on-site.
Morganthau, Brink, 36. 64 this information been disclosed, or at the very least a public statement been issued stating that the presence of the warheads was only ""suspected"" on Cuba, Kennedy's anti-Soviet rhetoric would have most assuredly been less tolerated internationally, and probably domestically too.
Richard Lebow makes an interesting point when he stated that the warheads were more than likely located somewhere between the U.S.S.R. and Cuba at the time of Kennedy's quarantine order.
Lebow argued that the Soviet transport ship Poltava could not have made the needed trips to transport the entire quantity of both missiles and warheads in the number of times that the ship traveled to Cuba.4 One explanation that follows from this analysis is that Khrushchev merely meant to plant a seed in the minds of the Americans about the nuclear weapons, and that he either did not intend to send real warheads at all, or the very least was going to delay their arrival until he was able to make the United States show their cards before the world.
First of all, I never had any positive information that they were on the island.
Then, knowing the psychology of N Khrushchev, I think it hardly likely that he would immediately throw all his cards on the table.
Anatoli Gribkov explained that the Poltava and her sister ship the Omsk was used to transport thirty-six medium range R-12 missiles prior to mid-September.
Then the Poltava made a return trip and, by mid-October, returned to Cuba with twenty-four intermediate-range R-14s.
While these trips led many analysts to conclude that she was the nuclear transport ship, largely due to her size and appearance (missile and warhead transport cones on deck), and that the warheads were in-place by October.
Also, the theory proposed by Lebow and Burlatsky falls short by assuming that the United States had collaborative sources on Cuba, or even in the Soviet Union, that could give any detailed information about the warheads at the time of the crisis.
In fact, the only known U.S. spy who was in a position to alert the United States of the nuclear threat was a Soviet officer by the name of Colonel Penkovsky.
Penkovsky inadvertently sent the second code but it was luckily ignored by the CIA.117 This example is evidence that the CIA was at a loss for good information regarding the warhead question, and that the information they did receive was thought to be suspect at best.
As it turns out, the missiles were on Cuba by October, but the Indigirka and Alexandrovsk and not the Poltava or Omsk were responsible for their arrival.
Once again, it is not as important that the missiles were or were not present on Cuba by October as it is that the United States could not accurately determine this.
In essence, the ExComm made their recommendations to the president based on flawed information and outright guessing.
Had the world known that missile sights, sans warheads, were the only things known on Cuba by 16 October, it is highly unlikely such an outcry of international denunciation as well as support for Kennedy would have occurred.
In fact, as the crisis progressed, anti-Americanism began to develop, especially in Latin America.
There are reports that antiUnited States demonstrations have broke 1,7 Nye, Cuban, 18. 67 out in several Latin American capitals, including Buenos Aire, Caracas, and La Paz.
There would no doubt have been increasing demonstrations and denunciations without Kennedy's assumption of Soviet warheads on Cuba.
Some scholars and officials, like Ray Cline, claim that these issues were unimportant and that, ""While it is exciting to speculate on how brilliantly we escaped the nuclear holocaust, none of the informed officials I talked with at the time thought the chances of war were high.
They ignore signs that tensions escalated due to the numerous miscalculations.
The United States assumed from the beginning of the crisis that the Soviets were using Cuba to further their aims.
During one of the very first Kennedy cabinet meetings convened to discuss the crisis, which was recorded on tape, the idea that the Soviet Union had ulterior motives with regard to Cuba was introduced.
During this meeting, held on 16 October, the Undersecretary of State, George Ball said when discussing Soviet reasons for using Cuba, ""That here is Cuba armed against the United States, or possibly use it to try to trade something in Berlin, saying he'll disarm Cuba if, uh, if we'll, uh, yield some of our interests in Berlin and some arrangement for it.
First Strike Again, though the command and control policy seemed clear-cut to the United States, the oral histories of the five conferences depict a far different situation.
As Khrushchev's memoirs show, he viewed Castro as a man who had no real concept of the power of nuclear weaponry.
Khrushchev said of a letter received from Castro, commonly referred to as the ""First Strike Letter"", ""Castro suggested that in order to prevent nuclear missiles from being destroyed, we should launch a preemptive strike against the United States.
In other words, we needed immediately deliver a nuclear missile strike against the United States.
While it is impossible to know what Castro really wanted to do with the nuclear warheads, Castro's proposal shook the Soviet leader severely, and led to Khrushchev's reversal of trust in Castro.
The exact text of Castro's letter, received by Khrushchev on the evening of 26 October 1962, read, ""If... the imperialists invade Cuba with the goal of occupying it, the danger that that aggressive policy poses for humanity is so great that following that event, the Soviet Union must never allow the circumstances in which the imperialists could launch the first strike against it.
That Castro reacted this way to the escalating crisis proved several things to the planners in Moscow.
The first thing it showed them was that while they were making an attempt to resolve the crisis diplomatically, Castro was conjuring-up more militaristic solutions, based on his emotional leadership style.
This left a lasting impression on the Soviet planners who attended the Havana conference.
The second issue was that Castro was too far from the Kremlin's control.
There was no real safeguard to prevent the Cuban leader from following his own course of action and, unlike the other Soviet peripheries in Eastern and Central Europe, the tremendous distance between the two countries prevented any ""normal"" Soviet control safeguards.
Also, the warheads had no ""locks"" to prevent Castro from seizing the launchers and firing the missiles.9 Castro had a larger military force on Cuba than did the Soviets and, thanks to the military weapons, ammunition, and equipment that the Soviets had provided to Castro previously, Castro's force was also well prepared.
Force Command The selection of General Issa Aleksandrovich Pliyev to command all forces, both Soviet and Cuban, during the crisis raises several perplexing command and control questions.
The most obvious question to those knowledgeable in military planning pertains to Pliyev's qualifications, or lack thereof.
The second interesting point to bring out centers around Pliyev's apparent lack of diplomatic ability, especially when dealing with high-level Cuban officials.
For Castro, there seems to be no question that he understood the command and control structure as dictated by Moscow.
He also claimed that any combined operational decisions would be made by the Soviet Union due to their experience in dealing with global matters.
A strong, experienced, combined arms general would have almost assuredly kept Castro in line, but instead General Pliyev was the choice of Moscow.
Pliyev was selected to lead the combined forces for several reasons that would later be considered questionable.
Most importantly, Pliyev was selected because he was a highly decorated, and well known (even in the West) cavalry officer.
The fact that he was widely recognized as being a conventional, combat-arms officer would, in the eyes of the Soviets, focus attention away from the possibility of nuclear forces being present.0 The problems that arose as a result of Pliyev's appointment were the direct result of his inexperience in this type of military operation as well as his lack of diplomatic skills.
He knew relatively little about ballistic missiles much less air defense and concealment from aerial reconnaissance.
His claim to fame revolved around his cavalry exploits in Mongolia from 1936-1938 and then in Manchuria where he led the last cavalry charge in history that crossed the Gobi Desert and the Greater Khingin Range and attacked the rear of the Japanese Kwantung Army in August 1945.131 These credentials were hardly the leadership skills necessary to lead the most massive, covert military operation of the modern era.
Because the diverse troop configuration on Cuba, Pliyev would have benefited from surrounding himself by senior officers used to combined arms operations.
Instead, Pliyev was assigned a staff comprised of all rocket forces officers who added to the inexperience already confronting Pliyev.2 Pliyev certainly does not seem to be the type of military expert that would be selected to use technical as well as tactical skills to mesh together a combined forces group assigned the enormous task it was eventually given.
General Issa Pliyev lacked another needed skill in dealing with the crisis diplomatic expertise.
In fact, not only did Pliyev lack experience, he more importantly lacked the type of personality necessary in working within diplomatic parameters.
Castro, who was known to Moscow as being somewhat strong-willed and adamant in his nationalistic aims, needed to be held in check and controlled during this diplomatically volatile situation.
As a result of Pliyev's command assignment, the Soviet Union found themselves in a situation that was militarily weak as well as diplomatically fragile.
Mark Kramer sees Gribkov's account as nothing more than a way for an overzealous conference participant to grab some publicity.
Other scholars like James Blight and Robert McNamara were eager to take Gribkov's testimony at face value.
In the book, which appeared in April 1994, Gribkov appears to back-away from his startling Havana statements by writing, ""Hours before receiving the translation of Kennedy's address, however, Khrushchev and his colleagues had also agreed on measures to reduce the risk that conflict over Cuba might lead to general war.
Moscow time that reached us in Havana some thirty minutes before the United States President began his broadcast.
Addressed to Trostnik Comrade Pavlov (code for Soviet headquarters on Cuba), and signed by Defense Minister Rodian Y Malinovsky as Director, the message contained both a call to arms and a prohibition on the use of atomic arms.
If official planners and strategists can misunderstand the orders in a combined arms operation, commanders can also be expected to perceive confusion by these incomplete and ambiguous orders.
Also, if there was this distinction made between tactical and strategic control, who is to say that tactical usage at the local level would not have precipitated a large-scale nuclear escalation.
Spy Plane Incident The best example of confused command and control during the missile crisis can be seen in the shooting down of an American U2 spy plane over Cuban territory on 27 October.
This act was the turning point of the crisis, and it succeeded in showing both super-power leaders that the situation in Cuba had almost reached the point of no return.
It also proved to both sides that the control issue was key in avoiding nuclear confrontation.
Speculation runs the spectrum from it being a purely Soviet initiated action to suggestion that Castro himself pulled the trigger.
The Havana conference shed much light on the subject when it was discovered that once Castro had ordered his own air defense batteries into action, the Soviet commanders too upped their readiness.
Soviet commanders then apparently loosely interpreted self defense orders and decided that United States reconnaissance aircraft were posing a threat to their safety.9 Still, neither the Russians nor the Cubans seem to confirm the details.
Regardless of the truth, from the point of view of Khrushchev, Castro was behind the decision to shoot at the aircraft, further solidifying his distrust of the Cuban leader.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev stated that it was Castro, and not Moscow, that authorized the firing.0 Although this account is now widely disputed by both the Cuban and Soviet camps, the fact that Khrushchev perceived this as being true shows that he understood the C2 question was very volatile and quickly slipping out of his control.
The U2 incident had an unnerving effect on Khrushchev during the waning hours of the conflict.
Had Kennedy better understood the command and control problems on Cuba, he may have elected to change to a different policy.
During an executive committee meeting on 27 October, the staff actually recommended taking out some of the surface-to-air missile sites to protect future United States pilots.2 This policy was preempted by the 28 October resolution to the conflict.
Khrushchev was clearly skeptical about letting this most dangerous situation further escalate.
Castro pointed out that he always understood the command and control question to be very straightforward.
To Castro, his soldiers were to fall under the command of Cuban commanders, and Soviet soldiers under their leadership.
He also claimed that any combined operational decisions would be made by the Soviet Union due to their experience in global matters.
As Castro said in 1992, ""We were very confident in the experience of the Soviet Union.
We had practically just won against the Batista army it was just two years after the end of our war.
The Soviets, on the other hand, had decades of experience in diplomatic, international, and military matters.
It appears that the Soviet leader was willing to do anything, including negotiating an end to the crisis without the participation of Cuba, to quickly bring to a halt the spiralling turn of events which threatened to set a dangerous course toward nuclear war.
Had Kennedy realized Soviet control of the situation was as tenuous as it actually was, he may not have pushed as hard as he did for the humiliating terms of the crisis resolution.
As it turned out, the mis-diagnosis of the C2 situation turned out to work to the U.S.'s favor in light of the fact that Khrushchev was prepared to do anything in his power to prevent being pushed into an all out nuclear confrontation, a no win confrontation, by a non-Russian like Fidel Castro.
The most important question about the crisis, that of how close the world was to all-out nuclear war, continues to be debated.4 Now, however, those studying the crisis have access to much more information than ever before.
This new information, especially from the Russian side, shows that mistakes in information analysis on the part of the Americans during the crisis could have very easily changed the eventual outcome.
During the Havana conference, General Gribkov brought into question the absolute control over the nuclear warheads.
I did not believe that either Khrushchev or Kennedy, looking foursquare at the prospect of nuclear confrontation, would plunge the world into Armageddon.
Though the Soviets clearly provoked a United States response, they are right in contending that there were other alternatives in resolving the dispute that would have lessoned the opportunity for confrontation.
As Nikita Khrushchev said when he later talked of how he wanted to end the conflict, ""Our preference was for talks around a table and for all countries to remove their troops from others' territory.
Historian Raymond Garthoff best sums up the crisis saying, ""The most important lesson of the Cuban missile episode is that many elements of the superpower crises are likely to go beyond the control of parties.
In fact, Khrushchev thought they were more justified because Cuba was much more at risk from a United States invasion than Western Europe was from a U.S.S.R. invasion.
As Khrushchev said on 12 December 1962, ""Cuba needed weapons as a means of containing the aggressors, and not as a means of attack.
Robert McNamara best explains the complexity of superpower crises by stating, ""I don't think the Cuban missile crisis was unique.
No doubt the debate will continue over how close the world really was to total devastation.
Hopefully, the lessons learned, and still being learned, will go a long way in preventing future nuclear hostilities.
His father, a career army officer, was reassigned numerous times throughout the United States and the world.
Following graduation, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the United States Army and assigned to Fort Benning, Georgia.
After attending Ranger training and other service related schools, Mr Errickson's assignments included tours to Washington, Korea, Hawaii, Florida, and California.
After commanding a company and achieving the rank of captain, Jon Errickson was sent to the Defense Language Institute to complete Russian language training.
