In any case it was a United States funded and orchestrated violent overthrow of a democratically elected president in 2014.
If it looks like a war, smells like a war and kills like a war, it’s probably a war and the war in Ukraine started in 2014 even if western mainstream media does not wish to report it to conceal its own ongoing complicity in it.
The armed conflict in Ukraine really began in February 2014 with an American orchestrated coup that between 2014 and 2020 resulted in the killing of more than 13,000 innocent people in the Donbass region of Ukraine by the Ukrainian military supplemented by American funded and trained neo-Nazi forces.
So-called “Peaceful Ukraine,” was anything but peaceful in that region, because the citizenry did not accept the American appointed presidents following the American orchestrated coup overthrowing former President Viktor Yanukovych.
There are two important exceptions to this obligation, the first being the right of individual or collective self-defence under Article 51 and the collective enforcement by the Security Council on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter which deals with threats to the peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression.
The inherent right of self-defence, individually or collectively, with the support of other states, exists so long as the Security Council has not taken measures to “maintain international peace and security,” and thus President Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine is protected by international law.
The only way to stop that armed intervention now is for western nations to place a moratorium on weapons to Ukraine to provide a face-saving reason for Presidents Zelensky and Biden to begin to negotiate with President Putin on a level playing field, and for NATO to back off Russian borders to pre-1991 positions.
Likewise, all sanctions should be dropped against Russia as a Confidence Building Measure to help return friendly relations between nations as stated in the original UN Charter.
This — not incidentally is the second illegal war in which Joseph Biden played a key role in igniting, with the first being the Iraq War.
This case is substantially different because of the threat of nuclear war and potential containment breeches in the 30+ American BSL-3 and BSL-4 laboratories located in Ukraine.
Since 2015 the number of Angels has increased hugely and in the four days before President Putin’s humanitarian intervention, even more.
Not if you didn’t want to accept the United States funded overthrow of the democratically elected president and subsequent United States nominated puppet presidents.
The US/Ukrainian government then silently launched a war against them characterized by indiscriminate bombings.
For the victims and surviving family members of that war, it’s been a long horror filled road since 2014.
Did You, Mr President play a key role in starting the Iraq War?............:ee 45 2.
Given the following information, does your role in the attack on Iraq potentially implicate You, Mr President as a war criminal, or at minimum culpable HAS WA CUUINNCS 8 dead nssazueccusnacetiasatue desta onic taneauietanatuadeupuaue asia heaeedereterianerenes 45 3.
What year did that relationship begin? .............ceesscecsssseeeessteeeeeeenaes 46 7.
Did any United States government funded or affiliated organization including NED and USAID give any form of material or logistic support including money, to the November 2013 “wave of large-scale protests” called “Euromaidan,” by some anda “color revolution” by others, resulting in the overthrow of former President Viktor NANMUKOWY Ch Piz svevs exe zecscedssvessxetescsees atoleacacesces das soeddtatenisacss# vse ones esau ava aat 48 9.
Is interfering in the domestic affairs of a foreign nation a violation of international law as enshrined in the UN Charter? ............ccccssccccesssstececsesteeeeesseeeeees 48 10.
Did conditions of the EU loan former President Viktor Yanukovych refused to accept contain “austerity” measures that would have been extremely unpopular with the people of Ukraine? ...........cccecessssececeeecsssssseaececeeseessesseaeseseeeesseesseaeaeeeeseseeeeees 48 11.
Have You, Mr President, or any of your family members or close friends attempted to undermine Russia’s energy exports in any other Way? ...........c0000e 48 14.
Would completion of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project compete with American fracking oil exports and benefit Russian-EU relations?...........c.cccccccceeee 48 15.
Do, or did You, Mr President or either Hunter or James Biden have business Cealing with JP MOrgan?...........ccccccsesssscececeeecessssseaeeeceeeesseeseaeaeeeeeescesseeeaeseeeesesseeees 49 16.
Se Wills cosas, saec Aicesonceaeacn tsa vas tut auseecanna eto td tec cule aad ucaceian Satan sanetes eigen se 49 18.
Does the United States Department of State have undue influence within the government of Ukraine, while lacing the government N@O-NaZiS?............sssceceeeeees 50 “News” reports about Russians attacking hospitals and SCHOOIS..............ccceesessseeeeeeees 54 20.
Wal 2c ces. il cosetaa gee tasa sls ccuune lions sail ecdtwnea ia earaaieceies det ats staltenwaueaee 55 21.
When You, Mr President were sworn in to become the President of the United States, did you swear an oath to uphold the United States Constitution? ........ceeeeeeeeeeeeees 55 22.
Did You, Mr President ever hear of First Amendment rights?................:006 55 23.
Wal"" savcescazcecesancdoassteecdow tans exniduceceveasteieatacdcupaeents 68 24.
You, Mr President “predicted” President Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine many times, however reports from the OSCE suggest he was provoked into that humanitarian intervention at that time by a rapid escalation of killing of innocents in Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics by Ukrainian forces.
The above report states that those murderous attacks upon the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics were called false flag incidents by United States and British officials, and that such claims were not credible.
Was that claim another lie to cover Ukrainian intentional provocation designed to intentionally lure Russia into the humanitarian intervention it finally PUPSUEA?.............ccccccccceceesssseceeeceeecessessaeeeeeeeens 74 Deadly pathogens, biological WeapONns ANd laW...........:cccccccccecsssessnsececeeeeeesssessaeseeeeeens 74 27.
United States WMD in Ukraine ............ccccceeseeeseeeeees 84 Robert Pope’s Admission of United States violation of BWC in Ukraine... cccssssssteceeeeeees 84 28.
Did it ever occur to You, Mr President that provoking a war in a nation with 30+ United States biological “research” labs could lead to release of biological pathogens that could lead to a pandemic far worse than COVID-19?............ccessecessssteeeesssteeeeesseeeeees 90 30.
Are there ever or often leaks from those BSL-3 & 4 labs? ..... eee eeeecceeseeeeees 90 Ms.
Wintrol’s published confession quoted above makes two of the top three United States officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be WeaPONIZed. ..........cccccccccceessesssteceeeceescesssssaeeeeeeeens 91 31.
Credibility issues regarding Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaDpdns cic s-ctcacettirccszeveceradascits sotrvcinatihaa tesaectxaduweteasbncrixa ten quik cos teieannes 98 33.
Davies, Global Research, February 28, 2022 / President Biden has called the Russian invasion “unprovoked,” but that is far from the truth.
In the four days leading up to the invasion, ceasefire monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe documented a dangerous increase in ceasefire violations in Eastern Ukraine, with 5,667 violations and 4,093 explosions.
A biological research facility with Anthrax, plague, cholera, and other highly contagious pathogens is a clear and present danger to all around, and those pathogens could be used as weapons, say for example in a false flag operation, or accidentally leak out in a containment breech.
An explanation must be offered for what was really going on in Ukrainian laboratories working with highly dangerous pathogens.
Prelude to Alt-news review of the Ukraine War and Questions for President Biden Like most people in the civilized world, | was shocked when President Putin ordered his army into Ukraine February 24, 2022.
President Biden had predicted he would, President Putin had said he would not, and consequently like most people | was very surprised and disappointed when President Putin did in fact order an invasion of Ukraine.
That’s when | decided to study the situation a lot more closely than | previously had to figure out what was really going on there. | knew checking regular American mainstream media news like CNN, NYT and so on would not offer any real explanations for President Putin’s motivation to launch that invasion.
Very quickly | realized there is a lot about the roots of the conflict in Ukraine, American mainstream news conveniently “forgot” to mention.
Likewise a great deal of relevant detail about President Putin’s motivation to launch that invasion.
Then | learned how the United States had funded and organized the overthrow of the legitimately and democratically elected president of Ukraine in 2014, and imposed a United States selected “president,” and | started to change my mind about President Putin.
When | saw videos of the devastation Kiev had caused in Donbass region of Ukraine starting in 2014, and a monument to the child victims of Kiev’s eight-year war (that could arguably be called a genocide according to the legal definition of that term) against that region for the ‘crime’ of not accepting an American imposed puppet president, | came to realize MSM was not communicating a half, quarter or even 1% of the real story.
MSM “news” was and is instead only acting as a mouthpiece for United States government expansionism, and the United States had intentionally provoked President with a massive eight year killing spree in Donbass that hugely accelerated in the days leading up to President Putin’s intervention.
In the simplest possible terms, it wasn’t President Putin that was crazy, it was and is the CIA and the presidents they control, with President Biden at the top of the list, as there is extensive evidence, he and his son Hunter Biden were up to their eyeballs in corrupt business in Ukraine as well, including a huge expansion of biological “research” labs.
In other words, American mainstream news not only doesn’t report most of the facts, but also tells a large number lies, again, and again, and again.
That is chronology of how this book came to be written, and the meaning of the title of this book.
My full-time occupation is | edit mostly medical research articles for doctors and medical professors in some of the Asia’s top hospitals and medical universities.
But, | do more than edit. | also check their references, organization, the quality of their summaries of other research, the kinds of statistics they use, and analyze how well they integrate their results within the larger body of medical research relating to their topic of study.
In other words, | edit and assess the quality of research studies and how well they interpret the data.
One conclusion | came to very quickly is that MSM is not relaying most of the relevant details leading to President Putin’s decision to launch an invasion of Ukraine to news consumers in western nations and the world, and, alt-news has been, and continues to do vastly more authentic investigative journalism in regards to the causes of this war and probable outcomes.
Number 1 above alone shreds the entire UN Charter and all international laws.
Number 1 above is the foundation reason WWIII may start in the near future.
Students of United States history will recognize Number 1 above as a natural extension of the American principle of “Manifest Destiny,” which is believed to be, by true American zealots, a divinely ordained right of the United States to rule other nations.
That deluded belief is solid evidence of psychopathology on the part of American leadership going back to 1845.
Mark Twain and Henry David Thoreau didn’t like it, neither does this writer and obviously neither did or do the surviving victims of American foreign aggression in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Latin America, most African nations, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Ukraine.
The flow chart above does not mention a lot too, for example United States biological research labs in Ukraine which were hugely expanded by President Biden’s son Hunter Biden and that some of those labs do contain bioweapons as admitted by Robert Pope, the director of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program in Ukraine reported February 25, 2022.
Since then, various United States officials have stated they are now destroying those pathogens, in, one can presume an effort to hide the evidence.
All wars are crimes in this writer’s opinion, and in the case of the Ukraine War, the CIA that ultimately guides United States foreign policies and politicians that profit from war in the United States government are the perpetrators of the crimes against humanity leading to this very rapidly escalating crisis in Ukraine.
As mentioned above | approached this quagmire as | would any medical pathology, and war is, in my opinion a pathological twist in human nature, as | consider human nature to be basically good.
While researching this article , | developed a large amount of respect for President Putin as he has proven himself courageous enough to put his country’s future and his own life on the line to save and protect innocents in his neighboring state of Donbass, with the added perk of helping defend his own nation from attack by the United States funded Ukraine military that is loaded with United States weapons and United States trained and funded neo-Nazis, in addition to dual-use biological pathogens.
The psychological pathologies here in my opinion stem from Wall Street’s large corporations’ leadership, CIA headquarters in Langly Virginia, Washington DC where politicians serve primarily corporate and CIA interests, not American voters or tax payers’ interests, for ultimately it is corporate and CIA leaders that decide who the faces of American leadership shall be and Mainstream Media so-called news that sells all these wars to the tax paying voting public that only years later finds out all those wars were all based on lies and deceptions.
At the time of this writing Finland and Sweden which have been neutral countries, are deciding if they too want to throw their country’s future in with the United States as well.
That might be problematic as there is little doubt all those who align with the United States will justifiably become targets for Russia’s thermonuclear arsenal, and the United States certainly appears willing to start a thermonuclear war in order to hang on to its Narcissistic fantasy of being the sole global superpower for the rest of time.
The United States of course isn’t the first nation to think they can conquer the entire world, and all former nations that have attempted such sick endeavors failed in horrifically spectacular and bloody ways.
Possibly unbeknownst to most readers Russia’s leadership from the beginning of the last Cold War knew perfectly well this day would come, and have no doubt built underground cities to survive a thermonuclear war.
It is highly unlikely the United States or Western Europe is in any way prepared for the apocalypse they are about to bring down upon themselves.
Tragically, given the mass and momentum of the United States push for launching WWIII to assert its “hegemony in perpetuity” by initiating and relentlessly escalating a war with Russia, it does not appear there is any way to prevent it.
Likewise, | don’t especially like reading and researching medical pathologies.
On the other hand, | have always enjoyed investigative work and knowing my work can possibly help protect life and prevent some really bad things from happening to mostly good people does keep me motivated.
There still is time to back off this madness now, before it’s too late but time is running out very, very quickly.
The “Situation” in Ukraine The situation in the current phase of the military conflict in Ukraine as portrayed by the majority of western mainstream media “news” appears quite simple.
That is the line relentlessly sold on MSM versions of news 24/7 around the world.
A closer examination of the facts leading to this current escalated state of armed conflict in Ukraine reveals an altogether different set circumstance involving a degree of United States duplicitous treachery most people with a moral mind would find nearly impossible to believe unless they’ve studied the exceedingly long and bloody histories of American domestic and foreign aggression.
America’s Deadliest Export: Democracy, and Killing Hope: United States Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II, reveal an altogether different face of American foreign policy based on Machiavellian style friendships wherein “help” is offered only to be betrayed in astonishingly deadly and selfserving ways.
This time the United States moved in as a friend to Ukraine, and then worked very hard to pick a fight between Ukraine and Russia launched by a coup against Ukraine’s former president Viktor Yanukovych.
Adding insult to injury those “guests” then go about murdering your brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews, sons and daughters that object to the activities of this ultimately horrid guest.
And thus, to describe the role of the United States in the current escalated military violence in Ukraine as “duplicitous treachery” is not an overstatement at all, but rather the shortest, simplest and most accurate description possible.
And thus, the United States has a great deal of experience at setting up these bloody and destructive “color revolutions,” which in all cases are profitable only to EuroAmerican “defense” industries with the added perk that the United States then determines who will be the next leaders of those countries.
Goodbye dad, welcome American puppet president, and increased “austerity” — which means poverty, degradation and brutal suppression of any dissent.
So, while dad is off in another country nursing his broken heart and wounds, the American puppet president is then free to play “foot-loose and fancy free” with the local citizenry, while murdering off any and all who object to this sickening scenario.
In the case of Ukraine, those objecting were and still are scattered around the country, but primarily concentrated in the Donbass region, Donetsk and Luhansk where this current escalated phase of the violent military conflict really began back in 2014.
Russia attacked “peaceful Ukraine” is as far from the truth as “far from the truth” can possibly be because thirteen thousand men, women and children is a lot of people to kill.
Many are the children in Donbass, Donetsk and Luhansk towns especially who grew up entirely living in underground bomb shelters because nobody knew when or where the next missiles and bombs would hit.
They were the “lucky” ones as they survived though many or most are refugees now.
Also, during those eight horrifically long and bloody years — at least for those who didn’t appreciate having American puppet presidents who were up to their eyeballs in corruption and abuse of power — the United States went about vastly expanding its biological “research” centers in Ukraine, some of which contained some of the world’s deadliest pathogens including Anthrax and plague.
It might seem an odd thing for United States biological “research” centers to be located in a place like Ukraine , but much of that work is so dangerous due to the possibility of leaks the United States didn’t want it done at home but rather some far away, “ally” country.
In the case of Ukraine, greatly expanding that biological research had the added perk of really annoying, even terrifying the Russians who really didn’t want large quantities of the world’s deadliest pathogens right across its border in Ukraine especially given they can pass through any border undetected making them as or more dangerous as a nuclear bomb, or many nuclear bombs.
Interestingly “Undersecretary of State Victoria Nuland confirmed this “discredited story” that there are “biological research facilities” in Ukraine and the United States “is concerned” Russian forces might seize them.
Nuland wasn’t the only United States official to admit the United States had, and probably still has deadly, highly infectious pathogens that could be used as biological weapons.
The Bulletin’s Board of Sponsors was established in December 1948 by Albert Einstein, with J Robert Oppenheimer as its first chair.
The Russian military claims to have identified 30 such facilities, and that does seem like rather a lot one must admit.
However, it wouldn’t be surprising given Hunter Biden did help secure millions of dollars in funding for United States contractors in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research, his laptop emails revealed, raising more questions about the disgraced son of then vice president Biden.
Also interesting is that it was the United States and United States alone that stonewalled inspection requirements for the Biological Weapons Convention.
Clearly, Victoria Nuland, United States President Barack Obama’s central agent overseeing the coup, at least during the month of February 2014 when it climaxed, was crucial not only in overthrowing the existing Ukrainian Government, but in selecting and installing its rabidly anti-Russian replacement.
The 27 January 2014 phoneconversation between her and America’s Ambassador in Ukraine, Jeffrey Pyatt was a particularly seminal event, and it was uploaded to YouTube on 4 February 2014. | have discussed elsewhere that call and its significance.
Nuland there and then abandoned the EU’s hope for a still democratic but less corrupt future government for Ukraine, and Nuland famously said, on that call “Fuck the EU,” and she instructed Pyatt to choose instead the rabidly anti-Russian, and far-right, Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
Both Ashton and Paet were shocked at this finding, but they proceeded immediately to ignore that matter, and to discuss only the prospects for Europe’s investors in Ukraine, to be able to get their money back — their obsession was Ukraine’s corruption.
So, though the EU was unhappy that this had been a coup, they were far more concerned to protect their investors.
That’s when Eric Schmidt of Google, and Jared Cohen, also now of Google but still continuing though unofficially as United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s chief person tasked to plan ‘popular movements’ to overthrow both Yanukovych in Ukraine, and Assad in Syria.
Bubenchik claims that the Yanukovich regime started the fire in the Trade Union House — where his and many other EuroMaidan fighters lived during the revolt — prompting the Maidan’s next reaction.
But shortly before the coup, the CIA secretly trained in Poland the Right Sector founder/leader Dmitriy Yarosh , who headed Ukraine’s snipers.
Two Georgian snipers say Saakashvili hired them in Tbilisi for a U.S.backed operation.
They each got $1000 for the operation and flew to Kiev on 15 January and were promised $5000 on return.
Brian Christopher Boyenger” a former “sniper for the 101st Airborne Division” who “after Maidan he went to Donbass” to fight in the “Georgian Legion” but during the coupclimax, the far-right Andriy “Parubiy came very often,” and “Brian always accompanied him” and also instructing there was Vladimir Parasyuk, one of the leaders of the Maidan.
The snipers were told not to aim but just to kill people randomly, to create chaos.
Some went down from the Ukraine Hotel to the second floor of the Conservatory Building, balcony.
Gordon Hahn hasn’t been able to verify any firing in February 2014 by the Yanukovych government.
Even UK propaganda now commonly acknowledges that a more overtly fascist takeover of Ukraine’s Government is what mainly threatens the people of Ukraine.
The anti-Russia nazis took over America’s Government, which has taken over Ukraine’s.
These are certainly “tryin’ times,” as noted by bluesy R&B singer Roberta Flack.
With that as an introduction to the eight-year American duplicitous treachery involved in the horrifically bloody conflict in Ukraine, the reader is invited to read the rest of this document and appreciate the cleverness, deadliness and ultimate selfishness of United States foreign policy, without being suckered into the grandiose overly simplistic illusions corporate owned mainstream “news” media has created to hoodwink western audiences into paying for and supporting another in a long, long, long line of cruel, unjust and wildly illegal American orchestrated wars.
As a nation it deserves recognition by other states, self-determination and security including safe borders.
The same is true for Russia, and based on its historical uniqueness and current political situation, Donbass as well.
Searching for the titles of the funded projects listed in the last “intact” web capture yields no results.
Additionally, the current database search criteria have been restricted, previously funding from 2014 to present could be searched, currently only 2017 to present is searchable per the drop-down menus.
The questions that follow in this document substantiate those beliefs and also prove motive, intent, methods, and opportunities for President Biden to essentially start another war , this time in Ukraine.
Before European leaders hitch their wagons to the perpetrators of what is already an eight-year war — a series of Crimes Against Humanity against the innocent people of Lugansk and Donetsk perpetuated by Kiev and motivated, aided and abetted primarily by Presidents Obama, Biden and NATO, they are invited to consider the questions for President Biden listed on this document, the referenced evidence supporting the relevance of those questions, and President Biden’s answers, should he have the courage to try to answer any of them.
Whether or not Euro-American authorities, media or publics wish to recognize it, the people of Lugansk and Donetsk were on the losing side of a civil war initiated by Kiev because they strongly objected to an American backed coup against Ukraine’s former President Viktor Yanukovych.
But, alas, this will probably never happen because war is so profitable for the United States and western Europe’s ultra-rich corporate capitalists and the politicians they can so easily afford to put in office.
Given that moratorium will probably not happen until a few million Ukrainians are dead, it might be more expedient if United States and relevant international prosecutors start the process to prosecute the real progenitors of this war, NATO, Former President Obama, President Biden, and other politicians that vote to prolong the war by adding fuel to the fire, specifically encouraging and funding Ukrainians to fight to the bitter end.
Then Senator Biden’s key role in starting the Iraq War Then Senator Biden, chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations played a key role in starting the Iraq War.
The invasion of Iraq was neither in self-defense against armed attack nor sanctioned by UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force by member states and thus constituted the crime of war of aggression, according to the International Commission of Jurists in Geneva.
Yet his role in bringing about that war remains mostly unknown or misunderstood by the public.
When the war was debated and then authorized by the United States Congress in 2002, Democrats controlled the Senate and Biden was chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations.
The vast majority of Americans and people worldwide have no idea whatsoever how much their news is illegally censored by the United States government, and downstream government funded related organizations.
In 78 days, NATO jets conducted 2,300 sorties, dropping 420,000 missiles and bombs, including cluster munitions and depleted uranium rounds.
Hunter Biden’s Ukraine salary was cut two months after Joe Biden left office By Miranda Devine, May 26, 2021 The Ukrainian energy company that was paying President Biden’s son Hunter $1 million a year cut his monthly compensation in half two months after his father ceased to be vice president.
On might consider this concealing or destroying evidence, a form of obstruction of justice.
US-NATO Installed a Neo-Nazi Government in Ukraine by Prof Michel Chossudovsky Global Research, March 23, 2022, First published Global Research 6 March 2014 This article first published by Global Research on March 6, 2014 at the very outset of the Ukraine crisis explains the nature of the Kiev proxy regime.
What is a stake is a US-EU-NATO sponsored coup d’etat in blatant violation of international law.
The forbidden truth is that the West has engineered —-through a carefully staged covert operation— the formation of a proxy regime integrated by Neo-Nazis.
Journalists have been instructed not to use the term “Neo-Nazi” to designate Svoboda and the Right Sector.
Composition of the Coalition Government We are not dealing with a transitional government in which NeoNazi elements integrate the fringe of the coalition, formally led by the Fatherland party.
He is referred to by the Western media as the “kommandant” of the EuroMaidan movement.
Dmytro Bulatov, known for his alleged kidnapping by police, but also with UNA-UNSO connections, was appointed minister of youth and sports.
Neo-Nazis in Control of Armed Forces, National Security, Economy, Justice and Education, Global Research, March 02, 2014 / The Lustration Committee is to organize the Neo-Nazi witch-hunt against all opponents of the new Neo-Nazi regime.
The targets of the lustration campaign are people in positions of authority within the civil service, regional and municipal governments, education, research, etc.
It will in all likelihood be directed against Communists, Russians and members of the Jewish community.
It should be understood, however, that the Neo-Nazis do not ultimately call the shots.
It would call on States to ensure that education systems develop the necessary content to provide accurate accounts of history, as well as promote tolerance and other international human rights principles.
On February 27, European Union president Ursula von der Leyen tweeted that the “state-owned Russia Today and Sputnik, and their subsidiaries, will no longer be able to spread lies to justify Putin’s war” and announced a ban on these outlets.
Multiple tech platforms have complied with the E.U.’s media ban and _ deplatformed, demonetized, or blocked RT and Sputnik from their services.
On Thursday, March 3, CNN Business reported that RT America — the United States cable branch of the Russia-owned news network — is effectively shutting down.
Opening the CIA’s Can of Worms By Edward Curtin, Global Research, February 28, 2021, edwardcurtin.com 15 February 2021 “The CIA and the media are part of the same criminal conspiracy,” wrote Douglas Valentine in his important book, The CIA As Organized Crime.
The corporate mainstream media are stenographers for the national security state’s ongoing psychological operations aimed at the American people, just as they have done the same for an international audience.
It is shocking only to those who don’t do their homework and see what is happening today outside a broad historical context.
It therefore should come as no surprise that those same elite corporate media are now leading the charge for increased censorship and the denial of free speech to those they deem dangerous, whether that involves wars, rigged elections, foreign coups, COVID-19, vaccinations, or the lies of the corporate media themselves.
Having already banned critics from writing in their pages and or talking on their screens, these media giants want to make the quieting of dissenting voices complete.
It is a perfect piece of propaganda posing as reporting, since it accuses Kennedy, a brilliant and honorable man, of falsity and stupidity, thus justifying Instagram’s ban, and it is an inducement to further censorship of Mr Kennedy by Facebook that owns Instagram.
What was once done under the cover of omission is now done openly and brazenly, cheered on by those who, in an act of bad faith, claim to be upholders of the First Amendment and the importance of free debate in a democracy.
Since the digitization of news, their new business models are geared to these separate audiences since they are highly lucrative choices.
Its business driven since electronic media have replaced paper as advertising revenues have shifted and people’s ability to focus on complicated issues has diminished drastically.
Old school journalism is suffering as aresult and thus writers such as Greenwald and Taibbi and Chris Hedges have taken their work to the internet to escape such restrictive categories and the accompanying censorship.
The censorship is not being driven by power hungry reporters at the Times or CNN or any media outlet.
All these media and their employees are but the outer layer of the onion, the means by which messages are sent and people controlled.
If they do not play their part in this twisted and intricate propaganda game, they will suffer.
They will be eliminated, as are pesky individuals who dare peel the onion to its core.
These companies are deeply connected to United States intelligence agencies, as are the NYTimes, CNN, NBC, etc.
They too are part of what was once called Operation Mockingbird, the CIA’s program to control, use, and infiltrate the media.
In addition, Google and other search engines have silenced virtually all facts and opinions contrary to United States government narrative regarding the 2014 American backed coup in Ukraine, and February 2022 acceleration of the Ukraine War.
Meanwhile, the Ukraine War and body count escalates daily, and the United States and EU continues to agitate and advocates sending more and more weapons of mass destruction to Ukraine.
Even the ordinarily very diplomatic UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres has warned this conflict can end in nuclear war.
May 15, 2019 In the United States, “The Great War” led to unprecedented efforts by the federal government to control and restrict “unpatriotic” speech.
But the boundary between speech that undermined the government and legitimate criticism was often unclear.
This law, which is still largely in effect, makes it a crime to do three things.
First, convey false information in order to interfere with the American military, or promote the success of America’s enemies.
Phil Donahue on His 2003 Firing from MSNBC, When Liberal Network Couldn’t Tolerate Antiwar Voices, March 21, 2013 In 2003, the legendary television host Phil Donahue was fired from his prime-time MSNBC talk show during the run-up to the United States invasion of Iraq.
The United States occupation there now is illegal as the Iraqi government has asked them to leave, but they won’t.
No weapons of mass destruction were found, and the whole thing casually dismissed as a mistake.
Phil Donahue was never “rehabilitated” for disagreeing with the United States government’s decision to start the war in Iraq.
William Blum, Killing Hope, United States Military and CIA Interventions since World War II, 15 [Permission to quote granted by William Blum via email March 15, 2018] American censorship has gotten much more extreme than when Bill Blum wrote the above referenced book.
UK govt claimed that RT has propagated pro-Kremlin narrative The British government claimed that RT has propagated proKremlin narratives around the invasion of Ukraine, including the neo-Nazis and that Ukrainian soldiers have committed war crimes, according to UK Foreign Ministry.
On Thursday, 14 people and entities were sanctioned, including a senior Russian military planner, and Sergey Brilev, a well-known Russian TV anchor on the state-owned channel Rossiya.
Censorship is not helping, and probably the primary reason those scoundrels keep getting reelected.
RT was banned in Ukraine in 2014 after Russia's annexation of Crimea; Latvia and Lithuania implemented similar bans in 2020.
Costa Rica” e Declaration on principles of freedom of expression e African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights e Declaration of principles on freedom of expression in Africa e Amsterdam Recommendations.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe e Bishkek Declaration.
By December 2021, the Kiev government had amassed up to 125,000 troops along the contact line with the Donbass republics.
At the same time, OSCE reported more frequent use of heavy weapons, prohibited under the Minsk Agreements, by the Ukrainian Armed Forces against the breakaway regions.
The Western smoke-and-mirrors media campaign speculating about Russia's ‘imminent invasion’ began in spring 2021, according to the investigative journalist.
Published satellite images of Russian army positions accompanying these news reports showed the Russian army on bases over a day's travel away.
Censored War in Donbass starting in 2014 At the same time, the Western mainstream media have kept silence for years about the shelling of the Donetsk and Lugansk Republics by the Ukrainian government forces and neo-Nazi battalions.
Just a limited number of independent American and European journalists and freelance photographers have been working in the Donbass region, chronicling the invisible war of the Ukrainian government against its own people.
Over the past several weeks the Ukrainian military had intensified bombardment of the Donbass region, prompting the leadership of the DPR and LPR to launch an evacuation of children and elderly people to Russia.
However, ‘Ukrainian spec ops groups have been targeting evacuees leaving to Russia with mines and shells,’ says Eliason.
The United States openly dismissed Russia's warnings about the ongoing genocide of Russian-speakers and crimes against humanity in Eastern Ukraine.
For his part, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz claimed at the annual Munich Security Conference on 19 February that it is ""really ridiculous"" to say that ""there is something like genocide"" in Donbass.
Coming this from the German chancellor is ""scandalous but expected,"" says Eliason.
By turning a blind eye to crimes committed by Ukrainian military and neo-Nazi militias in Eastern Ukraine, the Scholz-led coalition is indirectly supporting ""what amounts to second generation 1930s-40s political Nazi thought"" in Ukraine, according to the investigative journalist.
De-Nazification Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov stated on Thursday that Russia started a military operation to protect Donbass in order to clear the country of Nazis.
In the wake of the 2014 Maidan coup, anumber of corporate media sources questioned the role of Ukraine neo-Nazi groups in the nation's political life but very then it was largely scratched from the Western mainstream narrative.
The professor continued that the mainstream media has similarly overlooked the fact that the Azov Battalion, which is an official component of Kiev’s armed forces, has a pro-Nazi ideology.
What’s more, the rehabilitation of neo-Nazism in Ukraine has been tolerated by successive American administrations since the time of the 2005 ""Orange Revolution"" and continued to thrive, under George Bush, Barack Obama, and Donald Trump, according to Cohen.
The administration of Joseph Biden, who used to be Obama’s appointee in Ukraine, went even further, by providing tonnes of weapons and training to the Ukrainian military as the latter concentrated along the line of contact with Donbass.
On 16 December 2021, the UN General Assembly discussed a resolution that called for combating the glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices fuelling racism and xenophobia.
But the condemnation is very much misapplied if no mention is made of the fact that Eastern Europe became communist because Hitler, with the approval of the West, used it as a highway to reach the Soviet Union to wipe out Bolshevism once and for all; the Russians in World Wars | and II lost about 40 million people because the West had twice used this highway to invade Russia.
It should not be surprising that after World War II the Soviets were determined to close down the highway.
In the case of Ukraine mainstream news has “left out” critically important facts like how the United States overthrew the government, the war really started in 2014 as the result of that, that Ukraine has not been peaceful ever since, and the United States has loaded it with Nazis, and weapons of mass destruction up to and including biological pathogens that could be used for biological warfare.
Those are essential for understanding the basis for Russia’s need to de-Nazify and de-militarize Ukraine.
In a break with the past, United States is using intel to fight an info war with Russia, even when the intel isn't rock solid, by Ken Dilanian, Courtney Kube, Carol E Lee and Dan De Luce, April 6, 2022 “It doesn’t have to be solid intelligence,” one United States official said.
United States officials said they had indications suggesting Russia might be preparing to use chemical agents in Ukraine.
But three United States officials told NBC News this week there is no evidence Russia has brought any chemical weapons near Ukraine.
The Biden administration put that out as a warning to China not to do so, they said.
Professional war slut Max Boot said via The Council on Foreign Relations think tank in February that the Biden administration had ushered in ""a new era of info ops"" with intelligence releases designed not to tell the truth but to influence Putin's decisions.
Former MI6 chief John Sawers told The Atlantic Council think tank in February that the Biden administration's ""intelligence"" releases were based more on a general vibe than actual intelligence, and were designed to manipulate rather than to inform.
One of the article's authors is Ken Dilanian, who in 2014 was revealed to have worked as a literal CIA asset while writing for The LA Times.
If you see Dilanian's name in a byline, you may be certain that you are reading exactly what the managers of the United States empire want you to read.
And the only plausible reason | can think of that they would want the public to know about it is that they are confident the public will consent to being lied to.
Moskalkova says she personally spoke with several refugees, all of whom claimed they specifically wanted to seek refuge in Russia.
The ombudswoman claims all refugees are being provided with the necessary food, clothes and medication.
She went on to insist that officials from The Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions should come visit the temporary accommodation points in Russia to confirm the wellbeing of the asylum seekers for themselves.
Earlier, Moskalkova said that Karim Atassi, the acting head of the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Russia, visited a temporary accommodation center in the Rostov region, which is near the DPR, and gave a very positive assessment of Russia’s efforts in aiding refugees.
Meanwhile, Ukrainian human rights commissioner Lyudmila Denisova has been calling on international organizations such as the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund to intervene in what she claims to be the forceful abduction of children from Ukraine by Russia.
Denisova claims that over 121,000 children, including orphans and children with parents, have been forcefully sent to Russia and that the Kremlin is planning to simplify adoption procedures for these kids.
UNICEF provided some alarming numbers on the number of children affected by the military conflict.
The organization also warns that half of the 3. million children that remain in Ukraine “may be at risk of not having enough food,” with those in besieged cities like Mariupol facing the most dire situation.
UNICEF has previously claimed that over 4. million people have fled Ukraine since the start of the military conflict while 7. million are now internally displaced.
NED Finances Key Ukrainian Propaganda Organ, the Kyiv Independent By Evan Reif, April 13, 2022 One NED-sponsored journalist even fights with the neo-Nazi Azov Battalion and openly advocates for the commission of war crimes.
Throughout this war, one of the most prolific voices has been the Kyiv Independent.
Despite never offering even a scrap of evidence, however, it exploded from a few thousand followers before the war to several million now, with millions more following its individual reporters.
It is routinely promoted by some of the biggest names in media, such as CNN and Fox News.
While strikes would hit the warehouse, and the Red Cross would confirm that (and also, that it had been abandoned for more than two weeks by that time and all aid was distributed), no evidence was given that the strikes were Russian and the Red Cross did not comment on it.
The only source for the claim that the attacks were Russian is the Azov Battalion, putting the credibility of the statement into serious doubt.
This means that all you will see is dead Russians, burning Russian tanks and the wreckage of Russian aircraft.
Deadly pathogens, biological weapons and law It wasn’t just Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland admitting to United States research on deadly pathogens in Ukraine.
United States DOD, Big Tech & Big Media Will Try to Mute Hunter Biden's Ukraine Bioweapon Labs Story / The Russian Ministry of Defence on 24 March presented new evidence that Ukraine was involved in bioweapons research, revealing that President Joe Biden’s son, Hunter, funded the Pentagon’s military biological programme in Ukraine via the investment fund Rosemont Seneca.
Karen Kwiatkowski, a former analyst for the United States Department of Defence.
However, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland on 8 March told United States senators that ""bioresearch facilities"" in Ukraine actually exist, while a 2010 BioPrepWatch article preserved in web archives and the United States Armed Forces' Counterproliferation Centre confirmed that America had maintained bioresearch cooperation with Kiev since 2005.
At least 31 laboratories across 14 settlements are suspected of being involved in US-funded military biological activities.
Metabiota and Black & Veatch are known as major supplies of equipment for Pentagon biolaboratories around the world, the MoD specifies.
Below, ties are shown to the Lugar Center in Georgia, the Ukrainian Ministry of Health and associated centers and institutes, and the Ukrainian Defence Ministry's epidemiological departments.
Russian Defence Ministry According to Kwiatkowski, major mainstream sources are likely to suppress the story as major United States defence contractors are heavily investing in American mainstream media.
The former Pentagon analyst notes that judging from surveys, 90% of United States mainstream media personalities, reporters, and publishers are politically Democrats, which makes it almost impossible that they would attack the Democratic administration and key politicians.
He recalled that he was the first one to blow the whistle that the anthrax attacks of October 2001 came out of the United States Biological Warfare Weapons Lab and programme.
April 1, 2022 Amid its ongoing special operation in Ukraine, Russian forces discovered US-operated biolabs in the country carrying out dangerous pathogen research.
While Washington initially tried to deny their existence, they later confirmed it, but claimed the labs’ activities were unremarkable.
The Russian Ministry of Defense revealed new documents on Thursday that had been seized by Russian forces in eastern Ukraine, including correspondences between American financier Hunter Biden the son of United States President Joe Biden and figures involved in biological research in Ukraine, which an investment firm of his helped to bankroll.
The documents revealed an intent to create a ""Central Depository of Especially Dangerous Microorganisms in Kiev,"" according to Russian MoD spokesperson Maj.
Igor Konashenkov, as well as ways to distribute biological agents via drone.
A Robert Pope Pope was deputy director of operations, readiness and exercises at the DTRA from 2017 until 2020.
He previously held various positions at United States Air Force European Command , United States Central Command , and the Pentagon.
The published emails revealed a correspondence between Pope and Ukraine’s acting health minister between 2016 and 2019, American-born Ulana Suprun, who went to Ukraine to participate in the US-backed coup in 2014.
B Rhys M Williams Williams took over for Pope as acting DTRA director in 2020, having previously been the agency’s director of development, test and evaluation.
He led the Department of Defense’s program to develop capabilities to detect, locate and neutralize foreign WMD and improvised explosive devices.
Williams also served as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Nonproliferation at the National Nuclear Security Administration of the United States Department of Energy, the organization responsible for the country’s nuclear weapons arsenal.
C Joanna Wintrol Wintrol headed DTRA projects in Ukraine until 2021 at the United States Embassy in Kiev’s Defense Threat Reduction Office.
Previously released documents showed she also oversaw Project P-782, conducting research into the transmission of diseases through bats.
According to a DTRA publication, CSE was formerly known as the Chemical Weapons Elimination program and the Chemical Weapons Destruction program.
TWN STET i LA hd TST Te St eld eek v 7 Black&Veatch Special Projects Corp.
He has been with the company since 1978 and was formerly its Chief Operating Officer.
Black & Veatch was long known to be working on Pentagon projects in Ukraine, but the documents seized by Russian forces earlier this month revealed the firm’s job in overseeing biological programs there, including the UP-8 project previously mentioned, studying Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, leptospirosis and hantaviruses.
E Lance Lippencott He has been the project manager in Ukraine for Black & Veatch since 2011 and its biological project coordinator.
In August 2021, he told the Kansas City Business Journal that his work on airborne biological agents in Ukraine had helped Black & Veatch to develop a device for purifying air of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Lippencott is a graduate of the United States Army Military Academy at West Point.
Another document from Lippencott to the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense concerns the extension of the UP-8 project mentioned above.
In Ukraine, Guttieri was the integrator of research projects for the United States biology program and supervised the execution of biological projects related to the research of animals as vectors of disease.
She specializes in epidemiology and pandemics and has a PhD in Public Health.
However, according to the Russian MoD, there was no information in the documents about her supervising any specific biological programs in Ukraine.
I Scott Thornton Thorton was Metabiota’s senior microbiologist and laboratory start-up coordinator between 2006 and 2016.
He previously spent 20 years in the United States Navy, where he worked as a research microbiologist and head of the Navy’s Threat Assessment Department.
The pathogens in Ukrainian labs vary by facility, Pope said, but some can be characterized as presenting a concern in the Ukrainian environment.
Herein lies the grand deception, another duplicitous treachery of the Euro-American empire.
It cleaned house and disavowed biological and chemical weapon research.
The United States swooped in and collected those biological and chemical weapons, and according to United States top official in Ukraine Robert Pope, continued that research right on Russia’s doorstep.
There are no bioweapons in Ukraine, while at the same United States officials have admitted there are, totally confident United States taxpayers and voters along with the rest of the international community will swallow the lie and either never hear the factual admissions of United States officials asserting there are indeed biological weapons in American funded and operated laboratories in Ukraine, or perhaps just not care.
Victim nations of the United States drive for hegemony in perpetuity (including those afflicted by smear campaigns like the “China Virus” and deadly pathogens) should have a voice, and not be censored by the United States or anyone.
Bardhan, International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh PAHO.org 29.
Again, this confirms that United States funded and operated BSL in Ukraine did indeed have what could be and naturally would be viewed by a United States target nation as biological weapons, proving by confession, United States denials of having those weapons are categorically false.
Wintrol’s published confession quoted above makes two of the top three United States officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be weaponized.
According to the Russian Ministry of Defense, on February 24, employees of biological laboratories in Ukraine destroyed especially dangerous pathogens.
Among them were the causative agents of plague, anthrax, tularemia, cholera, and other deadly diseases.
By the way, an agreement on joint biological activities was concluded between the Pentagon and the Ministry of Health of Ukraine.
But the real recipient of the funds was the laboratories of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense.
It’s too bad it required a military intervention by Russia for United States security officials to destroy those deadly pathogens as it should have done decades ago, if indeed they did, as transporting them another location outside Ukraine would be all too easy given that United States diplomats can transport anything anywhere without inspection as per their diplomatic immunity.
DTRA allocated $80 million for biological research in Ukraine as of July 30, 2020, according to information obtained from the United States Federal Contractor Registration.
United States company Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp. was tasked with the program.
There are also issues involving destroying evidence, witness tampering, obstructing justice and so on.
Thousands of American soldiers and civil servants have lost their lives in the War on Terror.
Innocent citizens of many nations, including Americans killed on 9/11, have also paid the ultimate price.
CIA Handouts That Rocked the World sets the record straight by laying the blame on high-ranking United States government officials.
During the 1980s, the CIA recruited and trained Muslim operatives to fight the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Later, the CIA would move those operatives from Afghanistan to the Balkans, and then to Iraq, Libya, and Syria, traveling on illegal United States visas.
There is also former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s very open public support for the internationally recognized LTTE terrorist group in Sri Lanka, and even this author visited a United States designed Talban training madrassa near Islamabad accompanied by Pakistani military in November 1993 while working as a journalist.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1.
White supremacists and other far-right-wing extremists are the most significant domestic terrorism threat facing the United States.
However, providing funding and or weapons to the Ukrainian neo-Nazi groups such as United States and EU governments have been routinely doing for years might pass this threshold.
Why right on his border unless they are there as a threat or weapon, regardless as to the excuses by United States officials, who appear to have earned themselves potential life sentences in federal prisons.
Thus, no doubt, corporate controlled mainstream media will censor the whole illegal biolabs story to ensure the voting public never hears about until years in the future, if civilization as we know it survives that long.
Karen U Kwiatkowski and former United States Dept. of State official and diplomat Michael Springmann in launching previous unjust and illegal wars.
Someone can dismiss allegations brought forward by sputniknews.com as Russian propaganda, but fact checking their sources proves it to be 100% accurate at least in the above quoted article.
Credibility issues regarding Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons There has never been a credible international body to regulate the development of potential dual-use biological pathogens and chemical weapons.
BWC states-parties had been meeting since 1995 under a body known as the Ad Hoc Group to negotiate the protocol—a legally binding agreement to strengthen the BWC, which outlaws biological weapons but does not contain verification measures.
Because of these dual-use dilemmas, the BWC Protocol was not designed to be capable of detecting violations with a level of confidence comparable to that of verification systems for treaties controlling nuclear or chemical arms.
Instead, the primary aim of the Protocol was to provide greater information about, and access to, dual-capable facilities and activities that could potentially be misdirected for BW purposes.
Such increased transparency was believed to provide a useful deterrent by complicating any efforts of countries attempting to defraud their BWC obligations.
It’s a slippery slope when nations start researching potential bioweapons without oversight because they have to create and/or collect, store and often transport them to research those potential weapons.
Political and Judicial corruption and United States failure to comply with Biological Weapons Convention A thumbnail sketch of American political corruption and the latest revelations To Native Americans, once called “red Indians,” the white colonialists were nearly all (as there were and are always a few notable exceptions) totally corrupt as they went about a systematic genocide of their entire race.
To the African American slaves, the white colonialists were nearly all (as there were and are always a few notable exceptions) totally corrupt as they went about greedily buying and selling, raping and torturing them in what seemed a systematic genocide of their entire race.
To the Mexicans for example in the Mexican American War, the white colonialists were nearly all totally corrupt as they went about greedily slaughtering, raping and torturing them in what seemed a systematic genocide of their entire race.
To the Muslim Filipinos starting in 1898, the white colonialists were nearly all (as there were and are always a few notable exceptions) totally corrupt as they went about greedily slaughtering, raping and torturing them in what seemed a systematic genocide of their entire race.
Even to this day, most African nations are still slaves to Euro-American domination, primarily US, French and British colonialization.
African leaders are chosen and installed by the intelligence chiefs of Euro-American nations based on their sole qualification of absolute subservience to Euro-American interests.
In my publications | often use Niger as an example of contemporary French/American colonial treacherous duplicity, or duplicitous treachery, or whatever.
To make a long horrific story short I’m just going to list some of my previously used references and let the readers figure it out.
In other words, Euro-US corruption is an intrinsic part of these country’s history and even — especially today’s economic and political structures.
Various details of today’s United States internal political corruption are presented with linked references in the “Endnotes” section at the very end of this book.
Most recent damning evidence of contemporary, previously secret political corruption in the USA [To be frank, | keep trying to finish this book , but revelations of American corruption and treachery are just pouring down from all directions these days.
Brooks said that both parties charge their members $1 million and beyond for chairmanships of committees, and that only those taking donations from lobbyists can afford these seats.
Either the National Republican Congressional Committee or Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee will charge members of Congress a fee to chair a committee for two years.
The fee varies depending on how important the committee is, but bidding for a top-tier chairmanship starts at $1 million, Brooks claimed.
One unnamed candidate running to lead the NRCC literally showed representatives “a brochure” of his prices, Brooks claimed, explaining that the prospective NRCC chief had broken his pricing down into three tiers, and boasted that he would charge less than other candidates.
Those who can’t afford to cough up a million dollars take donations from special interest groups, and are then beholden to these lobbyists once in office, Brooks continued.
Massie also described in 2016 how, earlier in his political career, a lobbyist from “the medical device sector” offered to pay for his seat on the House Ways and Means Committee, a powerful slot that would see the Kentucky Republican shape tax policy.
The unspoken implication, Massie wrote, was that he would then owe the lobbyist his favor.
The use of the phrase “Quid pro quo” in that original Twitter message is particularly important.
In order to get a more complete picture of the 7 +2 factors leading the USA and world inexorably towards WWIII one must also take into account the structure of the duopolistic democratic system in the USA, which leans more and more towards populism and permits unlimited anonymous “donations” to political parties.
Davies Taking ORB’s estimate of 1.033 million killed by June 2007, then applying a variation of Just Foreign Policy’s methodology from July 2007 to the present using revised figures from Iraq Body Count, we estimate that 2. million Iraqis have been killed since 2003 as a result of our country’s illegal invasion, with a minimum of 1. million and a maximum of 3. million.
The crucial importance of the Tweet above comes from strong evidence constituting proof that quid pro quo relationships do in fact exist between lobby groups, politicians, power within the United States political system and the decisions they make.
FEC decision led to further decisions which led to further decisions that led to today’s unlimited anonymous political “donations” and absolute corruption in United States politics.
What the Supreme Court did, is legalized corruption and it certainly appears WWIII, thermonuclear destruction and leaks from the 300+ American biological laboratory freezers are going to be the result.
Had President Biden been a law-abiding moral man that was capable of critical thinking and thought for himself, instead of simply a spokesperson for corporate greed, none of this would be happening.
He, as a moral man that cherishes life, had no choice, and United States intelligence knew that and provoked it with that knowledge in mind.
Anyone like this writer, that studied the details of events leading to President Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine, will come to the same conclusion, and it should be the weapons-related corporate CEOs, corrupted political system in the US, SCOTUS and the slavish MSM so-called “news” CEOs and producers that should be on trial in the Hague, not President Putin.
What’s happening now however in the real world, with the USA and world balancing on the edge of thermonuclear destruction because of those dirty secrets now is the time those secrets have to come out in order to prevent that thermonuclear destruction.
That is prima facie evidence of saturation corruption at the highest levels of the United States government.
Maybe World War III will change their minds, but alas, it will be too late.
A timeline on the current phase of the Ukraine War The United States and Ukraine Started the War—Not Russia, by Richard Ochs April 9, 2022 or eight years, Ukraine terrorized the people of Eastern Ukraine with United States weapons but this was never reported on.
Timeline leading to current Ukraine War e 1991 When Ukraine claimed its independence from the voluntarily dissolved USSR, it positioned itself as a non-aligned state capable of protecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
According to the draft DPG, the United States must also “show the leadership necessary to establish and protect a new order that holds the promise of convincing potential competitors that they need not aspire to a greater role or pursue a more aggressive posture to protect their 13 “Non-alignment is self-determined by a state and isn't required to be enacted by international treaties.
Although it involves non-participation in military alliances and blocs, the country retains the right to unilaterally reconsider its non-aligned status at any time.
Besides, a non-aligned state can participate in armed conflicts, including those on foreign soil, and is free to enter into defense cooperation agreements with military alliances and individual states.
Neutrality, on the other hand, has to be defined by an international treaty and recognized by other subjects of international law.
Yushchenko began his term by announcing that Ukraine was going to work towards the goal of satisfying the requirements necessary to join both the EU and NATO, a collection of former and current colonial nations led by the USA in violation of its own constitution and neutrality status.
As early as in 2008, statements were “4 That establishment of a unipolar global system strongly resembles Pope Boniface VIII's November 18, 1302 papal bull, Unam Sanctam , that established salvation is only available through the Church, and that the Church wields “two swords” that represent both spiritual and temporal power.
Think about the 2020 movie “Antebellum” without even the possibility of ever waking into some semblance of a civilized world.
The Minsk Protocol, was drafted in 2014 by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, consisting of Ukraine, Russia, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , with mediation by the leaders of France and Germany in the so-called Normandy Format.
This agreement followed multiple previous attempts to stop the fighting in the region and aimed to implement an immediate ceasefire. e 2015, February — Ceasefire agreements at Minsk were violated by Kyiv, continuing war. e 2019, May — Volodymyr Zelensky was elected president of Ukraine after false peace promise. e 2019, May — United States Rand Corp. think tank issued a manifesto to destroy Russia. e 2021, March — Russian troops appeared at the Ukrainian border. e 2022, February 17 — Ukraine attacked a kindergarten in Donetsk, blaming Donbass separatists.
Fortunately, American citizens do not appear to be the complete idiots President Biden’s advisors think they are as his approval ratings drop to new lows.
Biden’s approval falls to new low amid economic pessimism, inflation woes, CNBC survey finds April 13, 2022 by Steve Liesman President Joe Biden’s approval rating slid to a new low of 38%, according to CNBC’s All-America Survey.
His approval rating on the economy dropped for a fourth consecutive survey.
Even a “limited” nuclear war would be wonderful distraction news for the Democrats sometime this summer and boost their case, they think, that Democrats really are valiant heroes fighting off the forces of evil embodied in the form of President Putin.
Force the adversary to expand recklessly in order to unbalance him, and then destroy him.
With a staff of thousands of experts, Rand presents itself as the world’s most reliable source for Intelligence and political analysis for the leaders of the United States and their allies.
Rand analysts estimate that Russia’s greatest vulnerability is that of its economy, due to its heavy dependency on oil and gas exports.
The income from these exports can be reduced by strengthening sanctions and increasing the energy exports of the United States.
The goal is to oblige Europe to diminish its importation of Russian natural gas, and replace it by liquefied natural gas transported by sea from other countries.
Another way of destabilizing the Russian economy in the long run is to encourage the emigration of qualified personnel, particularly young Russians with a high level of education.
In the ideological and information sectors, it would be necessary to encourage internal contestation and at the same time, to undermine Russia’s image on the exterior, by excluding it from international forums and boycotting the international sporting events that it organises.
In the geopolitical sector, arming Ukraine would enable the USA to exploit the central point of Russia’s exterior vulnerability, but this would have to be carefully calculated in order to hold Russia under pressure without slipping into a major conflict, which it would win.
The USA can enjoy high probabilities of success and high benefits, with moderate risks, especially by investing mainly in strategic bombers and long-range attack missiles directed against Russia.
Leaving the INF Treaty and deploying in Europe new intermediaterange nuclear missiles pointed at Russia would lead to high probabilities of success, but would also present high risks.
By calibrating each option to gain the desired effect — conclude the Rand analysts — Russia would end up by paying the hardest price in a confrontation, but the USA would also have to invest huge resources, which would therefore no longer be available for other objectives.
This is also prior warning of a coming major increase in USA/NATO military spending, to the disadvantage of social budgets.
Then President Joe Biden told the world from Warsaw on March 26 that his Russian counterpart Viadimir Putin ‘cannot remain in power,’ the White House quickly sought to downplay the United States leader's remarks, noting that Biden's remarks were not a call for ""regime change"" in Moscow.
Overthrow a government the United States does not like for whatever reason, and 2) interfering the affairs of other nations such as overthrowing their government, is blatantly and unambiguously illegal in international law.
By labeling the government the United States does not like a “regime” American policy makers believe they can “smooth over” the immorality and illegality of their actions in the eyes of the public.
That is called “spin” and that kind of linguistic trickery is deeply embedded in the American foreign policy maker’s efforts to “control the narrative,” which means override any semblance of honesty with their own excuses virtually always based on complete lies, and/or distortions, and/or deletions of critically important information, of such immense proportions as to constitute a lie just the same.
It was the culminating event of a four-day trip planned at the last minute for the purpose of rallying Europe to the cause of standing up to Russia’s military incursion into Ukraine.
Speaking before a large and enthusiastic crowd in the Polish capital of Warsaw, United States President Joe Biden concluded his remarks by going off-script.
According to British journalist Niall Ferguson, a senior Biden administration official was quoted as saying, prior to Biden’s slip of the tongue, that in the aftermath of the Russian military incursion into Ukraine, “The only end game now is the end of Putin regime.
Neither the sentiment nor the mechanism of regime change represent new thinking in terms of the West’s approach to the current Russian government.
According to Michael McFaul, the United States Ambassador to Russia from 2012-2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin believes that the United States works hard to foster regime changes around the world, including in Russia, through the vehicle of so-called “color revolutions” or mass civil uprisings.
The Russian government has long held that Western intelligence services had been using “democracy promotion” as a front to organize political opposition to Putin with the goal of removing him from office—i.e., regime change.
At the same time this object (in reality, a covert electronic device used to facilitate communications) was in operation, the Russian intelligence services were accusing the British of secretly funding Russian political opposition groups.
Incidents such as the ‘spy rock’ led the Russian government to crack down on foreign-funded non-governmental organizations , first passing laws which compelled groups that receive foreign funding and are deemed to engage in political activities to register as “foreign agents,” before barring NGOs altogether if they were deemed to pose a threat to Russia’s constitutional order, defense or security.
The list of banned organizations included USAID, prompting the Obama administration to withdraw from the Civil Society Working Group of the US-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission.
Goebbels' Principles Still in Demand in the West, April 12, 2022 Recently, the West has embraced the trend of making direct appeals to the Russian people, sometimes using sloppy Russianlanguage phrases.
This is not counting the frequent injections of similar appeals to Russians by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky in his daily television broadcasts.
If necessary, our people are ready to share this knowledge with the British, we don't mind. | would like to remind those Western critics who have suddenly developed a ""love for the Russian people"" that it was not Russia who started turning on the ""jammers"", as was the case during the Cold War.
Schwarzenegger and company genuinely believe that we haven't seen footage of the destruction in Mariupol or other cities.
Confessing his ""love for the Russian people"", Arnold refers to his childhood memories of meeting our great heavyweight weightlifter Yury Vlasov.
Ask Schwarzenegger if he has heard anything about what has been going on in Makeevka, his childhood idol's birthplace, for eight years, the ex-governor of California would be most surprised.
Show him footage of Ukrainian troops razing this city to the ground in 2014-2015, and ask him why he did not remember the name of the great Viasov back then — he will shrug it off, and that is it.
Kindergartens, schools, and hospitals in Makeevka — everything was indiscriminately shelled.
But there were no such appeals to the Ukrainian people and UAF soldiers by Western actors, politicians, and writers.
Boris Johnson believes that the Russian viewer or reader has heard nothing at all about the events in Bucha.
If we turn on a VPN and read the British press, the scales will immediately fall from our eyes.
He probably has no idea that if there is a place, it is in our media that the events in the town near Kiev are analyzed frame by frame, minute by minute, with reference to primary sources, including, first and foremost, Ukrainian ones. | have not seen in any Western publication such a detailed analysis of these horrifying images as we have.
For example, | lived in China for 12 years, and all through those 12 years used VPN as did and do virtually all foreigners there.
Even the major international hotels supply it as well as major universities, industries for their research, and so on.
You have no idea what’s going on outside in the real world.” | couldn’t help laughing about that.
According to the late William Blum (formerly of the United States State Department and foreign service officer who went on to become one of the most respected and quoted critics of United States foreign policy) the United States tried to, and in many cases succeeded in overthrowing at least 56 foreign governments, and an updated list compiled since his published analysis brings the total up to 67.
In none of those cases was the target nation in any way a threat to United States security, in stark contrast to the case of Ukraine and Russia, where the US’ build up WMD and highly trained neo-Nazi brigades most certainly did present a provably imminent threat to Russia’s security.
Yemen 2014, Ukraine 2014*, Turkey 2016, Venezuela 2019, Bolivia 2019*, Iran 2017 to present, Nicaragua 2018, China 2018 to present, Cuba and Russia 2022.
One can assert Israel is the aggressor, however Israel is just a cat’s paw (along with Saudi Arabia, other Gulf States and Egypt) of the USA in its ambition to conquer the entire region.
No nation in world history ever tried to overthrow that many governments (67 at minimum), directly or via proxies.
The most recent economic and media wars against Russia by the US, and in the Ukraine proxy war, is the third major assault by the United States on Russia.
The 1918 US-UK Allied invasion of Russia is a landmark in Russian History, often mistakenly portrayed as being part of a Civil War.
He tried floating a proposal for NATO to back off, and was totally rebuffed, in fact ridiculed for the effort.
The United States does not negotiate with its target nations in its drive for hegemony in perpetuity.
Whereas Russia is attempting to engage in highly targeted attacks against forces trained to attack Russia by the US, Ukrainian forces bombarding Lugansk and Donetsk were not in any way careful about their targets during their deadly eight-year war against innocents.
No one in the mainstream media, or even the alt-news has asked why President Putin didn’t just execute his Nazi elimination plan via primarily drones and missiles the way the United States has primarily pursued wars for the past 20 years.
The answer may be that drones, missiles and bombs cause far greater civilian casualties than ground troops and especially special forces which tend to be much more precise in their targeting.
President Putin acted honorably to defend innocent Lugansk and Donetsk civilians from the eight-year genocidal war in Donbass waged against it by the neo-Nazi riddled Ukrainian government acting under orders from the United States State department.
But, the highly censored corporate controlled American news does not report any of that; certainly not the 13,000 human beings murdered in Donbass between 2014 and 2020 in what was then “peaceful Ukraine” because they strongly objected to the illegal American backed coup in 2014.
Those collusive entities — with intent — created President Putin’s existential need to prevent an even greater build up of Euro-American tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultra-nationalist extremists, other Euro-American financed militias, and ongoing highly infectious and deadly biological pathogen “research” right on his border with Ukraine while simultaneously butchering 13,000 friends of Russia also on Russia’s border.
Russia already had one Nazi invasion, and absolute proof of United States loading Ukraine with neoNazi forces, other paramilitary forces, and even the government of Ukraine was and remains permeated with neo-Nazis, and let’s not forget the deadly pathogens produced, and stored right on his border.
No videos of children blown to bloody bits, sobbing grandparents, amputated limbs as happened in Donbass region for eight years — nothing.
The people of Lugansk and Donetsk were under armed attack by American trained and coordinated forces, and they pleaded for assistance in self-defence from Russia which was also motivated by selfdefense given American massive buildup of military, paramilitary, neo-Nazi forces, and potential biological weapons right on its border in violation of numerous international laws, treaties, and agreements; agreements the UN Security Council failed to uphold.
President Putin’s legal analysts focus on Article 51 on the UN Charter as rational for disarming Ukraine.
It was the highly illegal aggressiveness of the US, and failures within the UN that led to the escalation of armed conflict in Ukraine in February 2022.
In the case of Ukraine’s war against dissidents in Donbass region that strongly objected to the 2014 American backed coup against the former democratically elected president of Ukraine.
A solid fact-based case can be made that President Putin was trying to stop a war, and prevent a vastly greater biological weapons war, with his intervention in Ukraine in 2022.
The Minsk agreements were a great idea that many nations worked together to bring to fruition.
The tragedy of the current escalated conflict can easily be traced to that betrayal by Kiev.
The Minsk agreements were a series of international agreements which sought to end the war in the Donbas region of Ukraine.
The first, known as the Minsk Protocol, was drafted in 2014 by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, consisting of Ukraine, Russia, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , with mediation by the leaders of France and Germany in the so-called Normandy Format.
This agreement followed multiple previous attempts to stop the fighting in the region and aimed to implement an immediate ceasefire.
Yes, the war did not start with President Putin’s intervention in Ukraine, but instead stemmed from the successful United States coup staged in 2014, overthrowing elected president Yanukovych.
The war continued until February 24 2022 when President Putin stepped in to start to end it.
The participants of the talks in Minsk agreed on a plan which focused on a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine and efforts to get the government functioning again.
Other points of the agreement include amnesty for all those who disarm and who did not commit serious crimes, corridors for refugees, and humanitarian aid access.
Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council chief Alexey Danilov warned on Monday that his country risks collapsing if it implements the UNSC-supported Minsk Accords.
This position doesn’t reflect reality but the existing Ukrainian elite’s self-interests and those of its foreign patrons.
Ukraine is therefore legally obligated to implement them though the US’ refusal to compel its proxy to do so in contradiction of that Great Power’s international commitments means that it probably won’t unless the American position eventually changes.
Washington wouldn’t have done so unless it believed at the time that this was a pragmatic means for resolving its proxy’s civil war.
This objective observation discredits Danilov’s fears that society will meaningfully revolt over the Minsk Accords’ full implementation since Kiev certainly has the capabilities to offset that scenario.
Even if it loses control, then that’s the government’s own fault and not Russia’s or anyone else’s.
If carried out to its full extent, this could lead to Ukraine’s de facto or de jure federalization, which in practice might end up creating a Bosnian-like scenario whereby various regions achieve quasi-independence.
That might result in the emergence of new elites who can challenging the existing ones.
For instance, Russia, China, Turkey, and even the GCC might begin patronizing local partners in pursuit of mutual economic and/or strategic benefits.
There’s nothing wrong with that or inherently destabilizing about it per se but it nevertheless threatens the USled West’s current influence over Ukraine.
These five points prove that Ukraine definitely wouldn’t “collapse” if the Minsk Accords were fully implemented but it might end up with a very different administrative structure in the most extreme scenario.
That outcome would be disadvantageous for the country’s existing elites and their US-led Western patrons but would arguably be more strategically stabilizing in the long-run since Ukraine’s extremely deep contradictions are quickly reaching a breaking point as proven by recent events.
In particular, the authorities’ arrest of people who it claims were plotting nationwide riots speaks to how tense the situation has become in that country.
It presently remains unclear whether the detained represented genuine grassroots resistance to the increasingly authoritarian government and/or were part of a USbacked Color Revolution plot to punish Ukraine for its very close economic ties with China, but this development nevertheless confirms that domestic tensions are close to boiling over.
Danilov’s prediction of a “very difficult internal situation” has already come to pass and by none other than his own government’s counterproductively authoritarian hand and its unexpected disputes with its chief American patron.
The United States and its allies don’t have any need to abide by such little things, even if the Minsk agreement did have the force of law.
It was home to nomadic peoples and farmers only moved south with great difficulty.
After the Mongol invasion in the 13th century, the Wild Fields was a dangerous place to find yourself.
It was then that many of the cities without which it is impossible to imagine today’s Donbass were founded.
In 1869, the British industrialist John Hughes built a factory around which the village of Yuzovka grew — it had a few more names, including Stalino, before a local man renamed it Donetsk, in 1961.
Coal deposits and increasing factories formed the unique ‘face’ of the region.
Donbass was formed as an industrial region and its cities and factories often flow into one another, even today.
The region was inhabited by several streams of colonists from Russia and Ukraine and its population was very diverse, but its peoples mixed easily due to the proximity of their languages and cultures.
Meanwhile, the Central Rada in Kiev declared Ukraine autonomous, before making a declaration of independence after the October Revolution.
The Rada made broad territorial claims, which included the territory of Donbass.
In Kiev, the Communist uprising was suppressed, and Russian officers, who considered the Rada a lesser evil than the Reds, actively participated.
Its center was Kharkov, a large industrial city that was not part of the Donetsk Basin region but closely tied to it.
Although the area was administratively divided into three entities, they had a common economy and interests.
While the Rada was in session, local councils in the east of Ukraine announced the unification of the Donbass and Krivbass coal basins.
It also included cities belonging to the region of the Don Cossack Army, such as Mariupol and Krivoy Rog, which was administratively part of the Kherson province, as well as Kharkov.
This structure, which was informally called ‘Donkrivbass’ or simply ‘Donbass,’ did not claim independence and deemed the idea of separating from Russia absurd, considering itself, instead autonomous within it.
Moreover, Ukraine’s independence projects were of no interest to it creators.
This whole district has its own completely independent fundamental importance for Russia and lives a separate life.
The administrative subordination of the Kharkov district to Kiev is not called for by anything at all, but on the contrary, does not correspond with reality.
Unlike the legion of American fake humanitarian interventions all over the world, the Russian military intervention in Ukraine was and remains real with verifiable evidence the United States media refuses to acknowledge.
Mar 3, 2022 — Putin is afraid of a free peaceful Ukraine, competing in a fair election, his own people, and the free press.
At least tens of thousands of those victims were children, and killing children is surely one of the most extreme forms of child abuse.
And now President Biden has the temerity to accuse President Putin of genocide, when in fact President Biden is well pursuing his own, second genocide.
In an amusing note in the aforementioned reference President Biden also accuses President Putin of causing inflation, when in fact the causes are much more nuanced and entirely predictable blowback for President Biden’s own corrupt activities in Ukraine, the US’ role in the coup deposing Ukraine’s democratically elected president, subsequent US’ proxy atrocities in Ukraine and most especially the US’ stunning legion of sanctions on Russia and Russians halting or at least diverting normal supply chains downstream from Russia’s energy, wheat, and other commodities’ production.
Dima Pavlenko had his right leg blown off as a result of artillery shelling by the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
They also claim that 96% of voters in the neighboring province of Luhansk voted for independence.
Donetsk is Ukraine’s most populous province, home to a tenth of the population.
Killing voters before they have a chance to vote is not a free or fair event 48.
And, NATO is certainly making its best effort to pour as much jet fuel on the fire they helped start in Ukraine as they possibly can.
We need a beefed-up NATO to face down threats to European security Invasion of Ukraine has ushered in ‘new normal’, so the alliance is preparing for ‘reset’ that will allow it to repel attacks from the East By Edward Malnick, Sunday Political Editor 9 April 2022 NATO Undergoing ‘Fundamental Transformation’ With Stronger Eastern Flank, But Keeps Eye on China MOSCOW NATO is going to beef up its military forces on the eastern flank as part of a fundamental reset of the alliance, NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said in an interview with The Telegraph.
According to The Telegraph, NATO military commanders are developing options for the reset and the alliance's military presence in countries like Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland is expected to be transformed into a ""major force"" that would be able to repel a potential invasion.
This is all not surprising if one knows anything about the roots of NATO as it is the direct descendant organization of the European crusaders.
It is also interesting to note that exactly like NATO, the crusaders broke every single contract they made with the Muslims during those crusades, thus a) setting a template for NATO’s disregard of agreements regarding its eastward movement after 1991, and 2) distinguishing them as the penultimate opposite of honorable gentlemen.
NATO actively took part in the killing of hundreds of thousands of Muslims in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Middle East, Africa and Libya.
It’s almost surprising they have now actually set their sights on Russia, however Russia was NATOs original target anyways, before they got distracted in great orgies of death slaughtering Muslims.
They had to do something while waiting to “get” Russia to justify their existence and in that process distinguishing themselves as no better than any other mercenary army.
This is one of the many major problems of an army without a legitimate cause beyond lining the pockets of those in Europe who profit from war, that is the cruel slaughter of innocents for profit, the sine qua non pleasure of the bullies and sadists that must be ruling the capitalist world, as there are far more honorable and productive ways to earn money than robbing and killing innocents.
NATO has been used as a stalking horse by the Clintons, Obama, Trump and now Biden to restart the Cold War making proxy-wars between the superpowers ever so much easier for everyone, except of course, the millions of victims.
Though for the moment the Ukraine conflict is still a proxy war, NATO is just dying to get boots on the ground in a hot, dirty really profitable war blithely ignoring the gray lines between conventional weapons and varying degrees of nuclear weapons can be transcended in a few minutes.
RIP human species, thank you very much CIA, Mr President Biden and the Deep State which ultimately rules both.
Russia has officially become the most sanctioned country in the world, surpassing Iran, Syria and North Korea.
The penalties include punishments against individuals, companies, confiscation of assets, and even the freezing of the country’s foreign currency reserves.
European nations, historically more wary of imposing sanctions, have led the way, even surpassing the United States in some cases.
Russia is now the single largest target of global sanctions, according to some economists.
The punitive measures rolled out so far target Russia’s financial sector, central bank reserves, energy supplies, major companies, President Vladimir Putin, his daughters, government officials, and other individuals.
Tehran has confronted 3,616 punitive measures against it over the last decade alone, data by the global sanctions-tracking database Castellum shows.
The penalties have been imposed mainly over the country’s controversial nuclear program.
In 2018, the Islamic Republic’s banks were cut off from the SWIFT payment system.
Nevertheless, the country’s economy grew 2.4% in 2020-21, according to the World Bank, and is forecast to rise 3.1% in 2021-22.18 Syria The war-torn country which had been fighting international terrorism since 2011 has been hit by a number of economic sanctions from the US, EU and some Arab states.
North Korea The hermit Asian state has been under UN sanctions since 2006 over its nuclear and ballistic missile programs.
The Castellum list shows that North Korea had 2,077 sanctions against it as of March.
This month the United States imposed fresh sanctions on North Korea, accusing it of developing weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs.
Venezuela The economy of the Bolivarian Republic has been under severe pressure over the past years, with the situation severely deteriorating after the United States slapped the country with sanctions in 2019.
The measures targeted businesses and oil entities associated with the government of Nicolas Maduro, both inside and outside of the country.
The current penalties put Venezuela in fifth place in the global rating of the most sanctioned 18 In a gut-wrenching example of United States ultra-violent duplicity, Saddam Hussein was the darling of the United States political administration, CIA, and DoD during the Iran-Iraq War that began with a full-scale invasion of Iran by neighboring Iraq.
Around a million people were killed on each side and the infrastructures of both nations destroyed.
Previous to that the United States CIA sponsored a coup installing their own leader usually referred to as the Shah of Iran whose reign of terror was and remains horrifically legendary.
Iran holds 157,530,000,000 barrels of proven oil reserves as of 2016, ranking 4th in the world and accounting for about 9.5% of the world's total oil reserves.
Each of the sanctioned nations on the above sanctions list have similar stories of suffering unimaginable numbers of deaths and other cruelties inflicted by the United States in pursuit of its own economic and geo-political ambitions.
Myanmar The Southeast Asian nation has faced sanctions by the United States and other countries over human rights violations.
In January, the one-year anniversary of the military coup of Myanmar’s democratically elected government, the United States Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control designated seven individuals and two entities connected to the military regime.
However, the list seems to have been broadened since the United States, the UK and Canada imposed coordinated new sanctions on the country last month, focusing on senior military officials.
Cuba has been under United States sanctions for more than 60 years, which have affected every aspect of life on the island.
Washington has been systematically ramping up punitive measures, while companies and foreign banks operating in Cuba have faced harsh penalties for doing business there.
The American sanctions regime against Cuba is one of the world’s longest-running boycotts by one country against another.
According to media reports, the platform is not planning to return paid bills for accommodation.
Money that was spent on bookings after the April 4 date will be converted into bonuses.
However, it is not clear how those bonuses could be used, as the service is no longer available.
Critical attention to this legacy mostly focuses on his rhetorical strategy for putting the nation into war with Mexico.
In a trial there is supposed to be an impartial jury and the defendant has the opportunity to defend himself.
In the case of President Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine, United States censorship has very effectively gagged him, and there can be no impartial jury found in the world given the highly sensationalized barrages of disinformation disseminated by United States government trained drones calling themselves reporters and journalists.
The woman interviewed in that story may have been raped, however there is no proof whatsoever the attacker was a Russian soldier.
Russian is the native language of 29.6% of Ukraine's population and most Ukrainians can speak Russian.
Given the trickery and deceptions of Azov throughout this war it is highly probable that was another “false flag” operation designed like all the others to smear Russia, in this case Russian soldiers.
That story title by NBC presents unproven allegations as fact, as American mainstream media has been doing from the start of this war in 2014.
Rape was the number one charge brought against innocent black men in the old south to launch a lynch mob.
To Azov this operation would be considered a “piece of cake,” and they would laugh about it.
There is a discernable tempo amidst the barrage of disinformation campaigns being launched against Russia, and the timing of this crime against humanity, war crime and crime of defamation fits that tempo perfectly.
Considering that virtually the entire narrative supplied by western politicians and the United States corporate owned “free press” from the beginning of the coup that overthrew democratically president Yanukovych until today is composed as lies covered as “information war” by the US, the probability of that rape having been done by Azov or other Ukrainian forces is 99.999% percent certain.
However, no voices questioning the veracity of NBC’s report will be heard.
Resulting from and facilitating this is that many United States and European corporations are cutting all operations in Russia affecting millions of Russians in Russia and overseas.
On March 5, 2022 Reuters reported MasterCard also was “suspending services” of Russian operations which left thousands of Russian tourists and business travelers quite surprised and stuck overseas without money.
Besides a form of illegal “collective punishment,” and another damaging blow to the tourism industry still reeling from the COVID-19 pandemic (which the United States failed to even try to defend against) locking markets leads to greater economic isolation for those doing the blocking, as much or more than the blocked parties who simply turn elsewhere for those same markets, products and services.
It seems the financial wizards of the western world forgot lessons taught by the protectionist Fordney-McCumber Act of 1922 which strongly contributed to the 1929 stock market crash, and the Smoot-Hawley act of 1930 that increased protectionism and deepened that economic Great Depression.
It’s surprising it never occurred to any of them that as they attempt to isolate others, they simultaneously isolate themselves, and by cutting Russia off SWIFT only accelerate global dedollarization.
He added that in this context, cash, volatility, commodities and cryptocurrencies could outperform bonds and stocks.
Keeping/absconding/stealing the money of those people — regular people that already paid for those services is another example of collective punishment, again, a violation of international law.
In the heat of a good lynching, it seems highly appropriate as it is backed by populist demand, but in the long run will be analyzed as mob rule in just one more of the US’ bloody ruthless campaigns for global domination.
The United States as usual presumes that the wealthy mostly white nations (plus Japan and Taiwan as a couple of token minorities) really represent the entire world.
The “international community” you always hear el eelene That map does bear a striking resemblance to Wikipedia’s map of countries sanctioning Russia in 2014.
Forcibly provoking Russia into a self-defense and humanitarian intervention in Ukraine is apparently a “white” thing, only considered “politically correct” because Russians are white too, sort of.
In fact, they are really “Eastern Slavic” with a higher percentage of Denisovan DNA associated with east Asian people than their western European cousins.
Russian populations very likely contain ancestral components that aren’t easily found in the populations represented in the 1,000 Genomes or even in the comprehensive HGDP database.
However, the Reich et. al article above notes primarily Asians, Africans and the French also appear to have some Denisovan DNA unlike most western Europeans.
That kind of research is only secondary to other more comprehensive research that identifies eastern Russians in particular as Eurasians.
Such data are crucial for medical genetics and essential for studying population history.
Besides the unquestionable racism involved, anti-Russian racism is also “excusable” for the United States Department of Defense and intelligence apparatus because the United States laid the groundwork to hate Russians at least since my childhood in the late 1950s and 1960s.
The Rocky and Bulwinkle Show, featuring the lovable Rocky the flying squirrel and Bulwinkle, the adorable but obtuse moose, as they reliably defeat the laughably stupid and evil Russians Boris Badenov and Natasha.
Sanctions are imposed by the United States and its junior partners against countries that resist their agendas.
They are a weapon of Economic War, resulting in chronic shortages of basic necessities, economic dislocation, chaotic hyperinflation, artificial famines, disease, and poverty.
In every country, the poorest and the weakest — infants, children, the chronically ill and the elderly — suffer the worst impact of sanctions.
United States imposed sanctions, violate international law and are a tool of regime change.
They are a crime against humanity used, like military intervention, to topple popular governments and movements.
International humanitarian law posits that no person may be punished for acts that he or she did not commit.
This is one of the fundamental guarantees established by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols.
Respect for this principle can be ensured solely by establishing guarantees that protect judicial procedures.
The case follows a temporary change to Meta's hate speech policy that allows some Facebook and Instagram users to express violent sentiments against Russian armed forced invading Ukraine.
Meta did not immediately respond to a request for comment from CNN Business regarding Russia's criminal investigation.
Euro-American Displacement and the Hate China and Russia Syndromes After the long painful hibernation of COVID-19 westerners really need someone or something to lash out at.
Call it “displacement,” that is transferring anger from one person, event or object to another, and Americans and Western Europeans are ready to kill — somebody, anybody that provides a convenient target right now.
President Trump brilliantly turned that anger on China with his “China virus” lie.
This is different because it’s the world’s premier colonial power picking the fight, instead of the colonized.
This concept has been used to mitigate the lack of definition provided by Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, which states that sovereign nations may fend off an armed attack until the Security Council has adopted measures under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
The Iraq War, promoted by then Senator Biden was “legally” justified by the Doctrine of Preemption, even though there was no proof.
For centuries international law recognized that nations need not suffer an attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves against forces that present an imminent danger of attack.
Legal scholars and international jurists often condition the legitimacy of preemption on the existence of an imminent threatmost often a visible mobilization of armies, navies, and air forces preparing to attack.
We must adapt the concept of imminent threat to the capabilities and objectives of today's adversaries.
The United States has long maintained the option of preemptive actions to counter a sufficient threat to our national security.
To forestall or prevent such hostile acts by its adversaries, the State will, if necessary, act preemptively.
In the case of the Iraq war to which he was referring there was no proof.
In the case of the Ukraine War, overwhelming proof does exist regarding American/NATO buildup for war against Russia.
Imminent threat is all too easily proven by Euro-American military forces’ relentless movement east after 1991 in violation of numerous agreements, especially in Ukraine.
Imminent threat is established by Victoria Nuland’s admissions regarding American biological “research” and destroying evidence right on Russia’s border.
That one single admission alone, legally justifies the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Biological weapons can be just as, or even more dangerous than nuclear weapons.
Actual and imminent threat refers to a physical danger that is real, would occur within an immediate time frame, and could result in death or serious bodily harm.
The duration of the risk, the nature and severity of the potential harm, the likelihood that the potential harm will occur, and the length of time before the potential harm would occur.
An inciter is generally one who is present at the scene of the offense and who encourages the principal offender to commit an act that he is already inclined to commit on his own.
Given the reasonable possibility that You, Mr President did not cook up the plan for this international crime syndicate yourself, please be so kind as to share the name of the individuals and/or group that proposed this scheme to you.
Corporate United States media and foreign policy hardliners want to create a new Afghanistan in the middle of Europe by flooding Ukraine with weapons.
Photographic evidence shows that these weapons have already ended up in the hands of neo-Nazi paramilitaries — units which have already received training and arms the United States and its NATO allies.
Many are now fleeing back across the Polish border, filled with fear in the face of heavy casualties.
Supposedly acting independently, they nonetheless stuck to the same talking points and often the same verbiage, suggesting a concerted effort to spin the unit as heroic defenders of Ukraine against the alleged “real” fascists — the Russians.
The latest wave of the lionization of Azov began sometime before the Russian military operation — notorious was the much-publicized image of an AK-47-wielding Ukrainian granny training to repel invaders in the regiment’s camp.
The last week of March, however, saw the puff pieces come ina tight group, like the bullet holes after an AK burst.
The first of the bunch was a ten-minute video, from Britain’s statebroadcaster BBC, on March 27, in which presenter Ros Atkins sought to debunk Russian “untruths” about Nazis in Ukraine.
While it acknowledges that Azov was created in 2014 “by volunteers with nationalist and often far-right political leanings,” the FT shrugs off its Nazi connections.
More to the point, the symbols themselves were picked out by Azov founder Andriy Biletsky — a notorious white supremacist — as he himself told another outlet back in 2014.
Azov has a “history of neo-Nazi leanings, which have not been entirely extinguished by its integration into the Ukrainian military,” but is “an effective fighting force,” check.
Azov’s political wing only won 2.15% of the vote in 2019 — quoting a German researcher this time — check.
Its story opens with the emotional description of a funeral for an Azov soldier killed in the fighting outside of Kiev.
As an aside, Azov members are apparently really good at sticking to the message — and knowing their audience and which buttons to push.
For example, the Times piece repeatedly mentions their praise of the British NLAW anti-tank rockets.
In an interview after the coup, he told the magazine he picked out Azov’s insignia.
Here they are in October 2019, complaining about how the militants browbeat Zelensky into not withdrawing from the Donbass as required by the Minsk agreements.
In fact, it’s hard to find a terrorist group the United States did not create or support.
Likewise with Azov that was absorbed into the Ukrainian National Guard in 2014.
But western mainstream media news is not reporting news objectively, and only reporting views and injuries on the side of those who do support the American backed “neo-“ Nazi regime in Ukraine.
And thus, the need for free speech, which has been eradicated by President Biden’s government, and that eradication process has not been challenged by President Biden’s Justice Department.
Facebook Allows Praise of Neo-Nazi Ukrainian Battalion If It Fights Russian Invasion The reversal raises questions about Facebook’s blacklist-based content moderation, which critics say lacks nuance and context.
By Sam Biddle February 25 2022 Facebook will temporarily allow its billions of users to praise the Azov Battalion, a Ukrainian neo-Nazi military unit previously banned from being freely discussed under the company’s Dangerous Individuals and Organizations policy, The Intercept has learned.
The policy shift, made this week, is pegged to the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine and preceding military escalations.
The Azov Battalion, which functions as an armed wing of the broader Ukrainian white nationalist Azov movement, began as a volunteer anti-Russia militia before formally joining the Ukrainian National Guard in 2014; the regiment is known for its hardcore right-wing ultranationalism and the neo-Nazi ideology pervasive among its members.
Russia investigates alleged footage of Ukrainian troops torturing POWs, March 27, 2022 Unverified graphic footage purports to show Ukrainian servicemen shooting Russians at point-blank range / Multiple disturbing clips apparently filmed at the same unknown facility, emerged online over the weekend.
The footage shows multiple people, apparently Russian prisoners of war, lying on the ground.
The injured soldiers are interrogated by armed men, many of whom are wearing blue armbands commonly used by Ukrainian units.
Some of the wounded personnel apparently died during the interrogation.
Footage also shows three other prisoners ordered out of a van and shooting their legs at a point-blank range.
The founder of the US-government funded Bellingcat “investigative journalism” outlet Eliot Higgins, for instance, has described it as “very serious incident” and called for a “further investigation” of the disturbing imagery.
The Germanand French-brokered protocols had been designed to regularize the status of those regions within the Ukrainian state.
This therefore should not have been difficult to verify and apparently it wasn’t.
The Ukrainian government stated that such behaviour was unacceptable and vowed to investigate the matter.
Russian Special Forces have managed to detain Ukrainian nationalists responsible for torturing captured Russian soldiers, Russian lawmaker, Chairman of the Defence Committee of the State Duma, Vladimir Shamanov has stated.
The Russian Defence Ministry has not yet confirmed the lawmaker's claim.
A video depicting several Ukrainians, either members of the armed forces or one of the nationalist battalions, humiliating and torturing Russian soldiers has been making the rounds online for days.
Several of the Russian servicemen had their legs shot and were left without any medical assistance, according to the footage.
The soldiers were captured during the special military operation that Moscow had launched in Ukraine on 24 February.
The Russian investigative committee ordered the launch of an investigation into the incident, during which at least eight captured Russian soldiers were killed after being tortured.
The committee said that it will spare no efforts to identify the perpetrators of the crime.
The Russian special operation was launched by President Vladimir Putin in response to a request from the Donetsk and Lugansk People's Republics , which had been suffering from intensified shelling by Ukrainian forces for over a week in February.
In any case, there has been a drop in foreign volunteers willing to go to Ukraine for a variety of reasons one being that they are often killed before they reach any battlefield, and second, they are not really trained or armed for their missions and usually end up dead because of it. , Meanwhile, Azov appears to have spread its extremist approaches to war throughout the Ukraine military while enjoying the full support of Euro-American mainstream media “MSM” in all of its forms, including social media.
According to Facebook rules now anyone can advocate for torturing and killing any Russian anywhere simply by yelling “Ukraine” first.
And thus, the USA under the leadership of President Biden has devolved into a level of depravity far below what most sane and healthy minds can possibly conceive.
As for those caught up personally in the current Euro-American war fever on any side, the price is likely to be beyond imagining.
Socrates observations about the fate of democracies devolving into populism, in this case an insane mob rule, has certainly been proven eerily and morbidly accurate.
President Biden’s top cabinet officers in addition to members of the senate that profit from war, in addition to the captains of the monopolist Euro-American MSM news media are most certainly culpable in all of these crimes.
April 3, 2022 Militants from Ukrainian nationalist battalions are taking humanitarian aid away from civilians in Donbass, Victoria Serdyukova, the Human Rights Commissioner of the Lugansk People's Republic , told Sputnik.
Under shelling, people come to the part of the city where the humanitarian convoy will be located.
Members of nationalist battalions arrive there with weapons in their hands, and they forbid them to receive this humanitarian aid.
For example, United States forces have also been stealing wheat from the hungry in their illegal war in Syria and stole $7 billion in Afghan funds, which they say was donated to 9/11 victim families, even though 15 of the 19 attackers were Saudi Arabia, two were from the United Arab Emirates, one was from Lebanon, and one from Egypt — all United States ally nations.
Throughout early 2022, 55% of Afghans will face acute food insecurity, including nearly 9 million people at emergency levels— one step before famine conditions.
Food insecurity is likely to deepen in 2022 as the country is facing shortages of food, rapidly rising food prices and an ongoing drought.
Yet, this sort of criminal behavior is deemed not worthy by the “media club” (actually an international crime syndicate and cabal) referred to in the Nebojsa Malic article quoted above.
Starvation The Washington DC generated war in Ukraine has shot world food prices to their highest levels in recorded history.
The FAO Food Price Index* averaged 159. points in March 2022, up 17. points from February, making a giant leap to a new highest level since its inception in 1990.
The latest increase reflects new all-time highs for vegetable oils, cereals and meat sub-indices, while those of sugar and dairy products also rose significantly.
Americans now cry watching CNN’s Oscar 22 Often overlooked in this and other analysis of the crimes leading up to and continuing during the most recent phase of the war in Ukraine is the most willing accomplice called Canada.
They can lie about their role in this war all they want, but that is another western government that should be voted out of office with all possible haste.
According to the Hunger Hotspots Report from the World Food Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization , Ethiopia, Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen remain the countries of highest concern.
USS7. billion United States: $6.32 billion Canada: $6. billion France: $4. billion Ukraine: $3. billion Australia: $2. billion Argentina: $2.12 billion Germany: $2. billion Kazakhstan: $1. billion Poland: $1 billion Ukraine only comes in at 5"" place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but is usually listed first for some odd reason on MSM these days.
Ukraine and Russia are two of the top five grain exporters in the world.
By some estimates, what is at stake is global food security since the global agricultural trade involved is worth nearly $1. trillion.
The immediate food related effects of the conflict are being felt in Egypt, Turkey, Bangladesh, and Iran who buy more than 60 percent of their wheat from Russia and Ukraine, and all of them have outstanding food imports.
Lebanon, Tunisia, Yemen, Libya, and Pakistan also rely heavily on the two countries for their wheat supply.
Something he did not put into his calculus was the years of planning at the Pentagon, Langley and the British military intelligence to entrap him.
Lethal equipment was obviously stationed in Ukraine by the West much before the war drums rolled.
In fact, the chorus, “Putin is about to invade”, was raised after the equipment was in place and duly manned.
Russians acted on a script they have been refining since the Orange Revolution of November 2004.
The climax was reached in 1998 when the United States senate, after a perfunctory debate, ratified NATO expansion.
To understand why Ukraine has been attacked Kennan’s statement must be read in full.
And now we are turning our backs on the very people who mounted the greatest bloodless revolution in history to remove that Soviet regime.
Despite Kennan’s warning, the Military Industrial Complex stopped at nothing.
Jens Stoltenberg, Secretary General of NATO (whom | interviewed as a peacenik Prime Minister of Norway) has been salivating on Georgia and Ukraine, both red lines for Russia.
The other purpose was to deter neo-Nazi groups menacing for the past eight years, Luhansk and Donetsk, the pro-Russian enclaves of Donbas in the East.
Just when his neck seemed to be on the line, he flew to Ukraine to shed the boozy image.
Supposing Johnson had fallen, President Joe Biden would have slipped with no hand to pull him up.
Questions were being raised about his mental fitness; Trump’s rating were the same as his, pandemic blues were not ending; race relations were plummeting, school kids were killing school kids with automatic weapons regularly.
All of this against the backdrop of defeat in Afghanistan, a failed attempt at regime change in Kazakhstan and the western alliance in total disarray.
The Anglo-American combine were beating the war drums at such high decibel levels that a larger war with Europe was being dreamed up.
The United States was across the Atlantic; Britain beyond the channel, distanced even more from Europe by Brexit.
The Military intelligence of the countries was pointing to the 1,20,000 Russian troops on the Ukraine border as precursor to a general war.
But war hysteria was a smokescreen to lure Russia into the Ukrainian foxhole for a sufficient length of time to enable the western media, transformed into a lying propaganda machine, to demonize Putin irreparably.
Rabbi Kaminezki, the chief rabbi in Dnipro in eastern Ukraine had warned against Zelensky, a Jew, becoming President.
Zelensky not only ignored the rabbi but proceeded to appoint Volodymyr Groysman, a fellow Jew as his Prime Minister.
Since then, the Prime Minister has changed. | wonder if this detail makes any material difference to the story.
The Russian embassy in neighboring Warsaw has been “seized” not by mobs but Poland’s Foreign Ministry.
Americans too were “trapped” in Afghanistan for 20 years and left in disgrace.
Thus, there probably were at least five to nine reasons why President Biden’s and Boris Johnson’s foreign policy planners decided to intentionally provoke President Putin into war.
President Putin being a man of honor with limits as to how much blood of innocents can be poured upon his doorstep before he would act decisively to stop it.
Only those without honor so deeply enthralled with a Machiavellian perspective on life and such cold-blooded cynicism as to be arguably inhuman.
As all familiar with Greek tragedies regarding hubris know, the results are invariably not good for those inflicted with it.
Yes, the United States is risking all — the very future of all life on earth on a roll of the dice, thinking it will make a “man” of someone who clearly is not a man at all.
The USA creates the real and imaginary monsters in the world just to keep enriching the already ultra-super rich who incidentally mostly don’t pay taxes on that wealth.
And yet, now, the United States is attempting to crash both Russia’s and China’s economies.
We don’t hear much about the human suffering in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Chad, Niger, Ethiopia, Somali (which is in the third year of a drought and relentlessly bombed and sanctioned by the US), Mali, and so on, and consequently not many Americans are crying about the victims in those United States generated conflicts.
The link here is a real-time counter the reader is invited to investigate.
Though President Biden may not know this yet reports are slowly starting to leak out from the hermetically sealed American political/media echo chamber that all Ukrainian civilians around the country are not all so enthralled with love for the United States installed neoNazi regime in Kiev, and many are welcoming Russian liberation from that totalitarian and corrupt regime.
True, there is no doubt a million or more Ukrainians will happily take a United States visa to find what think will be a better life in the US, and are willing, ready and able to tell all manner of wild lies and exaggerations about Russian “atrocities” to obtain that visa and elicit teary-eyed sympathy, but that will not change events leading up to, and consequent from the realities on the ground in Ukraine during the past eight years, now and the inevitable future.
The inhumane acts are often attributed to nationalist and Neo-Nazi groups.
Many reported atrocities are being committed by Ukrainian nationalists and the neo-Nazi Azov Battalion.
Being incorporated into the National Guard in 2014 the group is subordinate to the Ukrainian authorities.
Civilians are tied to electric poles or trees with tape, sometimes their faces are smeared with paint or green antiseptic dye, they are whipped and left in the cold.
Photos of the victims and footage of the punishment are widely shared on social media networks.
Among those targeted are the Roma people, one of Ukraine's ethnic minorities.
One photo shows a Roma family, including children, being tied to a pole with their faces painted with green dye in the city of Lvov.
There is no evidence that these people committed crimes, nor is there any provision in Ukrainian legislation authorizing the use of such brutal methods of punishment.
Yet another infamous torture site codenamed ""Library"" was located in the International Airport of Mariupol, the Donetsk region.
Those who disagreed with the policies of the Ukrainian authorities after the 2014 coup were detained, tortured and even killed there.
However, according to Kasonta, everyone in the West is perfectly aware of what is happening in Ukraine and how Ukrainian nationalists, the Azov Battalion, and violent mobs are treating regular citizens and ethnic minorities in Ukraine.
Racism and xenophobia have long penetrated into the fabric of Ukrainian society, according to the analyst.
Thus, it comes as no surprise that African students were turned back by Ukrainian border guards while attempting to cross into Poland.
Meanwhile, the nationalist agenda became part of the Ukrainian education system.
According to Ukrainian outlet STRANA.ua, the nationalist projects received up to half of all the funds allocated by the Ukrainian government for children's and youth organizations in 2020 alone.
What is amazing is the Euro-American mainstream news can so blithely completely cover it all up and present Ukraine’s leadership and well-known very wide neo-Nazi support in a positive light while claiming to be liberal enlightened people and honest news producers and reporters.
So, yes, United States and western European voters and tax payers are being conned again, by the same miscreants that led us into the last war, and the one before that and the one before that and so on for at least the past 70 years.
Had Russia submitted to the US’ attempted nuclear blackmail, Washington would have immediately set its sights on China, after which it would have restored its declining unipolar hegemony over the planet if it subsequently succeeded in strategically neutralizing that country too.
The author warned earlier this week that “Kiev Must Withdraw From Donetsk & Lugansk If It Truly Wants To Avert War”, pointing out that Moscow will decisively support its newfound Donbass allies with military means in order to ensure the security of their civilian populations if Ukraine kept up its unprovoked genocidal offensive against them.
Regrettably, the United States failed to rein in its Eastern European proxy army, which prompted Russia to commence its ongoing special operation in Ukraine.
Russian Ambassador to the UN Vasily Nebenzya articulated the reasons behind President Putin’s decision earlier this morning.
President Biden’s approval ratings in the United States plummet to new record lows 87.
The latest research by Redfield & Wilton Strategies finds that 47% of Americans disapprove and 37% approve of President Joe Biden’s overall job performance as President.
His net approval rating, at -10%, is eight points lower than in our polling on 23 February, when 41% disapproved and 39% approved of Biden’s performance.
Redfield & Wilton Strategies survey The following is a graphic representation of the overall data of that survey.
By far the strongest single issue diminishing his tattered remnants of his popularity is economics.
Throwing an extra four billion dollars at Ukrainians to get those same Ukrainians killed in another game of thrones is wasteful at a time when inflation is also at all time highs.
The price of gasoline is one of the single most important issues for Americans and it’s skyrocketed thanks to President Biden’s urgent need to overthrow President Putin and try to demolish another nation.
Raising fuel prices and other inflationary trends, and paying billions to essentially kill innocent Ukrainians and Russian solders in another unjust war probably are not helping President Biden’s standing.
Maybe somehow, enough Americans have learned the mainstream news lies so much one must assume the opposite of what is reported to get any inkling of the truth.
Public opinion surveys reveal American citizens strong distrust of the American mainstream news 88.
So, it should not be terribly surprising that American trust in MSM “news” is justifiably very low.
United States ranks last among 46 countries in trust in media, Reuters Institute report finds Just 29% of people surveyed in the United States said they trust the news, compared to 45% in Canada and 54% in Brazil, By Rick Edmonds The United States ranks last in media trust — at 29% — among 92,000 news consumers surveyed in 46 countries, a report released Wednesday found.
If one types “chemical weapons used by Russia in Ukraine” into Google a mind-numbing 65,600,000 links emerge, even though there is not a shred, not an atom of evidence to back up those scurrilous accusations.
Distortions and delusions from America’s top politicians Nancy Pelosi compares Putin’s Ukraine moves to Hitler By Steven Nelson, February 23, 2022 House Speaker Nancy Pelosi compared Russian President Vladimir Putin to Nazi leader Adolf Hitler Wednesday, calling Putin “very evil” for his deployment of troops into eastern Ukraine.
At a Capitol press conference, Pelosi likened Putin sending Russian “peacekeeping” troops into separatist-held areas of Ukraine on Monday to the Nazi takeover of Czechoslovakia prior to World War Il.
The longer a debate rages, the greater the likelihood that someone will compare someone else to Hitler.
On Tuesday the former secretary of state reportedly told a private fund-raising party that Russian President Vladimir Putin's actions are similar to Hitler's in the run up to World War Il.
Clinton might have had some invisible hand behind events in Ukraine and President Biden’s feverish attempts at overthrowing the government of Russia.
She was President Obama’s principal foreign policy advisor that pushed for the disastrous and deadly so-called “Arab Spring” “color revolutions” that left nothing but death and chaos behind.
The Maidan riots in Ukraine were American funded and an emblematic example of a classic color revolution.
It’s really easy from lofty perches in DC and NY to beat the war drums that get men, women and children killed in far away lands, but not so easy to see one’s own family members butchered in another American orchestrated war and then try to live and sleep with those memories for the rest of one’s life.
For the record it is the United States that’s funding and training neo-Nazis and sending them to Ukraine to fight against Russians.
One of President Putin’s key goals was and remains to de-Nazify Ukraine.
The United States Department of State organized the government the United States put into Ukraine and loaded it with Nazis too.
It would be fascinating to do MRI scans on people like Presidents Trump and Biden, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and mainstream news reporters to see to what extent they really believe the lies they tell, and to what extent they knowingly lie to the American public to help their family fortunes, friends, and political parties.
Taking China’s pulse Ash Center research team unveils findings from long-term public opinion survey July 9, 2000 For Tony Saich, Daewoo Professor of International Affairs and director of the Ash Center, the quest to build a firmer understanding of Chinese public opinion has taken the better part of 15 years.
It began with an attempt to develop a suite of curricular materials to inform a course on local government in China.
The work began in 2003, and together with a leading private research and polling company in China, the team developed a series of questionnaires for in-person interviews.
The surveys were conducted in eight waves from 2003 through 2016, and captured opinion data from 32,000 individual respondents.
The survey team set out to assess overall satisfaction levels with government among respondents from across the socioeconomic and geographic strata of China.
Levels of government and public opinion The survey team found that compared to public opinion patterns in the U.S., in China there was very high satisfaction with the central government.
In 2016, the last year the survey was conducted, 95. percent of respondents were either “relatively satisfied” or “highly satisfied” with Beijing.
You go to a movie, and violence is there,” Tanay told Psychiatric Times.
The average American watches nearly 5 hours of video each day, 98% of which is watched on a traditional television set, according to Nielsen Company.
Most self-involving video games contain some violent content, even those for children.
In a given year, more United States children will die from gun violence than will die from cancer, pneumonia, influenza, asthma, HIV/AIDS, and opioids combined.
In fact, the overall rate of firearmrelated death or injury in the United States is higher than the rate in most other industrialized countries.
Drawing on vast archives of shocking new documentation, Theaters of Command tells how the Pentagon and sometimes the CIA have had the final say over thousands of films, video-games, and TV shows, often imposing heavy rewrites.
The government’s deliberate creation of what investigator Roger Stahl terms “American empire’s cinematic universe” is one of the great swindles perpetuated against an unwitting public.
These actions have systematically scrubbed from the screen an unsavory century of military history including war crimes, illegal arms sales, racism and sexual assault, torture, coups, assassinations, and weapons of mass destruction.
This government operation amounts to the airbrushing of entire culture, laid bare here for the first time after decades of secrecy.
This deliberate creation of what some have called “American empire’s cinematic universe” is one of the great under-reported PR coups of our time.
False flag Operations For those not familiar with this terminology, a false flag operation is when one side in a conflict does something horrible, like kills many of its own people, usually civilians, and then blames the opposing side in that conflict.
Whereas false flag operations are usually difficult to prove, in some cases enough circumstantial evidence collects to make it quite clear who was the real perpetrator of that crime.
And, evidence from Ukraine strongly suggests that Kiev’s neo-Nazis have perpetrated at least two false flag operations thus far in an attempt to encourage the United States and/or Europe to enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine, escalating this conflict into a much larger international war.
The following was published March 23, 2022 in the Canadian Global Research online newspaper.
A) The Mariupol Theater Bombing Guilty until proven innocent, Russians are now in the same boat with African Americans and Hispanic Americans.
Fortunately, due to the preternatural overconfidence of the real aggressors in this ongoing tragedy, those who exalt Adolf Hitler, don’t even feel the need to do really convincing frame-ups and instead leave enough clues behind to prove that they themselves are committing these atrocities, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Max Blumenthal-March 18, 2022 Testimony by evacuated Mariupol residents and warnings of a false flag attack undermine the Ukrainian government’s claims about a Russian bombing of a local theater sheltering civilians.
A closer look reveals that local residents in Mariupol had warned three days before the March 16 incident that the theater would be the site of a false flag attack launched by the openly neo-Nazi Azov Battalion, which controlled the building and the territory around it.
Civilians that escaped the city through humanitarian corridors have testified that they were held by Azov as human shields in area, and that Azov fighters detonated parts of the theater as they retreated.
Despite claims of a massive Russian airstrike that reduced the building to ashes, all civilians appear to have escaped with their lives.
Video of the attack on the theater remains unavailable at the time of publication; only photographs of the damaged structure can be viewed.
The Russian Ministry of Defense has denied conducting an airstrike on the theater, asserting that the site had no military value and that no sorties were flown in the area on March 16.
While the Russian military operation in Ukraine has triggered a humanitarian crisis in Mariupol, it is clear that Russia gained nothing by targeting the theater, and virtually guaranteed itself another public relations blow by targeting a building filled with civilians — including ethnic Russians.
Azov, on the other hand, stood to benefit from a dramatic and grisly attack blamed on Russia.
In full retreat all around Mariupol and facing the possibility of brutal treatment at the hands of a Russian military hellbent on “de-Nazification,” its fighters’ only hope seemed to lie in triggering direct NATO intervention.
The same sense of desperation informed Zelensky’s carefully scripted address to Congress, in which he invoked Martin Luther King Jr.’s “| Have a Dream” speech and played a heavily produced video depicting civilian suffering to make the case for a no fly zone.
Azov Battalion fighters grow desperate in Mariupol, plea for Western military intervention The strategic southeastern port city of Mariupol has been held by the Azov Battalion since 2014.
Since its seizure, it has served as a political and military base for the ultra-nationalist paramilitary as it launched assaults on pro-Russian separatists in the breakaway republic of Donetsk.
Gathered from the ranks of extreme right activists that provided protesters with street muscle during the 2013-14 Euromaidan coup, the Azov Battalion has been formally incorporated into the Ukrainian National Guard by the country’s Interior Ministry.
With the Nazi-inspired Wolfsangel symbol emblazoned on their uniforms and flags, Azov fighters make no secret of their ideological goals.
Despite having been identified by the FBI, United States Congress, and its own fighters as a neo-Nazi unit, and implicated in an array of sordid human rights violations, Azov has collaborated openly with United States and Canadian military trainers.
Having accused Azov of seeking to exterminate the ethnic Russians of Donbas, Putin has marked its base in Mariupol as the front line of his stated campaign to “de-Nazify” Ukraine.
Since Russia’s February 24 invasion of Ukraine, the city become the site of ferocious urban fighting, with Russian special forces and Donetsk People’s Republic People’s Militia forces waging a block-by-block fight for control as artillery rained down on Azov positions.
On March 7, an Azov Battalion commander named Denis Prokopenko appeared on camera from Mariupol with an urgent message.
It was clear from Prokopenko’s plea that Azov’s position was growing more dire by the day.
As Russia’s military rapidly degraded Azov positions throughout the second week of March 2022, Azov soldiers apparently directed elderly civilians as well as women and children into the wardrobe hall of the Donetsk Academic Regional Drama Theater in Mariupol.
A video filmed inside the dimly lit building on March 11 featured a local man claiming that one thousand civilians were trapped inside and demanding a humanitarian corridor to allow them to escape.
Since Russia launched its invasion, Azov Battalion soldiers have been filmed preventing civilians from leaving Mariupol — even forcing men out of their cars and brutally assaulting them while they attempted to break through the paramilitary’s checkpoints.
If testimony from many Mariupol residents was to be believed, Azov had used many of them as human shields.
According to Steshen, local residents told him an alleged Russian bombing of the Turkish-built Kanuni Sultan Suleyman mosque in Mariupol that day was a false flag intended to “drag Turkey into the war,” and warned that a false flag attack on the Mariupol Drama Theater was imminent.
One of the provocation is against the citizens of Turkey, who hid in the mosque built by Akhmetov, and this provocation has already begun by the Ukrainian artillery gunners shelling the grounds of the mosque, from their positions at Balka in Nizhniaya Kirvoka.
Zelensky was unable to drag the EU, USA and UK into the war against the Russian Federation.
Now, Zelensky is trying to drag Turkey into the war, pinning his hopes on the explosive emotional character and the love the faithful feel for their sacred shrines.
On March 12, Western outlets like the Associated Press repeated Ukrainian government claims that the Turkish mosque in Mariupol had been shelled by Russia with 80 civilians inside, including children.
However, Turkish state media revealed that the Ukrainian government had misled Western reporters.
The Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Mosque was not only fully intact, it had never been hit by Russian fire.
Still filled with civilians, the Mariupol theater was next on somebody’s target list.
As Zelensky begs Congress for military intervention, news of a theater attack Less than 48 hours after the debunked claims of a Russian attack on the mosque in Mariupol were introduced, humanitarian corridors finally opened up around the city.
The flight of thousands of civilians toward Russian military positions further weakened the Azov Battalion, which was using Mariupol’s residents as collateral in its bid to compel a no-fly zone.
On March 16, with his military collapsing under the Russian onslaught, the Ukrainian president and famed comedian-actor Zelensky appeared by video for a carefully scripted, elaborately produced presentation before an assembly of awestruck United States members of Congress. “| have a dream.
These words are known to each of you today. | can say | have a need. | need to protect our sky,” Zelensky proclaimed.
Just hours after Zelensky’s address, news arrived directly from the Azov Battalion’s press department that Russia had bombed the theater in Mariupol.
The Azov Battalion’s watermark can be seen clearly in the lower right-hand corner of the image below.
Azov’s photo was republished by international outlets including Sky News, but with the paramilitary’s brand cropped out.
When South China Morning Post ran the image, it removed the watermark and credited “Azov Battalion via AP.” tme/polkazov 8ZOv.org.ua Among the first English language media figures to convey the Ukrainian government’s narrative of the incident to a mass audience was Illia Ponomarenko, a Kiev-based, UStrained reporter who has managed to rack up over a million Twitter followers since Russia’s invasion began.
Because they’re animals. pic.twitter.com/x YOkC7CPm5 — Illia Ponomarenko March 16, 2022 Ponomarenko happened to work for the Kyiv Independent, an outlet that has functioned as one of the most potent United States information weapons in Ukraine.
The paper had been set up with assistance from the National Endowment for Democracy, a United States intelligence cut-out, and an “emergency grant” from its EU-funded cousin, the European Endowment for Democracy.
The billionaire-backed NGO acknowledged it had not interviewed any Mariupol residents after the attack, and provided no evidence to demonstrate Russian responsibility.
Suspicious signs, holes in the Ukrainian government’s narrative emerge Though Azov boasts a sophisticated press unit which films its exploits in the field, and soldiers are publishing even the most banal video of themselves on social media, footage of the theater bombing was nowhere to be found.
Photos supplied by Azov to media in Ukraine and abroad invariably depict the bombed-out theater without any people in sight, living or dead.
One day before the bombing, on March 15, a group of militaryaged men were photographed in front of the Mariupol theater.
The men can be seen placing pallets against the side of the building, ferrying large objects across the theater grounds, and cutting down a fir tree.
As seen below, pallets and other objects were piled against the same area of the building hit by an explosive charge the following day.
The outlet 0629 has attempted to explain away the mysterious disappearance of the thousand civilians said to have been in the theater by claiming they were evacuated to the city of Zaporozhye a day before the supposed attack. “we are waiting for the official verified information and do not rush to conclusions,” the paper declared.
As Mariupol residents poured out of the city through the Russian military’s humanitarian corridors, testimonies began to emerge of ruthless Azov attacks on the fleeing civilians — and of a major deception at the local theater.
They were breaking everything, all around us, they were not letting us outside.
Multiple people from #Mariupol said that Azov Nazis held civilians as human shields in the local theater.
When the Russian advance forced them to retreat, they blew up the theater to frame Russian forces.
This plan was published 3 days in advance by an Azov deserter. pic.twitter.com/Xh3C9vWNbC — Jake Morphonios Blackstone Intelligence March 17, 2022 Numerous evacuees echoed the woman’s testimony about Azov holding Mariupol civilians as hostages, and said they were targeted with gunfire as they escaped through humanitarian corridors.
The above a good example of real investigative journalism that looks at the details and clears away the “fog of war,” in so many cases intentionally generated to obscure those very same details.
Motivation for that series of deceptions and killings by Azov are easily proven, but there is absolutely no — zero motivation for Russia to have bombed that theater.
The Mariupol Theater Bombing We don't know for sure what happened to the theatre, but it wouldn’t be the first time the Ukrainian government made false claims By Pedro Gonzalez Global Research, March 24, 2022 / On March 16, the Donetsk Regional Drama Theatre in Mariupol, Ukraine, was bombed.
Maxar satellite images showed the word “CHILDREN” written in Russian in large letters on the pavement outside.
The incident occurred within hours of President Volodymyr Zelensky’s virtual address to Congress, where he asked again for the United States to establish a no-fly zone over Ukraine.
Civilians would be endangered or even killed before the world’s watching eyes.
But these allegations, in the context of a war that has been distorted by misinformation, merit examination precisely because the incident had the supposedly desired effect.
If Moscow wanted to slaughter civilians, it could have easily targeted vehicles rolling in bumper-to-bumper traffic out of the city, heading in the direction of the pro-Russian separatist-controlled north.
This is not to say civilians have not been killed during the conflict— they have—but Russia is not deliberately targeting them as part of a genocidal campaign.
These facts, coupled with what happened in the days before the bombing, raise questions no one in the mainstream is asking.
The mosque would drag Turkey into the war, while the drama theater would supply a justification for closing the skies over Ukraine, ideally bringing a U.S.-led NATO into direct confrontation with Russia.
This is done so that they could scream to the whole world that Russia’s aviation did this and that the Ukrainian sky needs to be closed immediately, etc.
Later, investigative journalist Max Blumenthal noted that Western media repeated Ukrainian officials’ claims about the mosque in Mariupol being shelled by Russia with scores of civilians, including children, inside.
Zelensky and his officials had previously made similar misleading claims about the bombing of the memorial at Babi Yar, a ravine in Kiev that was also the site of massacres committed by the Nazis during World War Il.
On March 13, a Twitter user named Elena Evdokimova issued another warning.
Militants of the Azov nationalist battalion blew up the Mariupol theater building, which they rigged with explosives earlier, Russian Defense Ministry announced Wednesday.
The Defense Ministry debunked Kiev’s accusations of an airstrike on the theater building, where civilians could have been held hostage.
According to the verified information, militants of the Azov nationalist battalion carried out another bloody provocation by blowing up the rigged theater building,” the Ministry of Defense said.
People sheltering in a theater in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol are emerging from the building after it was bombed, the former head of the Donetsk region said Thursday.
Apparently, CNN was interested ONLY in information that was being supplied by Ukraine’s government.
Of course, ‘reporting’ in that way is only propaganda — not journalism.
By Frank Gardner Britain has reacted with concern at unconfirmed reports of an alleged chemical attack in the besieged city of Mariupol.
The alarm was raised by some of the last Ukrainian soldiers still holding out against the Russian assault there.
They are from the Azov Battalion, a small but controversial element of Ukraine's National Guard due to their far right tendencies.
They claim that after a Russian drone flew over, there was a cloud of smoke and three of their members experienced breathing difficulties.
The part about “unconfirmed,” will be forgotten by the vast majority of those “news” consumers.
This is a form of subliminal programming of, and planting false memories in western audiences to the conflict in Ukraine, and an extreme abuse of news media and psychology as weapons of war.
Unfortunately, most news consumers in the west won’t see the motivation or sneakiness of that kind of defamatory trickery.
That, along with 99% of the mainstream media “news” regarding the Ukraine conflict, is unconscionably misleading.
This, like all other so-called “news” about the war in Ukraine is another complete fabrication used to smear Russia.
He explained that the situation in Mariupol was “an eye-opener” for him, claiming he sought to convince his commanders to leave the city, but they chose to stay, not least because Kiev supposedly wanted them to stay.
Simply put, it’s the same corporate shareholders that own CNN as profit from the war industries.
B Bucha massacre The truth about Bucha is out there, but perhaps too inconvenient to be discovered It should be easy to find out what really happened to the massacred civilians in the Ukrainian town By Scott Ritter, April 4, 2022 [Scott Ritter is a former United States Marine Corps intelligence officer who served in the Soviet Union as an inspector implementing the INF Treaty, in General Schwarzkopf’s staff during the Gulf War, and from 1991-1998 as a UN weapons inspector.
One of the first lessons of objectivity is to slow things down to make sure that fact is not obscured by emotion.
The video has been released in its present form, it appears, with the express intent of producing a visceral “shock and awe” moment for the viewer.
If this was indeed the case, then those who released it — the Ukrainian National Police — have succeeded beyond their wildest imagination.
The linkage between the dead and the Russian military was established immediately, without any fact-based data to back it up, and subsequently echoed in all forms of media — mainstream and social alike.
Anyone who dared question the established “Russia did it” narrative was shouted down and belittled as a “Russian shill,” or worse.
That these conclusions are the byproduct of mass hysteria is beside the point — why seek to be objective when the narrative fits every stereotype that had been carefully assembled beforehand by the same people parroting the Bucha_ story today.
Social “preconditioning” of an audience unused to critical thinking is an essential step in getting this audience to accept at face value anything that is put before it, regardless of how egregiously the facts of the story strain credulity.
And let’s be clear — the Ukrainian narrative of the events in Bucha seems to stretch credibility.
It is established fact that Russian troops evacuated Bucha on March 30.
Ukrainian National Police began entering Bucha on March 31, and that same day the mayor of Bucha announced that the town was fully under the control of Ukrainian officials.
At no time was there any suggestion by the mayor or any other Ukrainian official of mass killings undertaken by Russia.
The videotape in question was released by Ukrainian authorities on April 2; it is not certain if the video had been taken earlier, or on that day.
What is certain is that the images shown in the video differed sharply from the narrative initially portrayed by the mayor.
For its part, Russia has vehemently denied the allegations, and has requested an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council to discuss what the Russian Foreign Ministry has called the “criminal provocations by Ukrainian soldiers and radicals” in Bucha.
The presidency of the Security Council is held by Great Britain, and the British mission to the UN has denied the Russian request, stating that a discussion on Ukraine currently scheduled for Tuesday, April 4 would serve as a forum for any discussion about Bucha.
One would think that the Security Council, which has shown a readiness in the past to meet on short notice to discuss the events coming out of Ukraine, would seek to accommodate Russia’s request on a matter of such importance.
The goal of the British, however, does not appear to be the rapid search for truth and justice, but rather to buy time to allow the political fallout from the alleged massacre in Bucha to develop further.
One example of this tactic manifesting itself is the reaction of United States President Joe Biden.
Biden took advantage of the Bucha crisis to advocate for the delivery of more weaponry to Ukraine.
All this from the president of acountry which has _ refused to recognise the International Criminal Court.
Fortunately for President Biden and the Ukrainian government, the British chief prosecutor of the court, Karim Khan, announced in early March 2022 that he had launched an investigation into alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Ukraine.
Given the high profile of the Bucha allegations, one would imagine that Khan has dispatched a forensics team to take control of the crime scene and oversee autopsies on the victims to establish the time of death, mechanism of death, and whether the victims had died where they were allegedly found, or if their bodies had been moved there from another location.
Khan would also be empowered to conduct interviews with the Ukrainian National Police, who have a history of close relations with members of the Ukrainian far right, including the infamous Azov Battalion.
Of particular interest would be any investigation into orders given to the police regarding the treatment of those Ukrainian civilians deemed to have collaborated with the Russian military during its occupation of Bucha.
The results of such an investigation would more than likely conflict with the narrative being pursued by the Ukrainian government and echoed in the West by compliant media outlets and politicians alike.
This is the prime reason why Khan is not currently on the ground in Bucha.
One can assume that if and when Khan is eventually given access to evidence about the Bucha killings, it will have been manipulated by the Ukrainian National Police to such an extent that disproving the allegations will be virtually impossible.
The truth about what happened in Bucha is out there, waiting to be discovered.
Unfortunately, that truth appears to be inconvenient for those in a position to pursue it aggressively through a forensicsbased, on-site investigation.
Following that he did an interview on the Rachel Blevins show where he presented the outline of a criminal case against President Biden for war crimes, likening that case to the Nuremberg trial.
Russia denies Ukraine war-crimes allegations Moscow claims accusations of Bucha massacre by Russian forces are fake news, April 3, 2022 The Russian military has firmly denied accusations of its involvement in the mass killings of civilians in Bucha, a Ukrainian town northwest of Kiev.
The claims have been made by Ukraine itself, and amplified by some Western media outlets and human rights groups, some days after Moscow withdrew its troops from the area.
Some of the dead apparently had their hands tied, while others wore white armbands, commonly used by Russian forces and civilians in areas under Russian control.
We must stop them and kick them out. | demand new, devastating G7 sanctions NOW,” Kuleba wrote on Twitter.
Top Western politicians have backed Kiev’s assessment of Bucha, with some explicitly pinning the blame for the killings on Moscow as well.
Bucha-Like ‘False Flag’ Incidents to Continue as West ‘Frustrated’ Over Propaganda Failures, April 3, 2022 Over the past 24 hours, the Western media have been fueling allegations that Russia committed mass killings of civilians in the Ukrainian city of Bucha as footage has shown city streets strewn with bodies.
The Russian Defence Ministry dismissed the accusations, underscoring that the footage is nothing short of yet another provocation.
With Kiev quickly accusing Russia of ‘genocide’ and ‘massacre’ in Bucha, Western media seems eager to automatically criminalize Moscow without a full investigation and it looks like the media is a tool for the West to make up for frustrations caused by the failures of its own propaganda, experts have stated.
Vanessa Beeley, an independent investigative journalist, points at how ‘NATO-aligned’ media plays its role to “protect their ‘side’” from repercussions for the war crimes they have been committing for decades"", while also highlighting inconsistencies in the Western-promoted narrative.
The sentiment is echoed by Joe Quinn, political commentator and author, who says that it was “entirely plausible” that that Ukrainian military policy was to shoot anyone on the street that did not have a blue armband, and in particular those with a white armband a sign recognized as an identifier of the Russian military.
According to Quinn, it was possible that some of the Bucha civilians wore white bandages as a sign of friendliness towards the Russian military, prompting the Ukrainians to assume that everyone with that bandage was somehow aligned with the Russian forces.
It is certainly a more plausible explanation than the irrational claim that retreating Russian soldiers decided to indiscriminately 'shoot' civilians on the street in Bucha,” Quinn says.
He also said that it can relate to the fact that Russia has made significant steps towards financial and economic independence from the West and stronger ties with China and India, which ""is causing a huge frustration"" in the West.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has said that Belarusian counterpart Alexander Lukashenko handed him documents exposing the Bucha fake.
According to Putin, the Bucha provocation is similar to the claims made regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Bucha provocation has been condemned by Russia as an ""outrageous"" fake created solely with the purpose of slandering Moscow.
According to Russia, the timeline of the Ukrainian allegations about the mass killing of civilians by Russian troops does not add up to the time when the troops actually left the city in the Kiev region.
Moscow asserted that the Ukrainian forces shelled Bucha after the Russian withdrawal with rocket and tank fire.
The Russian president also said that Kiev had backed away from the agreements made in Istanbul, leading the talks into a deadlock.
The attack, which Moscow attributed to a Ukrainian missile unit, killed 17 people and injured 36 others, it said.
When hostilities flared in eastern Ukraine in the wake of the 2014 armed coup, the city remained under Kiev’s control.
The missile was fired from Dobropole, around 45km southwest of the city, Moscow stated.
The latest casualty count by the city administration said 39 people were killed in the incident and 87 were injured.
When hostilities broke out in eastern Ukraine in the wake of the 2014 Maidan, the city remained under Kiev’s control.
Kiev accused Russia of hitting the station, claiming civilians were targeted deliberately with the intent to kill.
Kramatorsk Mayor Aleksandr Goncharenko said missile debris was found 40 meters from where most of the damage was done.
Those “little details” of motivation and intent are critical for proving a criminal case, and yet western media conglomerates are reporting not the news, but rather only United States government and Ukrainian propaganda.
Once again photographic forensic evidence suggests this was not a Russian attack, but rather a Ukrainian false flag attack working hand in hand with United States “information war” strategies — and it is innocents that are being killed, as usual in American wars.
That President Zelensky consents to and participates in this proves he values the American agenda of hegemony in perpetuity more-so than the lives of his own citizenry, exactly what one would expect from an American puppet president in a distant colony.
Because of President Biden’s and western media’s proven habit of automatically blaming Russia for atrocities, without proof or objective 3 party analysis of any kind, the real perpetrators in the Ukrainian military are encouraged to continue and escalate those crimes.
This crime (presenting false evidence to the Euro-American publics as incitement for further crimes in Ukraine) can and should be added to the list of war crimes and crimes against humanity that should appropriately, and with haste be leveled at President Biden, western mainstream news media and President Zelensky.
False flag operations by the United States A long dishonorable tradition 90.
Vietnam False flags are a longstanding United States tradition, dating from the 19th century.
But once-classified documents and tapes released in the past several years, combined with previously uncovered facts, make clear that high government officials distorted facts and deceived the American public about events that led to full United States involvement in the Vietnam War.
There was not a second attack on United States Navy ships in the Tonkin Gulf in early August 1964.
So, it’s not surprising the Azov neo-Nazis they trained certainly appear to use such horrific methods as well.
Occam's razor principle suggests it probably was Azov, as they have motivation, means and opportunities, however in a fair world ruled with justice one must await further evidence to be absolutely positive of their guilt before conviction, unlike United States media’s immediate assignation of blame on Russians in spite of strong evidence it wasn’t the Russians, such as forensic evidence from Bucha and the fact that Russians weren’t even in that town at the time those killed, were killed.
In 2017, the Syrian Arab Republic had been in the six-year long grip of a Western-backed regime change operation launched in response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s 2009 refusal to allow US-allied Qatar to build a pipeline through his country, one that would have undermined his relationship with key-ally Russia.
Like the aforementioned Operation Cyclone, Timber Sycamore would see the arming, funding and training of Wahhabi terrorists groups by the West and its allies, with the intention of removing Assad’s secular government and replacing it with a Westernfriendly leadership.
With the Syrian regime change operation not going as planned, Washington’s Neocons would soon resort to desperate — and reckless — measures.
More general uses of the phrase “false flag” The phrase “false flag” can be used to describe an imagined threat by another nation used to justify an attack upon it as in the following quote.
Iran, the United States and False Flags By Robert Fantina, Global Research, September 15, 2020, American Herald Tribune 13 September 2020 / United States’ government spokespeople are forever demonizing Iran.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has proclaimed that Iran is the world’s chief sponsor of terrorism.
In keeping with this, the possibility of the United States waging war against Iran is very real.
The United States is currently bombing, or supporting the bombing, of Palestine, Yemen, Syria, Afghanistan, Libya and Somalia.
It is sanctioning Venezuela, causing untold suffering there, wanting ‘regime change’ in that nation also.
And Pompeo has the temerity to say that Iran is the world’s chief sponsor of terrorism.
By any objective standard, that title must go to the United States / President Donald Trump and his cohorts continually raise the false flag of Iranian threats to the world, against all facts.
The United States has been at war for the vast majority of its history.
Yet more often than not they have been based on weak evidence, questionable motives, and outright lies.
How the United States Justifies its Wars (June 2020, Red Pill Press), journalist and human rights activist Robert Fantina explains how the United States government has rallied public opinion to support its wars and military objectives since before the American Revolution.
Next comes the use of propaganda to manipulate public opinion and enlist widespread buy-in.
Quoting and parroting the government, the media helps spread this propaganda.
This approach has successfully garnered support for both official warfare and acts of aggression such as plundering other country’s resources and removing left-leaning foreign leaders.
Two Men Wrongfully Convicted of Killing Malcolm X Are Exonerated After 55 Years Muhammad A Aziz and Khalil Islam, who each served more than 20 years of a life sentence, had always maintained their innocence, by Nora McGreevy, November 19, 2021 / Two men wrongfully imprisoned for the murder of Malcolm X_have been exonerated.
A lot less, particularly when they’re victims of the United States by Julie Hollar March 18, 2022 As United States news media covered the first shocking weeks of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, some media observers—like FAIR founder Jeff Cohen —have noted their impressions of how coverage differed from wars past, particularly in terms of a new focus on the impact on civilians.
We used the Nexis news database to count both sources and segments about Ukraine during the study period.
Comparing this coverage to that of other conflicts reveals both a familiar reliance on United States officials to frame events, as well as a newfound ability to cover the impact on civililans—when those civilians are white and under attack by an official United States enemy, rather than by the United States itself.
One of the most striking things about early coverage has been the sheer number of Ukrainian sources.
FAIR always challenges news media to seek out the perspective of those most impacted by events, and United States outlets are doing so to a much greater extent in this war than in any war in recent history.
Even the three Ukrainian individuals identified as having a relevant professional expertise — two doctors and a journalist—spoke only of their personal experience of the war.
But these voices were almost completely marginalized, with only five such civil society experts appearing during the study period.
Fair.com’s niche specialty incidentally is media bias and the entire article quoted above is well worth reading.
As if the wide range of sanctions against Russia were not enough, and stealing Russian assets in western banks were not enough, the United States and NATO must escalate with more weapons until every last Ukrainian is dead.
Before that happens though some western nation will declare war on Russia.
The mass and momentum pushing this drive to war will not be stopped by common sense or even self preservation.
None-the-less, Russia defeated the Nazis before and will again no doubt.
In any case the United States and NATO are currently flooding nations adjacent to Russia will soldiers trained to kill.
That is an artifact of a bygone age when the United States needed to pretend to be nice sometimes, at little bit at least.
Tod Wolters, commander of United States European Command told American senators on 29 March, falling short of specifying whether he meant permanent basing.
In recent months, United States military forces have soared from roughly 60,000 to 102,000 in Europe.
Tod Wolters was asked by Senator Roger Wicker whether the United States should increase the number of troops permanently stationed in Europe, rather than the rotating forces.
Still, Wolters' remarks left more questions than answers, as it remains unclear whether the additional United States military forces would be deployed on a permanent basis. ""| think the reluctance came from two things,"" says Scott Ritter, United States military analyst, former UN Weapons Inspector and WMD Whistleblower.
The general is aware of these financial and political unknowns, hence his hesitance, adds the military analyst.
For comparison's sake, NATO-allied European states hosted a total of 450,000 United States military servicemen in 1957, during the Cold War era, according to Axios.
That’s the way to start a war and when Russia is the target of this strategy, this is the way to start a thermonuclear war.
NATO holds war games on Russia’s border 'Bold Dragon’ drills held in Estonia, 11 Apr, 2022 British, French, and Danish troops who have recently arrived to serve in NATO Battlegroup Estonia began joint drills with Estonian forces this weekend.
The one and only thing that matters is quarterly dividends from war related industries for the super-rich, because they also own the politicians and news monopolies.
Besides all that, there are delicate little perks along the road to war sure to be enjoyed by all the great “warriors,” the shameless “men” of the west.
Over 6,300 foreigners kept hostage by Ukrainian nationalists Russian defense ministry, April 9, 2022 He also said that more than 19,600 people, including more than 3,300 children, were evacuated from dangerous regions in Ukraine, and from the Lugansk and Donetsk People’s Republics to Russia during the day.
He also said that more than 19,600 people, including more than 3,300 children, were evacuated from dangerous regions in Ukraine, and from the Lugansk and Donetsk People’s Republics to Russia during the day.
Banning all voices contradicting United States government dicta will be one of the primary causes of WWIII, and potentially the extinction of humanity, and a fundamental violation of innumerable human rights and national and international laws.
Google and MSN “deranking” those voices is the exact same thing and has been going on for years.
Since the beginning of the special military operation a total of 677,758 people, including 131,706 children, have been evacuated,"" he said.
According to Mizintsev, some 2,920 private cars crossed the Russian border on Friday and 86,980 since the beginning of the operation.
The Ukrainian side is deliberately hampering evacuation from Mariupol via humanitarian corridors opened by Russia as part of its response to Germany’s Turkey’s and France’s humanitarian initiatives, Mizintsev said.
According to Mizintsev, Russia’s armed forces open humanitarian corridors from Kharkov and Mariupol every day.
Apart from that, an additional humanitarian corridor is daily opened as part of the response to Germany’s, Turkey’s and France’s humanitarian initiatives from Mariupol to Berdyansk, from where they can take surface transport for Crimea or Zaporozhye, or sea-going transport to other destinations.
Militants of nationalist units have mined storage facilities with toxic chemicals at a coke plant in Avdeyevka and plan to blow them up when forces of the Donetsk People’s Republic approach the city, Mizintsev, said.
Furthermore, Ukrainian “right wing nationalists,” barely distinguishable from WWII Nazis, violently prevents seeking refuge in Russia to they extent they can.
In addition, it is commonly believed by most Americans that American wars are good for the United States economy, a fact which can help motivate American politicians to start wars.
Simultaneously, most nations in the UN General Assembly are held as economic hostages to American threats and/or bribes.
As political pundit Caitlin Johnstone noted in 2020, the United States has no allies, only hostages.
CHEN IA GLoBAL TIMES Section summary Based on substantial well-researched and verified public information it appears President Biden, due to his, his son’s*®, and his top cabinet members’ corruption, threats and an astonishing array of provocations have brought the United States and Russia to the brink of WWIII and thermonuclear Armageddon.
The United States invaded Iraq based on false information regarding “weapons of mass destruction” including chemical and biological weapons, yet none were found.
Analysts and diplomats have been saying since the 1990s that NATO expansion would eventually spark a conflict in Eastern Europe In 1997, 50 prominent foreign policy experts, including former senators, military leaders, and diplomats, sent an open letter to then-President Bill Clinton outlining their opposition to NATO expansion. “/t is a policy error of historic proportions,” they wrote.
This reminds me so much of a show-off rape, and the torture, rape and murder of Libyan President Gaddafi, about which former Secretary of State laughed so glibly.
In this 10 second video posted on YouTube, Hillary Clinton laughs, and admits to that murder.
Likewise, that video on YouTube is most certainly horrifically violent especially given that viewers know it is real and not a Hollywood production.
Motives, intent, methods, and opportunity for President Biden to lead the United States to World War III are all there.
Material facts evidenced by eye witness testimonies, news reports, videos and photos prove the Ukrainian war started in 2013/2014, with a United States funded and orchestrated “Color Revolution” against former President Viktor Yanukovych, in violation of “The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples under Article 1, paragraph 2” of the UN Charter.
Instead, the US, led by President Biden and his top cabinet officials, all of whom have “the appearance of conflicts of interest” between their government posts and weapons and related war industries, accelerated the slaughter of innocents in Lugansk and Donetsk.
That was not only “undiplomatic” but more extreme provocation by President Putin , virtually guaranteeing a Russian military response in the Donbass region, at least.
Previous to this decision, the United States had been playing a game of “peek-a-boo” repeatedly dangling the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO, and then later denying they would permit it.
Provocation was the name of the game the United States and NATO were playing and finally, they got a response.
QORALIIMES Now, “innocent” Ukrainian military, and genuinely innocent civilians, and innocent Russian soldiers are dying on the battlefields in Ukraine to “line the pockets” (increase quarterly dividends) of the provably corrupt President Biden family and many of his top appointed government officials.
At this point the only way to stop the acceleration of this war, is for Ukrainian President Zelensky to surrender.
He however would never do that, buoyed by massive United States and European financial, military, media and “moral” support.
Consequently, the only other option to stop this war from devolving into WWIII, is to place a moratorium on weapons delivery to Ukraine, such that President Zelensky has a “facesaving” excuse for calling for a truce, and negotiating in a reasonable manner with Russian President Putin.
If the recipients of this Referral for Criminal Investigation where to take it seriously, and begin the investigation that should have started in 2014, the potential for peace with selfdetermination and dignity for all parties would spring to life.
The alternatives include loselose scenarios for the entire human species and earth’s ecology.
Relevant United States and international laws and policies allegedly violated by above named United States officials Il.
Public officials shall not use their official authority for the improper advancement of their own or their family's personal or financial interest.
Requires such Member, officer, or employee to recuse himself or herself from any matter in which there is or appears to be a conflict of interest under the Rule, and to notify the Committee of such recusal.
Requires such individual also to submit to the Clerk of the House, for public disclosure, the statement of disclosure for which such recusal was made.
The people of Lugansk and Donetsk had voted in a referendum to secede, as they regarded the newly imposed Ukrainian government as illegitimate and had close economic and cultural ties to Russia. e During this attack, the city of Lugansk was surrounded and under siege for several months.
Water and electricity were cut, no people or supplies were allowed in or out, and the city was subjected to constant shelling by heavy artillery.
The victims were killed primarily by the Ukrainian Army including by shelling—not by the Russians. e War crimes were also committed in neighboring villages, including some occupied by right-wing militias that Kyiv had to rely on because many Ukrainians did not want to join the army to fight their own people.
The war in Ukraine did not begin February 24, 2022 as western media makes it appear.
Earlier a residential neighborhood had been struck by a grad missile, while other Ukrainian army attacks destroyed schools.
A woman told him that her daughter had been born on June 26, 2014, and that the war began in her village on July 19.
Ukraine not only instigated the war but has committed significant war crimes.
Those motivations can be proven and specific and credible evidence is provided in this document.
In any event, due to campaign finance laws permitting unlimited “donations” from anonymous sources, nobody can know for sure just how deeply the Bidens and other administration officials are involved with taking bribes from fracking industrialists.
That's an error Client does not have access rights to the content so server is rejecting to give proper response.
International Court of Justice in the Namibia case 7, the Western Sahara case and the 8.
Motivation for President Trump to accelerate the Ukraine War will not be found because he actively worked against building up the war machine there and was impeached for it.
However multiple motivations for President Biden to greatly accelerate the war in Ukraine can be proven.
It isn't the same as intent, which relates to whether an action was accidental or intentional.
Intent is an element of just about every crime, meaning that the prosecution must establish that the defendant intended to commit the criminal act.
But motive usually isn't a criminal element—the prosecution doesn't have to prove the defendant had it.
In regards to incentives, just making Hillary Clinton and his CIA director happy might have been enough.
In any case, this referral for criminal investigation is not directed at President Obama per se, but rather focused primarily on President Biden who had multiple motivations and material incentives to rapidly escalate this war.
Hillary Clinton was President Obama’s foreign policy advisor and Secretary of State for some time.
As Doug Bandow wrote in Forbes.com, ""Hillary Clinton Never Met a War She Didn't Want Other Americans to Fight,"" as she is credited with the disastrous and massively deadly series of so-called Arab Spring revolutions in more than half a dozen formerly stable nations.
Though those conflicts, mostly initiated by “color revolutions,” (mostly red, as in the color of blood exposed to air) were highly profitable for war and related industries in the US, they wreaked havoc, homelessness, death and hunger upon tens of millions of citizens of those nations — and yet the American public did not weep for them.
Multiple motivations and clear intent for President Biden to commit crimes against humanity in Ukraine To prove a crime, one must show intent and motivation.
Below are four separate but related verifiable motivations with references for President Biden to start and relentlessly escalate the most current phase of the Ukraine War.
President Biden’s family’s long-standing corrupt business practices in Ukraine profit from starting a war just to kill the legitimate Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany.
Most of President Biden’s top political appointees have the appearance of conflicts of interest , whereby they have personally profited from corporate war industries in the past, and most certainly can and probably will continue those collusive relationships after retiring from office.
Profit motive of other Euro-American war and oil & gas industrialists and the politicians they own, who wanted to create a boogieman to justify their budgets, bonuses and dividends.
The United States spends more on the war industry than China, India, Russia, United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Germany, France, Japan, South Korea, Italy, and Australia — combined.
President Biden might well have had additional motivation to greatly accelerate the Ukraine War provided by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
To what extent she is merely a salesperson for the CIA, or actually a progenitor of various international criminal schemes is unknown.
At minimum she is most certainly a facilitator of those illegal schemes, and therefore at minimum culpable in them.
The United States had driven the nuclear arms race from the beginning, and Russia has maintained parity.
The United States is jealous that China’s economy could grow larger than United States at some time in the future.
Ukraine has been considered a “battleground” nation since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
All of the above resulted in violations of the UN Charter (e.g., interfering in the affairs of other nations thereby negating any possibility of those nations exercising a right to selfdetermination) and innumerable other international laws and treaties.
However, that several distinctly personal motivations for greatly accelerating the War in Ukraine can be proven, the appearance of conflict of interest becomes impossible to ignore.
Raytheon’s stock rose over 4.6% on Monday and has risen more than 18% this year.
Lockheed Martin, the maker of the F-35 fighter jet, advanced more than 5.4% on Monday.
The company, with Raytheon, is the manufacturer of the Patriot missile defense system set to be deployed with the NATO battlegroup in Slovakia.
Northrop Grumman, leading manufacturer of attack and surveillance drones, saw its stock rise close to 7% on Monday, after rising 3% since the Ukrainian conflict began.
Outside the US, Britain’s BAE Systems, the largest defense contractor in Europe, Germany’s Rheinmetall, France’s Thales and Italy’s Leonardo have all seen their share prices rise sharply.
Yes, in addition to mass murder and scars that never heal enmities that will last generations so the super-wealthy can buy another island and boast at cocktail and drug parties about the “killing” they made on Wall Street.
Or worse, a nuclear winter that could kill a billion people instantly, cause another two billion to die of hunger, disease, and the tsunami of chaos and crime that will follow, and leave the rest scarred and damaged for life.
In 2021 alone we committed over $300 million in assistance to support Ukraine’s democratic and economic development, and over $650 million in security assistance.
He does not want his entire western front lined with American and NATO tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces and neo-Nazi ultra-nationalist extremists.
The Soviet Union is estimated to have suffered the highest number of WWII casualties.
As many as 27 million Soviets lost their lives, with as many as 11. million military deaths joined by up to 10 million civilian deaths due to military activity and an additional 8 million to 9 million deaths due to famine and disease.
Those totals do not include the more than 14 million Soviet soldiers who were wounded during the war.
Among the Soviet Union's 15 republics, Russia withstood the highest number of casualties, with 6,750,000 military deaths and 7,200,000 civilian deaths.
Threatening aggression is a violation of the UN Charter and the United States placing tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultranationalist extremists and especially BSL-3 and BSL-4 laboratories all along Russia’s western border is realistically viewed as a threat to Russia’s security.
There are furthermore many links between Neo-Nazi groups and United States government officials.
Hatewatch could not find Kreider or his contact information to seek comment from him.
The United States government has openly embraced many neo-Nazi groups around the world, including in the USA, Europe and Ukraine.
Given the US’s buildup of military along all of Russia’s western front, other military assets including space-based weapons, the west’s history of attacking Russia, and very long list of unwarranted and illegal foreign military attacks on nations, President Putin’s demands prior to it’s attack on Ukraine, appear critically necessary in order to ensure Russia’s selfdetermination as guaranteed by UN Charter.
Because President Putin is an oldfashioned romantic who apparently believes in family values and honor, and is willing to risk all to help those in Lugansk and Donetsk suffering under the withering fire of EuroAmerican-Kiev imposed genocide for eight long years, he is earning a place in history far more benign than the western political tools of the profit seeking corporations that are willing to ensure every last Ukrainian is killed to extract maximum quarterly dividends.
Living in a world where honor has been cast aside for profits and political expediency, makes President Putin very difficult or impossible for most American politicians to understand.
In any event, most American politicians don’t really care about his motivation for his attempt to disarm his increasingly aggressive, threatening and deadly neighbor.
Starting wars has been a “tried and method” of stimulating the American economy when it appears a bit flat, as occurred as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and mounting American debt.
Had former President Trump been reelected there is a reasonably high probability he would have somehow provoked a war against China instead of Russia.
Ukraine is a place well known to President Biden and his son Hunter due to their deep investments and profiteering there.
They wanted a war, and they got it, hugely aided by the fact that United States had one already going via it’s backing of the 2014 coup against the democratically elected president Viktor Yanukovych.
Given that President Biden , has profited enormously from the Ukrainian oil and gas industry, and many of his top appointed cabinet officials give the appearance of conflicts of interest between their official government positions, and positions in lobby groups and/or government funded think tanks, motivation and intent are established for President Biden to have intentionally provoked President Putin into his military invasion of Ukraine, a violation of the UN Charter, and numerous international treaties and laws.
As the result of President Biden’s family profit motivation and his top cabinet members’ profit motivation, fueled by the American intelligence apparatus and Department of Defense’s unlimited ambitions and drive for hegemony in perpetuity (a clear violation of the UN charter and innumerable international laws and treaties), the world now stands poised on the brink of thermonuclear war.
That is a comic book style rational cooked up by some minion in the legions of American disinformation experts posing as journalists.
That is because substantial evidence suggests they are complicit in launching and escalating the current armed conflict in Ukraine.
Likewise, they should have no say whatsoever in the determination to open a criminal investigation into their roles in starting this armed conflict/war.
Suppose Al Capone and/or Jack the Ripper had to give approval before a police and/or judicial investigation into their criminal activities was permitted.
This is the case | am bringing to the recipients of this request for a criminal investigation.
There appears only one reasonable and simple way to end the war in Ukraine almost immediately.
The UN needs to take a lead on a moratorium on arms shipments to Ukraine, in order to give President Zelensky a face-saving excuse for surrender.
Ukraine becoming a neutral country is the only solution to this war forced on it by United States and European political and economic ambitions.
This war is no different from any of the other wars the United States has launched since WWII, except it is still in its very early stages, and has a very real possibility of leading to nuclear war.
He had very substantial legal, national security and moral rationale for it — and yet the western media has entirely suppressed and mocked his legitimate motivations and instead demonized and censored him.
Americans meanwhile have not had fair access to news, falsely believing themselves to have that fair access.
Furthermore, many or most Americans are enjoying this war in Ukraine having been programmed by the United States government to enjoy viewing extreme violence.
At this time there is strong evidence Kiev is only escalating the US-NATO terrorism campaign in Ukraine begun in 2014 in attempt to further provoke and escalate it as much as possible to increase corporate profits in their respective countries and enlist NATO’s involvement, again leading to World War III, with Ukraine in the middle, which means the total destruction of “his” nation.
In order to encourage UN Secretary General Guterres to call for a moratorium on weapons shipments to Ukraine, investigation into alleged corrupt activities by President Biden, his 27 In any complex equation with many unknown variables, the best one can calculate the odds is 50/50.
Though this may seem awkward, ill-advised, and/or politically risky, compared to the effects of thermonuclear war, those efforts would be trivial.
The onus of responsibility lies with the relevant authorities to whom this Referral for Criminal Investigation is addressed.
The operation in Ukraine was launched on 24 February, as Russian forces hit Ukrainian military objects with precision weapons.
President Vladimir Putin noted it was started to stop the genocide in Donbass, where people have been suffering from an eight-year-long war waged against them by Kiev.
Appendix 1 — Reprints of some Russian source news Due to increasing censorship of Russian news media by the US, | am posting full text versions of some of the latest news regarding discoveries from Ukraine’s biological “research” facilities below.
Instead, the United States fights wars to make profits from war and war related industries, and will pump that war for all it’s worth until the target country is flattened.
Then the United States disgracefully withdraws, while the corporate profiteers, the merchants of death, laugh all the way to the bank.
Ukraine is meat on the table of the “good ol’ USA,” at least those rich enough to profit from it.
According to the document, a nearly $32-million program was aimed at “organizing work of the laboratories, built and modernized with the help of the donor ,” as well as “monitoring infectious diseases” and conducting work to “react rapidly” to outbreaks.
The program also listed the “safe collection, processing, temporary storage and transportation of clinical samples” as its goals.
The Ukrainian biolaboratories network has been funded by other United States agencies as well, Kirillov said, describing the scale of the biolabs program as an “impressive” one.
Policy and Implementation Guidance for the Defense Threat Reduction Agency 0 the Cooperative Biological Research DoD Advisery Board Progec Recommendations Based on the recommendations from the September 27.
The document highlights a meeting between the attaché and representatives of the US-Canadian company Skymount, which is involved in Al-related research.
The system “performs the work of 60-person years per day, greatly reducing the manual labor hours to generate new target molecules from existing, pre-approved drugs,” according to its developers.
We are talking about the screening system for pharmaceuticals ‘Deep Drug’, which have not passed the licensing procedure in the United States and Canada,” Kirillov stated.
In 2010, for instance, Indonesia shut down the United States Navy Medical Center in Jakarta, which was apparently involved in a similar project, over “numerous violations,” he added.
Russian media outlets recently reported that the Pentagon had commissioned more than 30 biological laboratories in Ukraine, where large quantities of dangerous viruses were stored.
Maybe because they have laboratories spread around the world, they are aware of the high risks of viruses leaking and triggering pandemics.
They assumed similar risks from Chinese laboratories, but that is stretching it too far.
And that's precisely why the United States has failed to bring COVID-19 under control on its shores.
But they cannot wash away the fact about the existence of such laboratories around the world.
It is time the United States published information about these biological laboratories, including what kind of viruses are stored there, what ""research"" is going on and what harm they pose to people in these countries and around the world.
Maybe Americans “let it all hang out,” but they don’t in this part of the world.
As for Russia asking China for military assistance in a military operation in Ukraine, it is laughably ridiculous.
Nothing less than screenplay writing for Hollywood style movies — smear jobs based on complete fiction.
The US, with more than 10 times the military budget of Russia, has never stopped research on biological weapons.
Russia on the other hand ceased all of that research in 1991 and has been open to international weapons inspections.
The United States “Department of defense” and most especially the intelligence apparatus of the United States have been known to “exaggerate” the threat posed by foreign nations it chooses to attack to “justify” those attacks, and simply for the purpose of expanding its already gargantuan budget.
Fortunately for Americans the United States is so rich and has no problems with poverty, health, education, infrastructure, supply chains and so on, so it can easily afford to waste trillions of dollars playing god around the world while simultaneously smashing and destroying entire nations while killing millions.
German very active participation in biological pathogen research in Ukraine Given the above information, it should come as no great surprise that on April 16, 2022 Russia Today newspaper published an interview with some of their findings on United States and German research in Ukraine on what can be termed “dual-use” biological pathogens.
The US, with 10 times the military budget of Russia, has never stopped research on biological weapons.
It became known that during the special military operation in Ukraine Russian troops discovered new documents on military biological activities in Ukraine.
As a result of the Special Military Operation in Ukraine , Russia’s Armed Forces found documents that shed some light on the bio-military programme implemented by the United States Defence Department in Ukraine.
They were also researching ways that epidemics spread based on these agents.
The scale of work makes it obvious that a considerable, and probably the most important, part of the information on the American military programme remains concealed from the international community.
Germany, alongside the United States, had been conducting vigorous military biological activities in Ukraine for many years and, possibly, continues to do so.
For you to better understand the situation, | will cite the following facts.
Since 2013, under the auspices of the German Federal Foreign Office, the German Government has been implementing the German Biosecurity Programme which _ includes partnership projects with government agencies and research organizations in focus countries, which Ukraine became part of in 2014, the year of Maidan.
German specialists from the Institute of Microbiology of the German Armed Forces , Friedrich Loeffler Institute , Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine and the Robert Koch Institute , which specialize in research of deadly biological agents, are engaged in practical activities.
According to the German Federal Foreign Office, the third phase of the GBP will be implemented in 2020-2022.
We can infer from the publicly available materials that the GBP’s stated technical goals include, among others, the gathering of epidemic intelligence in third countries, including with the use of big data technology, and developing the infrastructure of partner countries for handling dangerous biological agents.
The Institute of Experimental and Clinical Veterinary Medicine in Kharkov has been the Institute of Microbiology of the German Armed Forces’ main Ukrainian counterparty since 2016, which we know from its own data.
The fact that its official goal is to “improve the biological defence and security situation” in Ukraine, “particularly in the east of the country” gives rise to the rhetorical question of which border the German military biologists consider an outer border for the purposes of their professional interests.
The Institute of Microbiology claims in its materials that the project is related to the “potential threat of biological terrorism” in Ukraine amid the unending hostilities in eastern regions of that country.
It is crystal clear that this is a way to send a subtle message about the DPR and LPR’s possible “involvement” in hatching plans for the use of internationally prohibited biological weapons.
Obviously, to ensure protection against a potential biological attack, it is first necessary to study the potential biological agents with which it can be made.
In other words, it is necessary to conduct research in the field of biological or chemical weapons.
The Armed Forces of Germany have enough knowledge and practical skills in this area, as was demonstrated by the scandalous incident with the mysterious poisoning of blogger Alexey Navalny.
Specialists from the AFG Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology —a military institution allied with the AFG Institute of Microbiology — supposedly very quickly detected in the body of the Russian citizen traces of some military toxin that NATO lists in the Novichok family.
Such a high level of expertise — if, of course, all statements were factually accurate — suggests that the AFG is able to synthesise toxic substances independently, including the notorious Novichok and its markers.
Germany’s Friedrich Loeffler Institute that is in charge of the centre for the study of the most dangerous viruses and zoonotic infections on the Baltic Island of Riems, maintains active cooperation with the Ukrainian State Research Institute of Laboratory Diagnostics and Veterinary-Sanitary Expertise , the State Scientific Control Institute of Bio-Technology and Strains of Microorganisms and also with the Institute of Experimental and Clinical Veterinary Medicine that cooperates in parallel with the AFG Institute of Microbiology.
In Ukraine, the Friedrich Loeffler Institute has focused on Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever.
Soviet scientists discovered it for the first time on the territory of Russian Crimea in 1944.
There is documented evidence that the _ institute commissioned its Ukrainian partners to collect samples of ectoparasite recipients of bats that were transferred to the aforementioned Reims Island under the existing agreements.
The Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine has concentrated its activities in Ukraine on extremely dangerous fevers — Denge, Chikungunya, West Nile and Usutu, to name a few.
It cannot be ruled out that, as the special military operation progresses, additional documents will be discovered by the Russian Armed Forces.
According to confirmed reports, Germany closely coordinated its work on_ biological security with its American allies that established a network of at least 30 biological laboratories in Ukraine.
In addition to their other activities, they were involved in dangerous research.
We urge German officials to immediately stop spreading false allegations about our country’s intentions to use weapons banned by international law.
The Reich Ministry for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda also known simply as the Ministry of Propaganda was responsible for controlling the content of the press, literature, visual arts, film, theater, music and radio in Nazi Germany.
The ministry was created as the central institution of Nazi propaganda shortly after the party's national seizure of power in January 1933.
In Hitler’s cabinet it was headed by Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels, who exercised control over all German mass media and creative artists through his ministry and the Reich Chamber of Culture which was established in the fall of 1933.
After Hitler’s death, Goebbels had his six children first given morphine and then cyanide pills.
America’s allies in this current asymmetric war on Russia (and all Russian people everywhere) are being extremely foolish Because America’s game of international Whac-A-Mole is never ending.
The US’ friends today will find themselves on the receiving end of that same “game” sometime in the nottoo-distant future, and that is a sure and certain fact.
That assertion however presupposes they survive the current war against Russia, which is a 50/50 bet at best.
As soon as any nation develops to the point where it might be able to compete with the United States in anything, the United States sends it back to the Stone Ages.
And so, the United States insists on remaining the slave master of planet earth in perpetuity.
The French | can easily understand jumping on board with this kind of agenda, but | am truly amazed Germans and British would fall for this old trick again.
Before the Iran-Iraq War (Sep 22, 1980 — Aug 20, 1988 wherein the United States supplied weapons, including chemical weapons to Iraq, back in the good old days when Saddam Hussein worked for the CIA) both nations were highly developed with computer generated social security checks delivered to elderly and handicapped people every month.
A million people on each side of that war were killed, and the infrastructures of both nations destroyed.
Of course not, but gaining control of their particularly lran’s oil reserves was a huge motivating factor.
Likewise, the United States has nearly a hundred years of “hate Russians” propaganda floating around in the culture, so this war is easy to sell too.
We’ll make America great again piled upon the bones of innocents wherever and whenever convenient, as usual.
In the case of virtually all post-WWII wars, it has been the super-rich in the USA that profited from those crimes, and all wars are crimes.
In other words, the UK, Germany, Japan, and so on down the list of United States allies in this most current war effort are not in any way protecting their own nations, but rather ensuring their own dooms sooner, and helping to knock out the one super-power that might have — would probably have actually helped them when their turns at being target nations roll around again.
Please consider the evidence contained in this Referral carefully before making any decisions regarding the validity of this evidence, as failure to consider and act upon it in a timely fashion can and probably will have catastrophic consequences for all of humanity.
The Security Council took no measures to “maintain international peace and security,” despite President Putin’s best efforts, thereby opening the door to armed intervention to legitimately protect the security of his nation.
The proven American “dual-use” biological “research” facilities in Ukraine alone, with some of them very close to the Russian border, represent arguably reasonable justification for President Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine for the purpose of removing those threats, amplified by United States terrorist financing of neo-Nazi groups, especially in light of Russian casualties sustained from Nazi Germany’s attacks on Russia.
Nuland might not have known at the time of Hunter Biden’s key role in helping to escalate that dual-use pathogen technology “research” in Ukraine.
Hunter Biden DID help secure millions in funding for United States contractor in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research, laptop emails reveal, raising more questions about the disgraced son of then vice president By Josh Boswell, 25 March 2022 The Russian government held a press conference Thursday claiming that Hunter Biden helped finance a United States military 'bioweapons' research program in Ukraine.
He also introduced Metabiota to an allegedly corrupt Ukrainian gas firm, Burisma, for a 'science project’ involving high biosecurity level labs in Ukraine.
Every Russian has “links” with President Putin, as do many other world leaders.
Anyone who ever sold a washing machine to any Russian has links to President Putin.
The absurdity of United States sanctions is contemptable and proves United States contempt for international law, signed treaties, and innumerable signed contracts.
It also embraces expression that may be regarded by some as deeply offensive.
The right covers communications that are both verbal and non-verbal, and all modes of expression, including audio-visual, electronic and internet-based modes of communication.
The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities.
Thus, the United States retains sole right to censor all news except “news” generated by the United States government.
President Putin has a legitimate and legal right to protect the security of Russia from known and proven weapons of mass destruction the United States trafficked to Ukraine, including but not limited to highly infectious biological pathogens — as admitted by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland Washington DC March 8, 2022) and bioweapons as admitted by Robert Pope, the director of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program in Ukraine reported February 25, 2022.
Many make it clear both political parties are simply two sides of the same coin representing corporate interests and not the people.
If they are pro-peace, against racism, misogyny and economic sanctions, and support drastically reducing the ever-widening wealth gaps within and between nations they are probably alt-news.
America doesn’t need to strangle and blow up smaller weaker nations to be great and amazing.
And yet to collect all that glory there has been a “dark side” to American history and current events and we all know it.
And there is the USA again, perfectly ready willing and able to give us 10 million “very good reasons” for every crime against humanity, foreign invasion, devastating predatory behavior in one nation after another, and we at least pretend to go along with it.
Like a predatory killer, a hungry tiger, a vampire, a sadistic mass murderer the United States is a super-sized grand-scale serial killer selecting one target group, and/or nation after another for robbery, human slaughter and destruction.
The United States can afford to feed every person on earth, yet is more interested in accumulating ever more vast and unimaginable wealth for that small group of already fabulously rich people.
That is unrestrained capitalism which is totally different from and vastly worse than any hungry tiger.
The USA does need to keep blowing-up and robbing other nations to keep the momentum of its incredible grandeur going.
And so, the list of American slaughter of by-in-large innocent other nations — they antiseptically call “interventions” is a very long one.
Many or most of the educated around the world have known one or two or more Americans and they can be amazing.
Sometimes they come into a situation, analyze the problems, diseases, structural flaws etc. faster than imaginable, and have figured out solutions and ways to implement those solutions with light speed.
It is easy to see all that goodness in so many American movies, TV shows, cartoons, in medical and other science journals, and even from time-to-time newspapers.
And more recently, beginning with the War Powers Act of 1973, presidential war powers have expanded so much that, according to the Congressional Research Service, it's no longer clear whether a president requires congressional authorization at all.
But the reality was much more complicated, and it's only gotten more complicated.
These operations may require low visibility, clandestine, or covert capabilities.
They can be conducted independently or in conjunction with operations of conventional forces or other government agencies and may include operations through, with, or by indigenous or surrogate forces.
That doesn't mean its forces are carrying out capture or kill raids in every country, but it's almost impossible to know where and when different operations are taking place.
Since then, it's more than tripled in size, received an ever-increasing share of funding, and has conducted operationsin dozens of countries.
Army's 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment , the Naval Special Warfare Development Group , and the Air Force's 24th Special Tactics Squadron.
In addition to the SMUs, JSOC has its own intelligence division, the Intelligence Support Activity, and often oversees the 75th Ranger Regiment, the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment , and other special operations forces.
Journalists Dana Priest and William Arkin found that JSOC has carried out counterterrorism operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, Algeria, Iran, Malaysia, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Somalia, Syria, and Yemen.
Psychologist Sigmund Freud was the first to deeply explore psychological defense mechanisms in humans.
In most cases, these psychological responses are not under a person’s conscious control.
Some are well known and | won’t elaborate on the meaning, but some are not so well known and deserve some explanation.
Denial — This is when a person consciously or unconsciously refuses to accept obvious facts.
For example, nearly all American politicians, and probably at least half of the United States population are in denial of the criminality of American foreign wars.
Repression — Memories of things done by a person that are incompatible with a person’s value system are simply suppressed and “magically” forgotten.
Projection Some thoughts or feelings people have about another person may make that person so uncomfortable they project those feelings, misattributing them to the other person.
For example, a person may dislike a new co-worker, but instead of accepting that, s/he chooses to tell him/herself that they dislike you.
Displacement This is when a person redirects feelings from the true source to another.
Or, perhaps after work the man goes running, or plays a furious game of basketball.
Regression This is like a kind of denial where a person unconsciously goes back to an earlier stage of life — like childhoodto avoid some uncomfortable or exceptionally painful reality they can’t deal with.
Rationalization This is making excuses for things a person says or does when they know those things are incompatible with their value system.
So, they can build elaborate systems of excuses — usually flimsy reasons to excuse their words or actions.
Reaction formation Instead of feeling bad about having done something wrong, a person flips to the opposite side and takes excessive pride in it.
In 2015-2016, 45.8% of the United States population used prescription drugs in the past 30 days.
Anytime any national leader does not kowtow to American interests, they and their nation will be crushed.
If a nation signs on with the China led “One Belt One Road” project, they will be punished.
This is the Antebellum movie from which there is no waking up to a better reality for most of the world.
It’s a nightmare with no escape or end until death, which will be experienced without painkillers, however long it may take.
That’s the reality of American overseas foreign economic and military aggression.
He isn’t just fighting Euro-American “donated” weapons, or the neo-Nazi saturated government, he’s also fighting the saturation level Euro-American media’s disinformation machine that turns heroes into devils, and devils into heroes using all the trickery of American Hollywood media and the world’s most clever psychologists who know how to shape those lies into believable tales that people want to believe so they can escape one more massive horror unleashed by Euro-American corporate CEOs and federal government foreign policy makers.
And, that’s why every American and western European voter should read this book, and the links in their entirely.
The tyranny of ego Both bibles and virtually every major spiritual philosophy warns against the tyranny of ego.
It does appear murder/suicide, rather than learning to get along with those who are different, is an option for those so sure of themselves and their beliefs.
Freud postulated that humans are primarily motivated by unconscious forces, with the two dominant ones being sex and aggression.
Well-being means to be fully related to man and nature affectively, to overcome separateness and alienation, to arrive at the experience of oneness with all that exists—and yet to experience myself at the same time as the separate entity | am, as the individual.
Though it only reached #3 on United States Billboard Hot 100, it was by year end #1 on the United States Top Singles list.
It also signaled the final inglorious end of the peace and love generation and became the theme song of Gen X Generations Y and Z are only elaborations on the military-industrial complex’s full domination of popular culture.
In the more recent movie series Batman and Marvel superhero series, super rich characters Bruce Wayne and Ironman don’t need superpowers like other characters because they’re rich, and with that wealth they can buy superpowers.
In any case wealth and power overpowered the more social-minded philosophies of the 1970s, and during the 1980s many of the former anti-war, peace and love peak baby-boomers in the United States “sold out” and joined the “establishment” of corporate America facilitated by also taking up cocaine habits.
Given cocaine’s highly addictive qualities, and its ability to engender a sharp, hard, mean edge on personality it really was the perfect antidote to cure Americans of the “peace and love” disease, at least from the perspective of the military industrial complex, and thus it should be no surprise the United States government imported tons of cocaine to help kill off any altruistic hangovers from the 1970s.
The Clintons appear to have been facilitators of that process at least in Mina, Arkansas.
The cost of transgender operations and ongoing treatments Fast-forward 30 years and in the 2020s transgender operations are “all-the-rage” with United States schools coaching children on the reasonable viability of correcting nature’s “mistakes” with a “simple” operation.
The male-tofemale vaginoplasty is estimated to be somewhere between $20,000 and $50,000 or even higher.
Penectomy — surgical procedure for removing the external genitalia of males.
Feminizing genitoplasty — surgical procedure for creating the internal female genitalia.
One must notice the new vocabulary that has arisen to smooth this process out.
Adam’s apple reduction, Cheek augmentation, Chin surgery, Forehead contouring, Hairline advancement, Jaw reduction, Lip augmentation & Rhinoplasty.
Stunting prevents children from developing to their full potential mentally and physically, and it is largely irreversible.
Children who have severe acute malnutrition, the deadliest form of extreme hunger, can succumb to the disease in just a few days.
Children who die in this way suffer immensely as their vital organ functions slow down and eventually stop.
Regardless as to the above, starving people might think the whole global transgender movement a bit ridiculous given they only want to avoid agony and live.
Given the total victory of the military-industrialmedia-medical-educational complex within the United States to shape culture, it is not surprising narcissism is a common trait among the victors of what was once a cultural conflict.
So, while Americans worry about which body wash to use, which alcohol and drugs to use to stimulate their sexual encounters, and what their gender identity really is or should be, a human being dies of hunger every 5 seconds.
The “problem” of President Putin The problem with President Putin as seen by the United States “defense” establishment incidentally is he’s kind of old fashioned and traditional (as western civilization once was before the CIA re-engineered it) and just isn’t “hip” to all these trendy new waves in American and derivative world cultures.
Money may not “trickle down” to the great unwashed in the USA, but popular trends that encase the dictates of the military-industrial-media-medicaleducational complex — in steel certainly do.
Meanwhile conservative American Republicans hold on to a glimmer of hope that former President Trump can save them in the next presidential election from the excesses of the liberal democrats, which makes me think President Putin may be the last great hope of western civilization — even if he is a bit conservative and of the east.
One must also keep in mind there may be no “next” American presidential elections as President Biden appears ready, willing and able to launch WWIII to prove “what a macho man he really is” in the ultimate expression of grandiose ego in world history.
The mass and momentum of the military-industrial-media-medicaleducational complex appears to be irresistible.
Even most Americans that don’t approve of the whole American ego trip are terrified into silence, and unfriend their parents and progeny, brothers and sisters on Facebook who might have even once questioned the drive for American global supremacy in perpetuity.
A great cowardice has overtaken traditional Americans inspired by the terror the CIA is so very, very good at instilling in captive populations around the world.
For one thing Russia is by far the world’s largest country occupying about 11. % of the earth’s land mass, and it is also one of the world’s natural resource richest countries.
It is also a harsh and unforgiving land as the artic cold sweeps in from the North Pole and kills all those not very well prepared in advance.
To survive in Russia requires a great deal of planning, forethought and industrial cleverness.
Russia has been invaded by the west three times now with the last time, WWII resulting in about 24,000,000 total Russian civilian and military deaths caused by Nazi Germany.
And so, instead of making amazing movies, cell phones and cars, the Russians make amazing weapons that actually work — unlike so many of the hyperexpensive American weapon systems.
Likewise, Russia has a nuclear arsenal just a bit larger than the USA, but if the truth be told, it wasn’t Russia leading the arms race at any time.
For the most part it was a jolly party, though their sadness did manifest in teary eyes at those memories.
Recall that less than 1 in a 100,000 Nazis were ever prosecuted, with the majority melting back into society, mainly industry, the police, military and government.
Now, too many of their grown children have apparently rediscovered the ultra-nationalist philosophies that launched those first-generation Nazis in WWII and spread that fanaticism around the world — with a great deal of United States help, again, of course.
The United States has never tried to tackle a nation like Russia before.
It must be understood Russia has demonstrated no desire to be anyone’s foe, simple protect innocents and defend its own nation.
It, like every other target of American unrestrained military aggression, wants to be friends.
Our interests are eternal and perpetual, and those interests it is our duty to follow.
Life so often offers us winwin solutions, and to then betray the friends who make possible such brightness in our lives and endeavors, is treachery.
There is a limited warranty on all empires that have based their survival on such foundations.
Sooner or later, forces from both within and without always, always end up creating implosions and/or explosions leading to the downfall of such unmitigated arrogance.
And it appears on some level, most Euro-Americans are aware of this, and thus excessive alcohol, drugs, and other transitory escapist pleasures are needed to hide from and deny otherwise inescapable truths.
And yes, Russians do drink too, but, have — as per the climactic mandates their environment demands — planned for another attack from the west far more meticulously than the USA or Europe.
President Biden and the world will pay for this unimaginably deadly gamble in unimaginable ways if Euro-Americans do not back-off and soon.
All of the psychological defense mechanisms and potassium iodine in the world will not protect the mostly good people of the United States and Europe if this conflict is permitted to escalate any further.
This documented reality was deliberately obscured by the same sources that had previously documented its existence once the Russian invasion occurred.
To acknowledge the existence of this odious ideology by NATO would require NATO to acknowledge the role it played in training and equipping Azov regiment personnel since 2015.
The Ukrainian conflict is a proxy war, but one which Russia is poised to win decisively.
What concerns me is the sense of invincibility inherent in EuroAmerican Narcissistic hubris leading them, when Ukraine’s military can no longer conceal its losses, to attempt to enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine by striking at Russian airfields.
That can escalate very quickly into the grey-zone use of depleted uranium munitions which is the final step before all-out thermonuclear war.
On the bright side, it is highly likely President Putin’s military strategists have anticipated this possibility also and have contingency plans already in place for just such an eventuality.
It is also highly like NATO will screw it up, as the probability their pilots really want to die en masse over Russia or Ukraine knowing full well the political and economic motivations behind the entire war from the beginning, is extremely low.
Air Force personnel by the way have the highest IQs among the armed services.
In sum, Scott Ritter is probably right, regardless as to NATO and/or American potential interferences.
The United States was already sanctioning 1/3"" of humanity before Russia’s armed intervention in Ukraine.
By cutting Russia out of the world economy the United States further isolates itself as well.
The United States is spending itself silly, and its debts deeper than the Mariana Trench.
As casualties mount, and carefully crafted United States disinformation escalates, it seems as if President Biden’s war chiefs are attempting to goad NATO into attempting to enforce a no-fly zone and possibly sending ground troops to Ukraine.
That would transition this Russian attempt to clear Ukraine of weapons of mass destruction and neo-Nazi extremists into a major war, which the United States and EU “defense” industrialists would just love, in spite of the fact it would destroy all infrastructure in Ukraine and kill millions.
Those kinds of considerations however never slowed down the United States and European war machines for a second.
They get to sell weapons, while primarily Europeans and Russians die in a macabre replay of WWIII, again, far, far from American shores.
OECD predicts German economic growth rate at 4.1% in 2022 and 2.4% in 2023, possibly undercut by shortages of key manufacturing input which might turn out much worse and more expensive than originally calculated.
One cannot simply cut out one of the biggest global resource producers from the world market without all kinds of ripples far greater than those produced by butterfly wings.
In any case there is evidence President Biden’s true masters are attempting to trap Europeans into a very deadly quagmire of a major world war, without the loss of a single American life.
It was the Dulles’ plan from the beginning to then break the German-Russian alliance forcing the Russians to carry the penultimately heavy burden of stopping Nazi Germany.
That made it easy for the United States to attack from the west and win the war they created in the first place.
Europe, North Africa and Japan were smoking ruins, while United States industrialists had wild parties and enjoyed the many fruits of their total victory.
Oh yes, forgot to mention 60 million humans were killed, sacrificed on the altar of American capitalists’ and politicians’ infinite greed.
Deaths from WWIII however are likely to be in the billions, but the profits will be in the trillions if anyone survives.
Those who might think this is too cynical and wicked for any person to really consider simply don’t personally know the sadists and bullies American target nations and people have had to deal with since that nation’s inception.
True, there is much that is good in the US, and they were and continue to be intentionally cultivated to unknowingly conceal that which is not good.
Expanding empires in history usually did so with a great deal of bloodshed, true, but then their empires usually enjoyed at least a few hundred years of relative peace afterwards.
Even if WWIII does not happen, President Biden’s blunder of forcing this war is accelerating de-dollarization.
The status of the dollar in international trade fell below 50% several months ago largely due to sanctions imposed on Iran.
Now, banning Russia from than 70 countries and territories abroad—from giant “Little Americas” to small radar facilities.
Federal borrowing competes for funds in the nation’s capital markets, thereby raising interest rates and crowding out new investment in business equipment and structures.
Entrepreneurs face a higher cost of capital, potentially stifling innovation and slowing the advancement of new breakthroughs that could improve our lives.
Growing debt also has a direct effect on the economic opportunities available to every American.
It’s surprising the G7 and EU can’t figure out de-dollarizing the world economy will have a rather negative effect on the value of the dollar, which is an imaginary entity anyways since ditching the gold standard.
Besides that, exactly these kinds of isolationist policies directly led to the Great Depression of 1929.
Narcissistic personalities virtually always exhibit delusional beliefs in their own invincibility.
Countless would-be world conquerors have tried and died along with their empires.
In the language of competition fighters everywhere, the United States “telegraphs” its next moves loudly and clearly.
They need public support to further their unlimited aggression against innocents, and so they need to “spin” their deeds before the deeds to ensure public acceptance.
For example, it has been my observation that the United States seeks to intentionally promote divisiveness, conflict and chaos in all overseas foreign countries as the United States is geographically very isolated from all other superpowers and therefore theoretically safe from their problems.
They will not sell out their national sovereignty for United States dollars or anything.
That’s what makes them true super-powers, and that’s why the United States capitalist corporate and political leadership hate them so much.
Fortunately for the rest of the world outside the Narcissism of Euro-American domination, #2 above weakens with every sanction the United States applies to other nations (and that more than 50% of world trade is no longer in United States dollars), and that seriously weakens the dollar as the global currency.
Without its supremacy holding it up, the United States dollar can drop to the value of monopoly money overnight.
In any case, predicting the United States intelligence apparatus’ next move isn’t difficult.
Sometime before the November 2022 election the United States will attack and at least try to sink at least one and probably several of China’s Naval ships in the South China Sea.
The United States managed to provoke President Putin into his invasion of Ukraine with extreme aggression, and so they hope to provoke China with extreme aggression into an invasion of Taiwan.
Such an action would invite full-scale war against China even if it only attempts to fight back in any way in a naval battle, a war the United States believes it could win given United States naval and nuclear superiority over China.
The United States foreign policy makers mainly in United States think tanks, pentagon and CIA believe the Chinese people will then want to overthrow the Chinese government, based on CIA reports of Chinese dissatisfaction with the government.
There are many indicators this is precisely what the United States has planned.
It seeks to overtake us in literally every domain, from economic strength to military power, and from space to cyberspace.
Calling China a “silent partner” in Russia’s “aggression” against Ukraine, the intelligence chief also warned that the ongoing military operation posed an “immediate threat,” suggesting that “desperation” on the part of President Vladimir Putin could trigger a nuclear exchange.
China and Russia could be the US’ best friend if the United States wasn’t suffering “state capture” by corporate CEOs and their corrupt pet DC politicians.
Likewise, it is so pitiful today’s American leaders are so paranoid and terrified of playing and working nicely with other people.
This is a natural problem of American concepts regarding unrestrained capitalism that cannot tolerate friends and cooperation, but rather see and create only conflict and aggression in all areas.
Thus, the United States creates loselose scenarios at every turn, and the world economy and especially the poor suffer the agonies of the damned.
China actually believes in and works toward winwin solutions by way of cooperation.
And so naturally they are relentlessly smeared with false narratives at every turn.
The United States leadership cannot tolerate cooperation because they ultimately are controlled by corporations only motivated by quarterly earnings reports and nothing else.
The possibility of WWIII and thermonuclear and biological devastation of humanity is irrelevant to them.
Those corporations are so much like reptiles and machines and see only what is right in front of them.
They cannot imagine a cliff looming in front of them, before they reach it.
It is difficult to predict how China actually would react to the sinking of one or more of its naval ships.
Were | them, | would use mass media as a defensive weapon to decry United States aggression and relentlessly scream in outrage and righteous indignation, while activating squadrons of legalists to tie up United States and international courts and other criminal justice bodies until President Biden retires prematurely.
Kamala Harris meanwhile has accumulated a rather terrible reputation among Americans with many or most minorities seeing her as the “incarceral queen” and most white supremacists seeing her as an existential threat to their communities.
NATO Honors Nancy Pelosi with First-ever “Women for Peace” Award by Rick Rozoff Global Research, October 12, 2021 / Anti-bellum 11 October 2021 With an annual salary of $172,000 ($223,000 when she’s speaker of the House), Pelosi is worth an estimated $120-$315 million.
Number 3 in line for the presidency is President pro tempore of the Senate Patrick Leahy —a known China and Russia-phobe who again is likely to accelerate a war rather than put a halt to it.
Next in line for the presidency is Secretary of State Anthony Blinken, but would probably not be allowed that position because of judicial constraint given his long history of “giving the appearance” of conflicts of interest.
By this time of American chaos, the United States Civil War II will be cooking along vigorously, China still screaming and wailing in righteous indignation, and most of the United States and world crying and screaming along with it.
China’s symbol is the panda afterall, and everyone still loves Kung Fu Panda, even if folks in Langley and DC don’t like it.
Besides all that, President Xi is almost always smiling in photos and videos and that does speak to the heart of the civilized world or what remains of it.
Meanwhile CIA Director Burns will have long very private virtual meetings with President Putin trying to appeal to his “whiteness” to prevent him from joining in a thermonuclear war, and fail spectacularly.
Due to President Putin’s honor code, that more than anything at the moment is probably what will lead him to scald Burns with open contempt.
Instead that outrage and anger has built up inside, and when it does come out, it will be something the United States has never seen or even imagined before.
Americans have been watching American driven wars on TV for decades, like Romans watching the gladiatorial games, and enjoyed it while millions died in horror, agony and dirt.
President Putin knows this, as do I, having worked in several American (and its proxy’s) wars as a journalist and having interviewed many, many American war survivors.
What finally triggered his invasion of Ukraine however was the massively expanded indiscriminate bombardment — mass murder of innocents in Donbass next door.
He simply could not tolerate any more massive wholesale intentional, sadistic slaughter of his innocent friends.
His invasion of Ukraine appears to be been driven by empathy, and all people of empathy in the world who know what’s going on the world are livid, absolutely outraged beyond words to express — in response to the long, horrific bloody history of United States foreign policy makers led by the CIA and corporate CEOs smashing and destroying innocent nations and their leaders again and again and again in nation after nation after nation.
The instant the United States declares war on China, Russia will be there guarding its back, in full-force.
But, because of illegal pervasive American censorship (including and especially shadow regulation on the servers that host most of my publications), | know there is virtually zero chance any Americans will read this book beyond DoD legalists hoping | will advocate violence or something else illegal so-as to have an excuse to frame me for some crime and have “evidence” to support it.
The reader will notice, | hope, this writer never, in any way, shape or form, advocates violence. | see violence and hate as the causes of the problems the world now confronts, not the solutions. | believe communication and education are the only solutions to the epidemics of hate and violence in the world.
In spite of that optimistic approach, | am not optimistic about the future of humanity due almost entirely to the political/economic structure of the USA and most especially the wildly illegal eradication of the formerly mostly free press.
In other words, my educated guess is thermonuclear war is inevitable in the relatively near future, will be accompanied by a civil war in the US, and followed by revolutions around the world against American puppet leaders.
Likewise, | believe socialism will be the new prevailing political and economic world system, however without any suppression of religion.
Religions are not the causes of the current problems, even though the leadership of the major religions have been corrupted, weaponized and turned against each other.
That is not due to any inherent flaws in the religions themselves, any more than humanity is to blame for the “excesses” of the United States Military-Industrial-Media-Educational-Medical Complex.
The United States government has mocked religion from the very beginning of its history The United States has put forth pretenses of piety masking slavery, expansionism and colonialism as national virtues, even until today, and now the world is in a position, for the first-time centuries to push back, thanks to military strength of President Putin, the economic strength of China, and the moral courage of both of those leaders.
My article (cited in many locations in this book and) below is now impossible to find on Google.com even searching the “full name of the article” + “my name,” even though | could find it a few months ago on Google easily.
Censorship in the United States is accelerating at a logarithmic rate these days.
So many links | found doing research only few years, months and weeks ago are now dead links or gone.
The United States is “weeding” out everything that does not parrot United States government dicta from the internet.
The United States corporate and political leaders are fully prepared to start WWIII, even knowing the risk of thermonuclear war and leaks from many if not most of the United States biolabs around the world, in order to maintain its insane “hegemony in perpetuity” , and that is insane.
My review article about the labyrinth of American censorship mechanisms and laws prohibiting that censorship is one of the best in the world.
The only reason | was able to find the four links above for this manuscript is | knew where to look and logged in to find them.
It’s better than going into that long night of humanity silently, without resistance.
Regardless as to what the United States and its European allies may want, they must back off immediately and start negotiating to back NATO off Russia’s borders entirely, close their BSL laboratories and get psychological help for those Euro-American politicians and corporate leaders responsible for all of the American wars, and American terrorist groups including the neo-Nazis to deprogram them from their ultra-violent extremist philosophies and terrorist activities.
Given that in any large complex equation with many unknown variables, the best one can calculate the outcome is 50/50, the future of humanity, if there is to be one, is highly uncertain.
And thus, the fate of advanced life on earth beyond plants, bacteria and viruses rests on a 50/50 gamble unless the “Western Alliance” of unrestrained capitalists start to back off now.
In the case of a thermonuclear war, the United States will be totally obliterated along with large parts of Russia.
Following that there will be revolutions around the world deposing American puppet leaders in developing countries.
The probability all 300+ Top Secret American biological research labs distributed around the world will keep their pathogens contained is-equal-to-zero.
In other words, the full range of all American biological pathogens, some call “weapons” will be set loose upon the earth.
There will be no cures or vaccines due to obliteration of global supply chains.
In this current day real life scenario however, President Biden’s family is hugely sneakier and more corrupt than Nikita Khrushchev ever was.
That final part of the above statement is the conclusion of the United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs & United States Senate Committee on Finance Majority Staff Report, not this author, though | would not argue with it either.
One thing is for sure, President Biden is no Kennedy and in the context of the current military conflict in Ukraine, President Biden is actually playing the role of Nikita Khrushchev who wanted to put nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Just so President Biden and his predecessors have permitted deadly dual-use biological pathogens in Ukraine very close to its borders, United States financed and trained neo-Nazi militias in Ukraine, and NATO in several sections of its western border.
He will push the red button ending civilization as we know it without a second thought when the time comes.
There is no animal more dangerous than a cornered animal, and this is the situation into which the west thinks they have pushed him.
The dollar as the global currency is finished, and its legitimacy as legal tender for currency was based entirely upon its status as the global currency.
Maybe, maybe not. | am certain he has an endgame in mind and believes he has predicted Euro-American responses precisely.
The odds are 51% according to my calculations, because | believe his intelligence sources are vastly more reliable than American intelligence sources.
Region and country desk chiefs then tell their CIA station chiefs what the big bosses in Langly want to hear.
Then, the station chiefs tell their CIA officers what the big bosses want to hear.
Then the CIA officers tell their local agents want those officers want to hear.
Then the local agents go out into their own countries, and either make those dicta come true, or just lie and affirm everything their CIA “handlers” want to hear.
The big bosses in Langly were right, not really, but they have “actionable intel” to go ahead with whatever they wanted to do in the first place.
They live in a much more dangerous world dominated by the CIA and real intelligence (access to accurate information) is essential.
My mother always argued that a benign despot is better than a liberal democracy ruled by Narcissistic demigods which is not surprising given my parents’ Jesuit education; in any case | believe she was right about that and President Putin’s somewhat autocratic style of leadership has all the advantages of a good ship captain in a storm as argued by Socrates.
It appears highly likely the debt-riddled United States and EU have isolated themselves from world markets even more since February 24, and most of the people in Africa, Latin America and Asia now have some new measures of hope that either 1) the United States will grow up and let a multi-polar world evolve naturally, or 2) just trigger Armageddon and get it over with.
Unfortunately, civilian intelligence organizations usually have much more influence with national leaders than their military intelligence people, and so, | move a lot.
That chaos includes destruction of those nations’ infrastructures, around 90 million displaced people worldwide now and that population rapidly increasing at ever increasing speeds.
In the case of WWIII, most of humanity will die painfully of disease, starvation and violence, though hundreds of millions will die from thermonuclear weapons directly and in about 1/3"" of the cases relatively quickly.
The United States will probably experience a civil war which the White Supremacists have been planning on at least since the end of the last Civil War.
There will probably be only a few million survivors around the world living in extremely remote areas.
Because American corporate greed and nationalist ego will not permit them to back off this war, nuclear war is the most probable outcome of the current situation in Ukraine.
Conclusions on probable outcomes of Ukraine War 1) Euro/American voters should have paid a great deal more attention to who they voted for in past elections.
Due to multi-national, primarily American corporate greed, the lack of an effective and impartial international judicial body, the structure of the US’ totally corrupted fake democracy, and American ego-issues, the United States will not permit a fair outcome to Russia’s legitimate need for security and peace with true self-determination within the nations along its western borders, nuclear war is the most probable outcome.
President Putin will not be intimidated into surrender and will not be easy to capture or kill.
In the case of unlimited nuclear war most of the world’s population will be killed by the release of American biological pathogens stored in freezers all around the world.
Western Euro-American Caucasians will immediately be killed or enslaved whenever encountered if possible and surviving Russians celebrated as having finally brought the infinitely cruel white slavers to the bitter ends they deserved.
Either the Euro-Americans back off quickly or the probability of nuclear war looms hugely.
My parents did — each in their own unique way heavily influence me in becoming who | am and for that | thank them.
The side of peace; peace with dignity, self-determination and security for all.
The current conflict in Ukraine is only profiting those invested in western “defense” related industries, the vast majority of whom are already very rich men.
Everyone else in the world is losing at a time when humanity as a whole should be investing in global economic development, including obviously COVID-19 recovery and working to prevent the next global pandemic as globalization, climate change, poverty and inadequate health care precautions are very rapidly spreading many infectious diseases.
That said, | also have to acknowledge President Putin has access to a great deal more information than | have, so | cannot and will not assert he was wrong for launching his military operation in Ukraine.
It appears there is more at stake here than simply the survival of Ukrainians, Russians and Americans.
Lastly in this section | would like to add five years ago | had friends in Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Ukraine and Russia and all was well with everyone.
At the same time, | have infinite empathy for my dear, dear friends in Ukraine who the United States has thrown “under the bus” to even further enrich the already super-rich, and play the deadliest “Game of Thrones” in world history, with my friends’ lives on all five continents.
In that same breath | have to add, | also have infinite empathy for the families of the valiant and disciplined Russian militaries who suffer the loss of their loved ones because of the greed of the Biden family, other politicians, corporate shareholders and puppet presidents like Zelensky.
Ultimately however all are slaves to the dictates of the reptile-like big corporations*4, and until their power is contained, and campaign finance in the United States and Europe cleaned up, these wars will continue until thermonuclear war and a global biological and chemical weapons blitzkrieg occurs— which may be upon us all at any time.
Likewise, | have complete empathy for the working poor and jobless world-wide, including the US, who are all held hostages to the absolutely corrupt dictates of the very same “rulebased order” President Biden so loves to brag about but corrupts with every word and deed.
Global unrestrained capitalism has brought the working people and jobless to our knees and there is no hope in sight, except that provided by China and Russia.
It has been my long belief that the system of governance is not as important as the quality of people in 31 The linked reference there to the book “The Dragons of Eden” by popular scientist Carl Sagan is worth reading, even though none the reviews posted on Google mention what | consider to be the most important point of that book, specifically that corporations are like reptiles that are programmed only for consumption, and have no emotions whatsoever, as the midbrain region that mediates emotions didn’t evolve until after the age of the reptiles.
In other words, he warned the world of the dangers of corporations in a way similar to President Eisenhower’s final address, except he based his arguments on natural evolution and human neuroanatomy rather than the experiences President Eisenhower obviously had.
Sagan’s observations however may well have been partly motivated by Eisenhower’s final speech in addition to his own.
Likewise, | see flexible socialist/capitalist hybrid economic systems like China’s to have an infinite number of advantages over the unrestrained predatory and corrupted capitalist systems of the United States and Western Europe.
The political system in the United States has reached such saturation level corruption, such expertise in overthrowing governments, and such a casual attitude towards killing innocents, no honest person in the world is safe now, anywhere.
Epilogue 2022.03.30 Kiev ready to fulfill key Moscow's demands — Russia Ukraine stated that it’s ready to implement the demands that Russia has been insisting on for years, Russia's top negotiator claims / Russia’s lead negotiator, Vladimir Medinsky, said on Wednesday that Ukraine agreed in principle to officially become a neutral country.
Ukraine’s bid to join NATO was one of the reasons Moscow said it launched a military campaign against the country last month.
He said the Ukrainian team presented a draft roadmapping a future peace deal.
And the North Atlantic Alliance has also been creating an anti-Russian foothold from Ukraine, more precisely, from Ukrainian territory, for years.
Moreover, the issue of Ukraine's acquisition of nuclear weapons was also made public knowledge.
There’s irrefutable evidence that Kyiv was planning to launch an offensive against Donbass in the near future.
In that case Russia would have had to stand up for tens and tens of thousands of our Russian citizens living there anyway.
That is, Ukraine stated that it’s ready to fulfill these demands that Russia has been insisting on all these years.
As head of Central Command, Austin actively campaigned to resurrect the Pentagon’s spectacularly failed program of trying to arm ‘rebels’ in Syria to fight ISIS, and in 2014 he backed immunity for United States troops from war crimes prosecutions by the government of Afghanistan.
Though claiming to divest themselves of any investment in Pine Island, just prior to the election Pine Island launched some new ‘special purpose acquisition companies’ which are essentially shell companies.
His previous role as chairman of the House Intelligence Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security made him one of the leading congressional experts on those issues.
By Isaac Arnsdorf, 03/29/2016 “After his 2004 upset loss to John Thune, Daschle joined law and lobbying firm Alston & Bird as a “special policy adviser,” earning as much as $2. million a year, but he never registered as a lobbyist.
Daschle previously registered with the Justice Department under the Foreign Agents Registration Act to represent Taiwan.
Senator Daschle serves on numerous public and private boards, including the Center for American Progress and the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs.
And it’s just that sort of business as usual that Mandy Smithberger, the director of the Straus Military Reform Project at the Project on Government Oversight, says is concerning in this case.
Though not officially a lobby group, WestExec Advisors thrive in the so-called gray zone doing many, most or all of the same things as a lobby group.
Antony Blinken — Antony J Blinken was sworn in as the 71st United States Secretary of State on January 26, 2021.
Michéle serves on the boards of Booz Allen Hamilton, Amida Technology Solutions, The Mission Continues, Spirit of America, The United States Naval Academy Foundation, CARE, and sits on the Honorary Advisory Committee of The Leadership Council for Women in National Security.
But many of the people who work closely with Biden are enmeshed in the opaque world of strategic consultancies and by extension a network of the world’s biggest businesses.
If they’ve been consulting for corporations with offshore interests, this spells potential conflicts.
The legality of that has yet to be challenged and given the potential for encouraging corruption in government, and the deadly consequences of that potential corruption.
The Ukraine War is at minimum prima facia proof of that deadly corruption.
The world of special interest control of American politicians may not be so opaque as Mandy Smithberger suggests.
Professional/Academic Career After leaving the Obama administration, Haines worked in the private sector consulting for companies such as the Denver-based national security contractor Palantir Technologies, which specializes in data analytics.
Palantir’s government business grew much faster in 2020 than its commercial business.
Its total revenue increased 47% from about $743 million to $1,093 million in 2020.
Google’s “de-ranking” algorithms have done a thorough job of silencing all views not marching lockstep behind United States government edicts.
The United States keeps claiming “just war,” when its wars are profoundly unjust, and when someone actually does promote a real humanitarian intervention, and in real defense of his nation, nobody believes it is even possible.
It is like the boy who falsely cried “Wolf” so many times, nobody believes there are wolves anymore, anywhere.
It is long past time to exculpate President Putin and place the responsibility for the war in Ukraine that really began in 2014 where it belongs.
Unfortunately, due to United States dominance in world media and censorship, there are no fair trials anymore.
Another inconvenient fact that makes this war very different from the 67 other United States attempts to overthrow foreign governments since WWII, is that Russia can and will fight back effectively.
The author of this book argues that President Putin will not hesitate for an instant to do whatever is necessary to prevent this latest United States attempt at so-called “regime change” this time in Russia.
The author also argues convincingly that this Ukrainian war began with a United States financed and orchestrated coup in Ukraine in 2014, and President Putin was intentionally provoked in a legion of extreme ways with the specific goal of eliciting a military response which it finally got.
Finally, this book argues if the United States and NATO do not back off very quickly this war will definitely lead to thermonuclear war and containment breeches at most or all 300+ United States BSL-3 and BSL-4 laboratories around the world quite possibly leading to the final extinction of humankind.
If American and European citizens should read one book this year, it better be this one because failing to effectively pressure western leaders into backing off this war they intentionally provoked has inevitable consequences far beyond the worst nightmares of even the most pessimistic amongst us.
Furthermore, the benefits of getting used to the idea of a multi-polar world are beautiful far beyond the imaginings of even the most optimistic.
