The Cuban missile crisis continues to inspire books and attract readers both because it was the most terrifying face-off of the Cold War and because the release of new evidence has repeatedly compelled historians to reassess those harrowing thirteen days.
Into the 1980s, most of the evidence on the crisis came from United States sources, but scholars were nonetheless unable to nail down specifics about the secret discussions in the White House and knew even less about events in the Kremlin and Havana.
Nonetheless, Washington Post reporter Michael Dobbs, who covered the collapse of the USSR and is fluent in Russian, found that many key Soviet archives remain closed.
Most of the book deals with one day—“Black Saturday,” October 27, 1962—without doubt the most perilous day of the Cold War if not in all of human history.
Dobbs takes the reader directly into the thoughts and actions of American, Soviet, and Cuban leaders—and especially into the gut-wrenching fear and confusion experienced by Soviet combat and technical support forces in Cuba.
His most important conclusion, that humankind was fortunate to have restrained and rational leaders like Kennedy and Khrushchev in charge at this potentially apocalyptic moment, is certainly not new.
Dobbs relentlessly and rightly stresses the theme of historical contingency.
Kennedy and Khrushchev were often making decisions based on what we now know was inaccurate, misleading, or dead wrong information.
They could not communicate directly and securely (the hotline was not installed until 1963) and their exchange of letters and cables was agonizingly slow and unreliable.
Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, for example, has recalled watching in disbelief as a Western Union courier on a bicycle, carrying a vital message for Khrushchev, stopped down the street from the Soviet Embassy to flirt with a girl.
Kennedy and Khrushchev also shared eerily parallel experiences with their top-ranking military advisers.
Three days later, Dobbs reveals, Soviet Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky likewise urged Khrushchev to authorize his forces in Cuba to use “all available means,” including their medium-range nuclear missiles, to protect the island.
Dobbs’s principal contribution is to document a series of chilling details.
Soviet junior officers in Cuba were also prepared to launch nuclear missiles at the United States in the event of bombing or an invasion—without specific authorization from the Kremlin.
And, a Soviet missile regiment moved nuclear cruise missiles into position to destroy the United States naval base at Guantanamo in the event of an American attack on Cuba.
Dobbs also discloses that the famous “eyeball to eyeball” confrontation of United States and Soviet ships at sea never really happened.
The belief that this remark was ever made during a taped ExComm discussion, like the alleged confrontation at sea, may itself be a myth.
Dobbs clearly enjoys deconstructing the exaggerated claims surrounding the importance of the John Scali-Alexsandr Feklisov meetings, but the fact that those secret and dramatic discussions had no real impact on resolving the crisis has been well-known to historians for at least a decade.
However, it is nonetheless important to remember that JFK and his advisers did not know that during the ExComm meetings.
Dobbs is justifiably skeptical about the celebrated argument that the missile crisis represents a model for presidential crisis management.
Even leaders with the best of intentions cannot effectively manage such momentous historical events.
Crisis management on this scale is largely an artificial political science illusion.
Chaos theory, rather than crisis management modeling, provides a far better guide to understanding the Cuban missile crisis.
By October 27, for example, the errant U-2 over the Soviet Union was only the latest in a string of safety nightmares haunting the Strategic Air Command.
Nuclear bombers had gone astray, reconnaissance planes had been shot down, bombs had been dropped accidentally, and early warning systems had given false alerts of a Soviet attack.
Also, Dobbs makes clear that ideology was a potent factor in both Washington and Moscow.
JFK’s political career began in 1946 and closely paralleled the evolution of the Cold War and the ideology of containment.
Kennedy became an articulate representative of the new generation of World War II veterans, determined to avoid repeating the appeasement of the 1930s in what they perceived as a life-and-death struggle against international communism.
Dobbs’s book is not about the ExComm tapes—my own area of scholarly work.
However, readers can benefit from highlighting a few instances from the tapes on which we disagree.
But, only two days earlier, he had revived the previously rejected option of bombing the missile sites in Cuba and he remained a stubborn opponent of the president’s determination to accept Khrushchev’s public offer to link Cuba and Turkey.
Late that evening, Dobbs acknowledges, the younger Kennedy was still “dreaming of revenge” and remarked wistfully, “I’d like to take Cuba back.
In fact, McNamara did not “snap” at all, but instead muttered morosely and almost inaudibly, “Well, let’s wait.
His bleak and dismal tone momentarily exposed the depths of physical and emotional exhaustion, insecurity and anxiety that these men had endured around the clock since the morning of October 16.6 JFK and Khrushchev understood, Dobbs makes clear, that history is not a play.
Bush was that JFK “had an instinctive appreciation for the chaotic forces of history.
His experience as a junior Navy officer in World War II had taught him to expect screwups.
But, at the same time, historians should not let JFK off the hook for their over-reaction to Castro’s Cuba.
This fixation led to the Bay of Pigs fiasco and the sabotage and murder sanctioned by Operation Mongoose— and, ironically, contributed to Khrushchev’s decision to gamble on deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba in the hope of discouraging further United States military action against Castro.
Unfortunately, there is no evidence thus far to suggest that Khrushchev’s meetings or discussions were recorded.
In any case, Dobbs has crafted a highly readable contribution to the seemingly endless literature on the Cuban missile crisis and, even more importantly, has probed the qualities of judgment, temperament, and restraint that are indispensable for leadership in the nuclear age.
JFK actually approved many additional acts of sabotage against Cuba in the year after the crisis.
Rusk’s reference to an “advantage” hints that he might have been proposing a cover story.
Inevitably, the historical verdict on Dobbs’s work requires a thorough analysis of his methodology and use of sources.
For the first such attempt, vastly beyond the maximum length allowed for this essay, see Barton J Bernstein’s forthcoming review of One Minute to Midnight on www.washingtondecoded.com.
