This was all during the Cold War, where the United States and it's allies was recovering from World War II, and communism was a new trend and the U.S.S.R was influencing communism through out the damage world of Europe and Asia.
It was soon realize that communism wasn't as tagging with the capitalist countries.
Communism lands in Cuba, and now has possession of nuclear missile given by the Commies.
This was a huge event that took place in history that the world would have catastrophically change.
The main Leaders and commanders John F Kennedy During Kennedy's presidency, the CIA launched U-2 spy planes and took photographs of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites that were being built in Cuba by the Soviets.
He was then facing a major dilemma, which was if the United States were to theoretically engage the sites, a nuclear holocaust will commence.
Most of the National Security Council wanted an airstrike to take out the sites.
But instead, John F Kennedy ordered a ""quarantine"" to block and inspect all ships coming into the Caribbean.
On October 24, 1968, The crisis ended by pulling out the aging missiles in Turkey, and JFK was more favored in the United States.
Che Guevara ​Che Guevara was a major figure around the world, especially during the Cuban Revolution.
Che was very important because he developed the relationship with Cuba and the Soviets.
Nikita KhrushchevNikita Khrushchev was a Russian politician who led the Soviet Union during part of the Cold War.
When meeting Fidel Castro, he sought to place nuclear missiles in Cuba so he can expand he missile range farther.
They then agreed and secretly shipped in missiles and started to build missile launching facilities.
The Soviets finally agreed with the United States to get the missiles out of Cuba as the United States promise to not invade Cuba and withdraw there missiles in Turkey.
Later in the years, Nikita Khrushchev was remove from office because he can not cope being a leader.
Fidel Castro​ Fidel Castro was a Cuban politician and revolutionary who served as Prime Minister of the Republic of Cuba from 1959 to 1976.
Nikita Khrushchev met Castro to install nuclear missiles in Cuba to even there power with the United States.
He agreed, to believing that Cuba will be safe and can continue to expand socialism.
The United States upon discovered the missile sites and was begging Khrushchev to threaten the United States, but instead Khrushchev wanted to avoid a nuclear war.
The locations that took place The main locations that took place during the crisis was in the Caribbean Sea, and Cuba.
