Unexpected error occurred."",""elp_invalid_captcha"":""Robot verification failed, please try again."",""elp_invalid_key"":""Robot verification failed, invalid key."",""elp_successfull_single"":""You have successfully subscribed."",""elp_successfull_double"":""You have successfully subscribed.
It took approximately 30 minutes for the Soviet missiles to reach the United States.
This was enough time for the Americans to retaliate with a devastating counter-strike, which was an essential deterrence for peace.
From Cuba, the Soviet missiles would have been able to destroy most of the United States military and urban centers in 7-10 minutes.
Another important factor was that the missile accuracy significantly increased with the proximity of the target, making the Marxist island of Cuba the perfect choice to greatly improve Soviet nuclear capacity.
Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to Washington and a decisive figure with Robert Kennedy in finding a solution to the crisis, stated, in his memoirs published in 1995, that Khrushchev’s motives for the missiles deployment in Cuba was strategic.
A principal factor in the Kremlin’s decision to introduce nuclear missiles into Cuba was the Bay of Pigs disaster, where John Kennedy was perceived as a weak, indecisive president who would cave in under pressure.
The messenger was Ambassador Aleksandr Alexeyev, a veteran KGB agent and close associate of Raúl Castro.
But on Oct., a United States aircraft took photos that provided Washington with the first hard evidence of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
For the next five days, in absolute secrecy, the president and close advisors analyzed the available options.
Comments are closed. subscribe for a daily fix of Babalú by email Name Email babalú is social, never socialist founding editorValentín ""El Machete"" Prietomanaging editorAlberto ""El Americanito"" de la Cruzwebmaster and past editorHenry ""Conductor"" GómezwritersAsombra Dr.
Carlos ""Tres Fotutos"" Eire Humberto ""El Cirujano"" Fontova Rey ""El Guajiro"" Anthony Silvio ""El Tejano Cubano"" Canto Jr.
