Reviving Civil Defence From Professor Michael Howard, FBA Sir, The decision to provide bases in this country for United States cruise missiles; the future of our own ‘independent’ strategic deterrent; the extent of our provisions for civil defence: all these have surely to be considered together as part of a single defence posture.
No evidence emerged in the course of last Thursday’s debate that this is being done by the present Government.
The presence of cruise missiles on British soil makes it highly possible that this country would be the target for a series of preemptive strikes by Soviet missiles.
These would not necessarily be on the massive scale foreseen by Lord Noel-Baker in your columns of January 25.
It is more likely that the Russians would hold such massive strikes in reserve, to deter us from using our sea-based missiles as a ‘second strike force’ after the first Soviet warheads had hit targets in this country.
Civil defence on a scale sufficient to give protection to a 9 substantial number of the population in the event of such a ‘limited’ nuclear strike is thus an indispensable element of deterrence.
On the contrary, they should be given the widest possible publicity; not only so that the people of this country know that they will be afforded the greatest possible degree of protection in the worst eventuality, but so that the credibility of our entire defence posture should not be destroyed through absence of evidence of our capacity to endure the disagreeable consequences likely to flow from it.
In the absence of a serious civil defence policy, the Government’s decision to modernise or replace our ‘independent deterrent’ will be no more than an expensive bluff likely to deceive no one beyond these shores, and not very many people within them.
Howard, Chichele Professor of the History of War, All Soul’s College, Oxiord.
Those who advocate this policy are not ‘warmongers’ (or they suppose that they are not such), although they form an influential part of that lobby which advocates every kind of preparation for war.
I find their views to be not only odd and perverse, but also exceedingly dangerous, but I do not suppose that the fearful terminus to which they are directing our history is one which they intend.
Let me state clearly, then, that I accept that Professor Howard himself is innocent of any warlike intention.
But 1o his letter contains most serious assertions, and I will proceed to examine these.
One part of these is composed of speculations as to future events; the other concerns the postures and pretences appropriate in the theatre of nuclear diplomacy.
According to his scenario, the enemy — which enemy is plainly stated to be the Russians for as many years ahead as speculation can go — will make a pre-emptive strike against Britain with nuclear missiles.
Professor Howard considers that the presence of these missiles on our soil will make it ‘highly possible’ that this country will be the target, not for one, but for a series of preemptive strikes, at some time in 1983 or thereafter.
So far from ‘deterring’ the Russians, he supposes that the presence of these missiles here may provoke and draw down upon us these strikes.
He does not suggest that there will be any counter-strikes by British-based missiles against the Russians.
And that the Russians will hold more ‘massive strikes’ in reserve to ‘deter us from using our sea-based missiles’ against them.
In the absence of adequate measures of civil defence, these first ‘limited’ strikes would create conditions of ‘political turbulence’ in this country, preventing ‘us’ (but I am not now sure who ‘us’ can be, unless the typesetter has inadvertently dropped the capitals into the lower case) from massive nuclear retaliation.
If, however, a sufficient proportion of the surviving population were prevented from acts of ‘political turbulence’ by measures of civil defence, then a proper military strategy could be pursued by NATO, and massive second-stage nuclear exchanges could freely commence.
It will be seen that the purpose of civil defence is political and provisional.
It is to ensure the necessary degree of stability in that short interval between the first and the second nuclear strike.
He does not tell us whether the ‘massive strikes’ of the second stage would seal the entrances to the air-raid shelters and block up their airducts.
We may suppose, at least, that these second strikes will be effective in bringing ‘political turbulence’ to a prompt end, and thereby in removing the necessity for further civil defence.
At this stage the professor passes over to the consideration of the correct degree of mendacity to be exercised in our current defence ‘posture’, and we will consider that element in his argument later on.
Now, as to the scenario, we will commence by noting that Professor Howard, in a letter to The Times whose intent is to advocate much greater expenditure and publicity on civil defence, does not, in any single clause, indicate any detail of what such defence might consist in, nor how effective it might be.
He wishes there to be ‘measures’, which afford ‘the greatest possible degree of protection’, and ‘evidence’ of ‘our capacity to endure the disagreeable consequences likely to flow from’ our present military and diplomatic strategies.
But he does not indicate what measures might be possible, nor does he even explain what could be ‘disagreeable’ about the expected event.
I have therefore consulted the letter from Philip NoelBaker in The Times of 25 January.
Lord Noel-Baker is the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize for his work for international conciliation over very many years.
He then goes on to detail the findings of Mr Val Peterson, who was appointed United States Civil Defense Administrator twenty-five years ago, and who organized many exercises, national, regional and local, at the height of a previous Cold War.
Mr Peterson drew the following conclusions from his successive exercises.
In 1954 the national exercise was estimated to have had a yield of twenty-two millions of casualties, of whom seven millions would have been dead.
In 1956 fifty-six millions, or one third of the population of the United States, were presumed as casualties.
In the last analysis, there is no such thing as a nation being prepared for a thermonuclear war.
There is no defence against such weapons; and . . . nuclear warfare will destroy civilisation, and perhaps exterminate mankind.
To hope for salvation from Civil Defence is a dangerous self-deluding pipe dream.
Professor Howard has at least taken care to cover himself against this argument.
The series of strikes envisaged in his scenario ‘would not necessarily be on the massive scale’ which Lord Noel-Baker foresees.
What he foresees is possible 13 , and perhaps even probable, but not ‘necessarily’ so.
If we are to be futurist authorities on war, or even historians of war, then we should be exact as to weaponry and as to its effects.
There is a good deal of talk around today, from ‘defence correspondents’, military strategists and the like, which leads us to suppose that the military, on both sides of the world, are capable of delivering very small nuclear packs, with the greatest accuracy and with no lethal consequences outside the target area.
The first concerns the known power and probable effects of these weapons.
The second concems the strategic assumptions of those ‘experts’ who suppose that any nuclear war could be limited in this way.
There appeared in The Times, nine days before Professor Howard’s letter, a major article (“The Deterrent Illusion’, 21 January) by Lord Zuckerman.
The author was the government’s chief scientific adviser from 1964 to 1971, and, in addition to drawing upon his own extensive experience, he also draws, in this article, upon that of eminent United States scientists and advisers.
It is still inevitable that were military installations rather than cities to become the objectives of nuclear attack, millions, even tens of millions, of civilians would be killed, whatever the proportion of missile sites, airfields, armament plants, ports, and so on that would be destroyed.
And he explains that strategists, in calculating the estimated 14 effects of missile strikes, employ the acronym CE P (Circular Error Probable) for the radius of a circle within which 50 per cent of strikes would fall.
Lord Zuckerman does not tell us the presumed C EP for a ‘limited’ strike aimed at a single missile base, and this is perhaps an official secret.
But in the debate that was eventually held in the Commons after NATO's decision to base cruise missiles here, statements were made which enable an impression to be offered.
Mr Pym, the Defence Secretary, spoke in the House of Commons on 24 January of ‘an interlocking system of comprehensive deterrence... a clear chain of terrible 15 risk’, with the pistol and the grenade at one end and the MX missile at the other.
It is generally agreed that ‘the West’ has some advantage in strategic weapons, although this fact has been concealed from the Western public in recent months in order to direct attention to long and medium-range theatre weapons, where it it said that the Soviet Union has recently attained an advantage by replacing the SS 4 and SS 5 missiles with the very deadly SS 20, and by introducing the Backfire bomber.
It is to meet this ‘threat’ to parity in the middle link of the chain that cruise missiles are to be introduced by NATO in Western Europe.
It will be seen from this map that the Soviet threat is very serious, since it is marked in heavy dotted lines and thick arrowheads, whereas NATO's response is delicately etched.
It will also be seen that NATO’s existing, pre-modern weaponry is pitiful, and will not even be able to destroy Rome or Naples, nor any part of Greece.
So that if it were not for the submarinelaunched ballistic missiles , NATO would be reduced in a nuclear war to stinging itself, like a scorpion, to death.
The point, however, is that present strategic thinking supposes a ‘limited’ nuclear war, with ‘theatre’ weapons.
Europe is such a ‘theatre’, and this limited war will be localized to a small area from the Urals to the Western coast of Ireland.
In this scenario, ‘strategic’ weapons will be held back for a ‘second strike’, so that neither Siberia nor the North American continent will be under any immediate threat.
Sir Frederick Bennett affirmed in the Commons debate on 24 January that the warheads of these Russian theatre missiles ‘have at least the destructive capacity of the bombs dropped on Nagasaki and Hiroshima’, although Mr Churchill had different information.
It will be seen that two well-informed Conservative spokesmen differed in their information by a factor of one hundred.
But it serves to illustrate the fact that, when we come to hard information, the air is very much fouled up today.
The reasons for this are easy to identify, but they illuminate a part of the problem, so we will digress to explain them.
First, it is axiomatic that each military bloc has an interest in misleading the other, and this is done both by concealing information and by deliberately spreading disinformation.
In general, each bloc is at pains to deny and conceal its own areas of greatest military strength, and to advertise a pretence to strength in areas where it is weak.
The intelligence agencies which report on each other’s resources are themselves an interest-group, with high ideological motivation, and on occasion they deliberately manufacture alarmist reports.
Lord Zuckerman gives evidence as to the steady flow of ‘phoney intelligence’ and ‘far-fetched’ predictions as to Soviet military power which have influenced United States planning over the past twenty years.
There is no reason to suppose that this fouling-up of information takes place only in Western capitals.
The debate on that day was the first to be held in parliament on the subject of nuclear weapons for fifteen years, and it lasted for about five and a half hours.
It was distinguished throughout by the paucity of hard information, although it should be said that Mr Pym imparted some new information, and more than had come at any time from the previous administration.
Mr Pym announced the near-completion of the ‘Chevaline’ programme to ‘modernize’ the warhead of our Polaris missiles — a programme costing £1,000 millions, which had been carried out in the deepest secrecy, and without the knowledge of the full Cabinet, and in defiance of official Labour policy, on the authority of Mr Callaghan and two or three of his particular friends.
Thus the House was given this information after the decision had been taken, the money had been spent, and the work had been done.
I do not know how £1,000 millions was tucked away in a crease in the estimates and hidden from view (just as the many millions expended on internal security services, telephone-tapping, etc., are hidden from view), but it suggests that the level of official mendacity is today very high indeed.
In any case, let us be fair, Mr Pym did give the House this information, and we may suppose that he did so in order to embarrass Mr Callaghan, Mr Fred Mulley, Mr Healey and Dr David Owen (the co-partners in this expensive deception), and to reduce them to silence or assent on other matters of nuclear weapon ‘modernization’ in the ensuing debate.
But apart from this malicious little political 19 detonation, the yield of new information in the debate was low.
The second reason why the air is fouled-up is that the military and security elites in both blocs, and their political servitors, Cannot pursue their expensive and dangerous policies without continually terrifying the populations of their own countries with sensational accounts of the war preparations of the other bloc.
To be sure, the plain facts are terrifying enough without any embroidery.
But it is necessary to persuade the native populations that the other side is stealing a lead in order to justify even greater preparations and expenditure at home.
This is as necessary in the Soviet Union as it is in the West, despite the absence of any open public debate over there on the issues.
For the Soviet military budget is very heavy, and this entails the continual postponement and disappointment of people’s expectations as to improving services and goods.
In particular, a quite disproportionate concentration of the nation’s most advanced scientific and technological skills takes place in the military sector — as it does, increasingly, even in this country.
The threat from the West, whether it exists or not (and in Soviet perception it certainly does), has become a necessary legitimation for the power of the ruling elites, an excuse for their many economic and social] failures, and an argument to isolate and silence critics within their own borders.
In the West we have ‘open debate’, although it is contained by all-party ‘consensus’ and is not permitted to intrude in any sharp way into our major media.
An interesting example of this manipulation came out towards the end of the Commons debate.
In responding, Mr Barney Hayhoe, the Under-Secretary for Defence, sought to allay fears expressed by the patriotic Mr Peter Shore that the NATO 20 programme of missile ‘modernization’ might not be large enough to keep up with Soviet missile programmes.
The United States is planning to introduce cruise missiles, carried on B 52 bombers, for the strategic role.
It is planning an armoury of 2,000 or 3,000 missiles .. . forming only one part of a huge strategic triad alongside 1C BMs and submarine-launched ballistic missiles, and all due to enter service in two or three years’ time.
Now I am not an expert in these matters, and I do not usually follow the specialist press.
But in the previous three months, and especially in the weeks preceding the NATO decision of 12 December, I had followed the general press with care.
Yet this was the first mention | met with of these rather substantial United States plans, which are to be added to NATO’s little provision.
The entire ‘debate’ in Britain prior to the NATO decision was not a debate at all, but an exercise in official information.
It was conducted in the press and television on the basis of letting the people believe that there was a massive build-up of Soviet SS 20s and Backfire bombers, all aimed at NATO, but with the United States, the dominant power in NATO, removed from the equation.
NATO’s programme of nuclear weapons ‘modernization’ could then be presented as a tardy and inadequate response to the Soviet threat.
Since that decision — and as some members of the British public have begun to ask awkward questions — official 21 information has given way, in some quarters, to downright official lying.
Iam not complaining at the fact that Mr Pym, when on 17 June he announced on television the sites chosen by the United States Air Force for their missiles, pleaded, with a catch in his throat, that these were intended only for the ‘defence’ of our peace and our liberty.
This is exactly what Mr Brown, Mr Ustinov or any other Minister of Defence (as Ministers of War are now laughably called the world over) tells his own people.
The Russian nuclear force threatening Europe’s cities will build up to something like 2,000— 3,000 warheads by the mid 1980s.
That is from the leading editorial of the Sunday Times for 6 July 1980.
I am sorry to single out this newspaper, since it is only repeating what is said on all sides.
But a paper which pretends to objectivity and authority ought to be judged by stricter standards than those which pretend only to propaganda.
The SS 20 is based on land and the Poseidon is based at sea, and, until lately, it had been supposed, in the wargames rooms, that they traded off against each other.
What has happened is not the introduction of some wholly new dimension of threat (the SS 20 came into production in 1976, the Backfire bomber in 1974), but a redefinition of the rules of the game.
Our Western experts have suddenly decided to hold their hands over Poseidon, Polaris, etc., and to pretend that they do not exist.
This is a contemptible exercise, since the true facts could easily be ascertained by any editorial writer.
And, in fact, any competent Russian editorialist can make a very much better case against cruise missiles than our ‘experts’ can make against the SS 20.
For the plain fact is that the critical accounting must be done, not between the Warsaw Pact and NATO (with the USS Rand USA both removed from the equation), but between the two giant superpowers.
The Pershing II, from its West German bases, could descend on Russian targets in only four minutes.
Mr Pym, on that same telly fireside chat , assured the British people, with tears in his eyes, that cruise missiles did not ‘escalate’ nuclear armaments — no, not at all.
For each cruise missile, one F 1-11 or older warhead would be withdrawn.
Where Vulcan bombers can hit Leningrad, the cruise and Pershing II can hit Moscow.
It would make me feel uneasy, just as, if the Russians had weapons which could hit Hull and Norwich, but then introduced missiles with a stretch to reach London, Bristol and Birmingham, I would feel uneasy here.
I am not suggesting that Russian missiles are not multiplying, nor that they are not menacing to us.
The mobile SS 20, with its triple warhead, is a foul, unnecessary, and threatening weapon, and I hope that those who contest the introduction of cruise missiles into this country will also let the Russian embassy know their views of those weapons.
First, the logic of ‘deterrence’, in which both sides play a never-ending game of leapfrog, justifying their actions at each stage by blaming the other, whereas in fact a good deal of the thrust to ‘modernize’ weapons is planned quite independently by the armourers of each side.
Second, I have sought to emphasize that the whole basis of our information is corrupt, and that every official statement, on both sides, is either an official lie or a statement with direct propagandist intent which conceals as much as it reveals.
As to the actual facts of the ‘nuclear balance’, objective research by such bodies as the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute gives rise to conclusions more complex than anything that we have been offered in our press or on our screens.
Thus, in one count of strategic weapons, by individual bombers and missiles, the Soviet Union appears to be a little ahead of the United States; whereas by a different count of actual warheads (that is, MIRVs, or independently targeted re-entry vehicles) the United States appears as having many more weapons (9,000 24 to 5,000) than Russia.
The available information has been examined with care by Dan Smith in The Defence of the Realm in the 1980s, and his fourth chapter, ‘Of Numbers and Nukes’, is essential reading.
Those who wish to be informed on these problems — and very much better informed than most Members of Parliament — should obtain these, read them, and then pass the information on, since it is becoming very clear that neither the press nor the television will do this honestly for us.
We are now in a position to conclude this digression, and to return to the arguments of Lord Zuckerman and of Professor Howard.
We have seen that the SS 20 is the ‘theatre’ missile which we must expect to strike Britain, and that the lowest estimate of its destructive capacity is ‘at least’ that of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
This bomb (Mr Churchill reminded the House on 24 January) caused the death of 100,000 persons within hours, and of a further 100,000 who have died subsequently, in the main from radiologically-related diseases.
The SS 20 is reputed to be an accurate missile, although not as accurate as the cruise, and the CEP might be down to a few hundred yards.
But the meditated strategy of both sides is to send, not one accurate missile at each target, but missiles in clutches of thirty or forty.
The late arrivals will 25 be buffeted about a good deal by the immense detonations of the first-comers, so that the CEP for a clutch is likely to be enlarged to several miles.
An American officer has now, at long last, told the waiting Mr Pym where these missiles are to be based, and they will be, not at Upper Heyford and Lakenheath — as had been supposed — but at Greenham Common, near Newbury, and Molesworth, near Huntingdon.
In my view the reason for this unexpected choice is that both of the latter bases had long been disused, and, by making them operative once more, the United States Air Force is able to add two major bases to their existing clutch in this country.
Ifstrikes were made against these newly-designated bases, then Newbury is likely to fall within the CEP, but Reading and Huntingdon may fall without.
Within the CE P we must suppose some fifteen or twenty detonations at least on the scale of Hiroshima, which will then discharge immense quantities of radioactive effluvia over the surrounding countryside.
This is to suppose that the Soviet strike is homing on to clearly-defined and immobile targets.
We are now told that the missiles will be carried in packs of four on mobile launching vehicles, and in times of ‘emergency’ will be dispersed from their bases into the surrounding districts.
On the one hand, we have been told that these are defensive weapons, which could never be used for a first strike.
And, equally, the sudden deployment of missilelaunchers from these bases (which would be monitored by satellite observation) would be the signal to an enemy that ‘emergency’ had come.
In any case, there is not much point in arguing about where these missiles are sited, since this decision has been taken, not only above our heads, but above Mr Pym’s head also.
From the point of view of siting the cruise missiles I don’t think it makes a great deal of difference.
It is really a security and defence and strategic consideration, and of course one must take public Opinion into account as far as one possibly can.
This was a politician’s way of saying that the United States military would take the decision, and that public opinion would go unconsulted and disregarded.
Three weeks before this Mr Pym gave a somewhat more honest reply to questions from the Member for Swindon , whose watchful constituents had already informed him of the Official Secret that Greenham Common was being cased by the United States Air Force.
The siting of these weapons in no way affects the vulnerability or otherwise of a particular place.
It is a mistake for anyone to think that the siting of a weapon in a particular place . . . makes it more or less vulnerable.
I do not know whether the citizens of Swindon find this 27 reassuring or not.
Mr Pym was saying that the Americans intend to spread and scatter these weapons before launching them, so that the enemy will have to spread and scatter his strike over a very much larger area in order to have any hopes of ‘eliminating’ them.
A person with the name of Lord Strathcona and Mount Royal announced in the House of Lords on 17 June that the launchers would be scattered from the bases to a distance of 50 miles or more before firing; and Mr Pym was reported in the Guardian on 18 June to have mentioned roo miles.
I do not intend to do all of the readers’ work for them, so may I recommend them to get out a map of Britain, and draw circles of a diameter of 50, and then of too, miles around Greenham Common and Molesworth, and find out for themselves what major centres of population — in addition to London, Bristol, Leicester, Norwich and Birmingham -— these circles take in.
Thus if the Russians really wanted to find the cruise missile-launchers out, then there would have to be CEPs dotted all across southern, central and eastern England.
This is before we take account of Lord Zuckerman’s other variable — the 50 per cent of strikes which would fall outside the Circular Error Probable.
These will be missiles whose navigational or homing devices are inaccurate or which, perhaps, are brought down on their path.
It would be overoptimistic to suppose that every one of these would fall on Salisbury Plain or on that barren patch of the Pennines around Blackstone Edge.
I have taken a ruler to a map of Europe, and I cannot see any way in which an SS 20 dispatched from Russia could home in on Newbury without passing directly over central London.
If by misadventure a strike outside the CEP fell on a 28 major city the damage would be considerable.
There is no room in this island to ‘scatter’ missiles without bringing multitudes into mortal danger, and there is no room to ‘search’ without inflicting a holocaust.
There are no vast deserts in Europe, no endless open plains, on which to turn war-games in which nuclear weapons are used into reality.
The distances between villages are no greater than the radius of effect of low-yield weapons of a few kilotons; between towns and cities, say a megaton.
We are now at last prepared to cast a more realistic eye upon Professor Howard’s scenario.
According to this, the ‘initially limited Soviet strike’ might, in the absence of civil defence precautions, create conditions of ‘politica] turbulence’ which would prevent ‘us’ from using our own nuclear weapons in retaliation.
This would be regrettable, since it would inhibit tht escalation from ‘tactical’ or ‘theatre’ to ‘second-strike’, sea-based nuclear war.
But he envisages civil defence measures ‘on a scale sufficient to give protection to a substantial number of the population’, enabling this number to endure the ‘disagreeable consequences’ which would ensue.
The object of civil defence, then, is not so much to save lives as to reduce the potential for ‘political turbulence’ of those surviving the first strike, in order to enable ‘us’ to pass over to a second and more fearsome stage of nuclear warfare.
We are still entitled, however, to inquire more strictly as to what measures would be on a scale sufficient, what proportion of the population might constitute a substantial number, and what may be indicated by the word disagreeable.
It is not as if nuclear weapons are a completely unknown quantity, which have only been tested in deserts and on uninhabited islands.
They have been tested upon persons also, in 1945, at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and to some effect.
These effects have been studied with care; and the beneficiaries of this sudden donation of advanced technology were so much struck by the disagreeable consequences that they have continued to monitor its effects to the present day.
One remarkable consequence of those two detonations is that the survivors in those two cities, and the descendants of the sufferers, were transformed into advocates, not of revenge, but of international understanding and peace.
To this day work for peace is regarded as a civic duty, and the mayors of Nagasaki and Hiroshima regard this work as the principal obligation of their office.
For example, in 1977 an International Symposium on the Damage and After-Effects of the bombing of these two cities was inaugurated, and a number of reports of this work are now in translation. [ have read condensations of these, as well as other materials from Nagasaki.
It had been my intention to condense this material still further, and to remind readers of the effects of the first atomic bombings.
After reading these materials, whenever I approached my typewriter | was overcome by such a sense of nausea that I was forced to turn to some other task.
The second reason is that, at some point very deep in their consciousness, readers already know what the consego quences of these weapons are.
This knowledge is transmitted to children even in their infancy, so that as they run around with their space-weapons and death-rays they are re-enacting what happened thirty years before they were born.
There is, however, one area of convenient forgetfulness in this inherited memory.
The moment of nuclear detonation is remembered vaguely, as a sudden instant of light, blast and fire, in which instantly tens of thousands of lives were quenched.
It is thought of as a stupendous but instantaneous moment ofannihilation, without pain or emotional suffering.
It is now estimated that 140,000 were killed ‘directly’ by the bomb on Hiroshima, and 70,000 by that on Nagasaki, with an allowance for error of 10,000 either way in each case.
But the bombs were dropped on 6 and g August, and the accounts for immediate casualties were closed on 31 December 1945.
This reflects the fact that a very great number of these deaths — especially those from burns and radioactivity — took place slowly, in the days and weeks after the event.
Michiko Ogino, ten years old, was left in charge of his younger sisters when his mother went out to the fields to pick eggplants.
Mamma was bombed at noon When getting eggplants in the field, Short, red and crisp her hair stood, Tender and red her skin was all over.
So Mrs Ogino, although the clothes were burned from her body and she had received a fatal dose of radiation, could still run back from the fields to succour her children.
One after another passing sailors and neighbours heaved at the beam to release the trapped two-year-old, failed, and, bowing with Japanese courtesy, went on their way to help others.
Then she got into an opening under the beam, and putting her right shoulder under a portion of it, she strained with all her might.
Peeled off was the skin over her shoulder That once lifted the beam off my sister.
Fujio Tsujimoto who was five years old, was in the playground of Yamazato Primary School, Nagasaki, just before the bomb dropped.
Hearing the sound of a plane he grabbed his grandmother’s hand and they were the first into the deepest part of the air-raid shelter.
The entrance to the shelter, as well as the playground, was covered with the dying.
The survivors made a pile of wood on the playground and began to cremate the corpses.
Mother also was burned and quickly turned to white bones which dropped down among the live coals.
Grandmother was also watching, praying with a rosary... 1 am now in the fourth grade at Yamazato Primary School.
That playground of terrible memories is now completely cleared and many friends play there happily.
I play with my friends there too, but sometimes I suddenly remember that awful day.
When I do, I squat down on the spot where we cremated our mother and touch the earth with my fingers.
When I dig deep in the ground with a piece of bamboo, several pieces of charcoal appear.
Looking 32 at the spot for a while, I can dimly see my mother’s image in the earth.
So when I see someone else walking on that place, it makes me very angry.
What it makes clear is that the ‘instant’ of detonation was protracted over days and weeks, and was full, not only of physical misery, but of unutterable yearning and suffering.
A great river runs through Hiroshima, and each year the descendants set afloat on it lighted lanterns inscribed with the names of the family dead, and for several miles the full breadth of this river is one mass of flame.
After this we still have to consider the future tens of thousands who have died subsequently from the after-effects of that day — chiefly leukaemia, various cancers, and diseases of the blood and digestive organs.
The sufferers are known as hibakashu, a word which ought to be international.
Some hibakashu suffer from the direct consequences of wounds and burns, others from premature senility, others from blindness, deafness and dumbness, others are incapable of working because of nervous disorders, and many are seriously mentally deranged.
We may now push this distressing matter back into our subconscious, and reconsider the possible effect of ‘a series of pre-emptive strikes’, with scores of weapons very much more powerful than those bombs, upon this island.
It is true that the inhabitants of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were very little prepared for this advanced technology, and, indeed, in Nagasaki the ‘All Clear’ had sounded shortly before the detonation, so that the populace had trooped out 33 of their conventional shelters and the women were working in the fields and the children playing in the playgrounds when the bomb went off.
Indeed, two Conservative M Ps have calculated that effective measures might reduce deaths in a nuclear war in this country from about thirty-five millions to just twenty millions, and I will allow that fifteen millions in savings is a substantial number indeed.
The first is that the death or mortal injury of even the small figure of twenty millions might still give rise to the conditions of ‘turbulence’ which Professor Howard is anxious to forestall.
Air Marshal Sir Leslie Mayor, Principal of the Home Defence College, addressing a civil defence seminar in 1977 said that ‘the main target areas would be so badly knocked about as to be beyond effective self-help.
There would be some total disaster areas, from the margins of which the wounded and dying would flee as refugees; other intermediate areas would have energy supplies destroyed, all transport dislo34 cated, and persons, food and water contaminated by fallout; yet others would be relatively immune.
But even in these immune areas there would be some persons in a state of hysterical terror, who would be ready to intervene to prevent the second stage of Professor Howard’s scenario.
The second comment is that we do not yet have any realistic notion of what might be a scale sufficient to effect substantial savings, nor what measures might be taken.
We may certainly agree with the professor that no such measures are either planned or contemplated.
The defence correspondent of The Times, Mr Peter Evans, in an illuminating survey in January, discovered that measures have been taken to ensure the survival of the high personnel of the State.
There will be bunkers deep under the Chilterns for senior politicians, civil servants and military, and deep hidey-holes for regional centres of military government.
The population of this country, however, will not be invited to these bunkers, and it is an Official Secret to say where they are.
The population will be sent off, with a do-ityourself booklet , to wait in their own homes.
They will be advised to go down to the ground floor or the cellar, and make a cubby-hole there with old doors and planks, cover it with sandbags, books and heavy furniture, and then creep into these holes with food and water for fourteen days, a portable radio, a portable latrine, and, of course, a tin-opener.
I have for long wondered why sociologists and demographers keep writing about ‘the nuclear family’, but now it is all at length set down and explained.
Now this might save some lives, but it will also make for an unhappy end to others.
For the principal effects of nuclear weapons are very intense heat, blast and radioactive emissions.
Within a certain distance of the centre of the detonation all houses, cars, clothes, the hair on dogs, cats and persons, and so on, will spontaneously ignite, while at 35 the same time the blast will bring the houses tumbling down about the cubby-holes.
We must envisage many thousands of nuclear families listening to Mr Robin Day’s consensual homilies on their portable radios as they are baked, crushed or suffocated to death.
Those outside this radius might be afforded a little temporary protection.
But when they eventually emerge they will find the food and water contaminated, the roads blocked, the hospitals destroyed, the livestock dead or dying.
If we are to learn from the experience of the people of Nagasaki and Hiroshima, then I think it is, after all, unlikely that many survivors will be devoting their energies to ‘political turbulence’, since, unless they know the entrances to the governmental deep bunkers, they will have nothing to turbul against.
Most will be wandering here and there in a desperate attempt to find lost children, parents, neighbours, friends.
A few of the most collected will succour the dying and dig among the ruins for the injured.
The evacuation of whole cities, as is planned in the USA and perhaps in the Soviet Union, is inoperable here because this island is too small.
But one might imagine the excavation of vast subterranean systems beneath our towns, complete with stored food and water, generating systems, air-purifying systems, etc.
This might save a substantial number of lives, although one is uncertain what it would save them for, since above ground no workplaces, uncontaminated crops or stock would be left.
It is certainly possible that, if civilization survives and continues on its present trajectory until the mid-twenty-first century, then the ‘advanced’ societies will have become troglodyte in some such fashion.
There will be immense thermonuclear charges capable of concussing a whole underground city.
And, in any case, by the time that humanity becomes troglodyte, it will then have been already defeated.
We will now turn to the second assumption which underpins Professor Howard’s arguments.
The professor supposes a ‘theatre’ war confined to Europe, which does not escalate to confrontation between the two superpowers.
We will not chide him too much on this supposition, since it is now commonplace in the strategic thinking of both blocs.
Indeed, it is commonplace not only as idea but also as fact, since immense sums are spent on both sides to match each other’s weapons at ‘tactical’ and ‘theatre’ levels.
We have seen that poor Mr Pym (who has now at last been told by an American officer what to do) is quite as simple on this matter as Professor Howard.
Both suppose a “chain of deterrence’, according to which war may not only start at any level but it may be confined to that level, since at any point there is a further fearsome threshold of ‘deterrence’ ahead.
Whether such wars lead on to confrontation between the superpowers will depend, not upon the logic of weaponry, but on further diplomatic and political considerations.
Jt is that nuclear wars between the two great opposed powers and their allies could be confined to this or that level.
This is a silly notion at first sight; and, after tedious and complex arguments have been gone through, it emerges as equally silly at the end.
For while it might very well be in the interests of either the USA or the USSR to confine a war to Europe, or to the Persian Gulf, and to prevent it from passing into an ultimate confrontation, we are not dealing here with rational behaviour.
Once ‘theatre’ nuclear war commences, immense passions, indeed hysterias, will be aroused.
After even the first strikes of such a war, communications and command posts will be so much snarled up that any notion of rational planning will give way to panic.
Above all, it will be manifest that the only one of the two great powers likely to come out of the contest as ‘victor’ must be the one which hurls its ballistic weapons first, furthest and fastest — and preferably before the weapons of the other have had time to lift off.
This was the commonsense message which Lord Louis Mountbatten, shortly before he was murdered, conveyed to a meeting in Strasbourg.
The belief was that were hostilities ever to break out in Western Europe, such weapons could be used in field warfare without 38 triggering an all-out nuclear exchange leading to the final holocaust.
In the event of a nuclear war there will be no chances, there will be no survivors — all will be obliterated. am not asserting this without having deeply thought about the matter.
I repeat in all sincerity as a military man I| can see no use for any nuclear weapons which would not end in escalation, with consequences that no one can conceive.
They have become the alchemists of our times, working in secret ways which cannot be divulged, casting spells which embrace us all.
Professor Howard takes his stand on these irrational foundations, and practises alchemy in his own right.
He calls for measures which must be ‘given the widest possible publicity’, in order to ensure ‘the credibility of our entire defence posture’, a posture which might otherwise be seen to be ‘no more than an expensive bluff.
The professor supposes that he is a tough realist, who is drawing conclusions which others, including politicians, are too timorous to draw in public.
If we spend thousands of millions of pounds upon nuclear weapons, then we either 39 intend to use them or we do not.
But, as he knows, there are no practicable civil defence measures which could have more than a marginal effect.
These are two distinct propositions, and it is time that they were broken into two parts.
For a long time the second proposition has been hidden within the mendacious vocabulary of ‘deterrence’; and behind these veils of ‘posture’, ‘credibility’ and ‘bluff’ it has waxed fat and now has come of age.
The first proposition is that nuclear weapons are capable of inflicting such ‘unacceptable damage’ on both parties to an exchange that mutual fear ensures peace.
The second is that each party is actually preparing for nuclear war, and is ceaselessly searching for some ultimate weapon or tactical/strategic point of advantage which would assure its victory.
It has ‘worked’ for thirty years, if not in Vietnam, Czechoslovakia, the Middle East, Africa, Cambodia, the Dominican Republic, Afghanistan, then in the central fracture between the superpowers which runs across Europe.
Yet we have moved upwards to 50,000, and each year new sophistications and ‘modernizations’ are introduced.
The current chatter about ‘theatre’ or ‘tactical’ nuclear war is not a sophisticated variant of the old vocabulary of ‘deterrence’; it is directly at variance with that vocabulary.
Thus it is thought by persons in the Pentagon that a ‘theatre’ nuclear war might be confined to Europe, in which, to be sure, America’s NATO allies would be obliterated, but in which immense damage would also be inflicted upon Russia west of the Urals, while the soil of the United States remained immune.
This has been seen as the way to a great victory for ‘the West’, and if world-wide nuclear war seems to be ultimately inevitable, then the sooner that can be aborted by having a little theatre war the better.
The trouble with all this, from the Pentagon’s point of view, is that it requires rewriting the war games-plan, and in this rewriting Soviet strategists have been unaccountably uncooperative.
Unfortunately, the Soviet Union has shown little interest in Western ideas on limited nuclear war.
All of these reviews are designed... to avoid a situation in which the President would be put under irresistible pressure to preempt, to avoid leaving the United States only the options of yielding or engaging in a spasmodic and apocalyptic nuclear exchange.
European war is to be one ‘choice’ or ‘option’ for United States strategists, although what might appear to be ‘limited’ on that side of the Atlantic might appear to be spasmodic and apocalyptic on this.
The cruise missiles which are being set up in Western Europe are the hardware designed for exactly such a ‘limited’ war, and the nations which harbour them are viewed, in this strategy, as launching platforms which are expendable in the interests of ‘Western’ defence.
While Russia might not wish to rewrite the games-plan, since some of its most populous and highly industrialized regions are within the ‘theatre’ whereas all of the USA is not, nevertheless her hand might be forced if faced with the alternatives of such a war or of outright ICBM obliteration.
If all this sounds crazy, then I can only agree that crazy is exactly what it is.
But, then, as a frequent visitor to the United States I must report that there is a dangerous 42 tendency to craziness in the American view of the world.
It is against all this that the generous and responsible American peace movement has to work.
Their use must be sanctioned by the President of the United States on the request of the Supreme Allied Commander, NATO, who is always an American general.
He has also made some evasive parliamentary provisos about ‘consultation’, but it is clear enough that in any ‘emergency’ (or on the plea of an emergency) such consultation will be null.
Europe is to be transformed into a ‘nuclear Maginot line’ for the defence of the United States.
Meanwhile the United States is urgently seeking for similar platforms in the Middle East for another small ‘theatre’ war which might penetrate deep into the Caucasus.
The idea here is to extract the West, at the last moment, from this war — much the same scenario as that which went disastrously wrong in 1939.
These little ‘theatre’ wars (not one of which would obediently stay put in its theatre) are now all on the drawing-boards, and in the Pentagon more than in the Kremlin, for the simple reason that every ‘theatre’ 1s adjacent to the Soviet Union, and any ‘tactical’ nuclear strike would penetrate deep into Russian territory.
The plans for the European ‘theatre’ war are not only ready — the ‘modernized’ missiles designed for exactly such a war have been ordered, and will be delivered to this island in 1983.
And at this moment, the advocates of civil defence make a corresponding political intervention.
These advocates wish to hurry the British people across a threshold of mental expectation, so that they may be prepared, not for ‘deterrence’, but for actual nuclear war.
The expectations supporting the theory of deterrence are, in the final analysis, that deterrence will work.
Those who have supported the policy of deterrence have done so in the confidence that this policy would prevent 44 nuclear war from taking place.
They have not contemplated the alternative, and have been able to avoid facing certain questions raised by that alternative.
The third question is, in some sense, new, and it is also extraordinary, in the sense that even proposing the question illuminates the degree to which the loss of our national sovereignty has become absolute, and democratic process has been deformed in ways scarcely conceivable twenty years ago.
But arguments such as those of Professor Howard are designed to hurry us past these questions without noticing them.
More than this, the arguments are of an order which permit the mind to progress from the unthinkable to the thinkable without thinking — without confronting the arguments, their consequences or probable conclusions, and, indeed, without knowing that any threshold has been crossed.
But mutual fear and self-interest predominate on one side, and active menace and the ceaseless pursuit of ‘tactical’ or ‘theatre’ advantage predominate on the other.
His language — his anxiety as to possible ‘political turbulence’, his advocacy of measures which are not ‘covert or concealed’ — appeared to reveal an intention to act in political ways upon the mind of the people, in order to enforce a ‘posture’, not of defence but of menace; and in this it corresponded, on a political level, with the menacing strategic decisions of NATO last December at Brussels.
In order to make the country bear the burden, we have to create an emotional atmosphere akin to a war-time psychology.
For the country — that ts, tis country — must now not only be made to bear a burden of heavy expense, loss of civil 46 liberties, etc., but also the expectation, as a definite and imminent possibility, of actual nuclear devastation.
And it is necessary to inflame these new expectations by raising voluntary defence corps, auxiliary services, digging even deeper bunkers for the personnel of the State, distributing leaflets, holding lectures in halls and churches, laying down two weeks’ supplies of emergency rations, promoting in the private sector the manufacture of Whitelaw Shelters and radiation-proof‘Imperm’ blinds and patent Anti-Fall-Out pastilles and ‘Breetheesy’ masks, and getting the Women’s Institutes to work out recipes for broiling radioactive frogs.
And it is also necessary to supplement all this by beating up an internal civil-war or class-war psychosis, by unmasking traitors, by theatening journalists under the Official Secrets Acts, by tampering with juries and tapping telephones, and generally by closing up people’s minds and mouths.
There are tactical problems, which those who live outside All Souls are able to see.
Whitehall’s reluctance to issue every householder with a copy of Protect and Survive is eloquent testimony to this.
For there is a minority of the British people who are reluctant to be harried across this threshold.
These people have voices, and if they are denied access to the major media, there are still little journals and democratic organizations where they are able to speak.
If the mass of the British public were to be suddenly alerted to the situation which they are actually now in — by ‘alarmist’ leaflets and by broadcasts telling them that they have indeed every reason for alarm — then the whole operation might backfire, and give rise to a vast consensus, not for nuclear war, but for peace.
I suspect that, for these reasons, Professor Howard is regarded, by public-relations-conscious persons in the Establishment, as a great patriot of NATO and an admirable 47 fellow, but as an inexperienced politician.
The people of this country have been made dull and stupid by a diet of Official Information.
But they are not all that stupid, and there is still a risk — a small risk, but not one worth taking — that they might remember who they are, and become ‘turbulent’ before the war even got started.
I suspect that the strategy of high persons in the Cabinet Office, the security services, and the Ministry of Defence, is rather different from that of Professor Howard.
There is preliminary work yet to do, in softening up the public mind, in intimidating dissidents, in controlling information more tightly, and in strengthening internal policing and security.
But the arguments which Mr Howard has proposed, are, exactly, the arguments most deeply relevant to the present moment.
I have sought, in these pages, to open these arguments up, to show what is inside them, which premises and what conclusions.
I have not been trying to frighten readers, but to show the consequences to which these arguments lead.
Nor have I been trying to show that Professor Howard is a scandalous and immoral sort of person. | do not suppose myself to be a more moral sort of person than he.
He cannot have put forward his ghastly scenario with any feelings of eager anticipation.
And, finally, although I am myself by conviction a socialist, I have not been grounding my arguments on premises of that kind.
I do not suppose that all blame lies 48 with the ideological malice and predatory drives of the capitalist ‘West’, although some part of it does.
Socialists once supposed, in my youth, that socialist states might commit every kind of blunder, but the notion that they could go to war with each other, for ideological or national ends, was unthinkable.
And they can use means and arguments as bad as those of the old imperialist powers.
I have based my arguments on the logic of the Cold War, or of the ‘deterrent’ situation itself.
We may favour this or that explanation for the origin of this situation.
But once this situation has arisen, there is a common logic at work in both blocs.
Military technology and military strategy come to impose their own agenda upon political developments.
This is an inter-operative and reciprocal logic, which threatens all, impartially.
If you press me for my own view, then I would hazard that the Russian state is now the most dangerous in relation to its own people and to the people of its client states.
The rulers of Russia are police-minded and security-minded people, imprisoned within their own ideology, accustomed to meet argument with repression and tanks.
But the basic postures of the Soviet Union seem to me, still, to be those of siege and aggressive defence; and even the brutal and botching intervention in Afghanistan appears to have followed upon sensitivity as to United States and Chinese strategies.
The United States seems to me to be more dangerous and provocative in its general military and diplomatic strategies, which press around the Soviet Union with menacing bases.
But we need not ground our own actions on a ‘preference’ for one of the other blocs.
What is relevant is the logic of process common to both, reinforcing the ugliest features of each others’ societies, and locking both together in each other’s nuclear arms in the same degenerative drift.
It is in this sense that NATO's ‘modernization’ programme, and the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, taken together, may perhaps be seen as a textbook case of the reciprocal logic of the Cold War.
In response, the hard arguments and the hard men had their way amongst the Soviet leadership, and, two weeks later, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan took place.
NATO ‘modernization’ was not a decisive factor, in the view of the Russian historian, Roy Medvedev (to whom I addressed some questions last June), since the intervention in Afghanistan had been meditated and prepared over a much longer period.
Throughout this essay I have been attempting to disclose this reciprocal logic of process, which is driven forward by the armourers of both superpowers.
And what I have been contending for, against Professor Howard, is this.
First, I have shown that the premises which underlie his letter are irrational.
What makes the extinction of civilized life upon this island 50 probable is not a greater propensity for evil than in previous history, but a more formidable destructive technology, a deformed political process , and also a deformed culture.
It makes possible a disjunction between the rationality and moral sensibility of individual men and women and the effective political and military process.
It habituates the mind to nuclear holocaust by reducing everything to a flat level of normality.
By habituating us to certain expectations, it not only encourages resignation — it also beckons on the event.
As much of reality as most of us can bear is what is most proximate to us — our self-interests and our immediate affections.
What threatens our interests — what causes us even mental unease — is seen as outside ourselves, as the Other.
Wars commence in our culture first of all, and we kill each other in euphemisms and abstractions long before the first missiles have been launched.
This was done in 1945, in the name of allies fighting for the Four Freedoms (although what those Freedoms were I cannot now recall), and it was done upon two populous cities.
It was done by professing Christians, when the Western Allies had already defeated the Germans, and when victory against the Japanese was certain, in the longer or shorter run.
The longer run would have cost some thousands more of Western lives, whereas the short run would cost the lives only of enemy Asians.
So long as we can suppose that this war will be inflicted only on them, the thought comes easily.
And if we can also suppose that this war will save ‘our’ lives, or serve our self-interest, or even save us from the tedium of queuing every other day for gasoline, then the act can easily follow on.
The deformed human mind is the ultimate doomsday weapon — it is out of the human mind that the missiles and the neutron warheads come.
For this reason it is necessary to enter a remonstrance against those who use this kind of language and adopt these mental postures.
They are preparing our minds as launching platforms for exterminating thoughts.
The fact that Soviet ideologists are doing much the same (thinking us to death as ‘imperialists’ and ‘capitalists’) is no defence.
Academic persons have little influence upon political and military decisions, and less than they suppose.
They do, however, operate within our culture, with ideas and language, and, as we have seen, the deformation of culture is the precedent condition for nuclear war.
It is therefore proper to ask such persons to resist the contamination of our culture with those terms which precede the ultimate act.
I am thinking of that great number of persons who very 52 much dislike what is going on in the actual world, but who dislike the vulgarity of exposing themselves to the business of ‘politics’ even more.
They erect both sets of dislikes around their desks or laboratories like a screen, and get on with their work and their careers.
I am not asking these, or all of them, to march around the place or to spend hours in weary little meetings.
I am asking them to examine the deformities of our culture and then, in public places, to demur.
I will recommend some forms of action, although every person must be governed in this by his or her own conscience and aptitudes.
But, first, I should, in fairness to Professor Howard, offer a scenario of my own.
I have come to the view that a general nuclear war is not only possible but probable, and that is probability is increasing.
We may indeed be approaching a point of noreturn when the existing tendency or disposition towards this outcome becomes irreversible.
By tactical I mean that the political and military conditions for such war exist now in several parts of the world; the proliferation of nuclear weapons will continue, and will be hastened by the export of nuclear energy technology to new markets; and the rivalry of the superpowers is directly inflaming these conditions.
Such conditions now exist in the Middle East and around the Persian Gulf, will shortly exist in Africa, while in SouthEast Asia Russia and China have already engaged in wars by proxy with each other, in Cambodia and Vietnam.
Such wars might stop just short of general nuclear war between the superpowers.
And in their aftermath the great powers might be frightened into better behaviour for a few years.
But so long as this behaviour rested on nothing more than mutual fear, then military technology would continue 53 to be refined, more hideous weapons would be invented, and the opposing giants would enlarge their control over client states.
They rest upon a historical view of power and of the social process, rather than upon the instant analysis of the commentator on events.
Very possibly it may have worked, at this or that moment, in preventing recourse to war.
But in its very mode of working, and in its ‘postures’, it has brought on a series of consequences within its host societies.
Deterrence has repressed the export of violence towards the opposing bloc, but in doing so the repressed power of the State has turned back upon its own author.
The repressed violence has backed up, and has worked its way back into the economy, the polity, the ideology and the culture of the opposing powers.
Soon spreads the dismal shade Of Mystery over his head; And the Catterpiller and Fly Feed on the Mystery.
And it bears the fruit of Deceit, Ruddy and sweet to eat; 54 And the Raven his nest has made In its thickest shade.
In this logic, the peace of ‘mutual fear’ enforces opposing self-interests, affords room for ‘Cruelty’ to work, endangers ‘Mystery’ and its parasites, brings to fruit the ‘postures’ of Deceit, and the death-foreboding Raven hides within the Mystery.
Within the logic of ‘deterrence’, millions are now employed in the armed services, security organs and military economy of the opposing blocs, and corresponding interests exert immense influence within the counsels of the great powers.
And within this normality, hideous cultural abnormalities have been nurtured and are growing to full girth.
The menace of nuclear war reaches far back into the economies of both parties, dictating priorities, and awarding power.
Here, in failing economies, will be found the most secure and vigorous sectors, tapping the most advanced technological skills of both opposed societies and diverting these away from peaceful and productive employment or from efforts to close the great gap between the world’s north and south.
Here also will be found the driving rationale for expansionist programmes in unsafe nuclear energy, programmes which cohabit comfortably with military nuclear technology whereas the urgent research into safe energy supplies from sun, wind or wave are neglected because they have no military pay-off.
Here, in this burgeoning sector, will be found the new expansionist drive for ‘markets’ for arms, as ‘capitalist’ and ‘socialist’ powers compete to feed into the Middle East, Africa and Asia more sophisticated means of kill.
The menace of this stagnant state of violence backs up also into the polity of both halves of the world.
Permanent threat and periodic crisis press the men of the military55 industrial interests, by differing routes in each society, towards the top.
Crisis legitimates the enlargement of the security functions of the state, the intimidation of internal dissent, and the imposition of secrecy and the control of information.
As the ‘natural’ lines of social and political development are repressed, and affirmative perspectives are closed, so internal politics collapses into squabbling interestgroups, all of which interests are subordinated to the overarching interests of the state of perpetual threat.
It may be observed even in failing Britain, across whose territory are now scattered the bases, airfields, camps, research stations, submarine depots, communications-interception stations, radar screens, security and intelligence HQ, munitions works — secure and expanding employment in an economic climate of radical insecurity.
What we cannot observe so well — for we ourselves are the object which must be observed — is the manner in which three decades of ‘deterrence’, of mutual fear, mystery, and state-endorsed stagnant hostility, have backed up into our culture and our ideology.
Imagination has been numbed, language and values have been fouled, by the postures and expectations of the ‘deterrent’ state.
These, then, are among the strategic considerations which lead me to the view that the probability of great power nuclear warfare is strong and increasing.
I argue from a general and sustained historical process, an accumulative logic, of a kind made familiar to me in the study of history.
The episodes lead in this direction or that, but the general logic of process is always towards nuclear war.
The local crises are survived, and it seems as if the decisive moment — either of war or of peace-making and reconciliation — has been postponed and pushed forward 56 into the future.
The weapons are more terrible, the means for their delivery more clever.
The notion that a war might be fought to ‘advantage’, that it might be ‘won’, gains ground.
There is even a tremour of excitement in our culture as though, subconsciously, human kind has lived with the notion for so long that expectations without actions have become boring.
The human mind, even when it resists, assents more easily to its own defeat.
But if my arguments are correct, then we cannot put off the matter any longer.
We must throw whatever resources still exist in human culture across the path of this degenerative logic.
We must generate an alternative logic, an opposition at every level of society.
This opposition must be international and it must win the support of multitudes.
It must act, in very different conditions, within each national state; and, on occasion, it must directly confront its own national state apparatus.
The Campaign for European Nuclear Disarmament, which is already gaining active support in many parts of Western Europe, as well as a more cautious attention in some parts of Eastern Europe, has as an objective the creation of an expanding zone freed from nuclear weapons and bases.
Its opposition to the use of nuclear weapons by its own state will be absolute.
In the international, and especially in the European, context, each national movement will exchange information and delegations, will support and challenge each other.
The national movements will not grow at the same pace, not be able to express themselves in identical ways.
Each success of a unilateral kind — by Holland in refusing NATO cruise missiles or by Romania or Poland in distancing themselves from Soviet strategies — will be met with an outcry that it serves the advantage of one or other bloc.
It cannot be expected that initiatives on one side will be met with instant reciprocation from the other.
Very certainly, the strategists of both blocs will seek to turn the movement to their own advantage.
The logic of peace-making will be as uneven, and as fraught with emergencies and contingencies, as the logic which leads on to war.
In particular, the movement in West and East Europe will find very different expression.
In the West we envisage popular movements engaged in a direct contest with the policies of their own national states.
At first, Soviet ideologues may look benignly upon this, looking forward to a weakening of NATO preparations which are matched by no actions larger than ‘peace-loving’ rhetoric from the East.
But we are confident that our strategy can turn this 58 rhetoric into acts.
In Eastern Europe there are profound pressures for peace, for greater democracy and international exchange, and for relief from the heavy burden of siege economies.
For a time these pressures may be contained by the repressive measures of national and Soviet security services.
Only a few courageous dissidents will, in the first place, be able to take an open part in our common work.
Yet to the degree that the peace movement in the West can be seen to be effective, it will afford support and protection to our allies in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
It will provide those conditions of relaxation of tension which will weaken the rationale and legitimacy of repressive state measures, and will allow the pressures for democracy and detente to assert themselves in more active and open ways.
Moreover, as an instrinsic part of the European campaign, the demand for an opening of the societies of the East to information, free communication and expression, and exchange of delegations to take part in the common work, will be pressed on every occasion.
We are going to find devices which will symbolize that pressure and dramatize that debate.
Against the strategy which envisages Europe as a ‘theatre’ of ‘limited’ nuclear warfare, we propose to make in Europe a theatre of peace.
This will not, even if we succeed, remove the danger of confrontation in non-European theatres.
For if the logic of nuclear strategy reaches back into the organization and ideologies of the superpowers themselves, so the logic of peace-making might reach back also, enforcing alternative strategies, alternative ideologies.
European nuclear disarmament would favour the conditions for international detente.
As to Britain there is no need to doubt what must be done to protest and survive.
We must close down those airfields and bases which already serve aircraft and submarines on nuclear missions.
And we must contest every stage of the attempt to import United States cruise missiles on to our soil.
When I first sat down to write this essay, in February 1980, it seemed to the handful of us in Britain, France, West Germany and Eastern Europe who were then discussing such a campaign that we were only whistling in the dark.
Only in Holland and Belgium did it seem that a popular movement of conscience could still bring any influence to bear upon political decisions.
The movement has taken off, and it is, already, too large and too various for any group or interest to manipulate it for sectional ends.
In every part of the country groups have been forming themselves, under many auspices and names —CND, World Disarmament, END, local councils of peace, and local campaigns against cruise missiles.
It is a confused and confusing scene, developing too fast for any central organization.
We hope in this book to provide a service to these hundreds of groups — and also to all readers who not only wish to act, but who know that clear argument and sound information are actions in their own right.
See the essays by Dan Smith, Mary Kaldor, David Holloway and Emma Rothschild below.
For the history of the concept of ‘theatre’ warfare, see Alva Myrdal’s essay below.
Since I wrote an earlier version of this, in the form of 60 a pamphlet, Professor Howard has told me, with courtesy, that I have misrepresented his views on some points.
He is not an advocate of cruise missiles (which he does not think will ‘do much good’), but intended in his letter to draw necessary conclusions from the decision to bring them here.
No doubt he will defend his own views more fully in due course, and also explain further his objections to cruise missiles.
I remember most vividly my job with the Air Targets Division of the Air Force where [ worked as an intelligence analyst.
Here I helped select targets in the Soviet Union at which, in the event of a war, Air Force officers would fire nuclear warheads.
While I worked at selecting and justifying political targets, fellow-analysts in other offices were busy identifying different types of strategic targets — petroleum depots, airfields, or industrial centres.
Like myself, my colleagues were graduates of liberal arts colleges and many were taking evening graduate courses in fields such as international relations or economic theory.
Most of us had vague hopes of a college teaching job some day but, meanwhile, taking courses meant improving our professional credentials and this made it easier to live with the more mundane aspects of our nine-to-five life.
Today, as a professor in a small liberal arts college, I am frequently visited by haunting memories of my work with Air Targets.
I’m surprised how clear these memories are; the details of my work, the faces and names of my colleagues and the atmosphere of the place where I worked — a grey, creaking two-storey temporary barracks-like building, anchored to Constitution Avenue by the weight of a large, heavy windowless cinderblock room in which classified documents were read and filed.
I and my colleagues, with whom I shared a large office, drank coffee and ate lunch, never experienced guilt or self-criticism.
Our office behaviour was no different from that of men and women who might work for a bank or insurance company.
At least no signs of moral revulsion surfaced when we were having an extra martini or two at lunch to celebrate the inclusion of some of our government control centres in a Joint Chiefs list of prime Soviet targets.
The Cold War made selecting targets for attack in the Soviet Union seem respectable.
Within the Defense Department one was struck by the atmosphere of a war to be waged 63 and won.
Crisis conditions made targeting seem imperative, which, in turn, made it morally acceptable.
Another factor was that the complex vastness of the Defense Department prevented any intelligence analyst from determining how his work might be used by higherranking officials.
This meant that analysts were permitted to know something only if it were needed to complete an assigned task.
Thus, in the case of the Air Targets Division, I had access to targeting information pertaining to Soviet government control centres but I did not have access to data concerning other categories of targets, such as Soviet petroleum depots or air bases.
Working on tasks of limited yet clearly defined scope appealed to analysts who might otherwise have felt at sea in the vastness of the bureaucracy.
Need to know, initially designed to help reduce intelligence leaks, restricted each analyst’s appreciation of the larger context of which his job was a small part.
While some administrative arrangements prevented analysts from grasping how all] the parts fit together, others helped analysts achieve a sense of professional security and personal gratification.
For example, analysts usually worked as members of a committee, team or task force.
Although this group-think process often blunted the expression of individual insights and diluted strong conclusions, it offered something of value to individual team players.
A wellreceived team product provided reinforcement through shared, mutual congratulations while, in the case of a negative or critical reaction, the individual player could absolve himself from personal responsibility by blaming less insightful team members or by joining fellow-teammates in 64 blaming the unappreciative system.
The team made it possible to savour the gratification of praise and muted the unappealing impact of criticism.
It was not only the protective structure of the team that shielded the individual analyst from serious challenges or the ignominy of being proven wrong; the broad theoretical or conjectural context within which research was carried on offered security as well.
It was difficult if not impossible for any potential critic to prove that a colleague was incorrect, or put him on the spot, if the study consisted of speculative generalizations about probable future developments concerning a broad, complex subject.
Another facet of DOD research was the practice of developing reports in terms of the so-called ‘worst case’ situation.
With regard to assessments of Soviet military capabilities, for example, analysts strained to depict the most extreme and threatening dimensions of the Soviet Union’s ability to develop the full resources of its military potential.
The worst case approach to ‘research’ was encouraged by the Department of Defense since, to the extent that Soviet military potentialities were described in their most horrendous dimensions, the Department strengthened its chances to motivate Congress to provide increased defence funds.
Furthermore, the worst case approach imposed no constraints on the analyst’s imaginative freedom to estimate future levels ofenemy weaponry.
Again, under these circumstances an analyst’s conclusions were less susceptible to effective challenge.
Further immunity from criticism was assured by the fact that each analyst’s conclusions, or those of his team, would be immediately classified and access to the finished product restricted to those who held proper clearances and the need to know.
This encouraged the view that America’s interests were best protected through superiority in arms.
Thus, what was initially only an approach to intelligence research (the worst case) came to colour the analyst’s world-view, an outlook that was buttressed by compatible attitudes in the Defense environment.
The worst case inevitably disposed Defense analysts to concentrate on assessing enemy capabilities, primarily military, without ascertaining what enemy intentions might be.
Worst case thinking implied that enemy intentions were known and that a concentrated effort to list enemy capabilities was required.
This could be best done through the acquisition of more weapons since, of course, the only thing the Russians respected was force.
What all of this fostered in the workaday concerns of Defense analysts was a persistent preoccupation with the state of military technology — the numbers game.
Assembling, or at least being familiar with, lists, tables, and catalogues of the estimated number and characteristics of enemy weapons was an essential part of being a respected intelligence analyst.
As the arms race continued and the United States and the Soviet Union acquired more and more weapons, there were more and more items to count and describe.
The strong technological and quantitative orientation of these tasks held the attention of analysts and the relationship of weapons to human life was an incidental consideration.
During a NATO war game I remember the surprise expressed by an Air Force colonel when he was informed of the number of casualties that resulted from his striking an ‘enemy’ urban centre with a one-megaton weapon.
It took the simulated reality of a war game to bring home the human dimensions of this act.
The colonel quickly 66 regained his composure, reassuring himself that this was, after all, only a game.
In retrospect, in the anxious atmosphere of the Cold War, and in the setting of the Department of Defense where arms were considered the means of survival, thinking about the social characteristics of an enemy society constituted an unrewarding, almost irresponsible pursuit.
The significance of military power in determining the behaviour of government officials was illustrated by remarks made by Pham Van Dong, Premier of North Vietnam, and Henry Kissinger, then President Nixon’s national security affairs adviser.
These remarks enabled Richard Barnet to contrast the capacities of the leaders of North Vietnam and America to comprehend each other’s political motivations.
I was struck by how well the Vietnamese politician understood Nixon’s character and situation as well as the pressures that operated on him.
Kissinger, on the other hand, while evidencing respect and even a little admiration for his adversary’s skill, seemed to have no genuine understanding of what motivated him.
In Hanoi, Nixon was a human being, not liked, but seriously considered.
Those with power easily convince themselves that they do not need to understand their adversaries.
A circular three-step form of logic offered comfort to Defense bureaucrats.
Superior military power disposed defence planners not to take the trouble to comprehend their victims.
Not knowing whom one was planning to kill made the sombre prospect of using weapons much less onerous.
Therefore, it was possible to think of arms superiority as the best means of achieving national security.
Also contributing to the atmosphere of intelligence work 67 was the stress given to security clearances.
Every analyst was required to have a security clearance and with a clearance was granted access to documents bearing security classifications up through Top Secret.
Clearance usually required a sixto twelve-month probe of an applicant’s past — where he had lived and worked, whom he knew, and organizations he had joined.
I can recall how we criticized the clearance process, pointing out how subjective the process was because of the weight given to impressions of neighbours and casual acquaintances.
Despite the many critical comments about clearances, I also had the impression that being cleared had its rewards.
These were personal and had to do with being confronted by a screening process, passing the test, and then enjoying final acceptance.
Being cleared represented a flattering experience sharpened by the quality of selectivity, not unlike the feeling accompanying acceptance by a fraternity or country club.
Being included confirmed that you had been found worthy by those unseen and unnamed officials somewhere in the upper reaches of the bureaucracy who managed America’s security needs.
It was a perverse gratification in a way — to feel rewarded simply for things one refrained from doing in the past — but most analysts quietly savoured the fact that someone had considered them fit to share vital national secrets in the cause of security.
Among those finally cleared for work at Defense, there were some upon whom was bestowed a higher, more selective, spectal clearance.
When I was ‘chosen’ for a special clearance, my immediate feeling was one of achievement and pleasure.
I also remember the earlier feeling when I was not cleared for special intelligence and how important it seemed to me to be one of the three or four who were cleared among the twenty or so analysts in 68 the Political and Economics Section.
With subdued envy I would watch those chosen few leave our office several times a day to check the ‘take’ in the ‘back room’, the guarded, windowless cinderblock cubicle filled with combination safes.
These special people would periodically read over my work to see if some fact or point of emphasis should be altered on the basis of what they were privileged to see and I was not.
Intelligence community decorum made it inappropriate to question any changes made by this select few.
Thinking back on DOD security practices, I realize that levels of clearance represent just another dimension of information fragmentation.
When | was denied access to special information I felt that I was not as fully informed as others and, because of this, I was not as fully a part of, or as responsible for, the ongoing work.
If nuclear weapons were being assigned to a section of Kiev or Kharkov, I imagined that someone else was more responsible than I Along with Civil Service grade and job experience, Special intelligence clearances also helped establish a hierarchy within the office.
Hierarchical relationships, wherever they exist, create a distraction of their own by causing one to think about where one stands in relation to others.
Within the intelligence community, not everyone had the special clearance and, largely because of this fact, one came to want it.
If this sign of more complete acceptance was not extended, one wondered why.
Yet there was no way to determine why, nor was there any way to correct the situation.
Doubts and hopes were generated which distracted attention from the substance of one’s work.
A preoccupation with the structure, process, and mechanics of day-to-day existence was encouraged by the atmosphere of the Department of Defense and one quickly became absorbed by these concerns.
What was done with the end product of work assumed a secondary importance.
If, on the other hand, a moment arose when one’s thoughts happened to fasten on the human consequences of devel69 oping and using arms, there was consolation to be found in the Defense environment.
The unsavoury aspects of such ruminations were blunted by the reminder that America’s victims deserved their fate and that it was the victims who were responsible for bringing a nuclear holocaust down on their own heads.
Describing the Soviet leadership as evil, corrupt, immoral, sadistic, power-mad and inhuman — plus being communists — provided at least a partial justification for their elimination.
Vilifying the enemy, describing him in demeaning terms, is a longstanding government practice intended to legitimize the killing of others.
Later, in the Vietnam War, the North Vietnamese were seen as aggressive communists and were therefore evil.
Besides, if the Vietnamese were seen as caring less than Americans about this temporal life, if they didn’t mind dying all that much, killing them became a less traumatic experience.
As America emerged in the 1950s as a world power committed to the use of military capabilities for national security, a variety of new words became part of the language of the foreign affairs bureaucracy.
Beyond its usual function of facilitating communication, language in Defense, and in the intelligence community in general, helped to obscure the reality of what the work was all about — to distract attention from the homicidal reality and give a brighter hue to the ominous.
Presumably certain words and expressions ‘took hold’ because civil servants felt comfortable with them.
Certain words helped link Defense work with familiar and positive experiences of each individual’s past and thereby reinforce the innocuous quality of ongoing 7O projects.
Changing the name of the War Department to the Defense Department, Strike Command to Readiness Command, and the Air Force’s use of the maxim ‘peace is our profession’ are examples of this.
Impressions of the benign were strengthened by the careful construction of acronyms, such as PAL , an electronically controlled DOD system of interconnected locks used to prevent the unauthorized launching of an inter-continental ballistic missile.
The vocabulary of Defense, to the extent that phrases such as ‘power vacuum’ and ‘power equilibrium’ could be used, had the ring of respected and predictable laws of the physical sciences that had nothing to do with such things as war and annihilation.
Weapons were called military ‘hardware’, thereby evoking impressions of something familiar, useful, and available in a neighbourhood store.
I recall the time in the late 1950s when the term “baby H-bomb’ was commonly used in referring to low yield, small tactical nuclear weapons suitable for use in limited wars.
The practice of referring to nuclear weapons by terms conventionally used to suggest everyday human experiences was evident with America’s first use of atomic bombs in Japan — the Hiroshima bomb was named ‘Little Boy’ and it was the weight of ‘Fat Man’ that fell on Nagasaki.
As America’s involvement in the Vietnam War grew deeper, the Defense vocabulary expanded and displayed an even greater imaginative and anaesthetizing flair.
Bombing raids became ‘surgical strikes’ and the forced movement and 71 impounding of Vietnamese citizens were part of America’s ‘pacification program’ — terms suggesting images of the hospital operating room or a Quaker meeting.
The enemy was not killed, but, instead, was ‘taken out’, ‘wasted’ or ‘blown away’ as a consequence of ‘executive action’ or a ‘protective reaction’ foray.
In Washington the semantics of the military muted the reality of war for the civilian policy-makers.
In quiet, air-conditioned, thick-carpeted rooms, such terms as ‘systematic pressure’, ‘armed reconnaissance, ‘targets of opportunity’ and even ‘body count’ seemed to breed a sort of games-theory detachment.
Americans are no longer fighting in Vietnam but the use of language for political purposes continues.
I have been back to Washington a number of times to talk with old friends.
Each time I visit the Pentagon or wait in the visitors’ lobby at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia , I 72 catch myself staring at the men and women who pass by.
I overhear snatches of conversations and am struck by the amount of laughter.
It’s all very much as I remember it — people whose speech and behaviour suggest their sociability, but also their strong conviction that they are doing what needs to be done and it is therefore right.
In her book Eichmann in Jerusalem, Hannah Arendt analyses why few Nazis or Germans were able to express a sense of guilt for the monstrous crimes they committed in the final solution to the Jewish question.
Arendt’s explanation was that the Nazi bureaucracy provided mechanisms for establishing distance between the individual and the reality of genocide.
It was important for those who did the actual killing to know that they were not responsible for the planning.
The Nazi state was administered by ordinary men and women performing routine acts no one of which seemed, in itself, unacceptably sinister.
What I look for when I return to Washington and talk to former colleagues is the reassurance that things have changed.
Public statements coming from the highest levels of government indicate that this is the case.
But within the heart of the bureaucracy, among the career civil servants of ten or twenty years, there is a holding back from the risks of detente and I wonder if things have really changed.
I fear that my memories of the Air Targets Division are more relevant than I wish to believe.
My memories of my experiences in the intelligence community would become less relevant if analysts today were able to stand back from their day-to-day activities and begin to examine the implications of their work with more 73 objectivity.
Thought can sensitize men and women to the implications of their actions and this could impose new inhibitions on the behaviour of the foreign affairs bureaucracy.
There are, as I have indicated, forces within the system that work against such self-examination but the tentative move toward a policy of detente offers a setting within which this could begin to happen.
Referring once again to Arendt, to the extent that critical self-examination does not occur, the individuals comprising the bureaucracy are abandoning a human undertaking which she considers to be of the highest value, the activity of thinking.
Many of the tragedies of the past are attributable less to the evil or stupidity of man than to his thoughtlessness.
Running from an uneasy war-time alliance through an almost immediately following sharply hostile cold war, the history of the superpowers’ postwar antagonism has been interrupted occasionally by the seeking of accommodation in the act of balancing each other.
The arms race was pursued by both sides under the assumption of an imminent risk of a military showdown between the two systems, or, at least, of a constant danger of encroachment from the other ideological camp.
Although Dr Myrdal’s study was completed in 1976, and preceded NATO's decision to ‘modernize’ its ‘theatre’ weapons (cruise missiles and Pershing IIs), this essay sets the scene for that decision, and analyses the strategic arguments underpinning the notion of nuclear warfare in the ‘European theatre’. 77 against the strivings for disarmament.
The detente of recent years led to a more polite choice of vocabulary as well as some, though limited, approaches to freer economic, scientific, and cultural relations and, generally, widened communications.
The Helsinki Conference held in the summer of 1975 represented a kind of codification of the ideas of detente, but without any firm commitments regarding implementation.
Detente, however, did not lead to a reversal or even a cessation of the arms race.
The main new element was rather the institutionalization of the continuous character of the arms race.
The two superpowers now stand more armed than ever with gigantic arsenals which continue to be increased.
The history of postwar disarmament endeavours can only be told as one of repeated lost opportunities, in which the crucial and determining factor has been sparring by the superpowers.
From the beginning, both have excelled in high rhetoric about the goal of disarmament, often employing acrimonious polemics against each other’s positions.
But beneath the surface they have increasingly acted as if there were between them a conspiracy not to permit a halt, still less a reversal, of the arms race.
Although the Soviet bloc had already been established and solidified, Europe was more firmly structured by the formation of NATO in 194g and WTO in 1955.
In other parts of the world, various regional or bilateral accords usually created less tightly regulated arrangements.
Within these alliances, despite all pronouncements of mutuality and partnership, the power has remained firmly in the hands of the two superpowers.
Spurred on by the superpowers’ arms race, most other countries have militarized unprecedentedly, not least the underdeveloped countries.
The superpowers have actively contributed to this militarization by military aid and by the politicization of development aid.
They have not acted in concert to prevent or stop wars in 78 various parts of the world, as the Charter of the United Nations prescribes that the great powers should do.
In these wars, as in the Middle East, they have often taken sides, even when they have not got themselves involved in active warfare, as the United States did in Indochina.
Still, they have until now been careful not to let their contributions to and involvement in these wars lead to an open military confrontation between themselves.
Talking disarmament while relentlessly building up their own armaments to dazzling levels; prodding and aiding allied countries to do the same, though on a necessarily more modest scale; making the world more dangerous; compelling even nonaligned countries to keep their defences high — this is how peoples and governments of the lesser powers have experienced superpower politics after the war.
While these repercussions are played out all over the world, the two superpowers in their competitive antagonism are fixated on each other.
Their posture is, I believe, well illustrated by the old Viking tale of the fighters who are required to carry on their knife-duel hitched together by a belt around their waists.
The primary motivating force for the superpowers has been that each must be second to none.
That this is their absurd ambition can be concluded from their constant measuring and comparing of military might.
Whenever the will of the United States Congress falters regarding military expenditures, the Pentagon propaganda machine releases news about an approaching bomber gap or missile gap or megatonnage gap or some other alleged 79 advance in the Soviet armoury.
The Soviet government is not dependent on a scrutinizing congress and the internal debate there is muted.
But it can be safely assumed that those responsible for the Soviet budget are egged on by their military establishments which deliver correct or incorrect information about threatening changes in American capabilities.
The simple idea that the main motivation of the arms race between the superpowers is for each to match the other in destructive Capacity is continuously revealed in official statements on both sides.
Initially the Soviet Union started from a position of inferiority, but it has gradually advanced towards equality in the gross kill-effect of nuclear weapons deployed or in production.
In regard to technology, the United States has always been and is for all foreseeable time far ahead.
But in practical terms, especially from the beginning of the SALT negotiations in 1969, the two superpowers have acknowledged that what they possibly can agree upon is the establishment of essential parity — which each of them then attempts to surpass in order to reach superiority.
Fear of what the opposite side may be aiming for then acts on both as a force to drive the arms race onward.
The military planners exploit this situation, the politicians do not oppose them, and the citizens therefore allow the two defence systems to spiral steadily upwards in an actionreaction pattern.
As long as the arms race is permitted to go on, more than momentary stability can never be secured.
Such are the questions left unformulated by the superpowers themselves in bilateral negotiations and official statements to the public in their own countries.
Independent experts have often approached these prob80 lems and effectively pointed out how vast is the overkill capacity of both superpowers.
The immediate aim of such observations has been to demonstrate the need to reach an agreement between them to scale down their nuclear ambitions.
Seldom, however, is the question raised whether one of the superpowers could unilaterally and safely cease the competition and even decrease its nuclear arsenal without risking its deterrent effect.
Often this argument is made in the form of estimating their ability to kill each human inhabitant so many times over.
It is most important . . . to have clearly in mind what the current technical situation means: the survival of the combined populations of the superpowers depends on the goodwill and the good sense of the separate leaderships of the superpowers.
If the Soviet leadership, for whatever reason, or as a result of whatever mistaken information, chose to destroy America as a nation, it is unquestionably capable of doing so in less than half an hour, and there is literally nothing we could now do to prevent it.
The only thing we 81 could do is to wreak on them an equally terrible revenge.
The extent of expected damage is the question of most vital concern to the people living under what they believe is the protection of the terror balance.
In the event of an exchange of blows by strategic nuclear forces of the United States and the U.S.S.R., most of the urban populations of the two countries could be killed, and most of the industry and commerce could be destroyed by the direct and immediate effects of the nuclear explosions.
The towns and rural areas of the two countries would at the same time be subjected to varying amounts of radioactive fallout.
The details of what would happen to the people living in such areas depend importantly on the weather conditions prevailing at the time and on the details of the attack pattern, but well over one-half of the town and country populations could be killed by the fallout.
In addition, the living standards and the life expectancy of the survivors would be substantially reduced by secondary effects, including both the effect of less-than-lethal levels of fallout and the general breakdown of civilized services.
But few visualize the tragic reality that the price, in terms of destruction, is going up all the time, without the concomitant increase in security which the arms escalation was intended to buy.
Ever since shortly after World War II the military power of the United States has been steadily increasing.
Throughout this same period the national security of the United States has been rapidly and 82 inexorably diminishing.
In the early 1950s the U.S.S.R., on the basis of its own unilateral decision and determination to accept the inevitable retaliation, could have launched an attack against the United States with bombers carrying fission bombs.
Some of these bombs would have penetrated our defenses and the American casualties would have numbered in the millions.
In the later 1950s, again in its own sole decision and determination to accept the inevitable massive retaliation, the U.S.S.R. could have launched an attack against the United States using more and better bombers, this time carrying thermonuclear bombs.
Some of these bombers would have penetrated our defenses and the American casualties could have numbered in the tens of millions.
Today the U.S.S.R., again on the basis of its own decision and determination to accept the inevitable retaliation, could launch an attack on the United States using intercontinental missiles and bombers carrying thermonuclear weapons.
The military power of the U.S.S.R. has been steadily increasing since it became an atomic power in 1949.
Hypothetically the United States could unilaterally decide to destroy the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.S.R. would be absolutely powerless to prevent it.
That country could only, at best, seek to wreak revenge through whatever retaliatory capacity it might then have lett.
The clearly predictable course of the arms race is a steady open spiral downward into oblivion.
In addition, the lives of many millions of people living in the immediate neighborhood of the superpowers would be imperiled by so-called local fallout, and long-range or world-wide fallout would endanger those living in even remote countries. [t is very difficult to make precise estimates, but it seems that a full nuclear 83 exchange between the United States and the U.S.S.R. would result in the order of 10,000,000 casualties from cancer and leukemia in countries situated well away from the two main protagonists.
In addition, genetic problems that are even more difficult to calculate would affect many, many millions of others — not only in this generation, but for centuries to come.
Civilization would survive somewhere, but probably not in the United States or the Soviet Union, and perhaps not elsewhere in North America or Europe.
Gaming over a Passive Europe The increasingly unthinkable danger to both the contesting superpowers of a head-on war explains their interest in planning for a ‘limited’ war.
Such wars do not imply the use of available strategic nuclear weapons against each other.
Rather the homelands of the superpowers become ‘sanctuaries’, while wars, if and when they would occur, are to be fought in the territories of lesser powers.
For historical reasons ‘limited war’ primarily has been discussed in regard to Europe.
The only possible origin of war would arise from a superpower conflict.
A ‘European war’ would be categorically different from wars started independently in other parts of the world.
In these, superpower interests might be involved, but not involved to the level of confrontation with each other.
A few reminders of European history, though abridged to bare essentials, are needed here for an understanding of how the present situation has evolved.
When World War II ended, the larger part of Europe, as well as the Soviet Union, was utterly devastated, suffering all sorts of social and economic disorganization.
Though the process ultimately took several years, the East European countries, including the then Soviet zone of East Germany, became satellites of the Soviet Union.
There was never any attempt by the United States to suppress similarly the political independence of the West European countries.
These were conceived of as democracies, including West Germany emerging at the end of the war from its humiliating defeat and material misery.
There were early moves by some West European countries to join in a defensive military alliance.
When in 1948 the Western European Union was formed by Britain, France, and the Benelux countries in response to the Soviet coup in Czechoslovakia the same year, the protective role of the United States was recognized.
The United States joined the alliance, the Berlin blockade having provided an additional warning of Soviet attitudes, and NATO was created for85 mally in April 1949.
Spain under the Franco dictatorship was never formally accepted as a NATO ally, but through United States bilateral arrangements involving military bases and other priorities it became included in the Western defence system.
Finally, West Germany, having undergone transformation from occupation to partnership, was incorporated in NATO in 1955, following a long struggle within Germany and among NATO members over its rearming.
In both Western Europe and the United States, NATO was from the outset conceived as a protective shield for Western Europe; the United States with its then monopoly of nuclear weapons was to provide a nuclear umbrella.
When, in September 1949, the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb, this created in many quarters of Western Europe an apprehension that it was becoming engaged in a contest between the superpowers.
The military strategies that evolved became more and more clearly a reflection of the mutual contest between the superpowers, dominated by their shifts in strength.
The American military policy was from the outset one of containment, which presumed the active threat of a Soviet military move against the West.
As long as the United States had the monopoly of atomic bombs, the threat of counteraction implied security for Western Europe.
When the Soviet Union acquired a nuclear arsenal, however, the security of Europe changed into the insecurity of the risk of being dragged into a nuclear confrontation between the superpowers.
Still, the reiterated promises to Western Europe of protection by the United States nuclear umbrella kept the worries from surfacing publicly.
Some disquietude was often felt, as when John Foster Dulles in the early 1950s enunciated the doctrines of massive retaliation and roll-back.
To the relief of the West Europeans, the latter doctrine was not applied to the uprisings in East Germany in 1953 and 86 Hungary in 1956.
No military countermeasures had been resorted to in Czechoslovakia in 1948 nor were they used later in 1968.
The United States by then had apparently accepted the division of Europe as West European governments had done much earlier.
From the beginning the NATO alliance resulted in contributions from the United States other than the promise of an ultimate defence with its nuclear weapons.
For many years the United States provided large-scale military aid and seemingly permanent garrisons of American troops to Western Europe.
The question of how far the defence of Europe should rely on conventional forces is, in reality, a crucial issue in the NATO strategic debate.
While the European allies in NATO were unwilling to make a contribution in conventional forces that would match the Soviet bloc, and the American forces naturally could not be expanded to fill the void, the decision was to rely on nuclear weapons deployed in Europe.
That the choice might have been a different one is borne out by the fact that the nonaligned countries of Sweden, Switzerland, and Yugoslavia have proven to be much more willing to build up strong defences with conventional weapons and to rely on their own strength to be independent.
They have continued this policy of strong national defence, forsaking not only alliances but nuclear weapons as well.
The real crossroad for the Western European defence strategy, signalled by the deployment of nuclear weapons in Europe, came when the United States, in the face of rising Soviet nuclear capabilities, no longer wanted to be committed to a near-automatic release of its massive nuclear retaliation.
During the Eisenhower administration the pos87 sibility of fighting a more limited war with tactical nuclear weapons was envisioned.
Large numbers of tactical nuclear weapons, intended for use in a local battlefield, began to be shipped to Europe in 1954.
Their deployment there was not negotiated, particularly with the major recipient, West Germany, not yet a NATO member.
American strategies for nuclear warfare, which did not necessarily serve Europe’s best interests.
These tactical nuclear weapons deployed in Europe remain, like the strategic ones, under United States control.
The very quality of deliberation which makes this strategy militarily desirable for the United States creates a sense of impotence or pressures for autonomy among our Allies.
The central command and control system, which is the key feature of the new doctrine, is American.
With Sputnik in 1957, the Russians demonstrated the possibility of Russian missiles with nuclear warheads reaching the United States and the credibility of the American nuclear umbrella was shaken.
The shock of the Soviet testing of a ballistic missile that could cross the Atlantic led the United States in 1957 to negotiate, as a token of increased defence preparedness, installation of intermediate-range 88 missiles in Britain, Italy, and Turkey.
However, the IRBMs were never a real threat to the Soviet Union because of its strategic retaliatory force and thus were not effective protection for the Western countries either.
They were removed in 1963 in a political bargain, part of the price paid for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Afterwards, though promises of protection continued to be forthcoming from the United States, whenever new strategic doctrines such as that of ‘flexible response’ or ‘realistic deterrence’ were announced from Washington, Europeans experienced growing anxiety.
The prospect of the superpowers fighting a limited war in Europe and the idea of their mutually establishing sanctuaries at home produced disaffection, but this was played down in public discussion and papered over in NATO compromises.
The initial premise about Soviet intentions, against which the capabilities had to be built up, became less and less a part of European thinking, though it spread rapidly in the United States.
In these early years, because of my assignments in the United Nations and later UNESCO, I had wide contacts in practically all countries of the European continent, as well as in the United States, and can testify to this.
In spite of European disapproval of the Soviet postwar annexation of the Baltic states and watchful protest against the Soviet suppression of political self-determination in the Eastern European countries, there was nevertheless a degree of understanding in the Western European countries that, after all the sufferings the Russians had sustained during the War, they could have valid reason to establish a belt of buffer states against Germany, whose onslaught on the European democracies was fresh in memory.
In addition, the division of Germany was not felt by its neighbour countries to be entirely unfortunate.
Still, overriding such considerations there was in Western Europe the widely shared conviction that the Soviet Union would not attempt to cross the line dividing the two Europes.
Active planning 89 by the Soviet Union for a military push westward was not perceived as realistic by most Europeans.
The Marshall Plan aid for reconstruction and development of Western Europe was, from 1947, of a scope and generosity greater than any aid afforded the underdeveloped world, and it continued for many years.
The basic American motivation was certainly human solidarity with the distressed European nations from which so many Americans reckoned their ancestry, while their own country had been spared, and this was gratefully acknowledged by Europeans.
But, as the cold war between the superpowers gathered momentum, the United States’ motivation for providing aid increasingly reflected an anticommunist, antiSoviet policy.
Western European governments for a time accepted this attitude as being necessary to secure passage of aid bills in the American Congress.
Those Western European governments who in the immediate postwar years had included in their cabinets representatives of indigenous communist parties paid the price and excluded them.
In addition several Western countries, including some nonaligned, paid the price of cooperating with the United States in a strategic licensing policy aimed at stopping exports to the Soviet sphere of a comprehensive group of commodities.
In the United States this policy was widely publicized as being directly aimed at hurting economic development in the communist world.
The West European nations had, in fact, been ready for a detente with the Soviet Union and its allies long before this could be advocated as policy in the United States.
Stalin’s death in 1953 signalled, from the West European point of view, an important political change.
At about the same time Marshall Plan aid was being terminated and United States military aid also was decreased.
Almost go immediately the West European governments used this greater political independence to quietly liquidate the export embargo policy.
What remained of the licensing procedures became more of a bureaucratic nuisance than a serious trade barrier.
East-West trade in Europe increased, but the United States continued its discriminatory trade policy.
These historical glimpses, despite omissions, point up the differences of political developments on the European and the American scene.
After the War, relations between the two Europes in trade, travel, and cultural contacts have been much closer than those between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Europe must be understood to have been reliably cured from any propensity to war.
Boundaries between its countries had been increasingly accepted as settled even when peace treaties had not been signed.
Finally, there was the acceptance of the division of Germany and the demarcation between East Germany and Poland, the result of Willy Brandt’s Ostpolitik at the beginning of the 1970s, which was solemnly countersigned at the European Security Conference in Helsinki on 1 August 1975.
The Soviet Point of View As the available nuclear-weapons strength between the two superpowers grew more equal, at ever higher levels of destructive capabilities, it was inevitable that the idea of using these weapons against each other’s homelands lost its appeal.
The strategy of preserving the Soviet Union and the United States as sanctuaries is viewed differently by the superpowers than it is by Europe.
The use of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe is likely to lead to an escalation.
By itself, the idea of introducing ‘rules of engagement’ and artificial restrictions ‘by agreement’ is illusory and untenable.
It is difficult to visualize that a nuclear war, if it is unleashed, could be kept within the framework of ‘rules’ and would not develop into an all-out war.
The most important of these is that Soviet proximity to European countries where United States nuclear weapons are stationed (some with definite capacity to hit targets in the Soviet Union) makes its territory more vulnerable than the territory of the United States.
Also, the limited-war concept was part of the United States official strategic doctrine of flexible response, and is endorsed by its allies in Western Europe.
As such it makes the Russians suspicious that the United States might pretend to engage in a limited war, and then use the occasion to escalate it.
Reflection on policy statements from Soviet sources raises the question of whether these statements may be merely g2 propaganda threats, a warning to the United States that it will not be allowed to wage war in Europe without risking a nuclear onslaught at home.
The Soviet Union must, equally with the United States, fear annihilation of its own country in case of a direct intercontinental confrontation.
Thus underlying both strategies is a definite, joint interest in preserving their own territories.
The fundamental difficulty with the sanctuary theory is that the limitation of warfare must rely upon an understanding between the potential main enemies.
Henry A Kissinger, when still a professor, insisted that limited war is only possible if the contestants, through diplomatic understanding, agree to view it as a chance to emerge from the war without too heavy material and human damage and without too much injury to their prestige.
In this utterly unclarified situation, it may be surmised that the Soviet Union probably holds all conceivable scenarios open as alternatives, including that of a limited war in Europe.
But in regard to such an eventuality, there seem to be two fundamental differences as to how the two sides view its course.
One is that the prevailing view in the USSR has always been that any war should preferably be limited to the use of conventional forces, a hitch being that a smaller or larger part of them may already be concentrated at other frontiers.
Upgrading a war to the nuclear level would mean ‘unlimiting’ it to the bitter end.
A second difference is that we can deduce from all that is known about the deployment 93 and composition of Soviet forces that their aim, different from the United States’, would be a massive attack or counterattack leading to a quick victory.
The USSR could then abstain from a nuclear assault on the United States, lessening the risk of assault on itself.
Alternatively, the Soviet Union might use nuclear weapons for an early decisive victory on a European battlefield.
The Soviet arsenal of nuclear weapons for war-theatre use is concentrated on systems with higher yields, many in the megatonnage class, and with higher radioactive fall-out than the corresponding United States weapons deployed in Western Europe for tactical warfare purposes.
Soviet strategists do not make the same categorical distinction as the United States does between strategic and tactical nuclear weapons and they are evidently ready to use a part of their strategic arsenal on targets in Europe.
The American Point of View Contrary to Soviet scepticism about the possibility of conducting limited war in Europe with nuclear weapons, it has increasingly become declared policy in the United States to try to keep any war limited.
The posture of ‘defence for Europe’ thus relies more and more on tactical nuclear weapons.
In current doctrines there is an ever clearer preference for, or belief in, limiting 94 a war with strategic offensive weapons to selected targets.
Kissinger: Our current military policy is based on the doctrine of massive retaliation — that we threaten an all-out attack on the Soviet Union in case the Soviet Union engages in aggression anywhere.
This means that we base our policy on a threat that will involve the destruction of all mankind.
What it will mean is that in every crisis an American President will have to make the choice whether a given objective is worth the destruction of American cities.
The American President will have to decide whether Beirut or whatever the issue may be is worth thirty million American lives.
In spite of considerable inconsistencies, he repeated his warning and continued to see Europe as becoming directly involved in war, although he recognized that war would in essence be a Superpower contest.
As Secretary of State, Kissinger did not change his view on this particular point, although his pronouncements were adjusted so as not to appear to retract 95 the United States promise to hold a protective nuclear umbrella over Western Europe.
For good reasons this scheme is not often presented officially in clear terms.
We continue to deploy our own theater nuclear forces in both Europe and Asia.
In the case of Europe, we have three basic reasons for our deployments.
First, the maintenance of theater nuclear capabilities in NATO is essential to deterrence as long as the Warsaw Pact deploys theater nuclear forces of its own.
They help to deter the use of nuclear weapons by the Pact and, along with our strategic nuclear and conventional forces, provide a general deterrent across the entire spectrum of possible aggression.
Second, should deterrence fail, our theater nuclear capabilities provide a source of limited and controlled options other than the early use of United States and allied strategic forces.
Different from likely Soviet strategy, the United States intention has been that the defensive forces in Europe should be built up, not for a quick victory, but for more enduring operations.
Reinforcement from the United States would require time; the logistics have usually been planned for some sixty days before a war would reach its peak.
The vagueness about what might be the fate of Europe is reflected in the attitudes and opinions of American political leaders, editorial writers, and public opinion.
It is fairly certain that neither the United States Congress nor American citizens in general would, even after a hypothetical Soviet attack against Western Europe, be in favour of letting such a war escalate to nuclear attack on the Soviet Union, which would initiate what has aptly been called mutual collective suicide.
To judge by the results of some publicopinion polls there are signs that it might even be difficult to bring the nation along in active participation of a limited war.
This brings into considerable doubt what is really meant by the loud exclamations that the United States stands firm behind its commitments.
The entire doctrine of what is meant by limited war in Europe remains hazy, and ideas of what might trigger such a war are equally hazy if not actually erroneous.
The European Point of View Viewed from the angle of Europe — whether East or West — there are no possibilities for a major war to be launched by a European power on its own initiative.
A major war could only originate from the protectors of the two blocs, the gaming superpowers.
If war comes to Europe, it will be because one or the other of the superpowers wishes a contest to be played out 97 there, which probably would be ignited outside Europe, for example, in the Middle East.
However, a military test of strength between the superpowers might then be transposed to Europe.
Thus, the war machines may well begin to roll over Europe as a main battlefield.
This kind of transferred incidental war in Europe would not be less gruesome than a deliberate one.
No Europeans, East or West, would have their hearts set to win it, only to avoid or delimit it.
The possible origins of a war befalling Europe are not discussed very openly in Europe.
Likewise, the nature and consequences of a limited war are not analysed in Europe.
This is natural for Eastern Europe, as such a war has never been announced as plausible strategic doctrine by the Soviet Union.
There has not been much public discussion in Western Europe of such a war either, in spite of the United States having declared flexible response, with the employment of nuclear weapons, to be NATO strategy.
Some experts, mostly German authors, have been quite outspoken about the possible effects.
Even a brief and locally limited war could mean ten million deaths and cause total destruction of West Germany as an industrial society.
Escalation to blind utilization of existing weapons capabilities could mean the extinction of all life in Germany.
Von Weizsacker is reported as having testified elsewhere, in studies for the NATO Nuclear Planning Group, that an input of just 1o per cent of the nuclear weapons now stationed in Europe could practically annihilate both East and West Germany.
The corresponding Soviet nuclear weapons, designed for tactical use, about half the number but of higher average yield, are said by the Soviets not to be intended for an attack on the West but Soviet officials add that if, for any reason, NATO should use nuclear weapons they will be repaid in kind.
York has elaborated in considerable detail what would be the consequences of the use of Soviet weapons.
There is a difference in the targeting pattern of all these 99 superpower weapons.
Several less potent types are meant strictly for use in an ongoing battle and are kept in reserve for an input in Western Europe — that is, to stave off advances over important bridges, etc.
The larger NATO weapons are in the main targeted on Eastern Europe, with a few of longer range targeted or targetable on the Soviet Union.
Obviously, if such weapons come to be used locally in Western Europe efforts must be made to limit collateral damage.
It is reasonable to assume that those targeted Eastern European countries, which probably have few or no nuclear weapons stationed on their territory, would attempt to avoid massive civilian damage.
Conversely, Western Europe, having tactical nuclear weapons deployed in its midst, cannot avoid itself providing suitable targets for a retaliatory attack by the Soviet Union which, according to its different strategic doctrine, would strike first in a systematic attempt to pre-empt the larger weapons and to destroy command and communication centres which are generally in or near large cities.
The projected result is very similar to von Weizsacker’s, which York presents in pictorial form.
In another he describes the possible results of the use of an even smaller number of one-megaton bombs on Western European cities with more than 200,000 population.
There has been a carefully kept official silence as to the consequences.
It is necessary to remember that Europeans had not asked for tactical nuclear weapons when they were first introduced in Western Europe in 1954.
They were also reluctant to approve the United States’ strategic doctrines.
When finally in 1967 they accepted the flexible-response doctrine, the European NATO members exerted considerable pressure to have greater influence over the use of the nuclear weapons.
The only concession they could obtain was the establishment of a Nuclear Planning Group in NATO for joint consultations in regard to, for instance, targeting of possible nuclear weapons operations.
West German leaders in particular have wanted a considerably stronger role for the European allies in the control of nuclear weapons in Europe.
Since 1967 there has been httle public discussion about any fundamental change in the policies of nuclear defence for Europe, little of the early clairvoyant anxiety of Helmut Schmidt.
West European official postures have become frozen in a kind of silent approval of the status quo.
In recent years, it has often appeared as if the NATO governments were backing continued deployment of tactical nuclear weapons in their countries even more than the United States.
West Germany particularly seems to fear that withdrawal would signify a lessening of the United States commitment to act in the defence of Western Europe.
In 1975 I was conducting a seminar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on tactical nuclear weapons in Europe.
The debate became nonconclusive as most of the participants cut off pursuit of the subject by asserting that any change in the present situation was totally impractical for political reasons — a nuclear-weapon-free Europe being altogether out of the question.
In summary, today’s Western Europeans have chosen to buy current political stability by placing the awful risks described above over their lives and their future.
Perhaps their choice was inadvertent; perhaps they did not and even today still do not realize what they have done.
The discussion of the potential damage tactical nuclear weapons would inflict now centres around the pending changes in weapons characteristics, the substitution of lower-yield, shorter-range, more accurately targeted missiles for some of those now deployed.
Plans to introduce a new generation of tactical nuclear weapons into the defence system of Western Europe are being met by criticism in many quarters, though criticism in NATO councils has not been audible outside them.
In the academic debate on strategy, there is open advocacy of using mini-nukes for a rapid first use to fortify the sanctuary of the United States.
The strategy proposed in this article ... calls for immediately engaging an attacker with low-yield nuclear weapons for all but the most trivial incursions.
Dealing with threats of irrational attacks to destroy all or part of NATO is a problem for our European allies to face without counting on United States strategic nuclear weapons.
As, due to European malaise, there has been little discussion and no public uproar about the plans for a superpower battle over European territory, I find it necessary to speak frankly about the limited-war concept being in reality little more than a plan for sanctuaries.
Though there is open discussion of the risk of American découplement from Europe, that is not a grave risk at present; what is a risk is the existing couplement of superpower conflicts with the potential sacrifice of Europe.
Some other dangers also need attention, although more marginal in this dramatic context.
If mini-nukes should become standard equipment, deployed interchangeably with conventional weapons, this would blur the distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons.
If the present distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons becomes blurred it will be impossible to believe in limited war and to avoid uncontrollable escalation.
Discussion of the questions raised in expert circles about the wisdom of withdrawing all or certain types of them, the more vulnerable or more offensive, has not reached the peoples of Europe.
There is definitely no interest in public discussion of a realistic analysis of the implications of drawing nuclear fire on to the European countries, or of the extent to which these countries and peoples would be devastated.
The ostrich attitude became apparent once again when the barter offer in the Vienna negotiations to withdraw a small part of the tactical nuclear weapons from Western Europe became known.
But many USS. allies in Europe, including West Germany, have previously expressed uneasiness over the proposal.
As was already customary in earlier periods, the European partners in NATO have preferred to have little public attention directed towards the possible consequences of their NATO allegiance.
Even in the nonaligned Western countries there has been astonishingly little discussion of these awkward issues or studies examining the consequences of various scenarios, for example, those involving the use of the thousands of tactical nuclear weapons deployed in the midst of Europe.
These nonaligned neighbours to NATO countries have demonstrated a kind, but ultimately not very helpful, discretion in questions which concern the destiny of the continent as a whole.
There it has often been understood that the political consequences of presently relevant scenarios and damage estimates are ominous.
But this conjures up for Europeans the picture ofa Europe devastated while the United States and the Soviet Union remain intact.
The idea that tactical nuclear weapons furnish a plausible ‘option’ for defending Western Europe (as distinguished from their escalatory role) has had a lingering half-life.
In fact, the use of hundreds of atomic weapons could cause so much collateral damage to the area being ‘defended’ that the inhabitants might prefer surrender as a lesser evil.
This would be less true of certain low-yield or ‘clean’ weapons; but even if NATO so limited its weaponry, an enemy might not.
The use of these weapons in Europe evokes a potential conflict of perceived interest between elements of the attentive publics in Europe and the United States.
Nowhere so far are views heard from the citizens of Europe, who will, after all, be the victims if there is a superpower war in Europe.
In fact, and that should be the overriding concern, the United States does not need to have these weapons in Europe.
If it maintains its strategy of using its nuclear strength to defend Western Europe, it need only detach some of its submarines, equipped with nuclear warheads on ballistic missiles, targeted and ready to fire in case of an attack against Western Europe.
Richard Nixon, address to a joint session of Congress, 1 June 1972, immediately on his return from Russia after SALT I Congressional Quarterly Almanac, g2nd Congress, and Session, 1972, Vol.
How to Reduce the Overkill’, in Fred Warner Neal and Mary Kersey Harvey , Pacem in Terris (Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974), Vol., 25.
Jerome B Wiesner and Herbert F York, ‘National Security and the Nuclear-Test Ban’, Scientific American, October 1964, 35.
Eastern Europe refers to those countries allied to the Soviet Union, the membership of W TO being seven; and Western Europe refers to the countries allied to the United States, the membership in NATO being fifteen.
In addition there are a few nonaligned countries, from those that remained neutral in the war, like Sweden and Switzerland, to some who joined the nonaligned ranks later, like Yugoslavia after 1948 and Austria after the 1955 State Treaty.
There are great difficulties involved in any such comparison, depending on important asymmetries between the superpowers in composition of forces and also in regard to the difference in distances for bringing up reserves.
A Reappratsal of the Atlantic Alliance, Atlantic Policy Studies, Council on Foreign Relations , 11t.
Henry A Kissinger, “The Search for Stability’, Foreign Affairs, July 1959, 548.
Heinz Trettner, ‘Tactical Nuclear Weapons for Europe’, Military Review, Vol., No, 7, July 1971, 48.
Belgium and the Netherlands are marked down to take 48 cruise missiles each, but, because of popular pressure, it looks as if neither of these two countries will take them.
Unlike ballistic missiles, cruise missiles fly all the way to their targets under power — essentially, they are pilotless aircraft.
The missile’s guidance system works by matching radar readings of the ground over which it is flying with a pre-programmed contour map.
Flying at low altitude at just below the speed of sound, it can take as direct or circuitous a route to its target as its programmer wishes.
Its low-level flight and small size — around fourteen feet long, depending on the particular version, with a diameter of twenty inches — mean it will be hard to detect on its way to the target, while the guidance system will be able, it is claimed, to provide such accuracy that on average half the missiles launched would fall within a few yards of their targets, having flown distances of 2,000 miles or so from their launching points.
At this stage, however, it is not clear that their technology will actually work reliably.
But the United States military is so enamoured of them that in March 1980 the United States Air Force announced it planned to purchase 3,400 air-launched cruise missiles over the next seven years, at a cost of $4,000 million.
These are different cruise missiles from the ones coming to Europe; the airlaunched types are to be produced by Boeing, whereas the Tomahawks are a General Dynamics product.
Boeing’s product will be carried, twenty at a time, on B 52 bombers, while the Tomahawks will be mounted in fours on trucks.
Each truck with its four Tomahawks will be a small target, but the area in which they deploy will be one big target.
These missiles, in Britain as elsewhere in Europe, will be completely under United States control.
At the time the decision was announced, and in all government statements and most press discussion since, the impression has been given that the new missiles represent no more than a response to a new threat from the USSR, and that without them NATO is virtually defenceless.
In military policy and in the arguments used to legitimate major decisions, distortions, half-truths and downright lies are common currency.
But in the period just before and since NAT O’s December 1979 decision, new standards have been set.
Europe remains the main site of the military confrontation between the USA and the USSR and their respective allies in NAT Oand the Warsaw Pact.
Detente in Europe removed some of the main bones of regional contention, but military confrontation continued and escalated through the 1970s.
European members of NATO now mount armed forces employing 2,779,000 personnel in uniform, in addition to which the USA has 276,700 military personnel in Europe III plus the sailors in its Mediterranean Sixth Fleet, while Canada chips in with 3,000 soldiers.
Non-Soviet members of the Warsaw Pact have 1,105,000 people in uniform, in addition to which the USSR has some 618,000 soldiers in the countries of East Europe, plus airmen and ground crew at airfields, together with the sailors of its various fleets in the surrounding seas.
This all adds up to well over 5,000,000 people in the regular armed forces of the two alliances in Europe and the seas around it.
But the numbers of people serving in the military forces in Europe do not tell the whole story.
Of these, about 7,500 are deployed by NATO, while around 3,500 are deployed by the Warsaw Pact.
The exact figures on either side are not publicly available, and in recent years estimates for Warsaw Pact nuclear warheads for use in Europe have ranged from 1,750 to 5,000.
These figures may surprise readers who had been led to believe that NATO's tactical or theatre nuclear warheads, were vastly outnumbered by the Warsaw Pact’s.
But the figures are taken from impeccably militaristic Western sources, and, like most such figures, derive by one means or another from United States intelligence.
Many of NATO’s TNW, however, are mounted on relatively short-range weapon systems, and the complaints about the Warsaw Pact’s numerical superiority in TNW have focused on the longer-range systems.
Even here we shall find that the picture is rather different from the overwhelming superiority the Warsaw Pact is usually claimed to have.
But before looking a little closer at the weapons and the numbers, some further points should be made about these misleading presentations.
In the mid-1950s NATO took the decisions which built the TN W arsenal up to its present size.
Not only did NATO deploy TNW in Europe first, but it has always had a large numerical superiority over the Warsaw Pact in this respect.
NAT O’s emphasis on relatively shortrange weapons systems is due to its own preferences and decisions; at any time since the mid-1950s it had the technology and capability to deploy long-range missiles for TNW had it so chosen.
It has done so, not because there is a qualitatively new threat from the USSR in the form of the SS 20 — the USSR has had longrange nuclear missiles targeted on Western Europe since the early 1960s.
Rather, its December 1979 decision was taken because NATO has come to different views about how it wants to prepare for nuclear war in Europe.
In other words, and this brings us to the second point, NATO was not forced into the decision by the Warsaw Pact; it moved into it of its own volition.
If NATO spokesmen and government ministers are right that the new missiles represent an important new capability for NATO, then they cannot deny that it is NATO rather than the Warsaw Pact which has given this particular aspect of the arms race its latest new twist.
The comparable TN W on the Warsaw Pact side are today much the same as they have been for many years, but rather more modern.
But with NATO we are dealing not with more modern versions of the same weapons, but with a totally new capability, and that means NATO’s decision bears a particular burden of responsibility for the dangers we now face.
This also means that the term ‘modernization’ used to describe the decision is thoroughly inappropriate.
It is a gentle word which implies nothing more than routine procedure in the arms race, not something which is qualitatively new.
It is almost totally aUS programme which the other NAT Ostates have accepted.
It has included the efforts to introduce ‘mini-nukes’ (referred to by Alva Myrdal in her contribution to this book) and the neutron bomb.
In both cases, the basic theme was that the greater precision of the weapons permitted realistic options to be developed for fighting a nuclear war in Europe.
Other aspects of the programme include the ‘hardening’ of airfields and other military facilities so that they remain serviceable in nuclear war, and the development of communication systems which would not be blacked out by the effects of nuclear explosions.
The accuracy of the cruise missiles is the counterpart of the supposed precision of mini-nukes and the neutron bomb.
But, unless the Warsaw Pact decides to join in the rules of this macabre game, none of it will do anything to reduce the destructiveness of nuclear war, which was supposed to be the main problem for NATO in planning to fight one.
As it has done for at least twenty-five years, NATO war planning amounts to preparing to defend Europe by blowing it up.
The main difference today is that the planning appears to be more enthusiastic.
The picture is further confused because both blocs possess ‘dual capable’ systems — systems capable of delivering either nuclear or non-nuclear munitions.
For numbers of TNW carried by ‘dual capable’ systems I am using estimates from the International Institute for Strategic Studies of how many of the total number of systems available would actually be used to carry nuclear weapons.
The SS 4 and SS5 missiles were first seen publicly in 1961 and 1964 respectively; the SS 4 has a range of about 1,200 miles, while the SS 5’s is about 2,300, and both carry single one-megaton warheads.
Unlike the older missiles it is mobile on the ground and carries three warheads, each independently targeted, over a range of between 3,000 and 4,000 miles.
We might therefore estimate that another 40 SS 20s may have been produced by October 1980, of which perhaps 25 would be targeted against Western Europe, raising this figure to 85.
It is now thought in NATO that, since the lead-up to NATO's decision to deploy new American missiles to Europe, the USSR has stopped phasing out the older missiles, in which case SS 20 would be augmenting rather than replacing the SS 4s and SSs5s.
Since early 1975 the USSR has also deployed a supersonic bomber, Backfire, with a range above 3,000 miles.
These aircraft are based not only in the USSR but also, in varying numbers, in every other Warsaw Pact country.
These have a range less than 40 miles, are capable of having nuclear warheads, and are deployed in all the Warsaw Pact countries.
But NATO does have long-range submarine-launched missiles, which are usually conveniently forgotten when the time comes round to moan about Warsaw Pact superiority and convince us we need the new missiles.
It has a little less than 1,000 bombers with ranges between 1,000 and 3,000 miles.
Among several types included here are British Vulcans, now rather aged, and the American F r-11s stationed in Britain.
Britain is now introducing Tornado multi-role aircraft into its forces, and some will be used to replace Vulcans.
Comparing Numbers The way in which the military strengths of NATO and the Warsaw Pact are compared by most orthodox Western commentators is extremely misleading, very often incompetent and occasionally downright dishonest.
At one level the problem starts because these comparisons are usually designed to show that NATO needs more forces.
I have already pointed to NATO's overall numerical superiority in TNW — approximately 7,500 to 3,500.
This is not enough for NATO strategists, who have broken the total down (and there is nothing wrong with that in principle) into different categories in order to reveal the Warsaw Pact superiority in land-based missiles with ranges over 1,000 miles, against which Tomahawk and Pershing II are presented as a defensive response.
If one took all missiles and aircraft able to deliver TNW over ranges above 1,000 miles, and worked from IISS estimates of how many would carry TNW and how many would be serviceable at the right time, the picture is a little different.
That is, NATO has a numerical superiority, not a large one , in precisely that category into which Tomahawk cruise missiles and Pershing IIs will fit.
This is a far cry from the crippling NATO inferiority we hear bemoaned so frequently and furiously.
But the ratio of about 1-3 or 1-1 to 1 is not large, and the lower ratio that includes the French on the NATO side, which is how the Soviets must see it, is within the margin of error for estimates of this kind.
I should repeat that this is really an interesting exercise rather than a genuine comparison of military strength.
I think I shall not reveal yet the way in which I will play that particular numbers game if and when the time comes.
European Nuclear Disarmament All this fooling around is interesting and necessary given the way in which government justifications for the new NATO missiles are presented.
First, these weapons represent an enormous amount of destructive power and the potential for many millions of deaths within the first few hours of a nuclear war in Europe, with many millions more of horrible casualties, a devastated continent in which the basic structures of society apart from the authority of the central state will totally collapse.
The appeal for European nuclear disarmament launched in April 1980 is directed against these weapons, against that war, and against that superpower dominance.
The idea and the campaign for it are discussed in more detail in other contributions to this book.
Non-nuclear Forces The point about the first objection is that, when the problem is closely studied, N AT O’s inferiority in non-nuclear forces is extraordinarily elusive.
In fact, in the 1960s and again in the 1970s, the United States Department of Defense conducted analyses of both sides’ non-nuclear forces which showed that Warsaw Pact superiorities in some categories were more than offset by NATO advantages in other categories it thought were more important.
Naturally, these studies never received the kind of coverage from either official spokespeople or the press which is given to the more common reports of Warsaw Pact superiority.
It can be added that a comparison of IISS estimates over the years, and these estimates need to be treated with a great deal of care, shows that the Warsaw Pact’s military build-up through the 1970s was at least matched by NATO's own military build-up.
For years NATO has expressed its anxieties about the much larger number of tanks held by the Warsaw Pact.
But that same diagram somehow forgot to mention NATO’s extremely accurate anti-tank weapons.
By late 1978, excluding short-range types carried and fired by individual soldiers, NATO had around 193,000 antitank guided missiles.
This represented an increase of one third over its inventory two years previously.
By early 1979 there were over 17,000 ground-based launchers for these missiles, with yet more on helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft.
The age and quality of Warsaw Pact tanks are not usually mentioned either.
The Soviet tanks produced in the 1960s are almost universally agreed to be of lower quality than the tanks NATO deploys, and these constitute the bulk of Soviet tank forces in Europe.
The newer Soviet tanks probably are superior in some respects to NATO’s current tanks, but Britain, the USA and West Germany are now in the process of developing and producing new types.
It is also not usually mentioned that NATO took a deliberate decision at the start of the 1970s not to match the Warsaw Pact tank for tank — which reveals the dishonesty of comparing tank against tank — and has a policy of going for weapon systems of higher quality — which reveals further dishonesty, since high quality generally means lower numbers.
NATO may be wrong to have decided not to match its adversary tank for tank.
The point is that the current situation, usually presented as the result of the USSR’s unilateral military build-up, is actually the result also of a series of specific and deliberate decisions by NATO, and that the current situation is always incompletely described by the British government and several others.
If NATO and Warsaw Pact forces are examined in this kind of detail across the board, two main conclusions emerge.
First, as far as it can be quantified there is a rough balance of forces in Europe; neither side has an important advantage overall.
Second, these forces, even without nuclear weapons, would be immensely destructive of each other and everything around them if war came.
Neither conclusion forms the basis for objecting to European nuclear disarmament on the basis of a NATO inferiority in nonnuclear forces.
In fact, there is much to be said for this objection; I think it is essentially correct to say that European nuclear disarmament would weaken NATO’s unity.
In the Warsaw Pact it would have a similar effect, though perhaps weaker in the short term.
This objection actually provides an important insight into the role of nuclear weapons in the current constitution of NATO and into the type of unity we are talking about.
They provide the USA with important strategic and thereby political leadership over the West European NATO states.
Indeed, it is precisely when American leadership is sharply challenged in other arenas that one might expect it to try and strengthen its strategic leadership in NATO, and the most obvious way of doing this would probably be to plan to deploy more United States nuclear weapons in Europe.
Since meetings of the NATO Nuclear Planning Group, which are supposed to involve the rest of NATO in this aspect of strategic planning, are largely taken up by American lectures, it is not too hard to develop momentum behind any American proposal in this field.
Thus unity in this context means acceptance of United States leadership.
And that brings with it acceptance of United States plans for nuclear war in Europe, for fighting a limited nuclear war, limited in the sense that the USA’s own territory is not directly involved.
Whether the USSR would permit war to remain limited in this sense is very dubious, but beside the point.
For the issue which is of overriding importance for West Europeans is that NATO unity means agreeing to be an expendable American asset, a forward line of defence, a battlefield for the two superpowers.
The movement for European nuclear disarmament thus gets to the heart of the matter.
Precisely because it does challenge NATO’s unity it could create the space for developing new and safer ways of ensuring some degree of security in a dangerous world.
It is the confrontation between the USA and the USSR which is leading us towards war.
European nuclear disarmament offers a possibility for Europe to disengage from that confrontation, to challenge the right of the superpowers to have the power over our fate that they now do, and eventually to eliminate that power.
European nuclear disarmament threatens both American and Soviet hegemony.
It therefore demands the rethinking of some of the basic and most cherished precepts in both NATO and the Warsaw Pact; for example, it demands seeing a challenge to NATO unity as positive.
It thus involves a head-on collision with what NATO would have us believe are the basic ‘facts of life’ of international politics.
Unless we undertake that task, we are all too likely to have those ‘facts of life’ draw us over the brink into nuclear war.
These figures are taken from The Military Balance 1979-1980 (International Institute for Strategic Studies, London, 1979), with the exception of the figure for Soviet troops in Europe, which was not given.
I therefore took the figure given in the previous year’s edition and subtracted from it the 20,000 troops unilaterally withdrawn from the German Democratic Republic by the USSR since.
This issue is discussed in more detail in my The Defence of the Realm in the 1980s , Chapter 4.
Guardian, 15 October 1979; International Herald Tribune, 15 October 1979.
These issues are those in the following paragraph are discussed in detail in Chapter 4 of The Defence of the Realm in the 1980s.
They mount the two largest military efforts and between them account for one half of the massive resources which the world devotes to arms and armed forces.
There are, it is true, considerable differences between the military forces of the Soviet Union and the United States, but these are insignificant when compared with the differences between them and the forces of other states.
From the armed forces it maintains and the weapons it produces, it is clear that the Soviet military effort is large.
The Soviet government publishes a figure for the defence budget each year, but this is of little help in estimating the military burden because it is not clear what the budget covers.
In any event, observers outside the Soviet Union agree that the Soviet armed forces could not be paid for by the official defence budget without the help of very large hidden subsidies.
This article was prepared for the Demilitarization Working Group of the World Order Models Project.
A military effort of this scale necessarily has a far-reaching impact on the Soviet economy.
An extensive network of military research and development establishments is required to develop armaments, while a major sector of industry is needed to produce them in quantity.
The Soviet Union has amassed military power roughly comparable to that of the United States, even though its Gross National Product is only about half as large.
Consequently a higher rate of extraction of resources has been necessary, with consequences which will be examined below.
Institutional arrangements exist to draft a substantial proportion of each generation of young men into the armed forces.
A considerable effort is made to ensure that reserves are available for mobilization if necessary.
Voluntary military societies provide moral support for the armed forces and military training for the population at large.
Secondary schoo] children are given pre-induction military training from the age of fifteen.
In recent years there has been a growing campaign of militarypatriotic education which tries to insti] in the population the values of patriotism and respect for military virtues.
Marxist thought has traditionally been marked by a strong antipathy to militarism, seeing war and armies as the product of the world capitalist system.
Before 1917 socialists agreed that standing armies were instruments of aggression abroad and repression at home; the proper form of military organization for a socialist state would be the citizen army which would not degenerate into a military caste or create a military realm separate from other areas of social life.
Although he had to lead the young Soviet republic against the White armies and foreign intervention, Lenin never succumbed to the worship of things military or tried to enhance his own authority by the paraphernalia of military command.
This claim is not usually argued at length, and is based on a general statement about the nature of socialism rather than on a specific analysis of the Soviet system.
In this view Soviet military policy is purely a response to external stimuli.
This is why the settlement of major political disputes in Europe in the early 1970S was not accompanied by any significant moves towards demilitarization.
This argument points not to specific features of socialism or Russian history, but to characteristics which the Soviet Union shares with the United States.
The Soviet Union has been subjected to this kind of critical analysis primarily since its emergency as a fullyfledged military superpower.
The attainment of strategic parity with the United States has made the Soviet Union seem to share full responsibility for the continuing arms race.
Soviet arms policies in the 1970s have proved profoundly disappointing to those who hoped that the SALT I agreements would lead to a slackening of the arms race.
The problem of militarization is, however, wider than that of disarmament.
The first of these is the similarity that exists between socialism and the war system.
The second factor is the inheritance by the Soviet state of the military-political tradition of Tsarism.
In other words, Odom sees the militarization of Soviet society as primarily a product of Russian history and the Soviet system.
There are, of course, many who see the militarization of Soviet society as a consequence of both external and internal factors and explain it in terms of the Cold War rather than of the Russian past.
In other words, many of the distortions of Soviet socialism could be explained in terms of the international pressure under which socialist construction had to be carried out in the Soviet Union.
It was a critical part of our advocacy that with each effective movement of detente there would follow a relaxation in military and bureaucratic pressures within the United States and the Soviet Union.
Thus the relaxation of Cold War tensions was a precondition for further destalinization, and a precondition for resuming socialist and democratic advances, East or West.
Thompson went on to ask whether Soviet policy in the early 1970s — detente with the West allied with sharper repression of dissidents at home — invalidated this argument.
Some see the arms race and detente coexisting for a long time; others see detente falling victim to tensions generated by the military-industrial complexes.
This is not a comprehensive, much less an exhaustive, survey of the approaches that have been taken in examining the obstacles to disarmament and demilitarization in the Soviet Union.
But it does provide some helpful pointers to the relationships that have to be analysed.
The first of these is the interaction of internal and external factors.
The particular form which socialist construction has taken in the Soviet Union cannot be understood without reference to the international context in which the Bolsheviks undertook the transformation of Russian society.
Consequently the militarization of Soviet society has to be examined in the light of international, as well as of domestic, relationships.
Moreover, some attempt must be made to discuss what is specific to militarism in the Soviet Union, and what it shares with militarism elsewhere.
Secondly, it has been seen that different historical perspectives — some rooted in the Russian Empire, some in the Cold War — have been adopted, and this raises interesting questions about the way in which patterns of political relationships are reproduced in a given society.
Although it is important to provide a historical perspective, there is the danger that the Russian tradition will be presented as monolithic, and that militarism will be seen as a genetic inheritance, transmitted from one generation (or even one social formation) to the next.
This would be disheartening in its suggestion that no change is possible, and also wrong.
The Russian political tradition is diverse, embracing not only militarism, but also the anti-militarism of Tolstoy and Kropotkin.
The Soviet tradition too contains various strands, and the diversity is very wide if the views of contemporary dissidents are taken into account.
Consequently it would be a mistake to begin this analysis by portraying this militarization as either inevitable or allembracing.
The history of the Soviet state is intimately bound up with war and the preparation for war.
This is true both in the classical sense that armed force has established the territorial limits of the state and secured internal rule, and in the sense that war and the preparation for it have profoundly affected the internal structure of the state.
It is one of the striking features of the history of Tsarist Russia and the Soviet Union that rivalry with other, economically more advanced, states has provided a major stimulus to economic and political change.
This was true of Peter the Great’s reforms, and of the reforms which followed the Crimean and Russo-Japanese wars; it was a major factor in Soviet industrialization too.
One consequence of this pattern has been the role of the state as the dominant agency of change; it was through the state that social and economic relationships were altered with the aim of mobilizing resources to increase the power of the state.
When the Bolsheviks seized power they faced the problem of consolidating their rule in the face of enemies at home and abroad.
The early experience of the young Soviet state — civil war, foreign intervention and internal unrest — had a profound impact on Bolshevik ideas about military organization.
The early vision of militia-type forces did not survive the realization that the Bolsheviks faced considerable opposition from inside Soviet society and from foreign powers.
The military reform of 1924-5 created a mixed system, with the main emphasis on standing forces; the territorial-militia element was retained for economic reasons rather than on grounds of principle.
Trotsky’s project of combining labour with military training was not implemented.
By the late 1920s the Red Army did have features which distinguished it from the armies of bourgeois states — its social composition and the commissar system, for example — but it was far from embodying the earlier socialist ideas of military organization.
With the failure of revolution in Europe, the Soviet Union was left largely isolated in a hostile world.
The policy of industrialization which was embarked on towards the end of the decade was the practical offspring of this marriage.
In 1931 Stalin, now the dominant leader, who had set his own brutal stamp on the industrialization drive, justified the intensity of the policy by referring to the need to overcome Russia’s backwardness and thus prevent other powers from beating her.
If you do not want this you must put an end to its backwardness in the shortest possible time and develop genuine Bolshevik tempo in building up its Socialist system of economy.
Industrialization was made possible by a massive extraction of resources from the population and their investment in heavy industry.
The defence sector was given high priority in the allocation of investment funds, scarce materials, able managers and skilled workers.
During the 1930s a powerful defence industry was created which produced large quantities of weapons, some of which were of high quality.
The Soviet Union had rejected the idea, which was popular in the West at the time, of building a small, highly mechanized army and sought instead to marry mass and technology — to create a mass army equipped with the best possible armaments.
The territorial-militia element of the armed forces was gradually abandoned.
Yet for all that had been done, the Winter War of 1939-40 with Finland exposed serious weaknesses in the Red Army, some of which resulted from the great purge which Stalin had inflicted on Soviet society in the late 1930s.
The German invasion of 22 June 1941 took Stalin by surprise, and found the Red Army in a state of unreadiness.
The opening months of the war proved disastrous, with the German forces advancing to the outskirts of Moscow.
Only by an enormous effort over the next four years was the Soviet Union able to halt the German advance, turn the tide of war and push the German armies back to Berlin.
The degree of industrial mobilization was much greater in the Soviet Union than in the other belligerent states, and Soviet losses of people and material goods were immense.
The Soviet name for the war with Germany —~ the Great Patriotic War — symbolizes the appeal which Stalin made to the Soviet people’s patriotism.
Victory brought the Soviet Union gains of territory and influence which had seemed inconceivable in the early months of the war.
But victory also brought political conflicts with the war-time allies, and these soon found their expression in intense military rivalry, which centred on the development of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery.
After Stalin’s death the implications of this ‘military-technical revolution’ became more pressing.
The existence of nuclear weapons in growing stockpiles raised fundamental questions about the relationship of war to policy, and about the appropriate structure for armed forces in the nuclear age — questions which have dominated Soviet military policy ever since.
Khrushchev now put greater stress on peaceful coexistence between East and West, and set in motion major changes in military doctrine and military institutions.
In the late 1g50s and early 1960s he tried to devise a new military policy, based on nuclear-armed missiles, that would be militarily and diplomatically effective, while freeing resources for civilian purposes.
He even floated the idea of restoring the territorial-militia element in the armed forces.
But internal opposition, which was strengthened by a succession of international crises (the U 2 incident in 1960, the 1961 Berlin crisis and the Cuban missile crisis of 1962) and by the Kennedy administration’s build-up of strategic forces, finally defeated Khrushchev’s efforts.
His successors have devoted considerable attention to the all-round strengthening of Soviet military power.
A major increase in strategic forces has brought parity with the United States.
Arms transfers to third world countries have grown substantially in this period.
Certainly Soviet policy has been subject to many rash and alarmist interpretations in the West, but the evidence does point to a steady and significant increase in Soviet military power since the early 1g60s.
In the first ten years after the end of the Second World War a clear bipolar structure emerged in world politics, with the United States and the Soviet Union as the dominant powers.
Since that time new forces have emerged to transform the international system.
The creation of the third world as a political force was helped by the existence of the Soviet bloc, which could provide a counterweight to Western power.
Fissiparous tendencies, both East and West, have further complicated international politics.
By the late 1960s Japan and the EEC had become major centres of economic power, while the rivalry between the Soviet Union and China had assumed military form.
From the Soviet point of view the international environment had become more complex, with the ever-present danger that the various centres of power would combine in opposition to it.
Indeed, elements of such a combination have been evident in the 1970s, motivated in large part by the desire to offset growing Soviet military power; in its turn, this countervailing power has provided the Soviet leaders with further reasons for military forces.
The Soviet Union now possesses large armed forces, an advanced defence industry and an extensive military R and D network.
As a consequence, the law of comparative advantage seems to operate in Soviet external policies, giving a major role to the military instrument.
The Soviet Union conducts its central relationship with the NATO powers from a position of military strength but economic weakness.
Soviet relations with China have now acquired an important military dimension with the build-up of forces along the Chinese frontier.
In the third world the Soviet Union has used arms transfers and military advisers as a major instrument of diplomacy.
Thus in spite of the fact that the Soviet concept of the ‘correlation of forces’, in terms of which international politics is analysed, does not place primary emphasis on military force, military power has become a basic instrument of Soviet external policy.
It is not surprising that the present generation of Soviet leaders should see military power as the main guarantee of Soviet security and of the Soviet position in the world.
The men now at the top levels of leadership came to positions of some power in the late 1930s, and Brezhnev and Ustinov are only the most prominent members of this generation to have had a direct part in managing the development and production of arms.
Victory in the war with Germany, the attainment of strategic parity with the United States and the long period at peace since 1945 — these are regarded by this generation as among its greatest achievements.
When one considers the course of Soviet history from 1917 to 1945, it is No surprise that this should be so.
It should be clear from this brief outline how important war and the preparation for war have been in the formation of the Soviet state.
This is not to say that the course of Soviet development has been determined by forces outside the Soviet Union, or that every event in Soviet history is to be explained in terms of external conditions.
The rise of Stalin and his system of rule cannot be explained without reference to social, economic and political conditions in the Soviet Union.
Moreover, not everything in the Stalinist period can be seen as a response to external threats.
The great purge of 1936-8 was justified in this way, but the justification was patently false and the purge greatly weakened the Red Amy.
The rate of extraction was very high, leaving the mass of the population with minimal living standards and sometimes (as when famine occurred) not even those.
Victory in the war seemed to show that, whatever the ‘mistakes’ of Stalin’s policies in the immediate prewar years, the general emphasis on industrialization had been correct.
After the war the high rate of extraction continued as industry was reconstructed and military rivalry with the West pursued.
But since Stalin’s death important changes have taken place which have a bearing on the questions of disarmament and demilitarization.
The first is that the rate of economic growth has slowed considerably, provoking intensive debate about economic reform.
It has been widely argued inside and outside the Soviet Union that the system of economic planning and administration was suited to the industrialization drive, but has now become a brake on industrial development and in particular on technological innovation.
Among the ways in which this has been done is through the provision of more and better goods and services to the mass of the population, and through appeals to nationalist sentiments.
Third, as a result of the greater attention that has been paid to the living standards and welfare of the population, the priorities of resource allocation have become more complex than they were under Stalin.
The enterprises that produce arms and equipment are controlled by a series of ministries which have responsibility for the different branches of the sector.
The work of these ministries is in turn planned by the central planning agencies (in line with the general policy laid down by the Politburo), since the activities of the defence sector must be coordinated with those of the rest of the economy.
There are, however, special institutional arrangements in the defence sector which are designed to ensure that military production has priority claim on scarce resources.
In this sense the defence sector is distinct from the rest of the economy.
Since the war some important changes have taken place in the defence sector.
It has expanded to include new branches of production, in particular nuclear weapons, rockets and electronics.
Along with this expansion has come the creation of an extensive network of research and development establishments to provide the basis for innovations in weapons technologies.
These establishments are controlled by the production ministries in the defence sector.
Research institutes from outside the defence sector — for example, from the Academy of Sciences — are also drawn into military work.
Military R and D is more effective than civilian R and D in the Soviet Union.
The defence sector is well suited to the development and production of follow-on systems (for example, of tanks) where no great shift of mission or technology is required.
The Soviet Union has also been able to organize large-scale innovation when the political leaders have deemed it necessary; the R and D system is well suited to the concentration of resources on specific goals such as the development of the atomic bomb or the development of the inter-continental ballistic missile.
In spite of the flexibility recommended by these principles the available evidence suggests that there is considerable stability in the defence sector and that this has a major influence on its mode of operation.
The research institutes and design bureaux, where new weapons are created, are funded from the budget and their finances do not seem to depend directly on orders for specific systems.
Consequently a strong tendency to create ‘follow-on’ systems can be discerned.
Stable production appears also to be a feature of the defence sector, with no major variation in output from year to year.
Besides the stability of its structure and its operations, the defence sector is marked by the continuity of its leading managers.
Ustinov, the present Minister of Defence, became People’s Commissar of Armament in 1941 and until his appointment to his present position in 1976 played a major role in weapons development and production.
P Slavskii, the Minister of Medium Machine-building (in charge of nuclear weapons development and production) has held that position since 1957 and has been involved in the nuclear weapons programme since 1946.
The managers of the defence industry form a coherent group, with interlocking careers.
There is, however, little evidence that they have acted together as a lobby.
The one occasion on which they seem to have done so was in the period 1957 to 1965 when they took part, with some success, in resistance to Khrushchev’s decentralization of the system of economic planning and management.
In the post-Stalin period there have been intensive debates about the need to reform the system of economic planning and administration in order to stimulate technological innovation.
Thus the present Soviet system of economic planning and management cannot be said to be entailed by the level of defence expenditure.
This is not to deny, of course, that the managers who have been used to working the present system might be fearful of changes on the grounds that their high priority position would be jeopardized.
In any event the choice of market socialism has not been made in the Soviet Union.
The Czechoslovak crisis of 1968 was a major setback for the Soviet advocates of far-reaching reform, because political developments in Czechoslovakia were widely seen as the consequence of economic reform.
The problems of economic growth and technological progress have not vanished in the Soviet Union, however, and piecemeal reform has been under way.
Interestingly, the trend of reform in the 1970s has been to take the defence sector as a model for the rest of the economy.
This marks an attempt to use the defence sector as a model or dynamo of technological progress in the economy as a whole.
This was clearly illustrated by an article in Literaturnaya Gazeta in 1972 and the correspondence it provoked.
The author of the article pointed out that in numerous ways — in prestige, in the priority given by other ministries (for example, in construction projects), in wages, in cultural and housing facilities, in labour turnover — light industry fared worse than heavy industry.
One of the correspondents wrote that the best conditions are given to the so-called ‘leading’ branches.
Naturally the most highly skilled cadres — workers, engineers or technicians — find jobs or try to find them where the pay is highest, so they are concentrated in the ‘leading’ branches of industry.
The Soviet system of economic planning and administration has not been altered fundamentally since it was first established.
It remains a relatively effective mechanism for extracting resources from the economy and directing them to the goals set by the political leaders, and one of the most important of these goals has been the creation of military power.
The defence sector occupies a key — and in some respects, a privileged — position in this system, not only in terms of central priorities, but also in terms of the organization of industry and the attitudes of workers and managers.
The debates about economic reform have resulted in partial and piecemeal changes rather than in a fundamental transformation of the system.
In terms of the militarization of the Soviet economy, this is an ambiguous development.
On the one hand, it testifies to a political concern about the performance of civilian industry; on the other, it highlights the special position and performance of the defence sector.
The Armed Forces and the Rationales for Military Power There is little evidence of opposition inside the Soviet Union to Soviet military policy.
This contrasts with the Khrushchev period, when military outlays did provide a focus of political argument.
And in the dissident samizdat literature, although sharp criticism has been made of many features of Soviet life, few voices have been raised against the military policy of the Soviet state.
Almost the only exception is the warnings which Andrei Sakharov has given the West of the growing military power of the Soviet Union; and Sakharov’s background in nuclear weapons development makes him in this instance a very special case.
Thus the situation is rather different from that in the United States, where militarism and racism formed the chief targets of protest in the 1960s and 1970s.
There are many reasons for this difference, but the chief one appears to be that inside the Soviet Union the Soviet military effort is widely seen as legitimate and as pursuing legitimate goals.
This is in spite of the fact that the burden of military expenditure is greater than in the NATO countries and that there are many competing claims for the resources which are devoted to defence.
The Soviet armed forces have seen very little combat since 1945 — certainly nothing to compare with the military role of the American, British and French forces.
The Soviet claim that Soviet military strength is conducive to peace does not, therefore, fly directly in the face of reality.
This is one reason why there has been, in the Soviet view, no contradiction between the processes of political detente and the growth of Soviet military power.
Soviet military power is regarded as a crucial element in detente because it makes it impossible for the West to deal with the Soviet Union from a position of strength or to use its armed forces in an unfettered way throughout the world.
Although Soviet forces have been engaged in relatively little combat since 1945, military power is certainly regarded by the Soviet leaders as contributing to their political purposes.
The main object of that policy has been to prevent the West from conducting offensive actions — whether military or political — against the Soviet Union and its allies.
Soviet military aid to third world countries is to be seen in the same context.
Since the 1g60s the Soviet Union has come to use its military power — in the form of advisers and arms transfers — more frequently as a way of gaining influence and undermining Western power.
The Soviet Union used military force in Hungary in 1956 and in Czechoslovakia in 1968 in order to maintain its dominant position in Eastern Europe.
That position is underpinned by the ever-present threat of military force, even though that threat is not voiced openly.
In the 1g60s the confrontation with China assumed a military form with the build-up of forces along the Chinese frontier.
Moreover, as Soviet military strength has grown, new roles have been found for it, particularly in the projection of power outside the Soviet frontiers.
The intervention in Afghanistan illustrates the Soviet Union’s growing ability to use its military power in this way, and — more important — its willingness to do so.
In the late 1960s the Soviet union attained strategic parity with the United States and on that basis entered into negotiations to limit strategic arms.
Of course, it remains extremely difficult to say what constitutes parity or equality (does it mean equality with one particular state, or with all potential enemies combined?), and acceptance of the principle still leaves great scope for disagreement both within and between the negotiating states.
Moreover, the principle of parity provides a basis for negotiation between the Soviet Union and the United States only because they have so many more nuclear weapons than other states that even the other nuclear powers can be left largely out of account.
Obviously not, since the NonProliferation Treaty represents a commitment of a kind to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.
Negotiations between the superpowers on the basis of parity goes along with the attempt to prevent other states from attaining that status.
Precisely because the Soviet Union and the United States are using arms control negotiations in this double-edged way, they are likely to stimulate other states to acquire nuclear weapons of their own.
Consequently arms control negotiations on the basis of parity are by no means the foundation for a process of radical demilitarization.
American thinking has laid particular emphasis on the ability, under all circumstances, to inflict widespread destruction on the enemy’s society.
Soviet thinking, on the other hand, has been concerned to limit the damage to Soviet society in the event of nuclear war.
Even in a relationship of parity Soviet policy has been directed towards limiting the vulnerability of the Soviet Union to nuclear attack, and ensuring the viability of Soviet society in war-time.
Whether this can be achieved seems very doubtful , but it does appear to be the rationale behind important elements of Soviet military, military-economic and civil defence policies, and it does have important implications for the militarization of Soviet society.
The Construction Troops carry out construction work for the armed forces and on high-priority civilian projects; the Academic City near Novosibiirsk, for example, where the Siberian Division of the Academy of Sciences is based, was built by them.
The Railroad and Road Troops play an important part in building and maintaining the Soviet rail and road communications system.
But there are three elements of the Soviet military system which are of greater interest from the point of view of the militarization of Soviet society.
These are the civil defence organization, DOSAAF (Dobrovol’noe obshchestvo sodeistviya armii, aviatsii i flotu — the Voluntary Society for Cooperation with the Army, Aviation and the Navy), and the system of military-patriotic education.
All are designed to strengthen the ability of the Soviet Union to defend itself, and all have political functions beyond that goal.
The effectiveness of the civil defence effort is very difficult to judge because it would depend so much on the way in which nuclear war was initiated.
It could not prevent widespread destruction, although it could reduce its scale.
There is an extensive programme of education and training which is designed to enable the population to carry out civil defence measures should the need arise.
DOSAAF has clubs and sports facilities and is organized at factories, farms, educational institutions and so on.
It seems clear that DOSAAF’s activities are of substantial help to the armed forces in providing recruits with skills which will be useful during military service, and also in raising the physical and technical level of the Soviet population.
Much of what DOSAAF does is done by non-military organizations in the West.
It is nevertheless significant that in the Soviet Union it is the goals of military preparedness and defence capability that provide the justification and the driving force for activities of this kind.
Both civil defence and DOSAAF contribute to the Soviet Union’s ability to defend itself; they also contribute to the more diffuse process of military-patriotic education.
Military-patriotic education is called upon to instil a readiness to perform military duty, responsibility for strengthening the defence capability of the country, respect for the Soviet armed forces, pride in the Motherland and the ambition to preserve and increase the heroic traditions of the Soviet people.
Militarypatriotic education is carried out in the teaching process in secondary and higher educational establishments, in the system of political education, by means of propaganda in the press, on radio and television, and with the help of various forms of mass-political work and of artistic and literary works.
Of great significance for military-patriotic education is the mastery of basic military and military-technical skills which young people acquire in secondary schools, technical schools, higher educational establishments, in studies at the houses of defence and technical creativity, aero, auto motor and radio clubs, at the young technicians’ stations, in military-patriotic schools, defence circles, at points of pre-induction training, in civil defence formations.
The Great Patriotic War occupies a key position in the programme of militarypatriotic education as the source of examples and illustrations of the desired qualities.
In this context it can be seen as a response to the problems of legitimation that the Soviet state has faced in the post-Stalin period.
This military-patriotic education does not amount to a glorification of war and should therefore be distinguished from Fascist militarism.
In this way it will help to sustain the Soviet military effort and the special position which the defence sector and the armed forces enjoy in Soviet society.
Since 1945 the post of Minister has, more often than not, been held by a professional soldier, although the present Minister, Ustinov, has spent most of his life in the defence industry.
Special mechanisms of control exist in the armed forces, the most important being the Main Political Administration, which is both an administration of the Ministry of Defence and a department of the Central Committee.
The Soviet Union embodies the apparent paradox of a militarized social system in which the military, while an important political force, are not the dominant one.
This is not to say, however, that the armed forces — or, more particularly, members of the High Command — have played no role in the political crises of the post-Stalin period.
But military support was one factor among others, and probably not the decisive one.
The spectre of Bonapartism was conjured up by Khrushchev as a major justification for Zhukov’s removal from office.
To say this is not to minimize Stalin’s brutal treatment of the armed forces or to deny that Khrushchev often pursued policies that were to the distaste of the High Command.
Finally, the professional interests of the officer corps have been generally well served, especially in the allocation of resources to defence and in the opportunities for career advancement.
Since Stalin’s death in 1953, and more particularly since Khrushchev’s fall from power in 1964, officers have been given considerable freedom to discuss questions of military policy and a greater voice in the policy-making process.
This has resulted from the general diffusion of power at the centre of the Soviet state, and has parallels in other areas of Soviet life where vigorous debates have been conducted about matters of policy.
The Brezhnev Politburo has placed great emphasis on ‘scientific’ policy-making and on expert and technically competent advice.
In this respect the armed forces and the defence industry occupy a special position.
The armed forces enjoy wide prestige as the embodiment of national power and integrity — a prestige which is enhanced by the extensive programme of militarypatriotic education.
The Ministry of Defence and General Staff are institutions of undoubted competence, with a monopoly of expertise in military affairs; there are no civilian institutions able to challenge this expertise.
The high priority given to the defence sector remains embedded in the system of economic planning and administration.
Finally, key aspects of military policy are shrouded in secrecy, and this limits criticism of the priority given to defence in resource allocation and of the way in which those resources are used.
The final decisions on military policy rest with the Politburo, and with the Defence Council, which comprises several leading Politburo members under Brezhnev’s chairmanship.
All the evidence points to a set of shared assumptions among the leaders about military power and military expenditure.
It is, however, possible that this state of affairs will change in the postBrezhnev leadership and that the level of military effort will become a contentious issue as it was under Khrushchev.
Then the institutional power of the armed forces and the defence industry might be important in determining the outcome of the argument.
It is true that there is a large military establishment and a large defence industry.
Sometimes it suggests a degenerate pluralism in which the balanced interplay of interests has been undermined by links between the armed forces and industry; in this sense it seems not to be appropriate because it implies too great a degree of pluralism — and it implies pluralism as a norm — for the Soviet Union.
Sometimes it is implied that the driving force of arms policies is the pursuit of profit by capitalist enterprises; this too would be inappropriate, and for this reason Garaudy has argued that the Soviet Union has a ‘bureaucratic-military complex’ — that is, a militaryindustrial complex without the economic driving-force.
This is too sweeping a statement, but it does make the point that the history of the Soviet Union is so bound up with military power that it seems wrong to speak of a separate militaryindustrial complex acting within the state.
Whether or not we say the armed forces and the defence industry constitute a military-industrial complex in the Soviet Union matters less than the fact that they exhibit many features that are identified as a characteristic of such a complex.
Because of the way in which the Soviet economic system is organized it does exhibit these features in the same way, or to the same degree, as the American defence sector; but it does share them nevertheless.
For example, competition is to be found in the weapons development process between offensive and defensive systems, with new technology in one area stimulating innovation in another.
Second, the military R and D system shows considerable inertia in its operations, thus generating strong pressure for follow-on systems.
Third, the R and D system does not appear to have a strong innovative dynamic of its own.
Fourth, the military R and D system is not especially conducive to the cross-fertilization of technologies to produce new weapons, but this may happen as designers search for ways of meeting new requirements.
Finally, the steadiness of Soviet arms policies may be accounted for, in part, by the planning to which weapons development and production are subject.
The Soviet military effort, which was created in the course of international rivalry, is now rooted in the structure of the Soviet state.
This is not to say, of course, that the external stimuli have vanished.
It is clear that foreign actions do impinge on Soviet arms policies and this can be seen both in the histories of specific weapons systems and in the direction of overall policy.
The advanced capitalist powers have set the pace in making major weapons innovations, and this has served to stimulate Soviet military technology.
Of course it must be borne in mind that military power rests not only on the quality of military technology, but also on its quantity and on the way in which the troops are trained to use it.
The arms competition between East and West consists of both qualitative and quantitative elements; although the balance of the two may change, the arms race has never been a question of one of these elements to the exclusion of the other.
Western military technology has spurred Soviet weapons development, but has often been justified in terms of superior Soviet numbers.
It would be wrong therefore to deny the effects of foreign actions on Soviet arms policies.
But it would be equally mistaken to see Soviet policy as merely a reaction to Western actions.
Foreign influences are refracted through the Soviet policy-making process, in which Soviet perceptions, military doctrine, foreign policy objectives and domestic influences and constraints come into play.
The effect of foreign actions on Soviet policy is complex and not at all automatic.
The very existence of large armed forces, a powerful defence industry and an extensive network of military R and D establishments generates internal pressures for weapons development and production.
The interplay of demands and invention gives rise to proposals for new and improved weapons.
As a system progresses from conception to development, military and design bureau interests become attached to it, building up pressure for production.
The first of these is the principle of ‘configurative causality’, which states that the overall configuration of the complex can be seen to give rise to pressures for arms production, even though these pressures may vary from case to case and cannot be identified in every specific instance.
The second principle is that of ‘overdetermination’ or ‘redundant causation’; to remove one cause or set of causes is not to eliminate the policies themselves, since other causes remain sufficient.
This principle lies behind the argument that it is not enough to tackle the international causes of the EastWest arms competition; the domestic roots too must be eradicated.
These principles are both helpful in understanding Soviet arms policies.
Although much of Soviet military policy-making is shrouded in secrecy, enough is known about the structures of the military-industrial-scientific complex to suggest that internal pressures are generated and considerable inertia built up in the military effort.
It seems clear too that the removal of external stimuli, while it might alter Soviet arms policies in some important respects (for example, make it less technologically innovative), would not eliminate its driving-force entirely, because much of that force is derived from domestic sources.
Conclusion This essay has tried to outline in general terms the domestic sources of the Soviet military effort.
It has suggested that these sources are deeply embedded in Russian and Soviet history.
Disarmament and demilitarization would involve therefore more than the surgical removal of some element of the Soviet state; it would have far-reaching effects throughout the whole society.
And although the ‘withering away of the state’ is one of the anticipated consequences of communist construction, the Soviet Union has one of the most powerful and extensive state apparatuses in the world.
Yet, although the sources of Soviet militarism are strong, this essay has tried not to present them as absolute, or to suggest that there is no scope for initiatives for demilitarization.
There are some developments in the Soviet Union today which suggest that a change of direction is possible.
It would be a serious error to overestimate their importance or the degree to which they can be influenced from outside the Soviet Union.
But it would be an even greater mistake to suppose that no change is possible or that its direction could not be influenced from afar.
Soviet military policy contains several contradictions which may, with time, become more apparent and exert an influence on Soviet politics.
The Soviet leaders have said that they are not striving for superiority, but they have made it clear that they will not fall behind the United States in military power.
The Soviet Union has thus locked itself into a relationship of parity with the United States.
At one level the maintenance of parity — along with the arms control negotiations which it underpins — provides the justification for Soviet military policy.
At another level, however, the attainment of parity has meant that the Soviet Union has come to share full responsibility for the continuing arms competition.
This has had a subtle, yet profound effect on the attitude of many people in the West to Soviet military policy.
Many of those sympathetic to Soviet policy deemed it legitimate for the leading socialist state to catch up with the leading capitalist power; but sharing responsibility for the arms race is not regarded so favourably, especially in view of the danger of nuclear war.
In a similar way, the continuation of a high level of military effort, even after parity has been attained, may help to breed opposition inside the Soviet Union to the amassing of more military power.
It is possible, for example, that Soviet militarism may emerge as a more important focus for dissident criticism, though the strength of nationalist sentiment (including dissident Russian nationalism) and the deep roots of legitimation should not be forgotten.
The Soviet Union shares with the United States the contradiction that growing military power does not bring greater security, even for superpowers.
The accumulation of military power may only spur other governments to increase their own forces, thus nullifying the original gain.
It is true that military power can further foreign policy, but it cannot ensure complete security in the nuclear age.
The ‘Soviet military build-up’ of the 1960s and 1970s has brought the Soviet Union political gains, but it has also helped to stimulate countervailing actions, and it is highly doubtful whether, in the last analysis, Soviet security is more assured now than it was fifteen years ago.
These contradictions would be of little importance if there were no possibility of giving them political significance.
The last fifteen years have been a period of consolidation and conservative reform in the Soviet Union.
But beneath the stable surface changes have been taking place which could result in major shifts of direction in Soviet policy.
The rate of economic growth has been declining, thus increasing the prospect that pressure for far-reaching reform will reemerge.
Agricultural performance has improved greatly, but at a very high cost, again raising the prospect of reform.
Other pressures exist for changing the priorities of resource allocation — for example, in order to speed up development of Siberia or to raise living standards.
The cumulative effect of such pressures might be to weaken the position of the defence sector or to involve it more deeply in non-military functions.
But it is not only the economic system that has been the focus of debate; discussion has also been taking place about the Soviet Union’s proper relationship to the rest of the world.
Some have pressed for as great a degree of autarky and isolation as possible; others have argued for a more outward-looking approach which would recognize that the world faces many problems which can be solved only by common and concerted action.
The present leadership, as has been seen, has given immense importance to military power.
In pointing to these developments one should not forget the militarizing pressures that were analysed earlier in this paper.
Nor should one suppose that a change of course undertaken by a Soviet leadership would amount to radical disarmament or demilitarization.
But the possibility for some change does exist and it should be the aim of the peace movement to try to influence that change in the desired direction.
The first of these is directed at Western governments and should aim at ensuring that they do not foreclose, through their own policies, the possibility of Soviet moves towards disarmament and demilitarization.
This course is a natural concomitant of efforts to press Western governments in that direction too.
But some attempt is needed to take the Soviet dimension consciously into account, and this means that the causes of Soviet militarism, and the ways in which pressure on Western governments can also serve to influence the Soviet Union, need to be analysed.
Such influence need not necessarily be directed solely at disarmament, but could try to draw the Soviet Union into cooperative efforts to solve such problems as the world food supply.
This might make it easier subsequently to work out cooperative, non-military security arrangements.
The second course is directed at the Soviet Union and should try to engage people there in a dialogue about the problems of disarmament and demilitarization.
The variety of political views and currents in the Soviet Union is very wide, and dissident and official views overlap and shade into each other; there are, for example, strong nationalist tendencies in both official and dissident thinking, and dissident reformist views find an echo in official circles as well.
The importance of this course is that vigorous debates about Russia’s destiny and the proper path of Soviet development are taking place inside the Soviet Union and among Soviet émigrés; in Eastern Europe too there is such argument about the future of state socialism.
But the issues of disarmament and demilitarization — which are important for everyone’s future — scarcely figure at all in these discussions, even though militarism and the lack of democracy are linked in the Soviet case.
If these issues could be injected into the discussions, they would then be subject to a great deal of creative political thinking — and thinking, moreover, that is more attuned to the specific problems and conditions of the Soviet Union.
Besides, it has been seen that the military burden in the Soviet Union is very heavy, but that its legitimation is also strong.
Debate and discussion about the problems of Soviet militarism might help to weaken that legitimation.
It should not be supposed that everyone will welcome such discussion, and the attempt to generate it may well be regarded as unwarranted interference in the internal affairs of the Soviet Union.
But in the nuclear age we are all affected by the military policies of the superpowers, and hence we surely have the right to try to influence them.
The figures available on arms production and force levels give only the roughest indication of Soviet military production.
The late 1950s and early 1960s appear to be the period of lowest effort.
Western estimates of Soviet defence spending as a proportion of GNP seem to fit this pattern, with the Khrushchev years as the period when the proportion was lowest.
Most estimates, derived by whatever means, fall into the range of 8 to 14 per cent, with the lower estimates for the late 1950s and early 1960s.
The Military Balance each year gives a figure for the manpower in the Soviet Armed Forces.
On top of these figures there are the 400,000 troops who engage in construction, railroad, farm and medical work.
This is not to deny that there was opposition to the Soviet state during the war; but the memory of the war is very potent.
It is also possible to trace the ‘Soviet military buildup’ to the Central Committee resolution ‘On the Defence of the Country’ in 1929.
But the present phase has its roots in the ‘revolution in military affairs’ which was the subject of much discussion in the early 1960s.
For a discussion of marginal shifts of resources see J Hardt, ‘Military-Economic Implications of Soviet Regional Policy’, prepared for Colloquium at NATO Economic Directorate, Brussels, April 1979.
Soviet Thermonuclear Research’, International Security, Winter 1979/80.
See, for example, the discussion in R Medvedev, On Socialist Democracy , Chapters 3 and 4.
The first is an economic decline of the sort that comes about once or twice in a century.
This country is in the early years — not, despite the new shine of the Carter Doctrine, at the very beginning — of the most expensive military boom in history.
In the process, the distinction between the military and the non-military modes of the American economy is being suppressed.
The continuum of money and destruction is being projected, through investment in military research and development, into the far future.
The expansion in military science and technology is the most ominous component of a defence budget that is dense with the ghosts of past and future wars.
The new defence boom has been welcomed — in the United States Congress, for example — as a response to recent events in South-West Asia and elsewhere.
Spending on strategic and other nuclear weapons increases particularly fast, as does futuristic research at the ‘leading edge’ of military technology.
With its research boom, it is defining a revised American doctrine of science-intensive war.
This effort is not new, and it is scheduled to persist for the balance of the five-year defence plan.
The proportion of defence spending devoted to research and the procurement of new weapons has increased steadily since 1976.
This constitutes, as the Report shows, the first sustained boom in United States military investment — investment in South-East Asia aside — since 1960-63.
The MX missile — the race track of Ozymandias — is its most expensive item.
This allocation for the M X is only part of a build-up in research on nuclear, anti-nuclear, and post-nuclear weapons systems.
It is as though the years of obscurity, of the bargain-basement, low-technology Vietnam war were over; as though military scientists can now step out into the clear light of particle beams, space optics, and blue-green lasers.
The military doctrine that Brown outlines is suited to the epoch of innovative war.
He returns again and again to concepts of flexibility, precision, ‘selective and measured’ attack and calibrated retaliation.
The notion of ‘flexibility’ is a leading piety of American strategic doctrine.
Nor is there anything new about the idea of a ‘continuum’ of nuclear weapons.
But it is elevated by Brown into the writing on the wall of future destruction, from bazookas to particle weapons.
Next in the continuum come the varieties of intercontinental retaliation dictated by the doctrine of ‘countervailing’ force.
What is most remarkable about the doctrine of the continuum from non-nuclear to nuclear conflict is the cool and precise rhetoric in which it is described.
We no longer find the pious disclaimers, the epithets (‘of course, terrible’) which earlier Defense Secretaries once appended to the words describing nuclear war.
The phrase ‘total war’ is used casually in a discussion of defence spending.
The Report puts forward three sorts of arguments in favour of increased defence spending.
The first, and most familiar, suggests that because the Soviet Union is spending much more than the United States on its military effort, the United States must now rearm.
But the argument relies in general upon the simple reiteration of relative expenditures.
The shortcomings of such comparisons are well-known, as the Report itself comes close to acknowledging.
They are selective, in that they sometimes measure the Soviet Union against the United States and sometimes NATO against the Warsaw Treaty Organization.
They pass lightly over the proportion of Russian military efforts which is directed not against NATO but against China.
They move even more expeditiously past the sharp qualitative advantages enjoyed by the US, such as the ‘rather startling asymmetries’ which SIPRI detects in United States and Russian strategic submarines.
One has only to imagine the reverse exercise to see the tenuousness of such calculations.
A Russian ‘estimate’ of American military research would start, to be sure, with the published budget figure of $16-5 billion.
To this it would add the $1-3 billion which the Department of Energy will spend on nuclear weapons and other defence research, and a sizeable part of NASA’s $56 billion RD budget.
Some such sequence may indeed have helped to determine the present arms race.
We can assume that the Soviet Union reacted to the American military build-up of the late 1960s — an effort directed in large part at South-East Asia ~ by investing in military research.
The weapons that the Russians are building now are the products of that research.
The Americans in turn react by increasing their own research, which will produce the arms race of the early 1ggos; such are the dynamics of comparative weaponry.
The second argument in favour of the military boom suggests that the ‘growth in international turbulence’ in Afghanistan, Africa, the Caribbean, Thailand, and elsewhere makes such an effort essential.
There are relatively few wars under way, and revolution is distinctly on the retreat.
It is even more questionable whether acquiring the capacity to construct particle beam weapons in the 1ggos is likely to reduce turbulence in the third world in 1980.
One of the major new projects, the CX airlift plane, is recommended for ‘contingencies outside of Europe’, yet it is some years from being deployed.
Brown’s report, meanwhile, demonstrates a far more muscular attitude to United States military imtervention outside Europe than has been seen for some years.
The immediate crisis shouldn’t deflect us from other areas of potential danger.
Morocco remains under attack from adversaries armed with Soviet weapons.
Even those who accept this argument — I do not — should ask themselves whether the United States is buying the right power and the right perceptions with its new defence dollars.
It should be added that the Report’s calculus of ‘perceptual’ costs and benefits is bizarre.
The Brown position is based on a view of the American economy and American society as organized around knowledge and science.
The obvious strategy, thus, is to lead from strength or from comparative advantage; to prepare to fight an automated and innovative war.
We learn, in passing, of production problems in constructing nuclear attack submarines, of ‘shore processing software, computer loading and array reliability problems’ with Navy sensor systems; that the Air Force finds it difficult to maintain ‘their increasingly complex equipment’, given ‘maintenance backlogs’ and ‘increases in our accident rates’; that the Army’s ‘telephone switches in Europe are obsolete, require continuous costly maintenance, and often break down’, and will be replaced by German digital switches.
The military has conventionally assumed that because it can afford the most elaborately redundant controls, and because its operations are isolated from the messiness of real-life clinics and sewage tunnels, it is thereby free from such tribulations.
There is a related and deeper contradiction in the notion of knowledge-intensive war.
The United States is practising a variety of ‘la guerre savante’, the stylized struggled which has dominated European wars since the sixteenth century.
The arms race implicit in the new military boom requires the most precise coordination of national scientific emotions, as the United States and the Soviet Union move together toward the MX, to ‘invulnerable’ missiles for the Russians, pressureon SALT, new missile defences, pressure on the ABM Treaty, laser weapons, even more pressure to abrogate the ABM Treaty, warfare in space.
That America’s leaders should choose, now, to evoke the last war fought in this country is itself awesome.
The last, striking contradiction of the doctrine has to do with its economic costs.
These, too, are determined by the technology-intensive character of the projected boom.
Yet they have been to an extraordinary extent forgotten in discussions of the Defense Budget.
Just as it is assumed that investment in lasers will somehow encourage the loyal Pathans, that the incantation of numbers (4 per cent real growth in defence spending) is itself useful, so too are the economic consequences of the boom ignored.
There seemed nothing, as in 1950 and 1966, that could so fortify business confidence as a vigorous defence effort.
Even the most rosy expectation does not deny that military spending will stimulate inflation.
Previous arms booms began in years of moderate price increases (consumer prices increased 1 per cent in 1950 and 2-9 per cent in 1966); United States inflation early in 1980 reached an annual rate of 16 per cent.
It is much less likely that the boom will provide extensive new employment for American workers.
In the first place, the character of defence spending is, following Brown’s dictum and the exigencies of the times, increasingly capitalintensive.
Secondly, by cutting into other government programmes, military spending may jeopardize the most precarious of existing jobs.
One mysterious aspect of the economic crisis of the 1970s in the United States is the extent to which employment has continued to increase.
This is in part because manufacturing industry there — far more than in France or West Germany — has maintained jobs.
But it is also because employment in social and public services, particularly health services, has multiplied.
There is one problem of the United States economy which the military boom may be expected to alleviate.
This is the decline in rates of growth of labour productivity in the 1970s, with an actual reduction in 1974 and 1979.
It seems likely that shifts in the economy away from the production of goods for military consumption and toward the production of social services have reduced growth in productivity.
Many industries that are dependent on defence enjoy high levels and high rates of growth of productivity.
They buy components, intermediate inputs, from other equally vigorous sectors.
The service industries, by contrast, tend to buy paper, construction, other services.
Perhaps modern defence contractors behave, economically speaking, like business services or technology consultants.
United States military expenditures started to increase in the mid1970s.
Military contracts for goods and services — what the Defense Department comptroller calls ‘procurement’, which includes spending for maintenance goods and for foreign military sales — increased from $458 billion in 1976 to $556 billion in 1977 and $69-0 billion in 1979.15 Yet this boomlet has done little for productivity growth.
The Soviet economy, of course, is a poor example of the economic benefits of militarization.
The Defense Department Report is generous with its estimates of Soviet economic growth in the 1980s.
It is perhaps the most ominous of the ghoulish economic indications of the past several weeks, not only for what it reveals about the perversity of capitalist economies.
Business optimism, now, is evidence of a keening desire by American industry to return to the old economic and technological patterns of the 1940s, 1950s, and 1g60s.
The economic changes of the period since 1970 have amounted to a vast, if unintended and perhaps unwanted, transformation of the American economy toward the provision of social security.
There has even, within this metamorphosis, been some conversion of scientific and technical efforts toward secular society; some social innovation.
Now, every instinct of the American political economy seems to be crying retreat, to be crying war.
If one considers the history of the American economy in the twentieth century, it seems possible that military industries have functioned as a ‘leading sector’ — in the economist Joseph Schumpeter’s sense of a dominant industry — during the long expansion of the 1940s to the 1970s.
One does not have to believe in specific explanations of economic cycles such as Kondratieff’s to see that modern economic growth is characterized by long periods of expansion, more or less associated with a given ‘locus’ of innovation.
Such periods include, for the world economy, 1848 to 1873 and 1895 to 1920, as well as the post-World War II boom that ended in the early 1970s.
There has been no undisputed leader during the United States expansion of the postwar years.
Instead, some theorists of economic cycles point to an assortment of leading industries, including electronics, consumer electrical goods, and air travel.
What seems possible is that the military industries themselves have constituted such a focus.
They do not function as a single or multiple industrial sector, as did the railroads and the automobile and electricity businesses in earlier booms, but rather as a cluster of industries joined by a common objective and a common customer.
The defence boom and the business confidence it inspires are from this perspective deeply disturbing.
An economy in the throes of decline cannot afford to lose this portion of its knowledge, of its education system, of its future to old industries, and to destruction.
There is now, as not often in the world since Nagasaki, the intuitive possibility of nuclear war.
There is also the possibility ofa remilitarized world economy which will make this prospect more imminent, year after year, as the research boom becomes a boom in procurement, in strategic doctrine and in military culture.
Very little is more important, as we enter the 1980s, than to act against the one and against the other.
Department of Defense Annual Report, Fiscal Year 1981, Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense, Department of Defense, 29 January 1980.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute , World Armaments and Disarmament.
Kevin N Lewis, “The Prompt and Delayed Effects of Nuclear War’, Scientific American, July 1979.
Quoted by Hans Morgenthau in D Carlton and C Schaerf , Arms Control and Technological Innovation , 262.
Edward Denison, ‘Service Industries — Trends and Prospects’, Survey of Current Business, January 1945.
Wassily Leontiefand Marvin Hoftenberg, “The Economic Effects of Disarmament’, Scientific American, April 1961; ‘The Input-Output Structure of the United States Economy, 1972’, Survey of Current Business, February 1979.
Procurement for foreign military sales accounted for $5:4 billion of the total in 1979.
See Eric Hobsbawm, “The Development of the World Economy’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, September 1979.
Estimated in Richard Dempsey and Douglas Schmude, ‘Occupational Impact of Defense Expenditures’, Monthly Labor Review, December 1971.
Donald Rumsfeld, Annual Defense Department Report, Fiscal Year 1979, 102.
It was during this period that Margaret Thatcher made the hawkishly vitriolic speeches about foreign policy which led Pravda, in a typically miscalculated effort at propaganda, to dub her the ‘iron lady’ — a tag she was proud to sport.
Those speeches not only revealed the centrality in Conservative ideology of perceptions of the Soviet threat and of a strong foreign and defence policy, they also served as a rallying cry for party unity and as a convenient stick with which to batter the Labour government about its head.
The same themes were pursued through the 1970s until the Conservatives were elected in 1979, even if they became rather less prominent as the Conservatives found other policies around which to unite.
Increased military budgets, improved military salaries and shopping lists of expensive new weapons projects were the Conservative answer to the Soviet threat, the Conservative solution to the damage allegedly done to British defence policy by the Labour government.
True to its promises, the Conservative government has increased military spending and has announced plans to go on doing so.
Yet this level of 3 per cent is no more than the Labour government had agreed to in 1977 as part of an all-round NATO programme, though implementation was delayed until 1979-80, the last defence budget prepared by Labour, when the actual increase was 4¥2 per cent.
In other words, the Tories are doing no more than Labour was doing by the end of its period in office.
By the late 1970s, wages and salaries had become matters of major grievance in the armed forces; morale was badly affected not only by this but also by often inadequate living conditions, and by the limited availability of supplies and spare parts.
The problem was that Labour’s budgetary trimming exercises left inadequate resources to sustain the military capabilities it was attempting to mount.
The result was a major crisis of morale in the services in 1978, characterized by high rates of early departure, low efficiency, and a deluge of leaks to the press about the inadequacies of British military preparations.
The Conservatives have committed themselves to preventing this from happening again.
A good proportion of the 3 per cent annual increases will be eaten up by that commitment alone.
On top of that, the costs of military equipment, especially the major weapon systems, are climbing at giddy speeds, far outpacing inflation in the civil economy.
It is likely that annual increases in real military spending of 3 per cent, even if sustained throughout the 1980s, will not be sufficient to maintain the present range of forces deployed by Britain, especially with the concentration of effort on major and prestigious procurement projects like the replacement of Polaris.
One would therefore expect the Conservatives to seek even larger increases, perhaps up to 6 or7 per cent annually.
But a study of possible British military spending in the 1980s within the context of the likely condition of the national economy shows that there must be serious doubts about the government’s ability to sustain annual 3 per cent increases, let alone anything more ambitious.
Economic and Social Constraints By the end of its period in office the 1974~9 Labour government was firmly committed to increasing military expenditure.
It has been succeeded by a Conservative administration distinguished by its enthusiasm for high military spending.
Thus over the past few years there has developed, despite the acrimonious debates between Labour and Conservative front benches, a relatively stable consensus in Britain’s political leadership in favour of increasing the military budget over the levels of the mid-197o0s.
But the political and ideological preferences of a government, even if supported by such a consensus, are only one factor, albeit an important one, in setting national military spending levels.
In the short run, however, considerable problems can be posed, and are at present being posed for the expansion of United States military programmes.
Moreover, if there is an expansion in the volume of procurement, or a gradual shift of emphasis towards new military technologies, additional capacity must be created.
The effect of these other calls on available resources can be described as the allocative constraint, reflecting socioeconomic choice between various goals.
Since resources available to a national economy are finite at any given time, these various goals are mutually competitive and, possibly, they are ultimately mutually exclusive.
Thus the allocative choices made express the priority given to military expenditure as against other forms of public expenditure, private consumption, investment or net exports.
A government may have a firmly held preference for a particular pattern of resource allocation, but in practice it is never entirely free to implement it.
It cannot but respond to economic conditions; it cannot but respond to other politically expressed social priorities.
Should it fail to respond adequately, there is in the end the possibility that it will be brought down and replaced by a government which at least claims, at least at the outset, to have a different set of allocative preferences.
In practice, choices about allocation are difficult and uncertain and have been made in inconsistent ways, even by the same government, as a result of which short-term stabilization measures have been required.
The adjustment within defence policy has been to drop roles , to cancel projects, to keep military wages down, to run down spares, and so on.
Thus, if allocation outreaches feasible levels, as a result, for example, of over-ambitious projections of economic performance or insufficient attention to other social priorities, later correction is a painful business for the armed forces.
This process of correction can be thought about in terms of the stabilization constraint.
To achieve long-term stability, planned targets should accord with long-run socioeconomic priorities and feasible projections of economic output.
Thus, if an attempt is made, through incompetence or, more important, through deliberate political choice about competing allocative demands, to challenge long-run socio-economic priorities in military planning, among the possible outcomes is an extremely disruptive encounter with the effects of the stabilization constraint.
Military Spending and Allocative Choice The government has declared its support for the NATO aim of annual increases in military spending of 3 per cent in real terms through to 1986.
We think it is reasonable to assume that the Ministry of Defence’s Long Term Costing, covering a ten-year period, includes a working assumption that this trend will be continued to the end of the decade.
In fact, since cuts in forces are a likely prospect even with that level of spending increase, the 3 per cent figure may be viewed in many circles as the lower limit of what is necessary.
The relative price effect expresses the difference between the rate of inflation for military goods and services and the rate for all damestically produced goods and services; it depends on the relation of import prices to domestic prices, relative productivity growth and the relation of military wages to average wages.
The relative price effect was low in the late 1970s because of the squeeze on military wages, which the current government is committed to preventing; our calculations therefore assume a slightly higher effect.
The assumed rate of growth of output is 1 per cent annually; this is the rate estimated by the government for the period to 1983-4, and at present there is no basis on which to assume it will be higher through the rest of the 1980s.
Having made these assumptions, the calculation and the conclusion are straighforward.
On current government plans and using feasible economic projections, the share of GDP in current prices devoted to military expenditure will rise from 4-6 per cent at present to 5-92 per cent in 1985 and 7-21 per cent in 1990.
This will take the GDP share back up to the level at which it stood in the mid-1g50s and from which it has since more or less consistently declined.
There is no sense in which this can be taken to represent a feasible programme of military expenditure given long-run socio-economic priorities.
It will have severe economic repercussions, most notably on civil industrial investment and the balance of payments.
Ironically, it will thereby undermine the foundations on which stable military programmes might be constructed.
But, as we have argued, the government’s preference is but one factor affecting the level of military spending.
Some guide to the future can be gained by reference to the past, especially by reference to long-run and relatively stable patterns in the past.
While we cannot predict how social judgement of competing priorities will be made in the future, we can assess past patterns and see what would happen in the 1980s if those patterns were to hold.
The volume of British military expenditure over the period 1951-75 is well explained by the relationship between real income, the relative price effect and United States and Soviet military expenditures, together with a statistical dynamic adjustment process which captures the fluctuations induced by periodic defence reviews and changes of course.
Using the equation which fits the period 1951—75, it is then possible to estimate British military expenditure in the 1980s as a consequence of the relationship of these four variables on the assumption that past long-run patterns will hold.
Far from there being an annual 3 per cent increase, the volume of military expenditure would decline over the decade by the equivalent of 1-5 per cent annually.
In current price terms, the share of GDP devoted to military spending would decline to 4:5 per cent by 1985 and 4-4 per cent by 1990, continuing its slow move towards the NATO average.
The difference between spending 4-4 per cent of GDP on the military in 1990 and spending 7-2 per cent expresses the difference between the reality of the British state and society for the past thirty years and the state and society the Conservative government wants to construct.
To fulfil its military spending ambitions, the government will have to push through profound socio-economic and _ political changes, yet within the ‘new’ departures the Conservatives seek there are several very familiar, traditional themes.
This can be understood by looking, in turn, at the decision to purchase Trident as the successor to the British Polaris nuclear force, and at the effects on the domestic British scene of its military spending plans.
The major decision in British military policy currently is the procurement of a new force to replace Britain’s four Polaris submarines.
Were the procurement of Trident or any other major nuclear force likely to result in a clear strategic advantage for Britain, or even were it likely to provide an important political instrument, the decision would be understandable within the terms of orthodox strategic debate, though it would not be supportable.
But the politico-strategic arguments in favour of Polaris and now Trident are vague, confused and contradictory.
And this contribution, even if annual increases of 3 per cent in real terms are sustained, will either require the orderly phasing out of other major military forces or result in extraordinary chaos in military policy and industry around the end of the 1980s.
Understanding the emphasis placed on the procurement of Trident is not aided by strategic analysis; we must leave that realm, and enter one of a more elusive political symbolism.
Neither changes of government nor failures in the late 1950s and early 1g6os, first with the British Blue Streak and then with the United States Skybolt, have really dented the theme; the most that happened was the reduction of the Polaris force from five to four submarines by the 1964-70 Labour government, after it had been elected on a manifesto which included a pledge to have nothing to do with the force, and at some severe cost to its credibility with Labour supporters.
Thus, whatever it is about the Blue Streak-Skybolt-Polaris-Trident theme which gives it its durability, it seerns reasonable to suggest it derives not just from the nuclear weapon dimension, but from the fact that they are missile forces, and not just missiles but long-range missiles of the kind the USA or the USSR might have.
It is the kind of thing the USA and the USSR — the superpowers — possess.
It provides the British state with a tinge of great power standing, in times when it has had precious few other such tinges.
Rather, they derive from a basic belief that Britain, being Britain, with all that means, with all that history, ought naturally to be in on this, the most devastating military instrument.
For these beliefs to be effective, to result in a series of policy decisions over time which lead to Polaris and beyond, there is no need for them to be shared by other states.
Arguments which demonstrate the weakness of claims that possessing a force like Polaris provides particular status thus miss the point.
What other states believe about Britain is here secondary, almost irrelevent.
Thus it is equally irrelevant to comment that the way Britain procured Polaris would hardly provide much status in the eyes of others.
What matters is that Britain has Polaris, and thus, in its own eyes, it has the requisite tinge of greatness.
Polaris and Trident are therefore concrete indications of the difficulty the British state has found in modernizing itself in the past thirty years, in accustoming itself to a permanently reduced international position.
This difficulty is seen elsewhere in British defence policy, particularly in the continual process of seeking greater military capabilities than the resources can be provided to sustain.
Of course, some adjustments have been made; the military withdrawal from Empire is one such, the abandonment of major aircraft-carriers is another, yet this decision itself has been partially negated by the procurement of the Invincible class of anti-submarine warfare cruisers — mini-aircrattcarriers.
Some adjustments have been made; some have been made and then qualified; others have not been made.
The difficulty of making the adjustments has been great, and the consequence of the inability to scale desired capabilities down to available resources has been a pattern of constant chops and changes.
The difficulty in modernizing, in coming to terms with the second half of the twentieth century, is felt elsewhere in British state policy; its sources lie in the history and structure of the state and in Britain’s economic and social relations.
In some ways, and in some instances, the British state has been able to modernize, but rarely with any ease.
And it is perhaps not surprising that it is in the field of defence policy, so closely related to imperial military traditions, that the difficulty has been the greatest.
For all the apparent modernity of British armed forces, for all the Ministry of Defence’s ability to function in sophisticated, modern levels of discourse, major aspects of British defence policy are totally anachronistic.
The submarines and missiles are there to sustain the self-image of the British state and ruling circles, an attempt to maintain the appearance of being a major world power long after the fact has ended.
The emphasis placed upon the procurement of a replacement for Polaris, despite the damage this will do to the rest of British military preparations, is a very good indicator of the hollowness and selfdefeating nature of the Conservative government’s international aspirations.
Indeed, it is all too reminiscent of the nineteenth-century British view of the world.
The archaism of this view of Britain’s role in the world is interestingly paralleled by the Conservatives’ economic policies.
We are thinking first and foremost of the ideology of ‘laissez-faire’ and the rhetoric of reducing the role of the state, but also of the increased emphasis on internationalizing British capital, together with the expansion in the City’s business as a result of the strength of the pound sterling in international markets.
The removal of controls on currency exchange and the opposition by both the City and the government to controls on the Eurodollar market are a further part of the pattern.
The rule of Britannia and ‘laissez-faire’, however, make up only a part of the picture of nineteenth-century Britain.
Social and Political Costs We have argued that if past social and political patterns hold, the Conservatives will be unable to sustain annual increases in military spending of 3 per cent in real terms.
In fact, evidence from analysing those past patterns suggests that military spending will actually decline in the 1980s.
Clearly then, despite the traditionalism which lies at the heart of much Conservative thinking on international and economic issues, compared to the past thirty years a genuine and profoundly new departure is required if Conservative military plans are to be implemented.
What this means is that the British people would have to pay costs for sustaining the imperial self-image on a scale which we have not been willing to pay for three decades.
We would have to accept the closures of more hospitals, the further run-down of the National Health Service, so that good health becomes a privilege once again, not a right.
We would have to accept the closure of schools and the enlargement of classes, the continuation of outdated and inadequate educational facilities.
We would have to accept the steady elimination of many of the services and amenities in local communities we have taken for granted, together with the further decay of inner-city areas.
And we would have to accept these and other costs, not as a temporary break, but for many, many years.
For the resources which military expenditure and military industry utilize are also those which could be utilized for civil investment.
In other words, we would also have to agree to put off economic recovery, to throw revenues from North Sea oil down the military drain, to watch the civil economy stagnate yet further while the military economy booms.
The war psychology which we see being created today, which is necessary to legitimate the replacement of Polaris and the devotion of enormous resources to the military, is one side of the coin.
The other side is the increased authoritarianism of the state in dealing with ‘dissident’ groups, the transfer of military techniques learned in Northern Ireland to the British mainland, the growth of the Special Branch and the political role of the police.
The British state had already increased, in the 1970s, under a Labour government, the attention it pays to domestic propaganda and techniques of political repression; the process would have to continue and reach into yet more areas of our social and political life.
Thus, the Conservatives’ rhetoric around international questions is in direct conflict with their rhetoric of reducing the role of the state, because to sustain their international aspirations and to impose the consequent social and political penalties on the British people would require a major expansion of the role of the state in particular areas.
The ideology of economic ‘laissez-faire’ is at odds with the means which would have to be employed to implement Conservative ambitions in the international arena.
Since the ideology of ‘laissez-faire’ is already at odds with the reality of economic policies, it seems to us more likely that the ideology would, over time, be jettisoned or downplayed, rather than that propaganda and coercion would be jettisoned for the sake of the ideology.
The Conservatives’ Forthcoming Failure This nightmarish prospect has been mapped out in deliberately stark terms.
It is predicated on the government being successful in increasing military expenditure and reconstructing British politics and society.
The government performs in the international as well as the domestic arena.
In the domestic arena it exploits the genuine dangers in the international situation, but by so doing it also contributes to an exacerbation of those dangers.
Building up a war psychology in Britain contributes to greater tensions and greater dangers of war.
And the government is not immune from the effects of its own propaganda.
Thus the Conservative government is currently contributing to the possibility of a major war, of a nuclear holocaust.
We presume that even the government would accept that, were such a war to occur, it would be some evidence that its policies had failed.
Secondly, as we have already argued, annual increases in real military spending of 3 per cent through the 1980s will undermine the economic basis on which stable military programmes might be built.
Accelerating economic decline would hit the mass of the British people hard, but might finally drive home the impossibility of current military plans and force a change of course.
But this is more likely to happen, and to happen sooner rather than later, if, thirdly, a powerful and conscious popular mobilization seeks a change of course.
This implies a resistance both to propaganda and coercion and the capacity to go beyond resistance into the development of a new and saner course for British policy.
To return to the terms we used earlier in this essay, this means a forceful assertion of allocative choices which are different from those of the current government.
The strength of this assertion would then result in a stabilization, in the closure of the Conservatives’ new yet traditional departure.
We have argued that Conservative plans for military expenditure in the 1980s conflict with the social, economic and political realities of late-twentieth-century Britain.
They will be asserted by people and movements struggling against coercion, the removal of social services and the threat of war, seeking a secure future and a reasonable standard of living.
Within the context of a general economic crisis, this requires a very different allocation of resources from the Conservatives’ preference and a different set of policies.
But the point is that these ‘forces’ are made up of people and of many kinds of groups and organizations who must first decide that they will actively oppose the Conservatives’ policies.
Business Week, 18 February 1980, carries a major article on this theme.
Work done on the possibility of converting military industry to non-military uses shows the adjustment is possible, but it has also shown that a successful transition depends on a series of political preconditions, to which the Conservatives would be thoroughly opposed.
For the years 1974-9, the average relative price effect was 1-36 per cent as against 2-23 per cent for 1968-79; for reasons stated in the text we have assumed a figure for the 1980s of 2 per cent.
The National Income and Expenditure figures for current expenditure on goods and services for military defence were used, since long runs of data are available in current and constant prices for this definition.
A Reply’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, March 1977 and September 1978.
Smith, “The Demand for Military Expenditure’, Economic Journal, forthcoming.
R Groom, ‘The British Deterrent’ , in J Bayliss , British Defence Policy i in a Changing World (Croom Helm, London, 1977), 153.
The Armament Process in Reverse Stopping cruise missiles is not just a matter of convincing the politicians.
Time and time again, the statesmen of the world have met together in international fora and expressed lofty and commendable ambitions for peace and disarmament.
New and more deadly kinds of weapons continue to be acquired; war and militarism continue to characterize international relations.
It appears as though disarmament, which is viewed as an international act of will, is quite unrelated to armament, which is a national process involving people, money and institutions deeply embedded in the fabric of our society.
If the campaign for European nuclear disarmament is to succeed, we need to see it, not just as a campaign to change the political will of Europeans — important as that is — but, more profoundly, as the first step in a process which reverses the process of armament.
The aim would be to undermine the ideas and institutions which foster the arms race, to rechannel the energies which are currently devoted to militarization into other new directions and create, so to speak, a vested interest in socially productive as opposed to destructive ends.
The act of will that is currently thought of as disarmament would present the final blow to a crumbling military-industrial edifice, the last and perhaps least act in a series of events which totally transforms the current political, social and economic environment of armaments.
The culture which invented the stirrup was quite different from the one which developed the gun.
The capitalist armament process and what is more or less its mirror image in the centrally planned economies has its own unique properties.
This essay is an attempt to sketch out these properties and to see what they imply for disarmament.
In countries like the United States, Britain or France which are major arms producers, the procurement of arms accounts for about half the military budget and the same is probably true of the Soviet Union.
Moreover, the procurement budget is dominated by a few major weapon systems,e. warships, aircraft or armoured fighting vehicles, that combine a weapons platform, a weapon and the means of command and communication.
In the US, for example, the Trident submarine, the new nuclear-powered aircraft-carrier, and a handful of guided missile destroyers and frigates, account for about two thirds of the naval procurement budget.
The MX missile, together with the latest air force fighters F 15 and F 16, is equally important for the Air Force, while the new XM 1 battle tank accounts for a major share of the Army budget.
In Britain, the Multi-Role Combat Aircraft Tornado accounts for around 40 per cent of the Royal Air Force budget; the three antisubmarine warfare cruisers, which are actually small aicraftcarriers with their associated escort and support ships, probably account for a fifth to a quarter of the British naval procurement budget.
Whereas formerly the weapon was the instrument of man, now it appears that man is the instrument of the weapon system.
A weapon system demands a rigid technical division of labour that admits little variation in the social organization of the men who operate it.
Equally, the weapon system, like the machine, guarantees the existence of certain types of industry for its manufacture.
Although in almost all industrialized countries, armed forces have been pruned and centralized since the war, they remain functionally organized around the weapon system.
Hence, navies are organized by ship, with groups of ships organized hierarchically into task forces.
At the apex of the American surface Navy is the aircraft carrier, requiring destroyers and a submarine or two for protection, aircraft to fly from its deck, and supply ships of various kinds for replenishment.
The bomber and the battle tank have a similar role in the Air Force and Army.
The Army is made up of armour, artillery, parachute or infantry units, but the armoured units are the core of the combined arms team.
The functional autonomy of individual services or military units is achieved through independent strategies associated with particular weapon systems.
This would explain why strategic bombing is so central to the United States Air Force or why the British Navy remains committed to an ocean-going role associated with carriers long after the abandonment of overseas commitments.
In the Soviet Union, for example, land-based mediumand long-range ballistic missiles constitute the basis for a separate service, the Strategic Rocket Forces.
The strategic doctrine of any particular military unit can thus be expressed in the military specifications for a particular weapon system; that is to say, in a set of specified performance characteristics.
Hence, the weapon system is the link between the enterprise and military unit, the embodiment of a persistent militaryindustrial alliance.
Western Countries In the West, the design, development and production of weapon systems is, by and large, undertaken by a few large companies known as prime contractors.
In general, the prime contractors are the manufacturers of weapon platforms-aircraft, shipbuilding, automobile or engineering companies; they assemble the complete weapon system, subcontracting subsystems, like the weapons, the engine and the electronics, and components in such a way as to create an interdependent network of big and small companies.
Boeing and Rockwell are bomber enterprises; Dassault in France and British Aerospace make combat aircraft, Westland Aircraft makes helicopters; Electric Boat and Vickers Barrow make submarines.
Firms have been amalgamated or nationalized, especially in Europe, but basically there has been very little rationalization.
The plants which receive prime contracts for major weapon systems have remained much the same, under different names, for thirty years.
There has been more specialization and an increased amount of subcontract work both among the prime contractors and the outside firms, especially in the electronics industry.
But among the prime contractors, there have been few, if any, actual closures in the postwar period.
Equally, there have been no new entries into the major weapons markets.
The consequence is that a specific mix of skills and physical equipment, and a specific set of relationships with customers and suppliers (the subcontractors), has been preserved — in effect, a specific manufacturing experience which corresponds to a specific military experience.
Although several of the big arms manufacturers in Europe have been nationalized, the prime contractors operate according to the principles of private enterprise.
They need to maintain their independent viability and this, in practice, means the constant search to find new markets, and to maintain or increase profit margins.
The fact that this competition takes a technological rather than price form has to do with the peculiarity of the arms market — the government as sole customer.
Firms put more emphasis on the ability to offer improvements to the product than on the ability to reduce the cost of production — in the end, the government pays.
In essence, then, the Western armament process is characterized by a contradictory combination of stability and competition.
On the supply side, it is monopolistic,e. has one customer, and on the demand side, it is oligopolistic,e. has a few competitive suppliers.
Inevitably, these two aspects are reflected in the final product, the weapon system.
In a planned system, unless there is some overriding objective like victory in war, a plan tends to reflect the objectives of the institutions that participate in the plan, to express the various interests of the plan’s constituencies.
In other words, consumer sovereignty in a planned system is rare because the people who draw up the plan are strongly influenced by the people who carry it out.
In peace-time, without external stimulus of war, decisions about what is ‘needed’ for defence tend to be taken by the ‘experts’, generally those who have gained their formative experience in the armament sector.
Such decisions tend to be ‘autistic’ — the outcome of the institutional interests of users and producers.
Because the Soviet Union has always lagged behind the United States, technologically, the need for any particular weapon system has been assessed against an idea of what the Soviet Union might possess when the weapon system eventually, five or ten years later, enters operational service.
This idea owes more to the subjective imagination of the designers than to any hard knowledge about what is happening in the Soviet Union.
The designers are the products of their military-industrial environment.
The competition between prime contractors propels technology forward as each corporation attempts to offer something better than its competitor and something the military, at least in the US, can justify to Congress.
And yet this technological dynamism is confined within certain limits — limits that are defined by the stability of military and industrial institutions, a stability which is guaranteed by the planning system.
The form and function of the weapon system have not changed much since 1945.
All weapon systems have more destructive weapons, particularly missiles, and greatly improved capabilities for communication, navigation, detection, identification and weapon guidance.
Each contractor has designed, developed and produced one weapon system after another, each representing an incremental improvement on the last.
For Boeing, the Minuteman Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile followed the B52 strategic bomber, which followed the B 47.
Between 1952 and 1979, Newport News’s yards have produced no fewer than nine aircraft-carriers, each bigger and better than the last, bow to stern in the best follow-on tradition.
And in Europe, Dassault has produced the famous series of Mirage fighters; Westland has manufactured one helicopter after another; and the submarine which the British propose to construct in order to launch the American Trident missile is likely to continue a tradition at Vickers Barrow that goes back, with interruptions, as far as the 1890s.
The idea that each weapon system must have a follow-on has become self-perpetuating.
Each corporation has a planning group whose sole function is to choose suitable successors for weapons currently being produced and which maintain close contact with consorts in the military.
In actual fact, because of the intimate relationship with the armed services it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Even so the system has not worked smoothly, and it has taken periodic industrial crises to initiate the full range of new projects.
Such was the crisis which followed the winding down of the Vietnam War in the early 1970s.
The pressure on the defence budget which we are now witnessing is partly the result of projects initiated during that period.
As weapon systems approach the limits of technology, they become increasingly complex and costly.
Although the basic technology of the weapon platform may not have changed much, such improvements have often entailed the incorporation of very advanced technology,g. radical electronic innovations such as microprocessors, or nuclear power for submarines, and this has greatly increased the complexity of the weapon system as a whole.
And as the weapon system becomes more complex, more labour and materials are required for development and production, greatly increasing the total cost.
The weapon systems of the 1970s represent what one might describe as a quantum leap in expense and grotesque elaboration.
It will involve the biggest construction programme in the history of the United States.
The obese Trident submarine, which is too big to get out of the channel where it was built, will cost much the same.
The cost problem facing the United States military is growing worse and no relief is in sight.
The so-called ‘bow wave’ of future procurement costs is growing beyond the point of reasonableness.
Current procurement programs are estimated to total about $725, billion.
If these costs are spread over the next ten years (a conservative projection) the annual average of $72-5 billion will be more than twice the current funding levels.
Yet many people, and not just those who question the whole basis of modern strategy, are beginning to wonder whether the extra money will buy any real increase in military utility.
For example, the development of naval aircraft and submarines has meant that speed is no longer important for surface ships.
The cost, complexity and size of modern weapon systems consequent upon the so-called improvements in performance characteristics may turn out to be a positive liability.
In the hostile environment of the modern battlefield, where the accuracy and lethality of all munitions have greatly increased, size and vulnerability go hand in hand.
Complexity greatly increases unreliability, reduces manoeuvrability and flexibility, and creates enormous logistic problems.
The United States Air Force’s First Tactical Air Wing, whose motto is ‘Readiness is our Profession’, recently failed a test given by the Air Force’s Tactical Command to see if it was ready to mobilize for a war in the Middle East.
Only 23 of the 66 F 15 aircraft were ‘mission capable’ because of engine and parts failures, lack of spares, shortages of skilled technicians, etc. — and these problems are not untypical of Western weapon systems in general.
Likewise, cost is a disadvantage because of the high attrition rates of modern warfare and because budgetary limitations lead to savings on such essentials as ammunition, fuel, spares, military pay, training, etc.
The huge support systems and the overburdened centralized command systems associated with the modern weapon system are very vulnerable and could be easily disrupted in a war.
Indeed, the experience of war in Vietnam and the Middle East — the problems of vulnerability, logistics, communications, etc. — has called into question the whole future of the weapon system.
Destructiveness and effectiveness are no longer synonymous — if they ever were.
The degeneracy of the weapon system is not without its effects on Western economy and society as a whole.
As an object of use, the weapon system is the basis of military organization both within individual nations and within the alliance as a whole.
The dominance of American weapon systems reflects the dominance of American strategic thinking and the American defence industry.
The proposals for groundlaunched cruise missiles could be interpreted as an attempt to reassert that dominance.
As the military rationale for such systems becomes more and more remote and rarified, so their usefulness in holding together, as it were, the Western alliance becomes more open to question.
As an object of production, the weapon system is part of modern industry and its development has to be understood as consequence and cause of broader industrial tendencies.
In a capitalist system, the market mechanism ensures rapid technical change.
As production processes are adapted to meet changing demands, the whole economic structure undergoes radical alterations.
Companies, industries, sectors and regions rise and fall according to the dictates of the market.
As the product ofa semi-planned sector, armaments can interrupt this process.
In so far as they guarantee the stability of military-industrial institutions, of the major corporations, armaments can help to alleviate crises.
That same stability has the effect of freezing industrial structure and postponing change.
In so far as armaments are themselves subject to the capitalist dynamic they can also drag the economy along their own technological cul de sac, passing on the degeneracy of overgrown trend innovation.
In effect they can preserve and even extend industries that would otherwise have declined and at the same time fetter the emergence of new dynamic industries.
This is one reason for the persistence of mechanical engineering and shipbuilding in Britain or the automobile and aircraft industries in the United States.
The absorption of resources by these declining sectors, the distorting effects of armament-induced ways of thinking about technology on new as well as older industries, are among the factors which help to explain the backwardness of arms-intensive economies like Britain and the United States compared with, say, West Germany and Japan.
The armament sector in the Soviet Union could be described as the inverse of the Western armament sector.
On the supply side, arms are produced by the same kinds of enterprises that characterize the centrally planned economy as a whole.
Unlike those in the West, research institutes, design bureaux and production plants are organized as separate entities under the control of nine different defence ministries.
The stability of these institutions, together with their suppliers, is guaranteed by the system of planning and budgeting.
Unlike in the West, where competition, the pressure for technical advance, the winning or losing of contracts may lead to the amalgamation of design teams and prime contractors and to massive shifts in the composition of subcontractors, the various industrial organizations are assured of a steady flow of work.
Armaments in the Soviet Union are privileged products; it is often said that the armament sector is the only sector in the Soviet system which enjoys consumer sovereignty, and this is evident in the priority system.
The armament sector receives the best machinery and parts; it can commandeer scarce materials; defence employees earn higher incomes and obtain better non-monetary benefits; requests and orders from the administration tend to be dealt with more quickly.
Many commentators have remarked on the unusual degree to which the consumer can ensure that specifications are met and can overcome resistance to demand-induced changes.
In general, these programmes were a response to developments in the West, which was always one technological step ahead of the Soviet Union.
Hence, because of the degree of consumer sovereignty, the armament sector can represent a mechanism for change in the Soviet system.
This was certainly the case in the 1930s, when military competition with Germany could be said to have been the overriding objective of the Soviet planning system.
It can be argued that it was through the armament sector that the economy was mobilized.
Disarmament The weapon system is the basis of modern military organization.
It holds together the two great military alliances and divides East from West.
And yet, paradoxically, the sector which produces the weapon system is also the conceptual link between the two societies.
For it introduces an element of planning into the capitalist system; it thus helps to stave off crisis but, at the same time, slows down change.
And it introduces an element of competition into the Soviet Union, inserting a mechanism for change.
In the past, the armament sector may have worked quite well in blunting some of the contradictions of each society.
The declining military effectiveness and growing cost of armament are gradually undermining the political weight of the superpowers and sapping their economic strength.
The crisis of the armament sector has thrown up new forms of conflict and protest.
The crisis has drawn a response from within the armament sector, as well as elsewhere, from soldiers illprepared for new forms of conflict and from workers in the defence industry, concerned about employment.
But it could alternatively initiate a process of disarmament by channelling the new protests into positive directions.
Most disarmament efforts are aimed at the role of armaments as objects of use.
To reverse effectively the armament process, we also need to undermine their role as objects of production.
But we also need to change the military-industrial culture which created them.
In a sense, any form of economic development represents a continual process of conversion — of finding new products and phasing out old ones.
The conversion from arms to peaceful production would be merely one aspect of this process.
The capitalist economy depends on the market as a method of allocating resources.
It involves anarchy, dislocation, structural unemployment and periodic crises.
The alternative is the central planning mechanism of the socialist countries which leads to rigidity because biases in government reflect vested bureaucratic interests.
It thus avoids crises but, at the same time, is much more resistant to change than is the capitalist system.
The conversion from war to peace needs to be seen not as the technical process of converting swords to ploughshares, but as a social process of finding a new mechanism for the allocation of resources.
These have become what one might call quasi-weapon systems — similarly elaborate and expensive, with, in the end, similar economic consequences.
Further, these products could never provide perfect substitutes for armaments since they do not command the same urgency.
It would be difficult to justify increased expenditure on space or artificial hearts in times of economic recession.
Conversion needs to be seen as a way of creating a new economic system which would minimize those problems that create opportunities for conflict and the pressure for armaments.
Such a system would combine the positive elements of planning with positive elements of free enterprise, instead of, as in the armament sector, the negative elements of both.
The Western armament system, as we have seen, is characterized by planning on the demand side and competition on the supply side.
The Western form of military technical change, the outcome of this system, is transferred to the Soviet Union through the consumer sovereignty that is the unique characteristic of the armament sector in the Soviet Union.
What is needed is a system of consumer sovereignty in which the consumer is not a military establishment engaged in a competitive arms race but an ordinary person — in other words, planning, under democratic control.
A sturdy democracy originates in popular movement, even though such movements must eventually find an institutional expression.
Already, trades unions in the defence industry in Britain, West Germany, the United States, Italy and Sweden have begun to express interest in the idea of conversion.
This interest has proceeded farthest in Britain, where the workers of Lucas Aerospace and Vickers have earned a world-wide reputation for their proposals and campaigns to achieve socially useful production.
Neither the market mechanism nor central planning has proved very efficient at marrying social need to available resources.
The alternative is to propose products which emanate from direct contacts between producers and consumers.
In developing their ideas, the unions found it necessary to develop links with unions in supplier industries and with consumer organizations.
For example, proposals by Rolls-Royce workers for gas turbine propulsion for merchant ships turned out to be an oversophisticated, marginally useful suggestion.
More importantly, it provides a more effective method of putting political pressure on management and the government.
Many of the ideas clash with priorities currently established by the government, which tend to reflect existing vested interests.
Hence the shop stewards proposed energy conservation equipment and alternative forms of energy based on wind or waves; yet official energy priorities stress North Sea oil, coal, and nuclear energy.
They also proposed new kinds of rail vehicles or ways of revitalizing Britain’s canal system; yet transport policy places the emphasis on roads rather than railways or canals.
The workers have consequently joined forces with organizations like the anti-nuclear energy movement or Transport 2000, which lobbies against the unplanned growth of the automobile infrastructure.
On more mundane levels, unions in British Leyland pressed their management to purchase a scrap metal baler, one of the ideas put forward by the Vickers Shop Stewards.
These informal alliances between producers and consumers could provide the basis for future planning agencies which would reflect a different set of social priorities from those that currently hold sway.
Ideally, these links should be international, for there is always the risk that social criteria for resource allocation could turn out to be national, and hence divisive on a global scale.
At both Vickers and Lucas Aerospace, some international links have been forged.
They have proposed various kinds of equipment for irrigation and for water purification.
Lucas Aerospace workers have discussed the possibility of adapting a road/rail vehicle they have invented for use in Tanzania and Zambia with the governments of those countries.
The Lucas Aerospace workers have actually achieved some success in pressing their management to undertake the manufacture of socially useful products.
For the first time, workers are inserting their own criteria, as both producers and consumers, into the choice of products.
They are, in a sense, developing a new mechanism for conversion, which, if it spreads, could change the composition of power in existing institutions — local councils, regional development councils, the Industrial Manpower Commission, the Atomic Energy Commission, for example — and which could eventually be embodied in a new set of planning institutions which set priorities according to the social needs of consumers and which guarantee stable, although mobile, employment.
Any campaign for disarmament must join forces with workers in the defence industry in demanding conversion.
Conversion — along with other more traditional disarmament issues — could build upon the growing fissures within the armament system and direct current frustrations towards disarmament rather than war.
Conversion would thus be seen as a way of achieving disarmament rather than a thorny problem to be solved after the politicians had finally willed the reduction of armaments.
Conversion would not just be a matter of turning swords into ploughshares.
It would be a matter of creating a new mechanism for the wider process of economic conversion, matching the desperate needs of the modern world with resources that are either misused or not used at all.
It could thus undermine the political and economic basis for armaments in advanced industrial countries and it would help to overcome the structural problems, weaknesses and divisions of different economic systems.
Report to the Congress of the United States by the Comptroller General, PSA D-80-6, November 1979, 3 6.
Economic and social difficulties in advanced industrial countries, crisis, militarism and war in the third world compound the political tensions that fuel a demented arms race.
In Europe, the main geographical stage for the East-West confrontation, new generations of ever more deadly nuclear weapons are appearing.
For at least twenty-five years, the forces of both the North Atlantic and the Warsaw alliance have each had sufficient nuclear weapons to annihilate their opponents, and at the same time to endanger the very basis of civilized life.
But with each passing year, competition in nuclear armaments has multiplied their numbers, increasing the probability of some devastating accident or miscalculation.
As each side tries to prove its readiness to use nuclear weapons, in order to prevent their use by the other side, new, more ‘usable’ nuclear weapons are designed and the idea of ‘limited’ nuclear war is made to sound more and more plausible.
So much so that this paradoxical process can logically only lead to the actual use of nuclear weapons.
Neither of the major powers is now in any moral position to influence smaller countries to forgo the acquisition of nuclear armament.
The increasing spread of nuclear reactors and the growth of the industry that installs them, reinforce the likelihood of world-wide proliferation of nuclear weapons, thereby multiplying the risks of nuclear exchanges.
An increasing proportion of world resources is expended on weapons, even though mutual extermination is already amply guaranteed.
Generations have been born beneath the shadow of nuclear war, and have become habituated to the threat.
Meanwhile, in a world living always under menace, fear extends through both halves of the European continent.
The powers of the military and of internal security forces are enlarged, limitations are placed upon free exchanges of ideas and between persons, and civil rights of independentminded individuals are threatened, in the West as well as the East.
We do not wish to apportion guilt between the political and military leaders of East and West.
Both parties have adopted menacing postures and committed aggressive actions in different parts of the world.
We must act together to free the entire territory of Europe, from Poland to Portugal, from nuclear weapons, air and submarine bases, and from all institutions engaged in research into or manufacture of nuclear weapons.
We ask the two superpowers to withdraw all nuclear weapons from European territory.
In particular, we ask the Soviet Union to halt production of SS 20 medium-range missile and we ask the United States not to implement the decision to develop cruise missiles and Pershing I1 missiles for deployment in Western Europe.
We also urge the ratification of the SALT II agreement, as a necessary step towards the renewal of effective negotiations on general and complete disarmament.
We appeal to our friends in Europe, of every faith and persuasion, to consider urgently the ways in which we can work together for these common objectives.
We must commence to act as if a united, neutral and pacific Europe already exists.
We must learn to be loyal, not to ‘East’ or ‘West’, but to each other, and we must disregard the prohibitions and limitations imposed by any national state.
It will be the responsibility of the people of each nation to agitate for the expulsion of nuclear weapons and bases from European soil and territorial waters, and to decide upon its own means and strategy, concerning its own territory.
These will differ from one country to another, and we do not suggest that any single strategy should be imposed.
But this must be part of a trans-continental movement in which every kind of exchange takes place.
We must resist any attempt by the statesmen of East or West to manipulate this movement to their own advantage.
Our objectives must be to free Europe from confrontation, to enforce detente between the United States and the Soviet Union, and, ultimately, to dissolve both great power alliances.
In appealing to fellow-Europeans, we are not turning our backs on the world.
In working for the peace of Europe we are working for the peace of the world.
This appeal will achieve nothing if it is not supported by determined and inventive action, to win more people to support it.
We need to mount an irresistible pressure for a Europe free of nuclear weapons.
We do not wish to impose any uniformity on the movement nor to pre-empt the consultations and decisions of those many organizations already exercising their influence for disarmament and peace.
We invite your support for this common objective, and we shall welcome both your help and advice.
Johnson had later been apprehended by the FBI, and sentenced to twenty-five years in prison.
Spivy, director of J-3 division, had been organizing for the ‘defence’ of his European allies.
The documents, it explained, appear to contain over 2,800 targets — possibly double that number — throughout Europe and parts of the Middle East.
The weapons designated for this work ranged from 2°5 kilotons to 1-4 megatons.
Curious observers will note, so prolific was the armoury by the time of the early sixties, that it was thought prudent to assign it to such hitherto unanticipated targets as bridges and motorway junctions.
Up to the mid-1g60s the United States had enjoyed a preponderating lead over the USSR in the numbers and refinement of its nuclear weapons.
What was not public was the information that much of this ‘retaliation’ was designed to forestall any regrettable tendency among allies or neutrals to be over-run.
But the proportion of the allied populations scheduled for similar elimination was not public knowledge during the years of those calculations.
But from what is publicly known it is clear that Europe is in a far worse position at the beginning of the eighties than was even secretly thinkable twenty years ago.
It was as early as the mid-1950s that so-called ‘tactical’ nuclear weapons were brought into widespread deployment in Europe.
By 1960 the USSR had an answering arsenal, all capable of targeting on European cities.
Overall, by 1978, the equipment of the world’s armies was costing substantially over a billion dollars a day, and the ‘overkill capacity involved had become quite staggering.
But the sinister leapfrog between Eastern and Western weapons developments was producing an even more sinister jump in the established theory of mutual deterrence.
In the late seventies, that large part of the world production of atomic explosives which was sited in Europe included, in Central Europe alone, 7,000 American and probably 3,500 Russian ‘tactical’ warheads, with a destructive potential at least fifty times that of all the weapons used in the Second World War, the Korean War and the war in Vietnam combined.
The conventional notion of deterrence had always been wrapped in swathes of assurances by its proponents that the actual use of nuclear weapons was unthinkable.
But in today’s world, nuclear forces in the superpowers are at near parity, so that nowadays 7Jime magazine offers up the pious hope that, next time, both parties might blink at once.
Since we must still presume that neither major power really wishes to destroy the world, we may begin to understand why more and more weight has therefore been placed on the notion of ‘theatre’ weapons, which, it is canvassed, might be actually employed without annihilating the whole of civilization.
This is the unlooked-for transformation which has come over the logic of deterrence.
It followed the development of highly accurate, adaptable and lethal weapons delivery systems.
It was not long, however, before smaller nuclear weapons of various designs were produced and deployed for use in what was assumed to be a tactical or theatre war.
I do not believe that any scenario exists which suggests that nuclear weapons could be used in field warfare between two nuclear states without escalation resulting.
There is no Marquess of Queensberry who would be holding the ring in a nuclear conflict.
I cannot see teams of physicists attached to military staffs who would run to the scene ofa nuclear explosion and then back to tell their local commanders that the radiation intensity of a nuclear strike by the other side was such and such, and that therefore the riposte should be only a weapon of equivalent yield.
If the zone of lethal or wounding neutron radiation of a socalled neutron bomb would have, say, a radius of half a kilometre, the reply might well be a ‘dirty’ bomb with the same zone of radiation, but with a much wider area of devastation due to blast and fire.
Once we have seen the trend involved in reasoning about theatre war we cannot fail to draw some very unpleasant conclusions about it.
First, if Mountbatten and Zuckerman are right, any ‘theatre’ in which such weapons of whatever provenance are used will be eliminated.
Second, the corollary is that if there is any meaning in the restriction implied in the concept of ‘theatre’ weapons, it is not that they will be selective within a particular zone, but that they might possibly be unleashed in one comparatively narrow area rather than another wider one.
It rather implies that there has been a mutation in the concept of deterrence itself, with grisly consequences for us.
In fact, deterrence is now so very costly that ‘conventional’ responses are becoming impossible, to the point where even superpowers find themselves stalemated unless they are willing to discover means of ‘conventionalizing’ and then actually employing parts of their nuclear arsenals.
If the powers want to have a bit of a nuclear war, they will want to have it away from home.
If we do not wish to be their hosts for such a match, then, regardless of whether they are right or wrong in supposing that they can confine it to our ‘theatre’, we must discover a new initiative which can move us towards disarmament.
New technologies will not do this, and nor will introspection and conscience suddenly seize command in both superpowers at once.
But another part of the response must involve a multinational mobilization of public opinion.
In Europe, this will not begin until people appreciate the exceptional vulnerability of their continent.
One prominent statesman who has understood, and drawn attention to, this extreme exposure, is Olof Palme.
Granted, the general assumption seems to be that any potential military conflict between the superpowers is going to start someplace other than in Europe.
But even if that were to be the case, we would have to count on one or the other party — in an effort to gain supremacy — trying to open a front on our continent, as well.
As Alva Myrdal has recently pointed out, a war can simply be transported here, even though actual causes for war do not exist.
Basing himself on this recognition, Mr Palme recalled various earlier attempts to create, in North and Central Europe, nuclear-free zones, from which, by agreement, all warheads were to be excluded.
Today more than ever there is, in my opinion, every reason to go on working for a nuclear-free zone.
The geographical area closest at hand would naturally be Northern and Central Europe.
But although the goal of the UN Special Session was ‘general and complete disarmament’, as it should have been, it is commonly not understood that this goal was deliberately coupled with a whole series of intermediate objectives, including Palme’s own proposals.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of agreements or arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the zone concerned, and the full compliance with those agreements or arrangements, thus ensuring that the zones are genuinely free from nuclear weapons, and respect for such zones by nuclearweapon States, constitute an important disarmament measure.
The process of establishing such zones in different parts of the world should be encouraged with the ultimate objective of achieving a world entirely free of nuclear weapons.
In the process of establishing such zones, the characteristics of each region should be taken into account.
The States participating in such zones should undertake to comply fully with all the objectives, purposes and principles of the agreements or arrangements establishing the zones, thus ensuring that they are genuinely free from nuclear weapons.
States of the region should solemnly declare that they will refrain on a reciprocal basis from producing, acquiring, or in any other way possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices, and from permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons on their territory by any third party and agree to place all their nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
Article 63 of this final document schedules several areas for consideration as nuclear-free zones.
They include Africa, where the Organization of African Unity has resolved upon ‘the denuclearization of the region’, but also the Middle East and South Asia, which are listed alongside South and Central America, whose pioneering treaty offers a possible model for others to follow.
This is the only populous area to have been covered by an existing agreement, which was concluded in the Treaty of Tlatelolco (a suburb of Mexico City), opened for signature from February 1967.
There are other zones which are covered by more or less similar agreements.
Conservationists will be pleased that they include Antarctica, the moon, outer space, and the seabed.
One is that the effectiveness of the agreed arrangements is often questioned.
The other is that if civilization is destroyed, the survivors may not be equipped to establish themselves comfortably in safe havens among penguins or deep-sea plants and fish, leave alone upon the moon.
If we are agreed that ‘it does not matter where the bombs come from’, there is another question which is more pertinent.
Clearly, highpriority targets are all locations from which response might otherwise come.
This would not in one step liquidate the alliances, or end all the tension.
But it would constitute a significant pressure on the superpowers, since each would thenceforward have a priority need to target on the silos of the other, and the present logic of ‘theatre’ thinking would all be reversed.
None of this would lift the threat of apocalypse, but it would be a first step in that direction.
As things are, we are in the theatre, and they are hoping to be able to watch us on their videos.
Nuclear-free Zones in Europe If Europe as a whole has not hitherto raised the issue of its possible denuclearization, there have been a number of efforts to sanitize smaller regions within the continent.
The idea that groups of nations in particular areas might agree to forgo the manufacture or deployment of nuclear weapons, and to eschew research into their production, was first seriously mooted in the second half of the 1950s.
The proposal was discussed in the Disarmament Sub-Committee of the United Nations, but it got no further.
But afterwards the Foreign Secretary of Poland, Adam Rapacki, took to the Twelfth Session of the UN General Assembly a plan to outlaw both the manufacture and the harbouring of nuclear arsenals in all the territories of Poland, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal German Republic.
Rapacki’s proposals would have come into force by four separate unilateral decisions of each relevant government.
Enforcement would have been supervised by a commission drawn from NATO countries, Warsaw Pact adherents, and nonaligned states.
Inspection posts, with a system of ground and air controls, were to be established to enable the commission to function.
Subject to this supervision, neither nuclear weapons, nor installations capable of harbouring or servicing them, nor missile sites, would have been permitted in the entire designated area.
Nuclear powers were thereupon expected to agree not to use nuclear weapons against the denuclearized zone, and not to deploy their own atomic warheads with any of their conventional forces stationed within it.
The plan was rejected by the NATO powers, on the grounds, first, that it did nothing to secure German reunification and, second, that it failed to cover the deployment of conventional armaments.
In the beginning, nuclear stockpiles would be frozen at their existing levels within the zone.
Later, the removal of these weapon stocks would be accompanied by controlled and mutually agreed reductions in conventional forces.
Meantime, in 1957, Romania proposed a similar project to denuclearize the Balkans.
In the same year the Chinese People’s Republic suggested that the Pacific Ocean and all Asia be constituted a nuclear-free zone, and in 1960 various African states elaborated similar proposals for an All-African agreement.
In 1962 the Polish government offered yet another variation on the Rapacki Plan, which would have maintained its later notion of phasing, but which would now have permitted other European nations to join in if they wished to extend the original designated area.
In the first stage, existing levels of nuclear weaponry and rocketry would be frozen, prohibiting the creation of new bases.
Then, as in the earlier version, nuclear and conventional armaments would be progressively reduced according to a negotiated timetable.
The rejection of this 1962 version was the end of the Rapacki proposals, but they were followed in 1964 by the so-called ‘Gomulka’ plan, which was designed to affect the same area, but which offered more restricted goals.
Although the main NATO powers displayed no real interest in all these efforts, they did arouse some real concern and sympathy in Scandinavia.
As early as October 1961, the Swedish government tabled what became known as the Undén Plan at the First Committee of the UN General Assembly.
This supported the idea of nuclear-free zones and a ‘non-atomic club’, and advocated their general acceptance.
Certain of its proposals, concerning non-proliferation and testing, were adopted by the General Assembly.
But the Undén Plan was never realized, because the USA and others maintained at the time that nuclear-free zones were an inappropriate approach to disarmament, which could only be agreed in a comprehensive ‘general and complete’ decision.
In 1963, President Kekkonen of Finland called for the reopening of talks on the Undén Plan.
Finland and Sweden were both neutral already, he said, while Denmark and Norway, notwithstanding their membership of NATO, had no nuclear weapons of their own, and deployed none of those belonging to their Alliance.
But although this constituted a de-facto commitment, it would, he held, be notably reinforced by a deliberate collective decision to confirm it as an enduring joint policy.
The Norwegian premier responded to this démarche by calling for the inclusion of sections of the USSR in the suggested area.
As long ago as 1959, Nikita Khrushchev had suggested a Nordic nuclear-free zone, but no approach was apparently made to him during 1963 to discover whether the USSR would be willing to underpin such a project with any concession to the Norwegian viewpoint.
However, while this argument was unfolding again in 1963, Khrushchev launched yet another similar proposal, for a nuclear-free Mediterranean.
The fall of Khrushchev took much of the steam out of such diplomatic forays, even though new proposals continued to emerge at intervals.
In May 1974, the Indian government detonated what it described as a ‘peaceful’ nuclear explosion.
This provoked renewed proposals for a nuclear-free zone in the Near East, from both Iran and the United Arab Republic, and it revived African concern with the problem.
Probably the reverberations of the Indian bang were heard in New Zealand, because that nation offered up a suggestion for a South Pacific free zone later in the same year.
Yet, while the European disarmament lobbies were stalemated, the Latin American Treaty, which is briefly discussed above, had already been concluded in 1967, and within a decade it had secured the adherence of twenty-five states.
African pressures for a similar agreement are notably influenced by the threat of a South African nuclear military capacity, which is an obvious menace to neighbouring Mozambique, Zimbabwe, and Angola, and a standing threat to the Organization of African Unity.
In the Middle East, Israel plays a similar catalysing role, and fear of an Israeli bomb is widespread throughout the region.
Apart from a thin scatter of neutrals, Europe is the seed-bed of alignments, and the interests of the blocs as apparently disembodied entities are commonly prayed as absolute within it.
They displace the constituent patriotisms of the member states with a kind of bloc loyalty, which solidly implies that in each bloc there is a leading state, not only in terms of military supply, but also in terms of the determination of policy.
Economic competition divides the West, which enters the latest round of the arms race in a prolonged and, for some, mortifying slump.
In the East, divergent interests are not so easily expressed, but they certainly exist, and from time to time become manifest.
For all this, subordinate states on either side find it very difficult to stand off from their protectors.
The European Appeal It was in this context that, at the beginning of 1980, the Russell ‘Foundation joined forces with a variety of peace organizations in Britain (CND, Pax Christi, the International Confederation for Disarmament and Peace, among others), to launch an appeal to do precisely this.
This was then circulated very widely in Europe, as a result of which a completely new draft was prepared incorporating the ideas of correspondents in many different countries, in Northern, Western, Southern and Eastem Europe.
The appeal then took on its final form after a meeting in London in April 1980 at which French, British, West German and Italian supporters were present.
The appeal was announced at the end of that month and signatures were still being canvassed both in Great Britain and the rest of Europe up to Hiroshima Day, 6 August 1980.
The initial response to what has already become known as the European Nuclear Disarmament movement was quite extraordinary.
It quickly became very evident that European hesitations about nuclear armament were in no way less developed than the reservations of Africans, Latin Americans, or Asians.
The composer Peter Maxwell Davies joined the painter Josef Herman with Moss Evans, the trade unionist.
But the growing swell of support included hundreds upon hundreds of other names which were not household words, but which reflected a real movement of opinion.
Dockers, coalminers, students, housewives, busmen and computer programmers sent in the printed appeal forms, often afhixed to home-made petitions listing dozens of adherents.
It was not possible and not desirable for British activists to attempt to prescribe what courses of action were most relevant in all the different nations of the continent.
Not only were the individual states within the two blocs quite different, one from another, but each of the important neutral states was caught in its own distinct patterns of affinities, from Yugoslavia, the inspirer of nonalignment, to Spain, recently emancipated from Franco, and poised before a variety of choices about possible future alliances.
Already, as the British supporters were agreeing on their first moves, mass movements had grown up in Holland, Belgium and Norway.
The Dutch and Belgians were able, in the swell of protest, to postpone the implementation of the NATO agreement to install cruise missiles in their countries.
Very soon after the agreement of the text of the END appeal, contact between these movements took place.
Key activists from each of these countries joined with eminent political leaders in supporting the proposed European Convention.
In France, the EN D initiative was announced by Claude Bourdet, the editor of Témoignage Chrétienne, at a national press conference in Paris.
Similar announcements were made in Oslo and Berlin at the same time, and a variety of organizations and individuals gave their support.
An international meeting was organized by the Spaniards to ventilate the argument in the days before the recalled Helsinki Conference on European Security, scheduled to meet in Madrid in November 1980.
An early signatory was Professor Giovanni Favilli, the scientist who had, from the beginning, been actively involved in the Pugwash movement.
He happened to be a councillor in the city of Bologna, and in association with the town’s mayor he convened meetings in all of the quartieri of the region to consider the appeal, which was widely published in the civic journal and elsewhere.
A Greek committee began to take shape, with the support of Andreas Papandreou, the opposition leader, amongst others.
Portuguese supporters included Ernesto Melo Antunes, the former Foreign Minister, and Francisco Marcelo Curto, Minister of Labour in the Soares government, alongside other members of parliament.
By mid-July there were supporters in Finland and Turkey, Hungary and Czechoslovakia, Ireland and Sweden.
The roll-call reached from Roy Medvedev in Moscow to Noel Browne, the former Health Minister, in Dublin, and from Gunnar Myrdal in Stockholm to ex-premier Hegedus in Budapest.
This extensive response was reinforced by the encouragement of lateral appeals, in which groups in one country made direct appeals to similar groups in another.
Several members of the British TUC General Council wrote to their opposite numbers in France, and a British trade union group soon received approaches from Oslo.
As the campaign gathers weight, this kind of initiative will gain importance, because it does not depend upon centralized networks of communications, and is a practical, as well as a symbolic, assertion of a growing all-European consciousness.
Already efforts are being made to ‘twin’ Cambridge and Siena, which share the burden of proximity to planned bases for cruise missiles.
Such arrangements are possible at a multiplicity of different levels, between women’s groups, churches, civic and industrial bodies, students, or a wide variety of sporting and cultural associations.
The problem of East-West contact may be especially susceptible to this kind of treatment.
At the same time, the appeal insists that We must resist any attempt by the statesmen of East or West to manipulate this movement to their own advantage.
No one should seek to minimize the difficulties involved in this task, but neither should they be magnified.
Whilst there are big differences in the scope for public campaigning in countries which support the two blocs, it is not possible for governments in either camp to ignore the pressure of informed and active public opinion in the other, still less when vast movements are developing a deliberate policy of lateral appeals to one another, and to the peoples of those nations as yet uninvolved in the campaign.
The movement for European nuclear disarmament, then, is a movement to transform the meaning of these blocs, and to reverse their engines away from war.
Ifall previous efforts to denuclearize parts of Europe have foundered, this is in large measure because they have all been partial, and thus incapable of mobilizing counter-pressures to dual bloc dominance on a wide enough scale.
The paradox is that if President Ceausescu still wants a nuclear-free Balkan Zone, or if President Kekkonen still aspires to a denuclearized Baltic, then both are more likely to succeed within the framework of an all-European campaign than they would be in separate localized inter-state agreements.
But it will only come about when vast pressures of public opinion have come into being; and these pressures must and will develop, albeit unevenly, over the continent as a whole.
Europe is not Antarctica, but Europeans have at least as much right to live as do Penguins.
For this reason, people must begin to organize, in what will become a gigantic transnational campaign.
A panEuropean Convention will only be the beginning, although the organizational problems involved in this first step are large enough in all conscience.
There must be meetings of many kinds, demonstrations, cross-frontier marches, concerts and festivals.
When they reach out to each other, this daunting labour will shrink to human size, and solving it may then become simplicity itself.
In schools and colleges, village halls and municipal libraries, in cathedrals and in Quaker meeting houses, I have been involved in meetings innumerable and meetings usually also encouraging and stimulating.
This experience is my only qualification for contributing a small section to this book.
If I do not claim expertise in much else I think I have some knowledge of how those who bother to come to such meetings are reacting to the new move of militarism which is so obvious in so many aspects of the life of this country.
Quite probably they are not representative of the country as a whole, whose citizenry still believes, for the most part without question, whatever the opinion-formers want them to believe, and who still think that the more weapons we have then the safer we must all surely be.
It is therefore well that from time to time I also visit semi-hostile groups who manifestly look on an evening with a middleaged peacenik with the honest joy of those on their way to a bull-fight.
The more upsetting for them often enough because the bull is not meant to know more about the contest than the matadors.
The issue of disarmament, low key for so long, has now come well up front in the public mind.
They want to know if we are going to have another war and what such a war might mean for them and their families.
They are ashamed of the waste of the arms race and they are deceived no longer by the dogma, acceptable in pre-1939 days, that more weapons means more security.
That our government has over-reached itself on the civil defence issue is clear enough.
There is too much in H MG’s ill-fated Protect and Survive that is simply too ludicrous for it to be credible.
Therefore the fears that the recent wave of civil defence propaganda, and it has been nothing less, have aroused may be expressing themselves in growing interest in the disarmament issue itself.
I have been asked many times about these extraordinary civil defence recommendations, and it has not been too difficult to make clear that it is just because we are a nuclear weapon state that we are at risk as targets in a nuclear war.
As soon as she realizes that civil defence in a nuclear weapon state, especially if seriously undertaken, is actually a new twist in the spiral of the arms race, then she too starts to think in disarmament terms.
The recent spate of nuclear weapon computer errors in the USA has certainly also brought many into the disarmament lobbies.
People are not stupid and they know perfectly well that the more complicated a mechanical and electrical system is, the more likely it is that one day things will go wrong.
Finally, I cannot help feeling, because it is so often mentioned, that people have now a far better idea of the cost of the arms race than ever they had before.
At a time of national affluence, real or imagined, it may not seem to matter much what slice of the weekly wage is on its way to the ‘defence’ budget.
When all seems to be going downhill, when productivity is more important than people, when hardly an aspect of the social services has not had its cuts, then there has to be very powerful justification for a weekly national average expenditure of almost £3.80 per person on the military.
It seems to me to be dawning that the threats of ‘the enemy’ are not as credible as the government would like them to be and that it has occurred to many that preparing to blow up a great deal of the civilized world may not in fact be the best way of protecting anyone against anything.
The shrill voice of the cold war has been heard incessantly on our media, and the result in some sections of the population has not been acquiescence or a war-fighting mentality, but horror and indignation.
I do not know how otherwise to explain not only many meetings, but meetings packed out time and time again.
In East Anglia, no fewer than thirty groups and committees sprang up in the first six months of 1980.
Alongside the new interest there are a number of other general public attitudes and preoccupations.
Those of us working in a realistic way for a more international, less violent, less paranoid world, directed not to the peace of status quo but peace of social justice, ought to take note of them.
One of his basic commonsense rules was that in any process of change you have to start from where people are rather than from where you would like them to be.
In practical terms my experience tells me that people are ‘at’ a number of basic positions.
Secondly, the belief that military violence is ultimately the only way of dealing with international conflict is very deeply rooted.
One is that in 1939, owing to the misguided efforts of pacifists and peacemongers, we in this country were militarily defenceless.
That the results of World War II appear to have little enough to do with its original aims seems hardly to have been noticed.
Our treaty obligations to Poland somewhere got lost down the labyrinthine ways of six years of what turned out on both sides to be total war.
The idea that military ‘balance’ actually means something in the era of nuclear overkill still goes very deep.
Not surprisingly, since it is regularly presented as the justification for spending more and more and more.
Beyond ‘balance’ lies the belief that the Russians are not only aggressive and expansionist but also the possessors of a much greater military arsenal than our own.
No serious international survey would support such a position and I believe that our ‘free’ media bear a very heavy responsibility for its uncritical acceptance of NATO propaganda on this issue.
The SS 20, evil monster of the European war theatre, has been made the centre of a giant numbers fraud.
However, most people do not find it difficult to believe that, should the horrific day of a nuclear war come, it will not much matter to the Soviets where a missile came from if it lands on their territory.
More than that, it takes only a little unravelling of propaganda to demonstrate that ifall ‘theatre’ systems are actually counted, submarineand carrier-based as well as land-launched, then there is something like parity in theatre warheads between NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
It is, of course, perfectly easy to understand that to be able to kill only four times, rather than five times, is not actually much of a disadvantage.
People know too that something funny must be going on if the cruise missiles, so desperately necessary for our well-being, are not due to arrive for another three years, and yet still those horrible Russians don’t attack.
In short, there are three major popular positions — the sense of helplessness, the acceptance of war as a normal conflict-solving system and the fears of vast Soviet superiority.
In crude ways, no doubt, and without any suggestion that all the answers are in my hands, at least I have tried to grasp these problems.
It is a mystery to me, one, I suspect, that is becoming a mystery to many more people, that the military solution should be thought of as the normal method of conflict resolution at international level.
At village, town or city level, or within all the interstate organizations from cricket clubs to trade unions, to threaten to kill someone, let alone to actually kill them, is not only abnormal, however lively the dispute, but actually criminal.
Somehow, at nation-state level and upwards there is a blockage in the pipe.
All those concerned with the extension of the rule of law into international society must be about the business of exploring alternative defence systems.
But part of it also must be the exploration of other kinds of defence, both violent and non-violent.
If the present system is more of a risk than a protection, and the UN Special Session on Disarmament in 1978 said no less, then to get away from that system just makes sense.
In the hour or so of question time at most disarmament sessions there is not much chance to do more than shake a few cherished dogmas.
One does not have to serve on a Parliamentary Select Committee to know that the largest and best equipped military force in the area did nothing to protect the Shah of Iran.
It vanished like the morning mist in front of popular indignation and religious feeling.
It is not necessary to be an international financier to know that the war in what was Rhodesia was prolonged for years by companies which flouted trading sanctions with British government connivance.
It is not necessary to be a Free Presbyterian to note that in 1974 the British Army was roundly defeated in Northern Ireland by nearly a million people who refused to do anything — a refusal which frustrated the will of the Westminster parliament to which they all claimed to be loyal.
The Swiss, the Swedes, the Costa Ricans, the Yugoslavs and the Vietnamese have all in their different ways things to tell us about alternative defence.
So have a long list of authors from Dr Gene Sharp to Sir Stephen King-Hall.
The East-West campaign for a European nuclear-free zone is part of that process.
It is the problem of the horrible Russians, ruthless, expansionist, over-armed, untrustworthy ... you have heard it all.
We judge ourselves by our stated intentions, but they are to be judged by their capabilities. once heard a most distinguished bishop who looked at a CND crawd one Easter.
The churches have played a very sad part in stimulating the demonic content of the arms race.
If there is to be any progress, then we have both to try and understand the fears of the ‘enemy’ and to judge his behaviour by standards which we apply equally rigorously to ourselves and to those with whom we ally ourselves.
There is a very long list of countries with whom we have economic and military alliances and to whom we supply weapons who also have a dreadful record of violating human rights.
If Afghanistan is a shocker, then so was the inhuman war in Vietnam, and so is the present Indonesian invasion of East Timor, the South African military occupation of Namibia, the Turkish invasion of Cyprus and the collapse of constitutional government in Chile.
To understand that the Soviets also have fears is a great step forward.
Once we realize that the West has effectively made a military alliance with the Chinese, who regularly talk about war with the Russians, we can understand that the Russians might well have reason for a certain amount of additional anxiety.
There are, of course, Eastern bloc sources of information equally and often more obviously subject to the same process.
The argument about balance is often not over fact, but over which facts are to be selected in presenting a general picture.
Happily, the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute produces an annual digest that is quite within the capacity of anyone who can work out how to fll in a passport application or an income tax declaration, and it is provided with nice little graphs as well.
Perhaps the first response should be that the signs of history being made are all around us.
Social change happens, and its direction depends often enough on the energy, sacrifice and determination of quite small groups of people.
The iniquities of nineteenth-century industrialism did not come to an end (in so far as they have in this country) by chance.
That women have a great deal more in the way of equal opportunity now than they had at the turn of the century is no accident.
The overseas aid movement, a fragile post-World War II creation, partly radical, partly remedial, had to be built.
The awareness created by Amnesty that torture and imprisonment without trial are as much features of the nonaligned countries and the West as of the East, and that there are ways of working to end such abuses wherever they occur, is a very recent initiative indeed.
They range far and wide, from the United Nations Association to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, from the Peace Pledge Union to the Campaign against the Arms Trade, from Pax Christi to the Fellowship of Reconciliation, from the World Disarmament Campaign to the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom.
Some are affiliates of political parties whilst some are outside any party framework.
All are actively engaged in the business of public education about the risks and the costs of the arms race.
It does not require some special or unusual skills to collect petition signatures against the arms race and British participation in it from your friends and neighbours.
It is not so hard to arrange a fund-raising jumble sale or some other cashproducing event.
It is not difficult to hire a film like The War Game, still banned from T V showing by the BBC which commissioned it.
Out of date now in some technical respects, The War Game is still the most powerful piece of motivation in the business.
But it would be quite impossible to list the actions and endeavours open to ordinary people from different walks of life aimed at increasing knowledge of the facts and the perils of the arms race.
Few of us are without involvement in organized groups of one sort or another.
Few people have no connection of any sort with the educational system, either as parents, teachers, pupils or administrators.
They can pass on myth and prejudice, violence and national militarism, or they can more constructively transmit a message of internationalism, alternative defence and the heroism of the pioneers of constructive social change.
No secondary school should be without a specific course on international institutions and the history and consequences of the arms race.
Hundreds of thousands of generous people are today involved one way and another in the work of the development agencies — Oxfam, Christian Aid, War on Want and so many others.
All responsible development agencies know that the education of the public here about the causes of third world poverty is an essential part of their work.
Yet the unmistakable fact that the arms race, now running at about $550,000,000,000 a year, is the greatest single cause of world poverty has yet to become a serious part of development agency programmes.
I could, of course, fill a book with groups where the antiarms race message should be heard and acted upon.
Trade unions, political parties, medical associations, legal groups , the ecology and energy lobbies — the list is as long as one cares to make it.
From a personal point of view I think with a heavy heart especially of the churches.
The Society of Friends apart, how little they have so far done and how tied they are to national prejudices, how wedded to a moral theology of war that makes counting angels on the tips of needles sound by comparison a most constructive pastime.
So often, at so many meetings, the frustrated laity of the mainstream churches are there but their clergy not.
The splendid, careful British Council of Churches resolution of November 1979 opposing the renewal of Polaris is a model ofits kind.
This, however, is only a ragbag of ideas, not an exhaustive manual of ‘what I can do’ prepared for every situation.
Once that threshold is passed, there is no doubt whatever that your road will open ahead of you.
It may mean that you will be thought odd, indeed a little cracked, perhaps.
It is more than possible, however, that you are actually a symbol of sanity in an international society of manipulated sleepwalkers and that the future of the world is in your hands.
Further Reading Compiled by Harry Dean There is a large and varied body of literature concerning armament and disarmament.
The following list of journals, books and official publications is not a comprehensive bibliography, but simply a guide to some of the more interesting and useful material available.
A new journal intended to ‘probe and understand the nature of arms control’, published three times a year.
From Frank Cass & Co., Gainsborough House, Gainsborough Road, London E11. £18a. for individuals.
Published quarterly by Nonviolent Alternatives, Kerkstraat 150, B-2000 Antwerp, Belgium. $6a.
Proceedings of the Medical Association for the Prevention of War.p; free to members.
Reports, analysis and news of the movement. £1-50a. , from 29 Great James Street, London WC1.
State Research is ‘an independent group of investigators collecting and publishing information from public sources on developments in state policy’, including internal security and the military. £4a. for individuals from g Poland Street, London WCr.
Messelson, M., and Julian Perry Robinson, ‘Chemical warfare and chemical disarmament’, Scientific American, April 1980.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute , Sveavagen 166, S-113 46 Stockholm, Sweden.
In addition to a number of books on many aspects of armaments and disarmament, SI PRI publishes annually the S/ PRI Yearbook of World Armaments and Disarmament.
W MSE is an annual digest listing and comparing national military and social expenditures.
His thanks also to Silviu Brucan, Judith Reppy and William Sweet for comments on an earlier draft.
Bruce Kent is the General Secretary of CND and a former chairman of War on Want.
She is the author of The Game of Disarmament and the first winner of the Einstein Peace Prize in 1980.
Ron Smith is Reader in Applied Economics, Birkbeck College, and author of ‘Military Expenditure and Capitalism’, Cambridge Journal of Economics , and of several other articles on the economics of military spending.
He wishes to thank Norman Minaur, Dan Smith and Dorothy Thompson for help with an earlier draft and all connected with the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation, which, together with C ND, published the first version of Protest and Survive as a pamphlet.
In one forum after another, expert contradicts expert, and the man in the street looks on in nervous uncertainty.
To those who feel that nuclear matters should not be left to the battling experts, NUCLEAR POWER offers essential support.
In lively everyday language it describes nuclear technology and how it works — and sometimes fails to work.
The author surveys the development of nuclear power worldwide, and delineates the issues, not only technical but also economic, social and political, which now preoccupy the policymakers.
An extensive annotated bibliography provides guideposts to further investigation by the concerned reader.
A Pelican Original THE ENERGY QUESTION Second Edition Gerald Foley with Charlotte Nassim This book surveys the world’s energy resources and their potential for development.
Living standards and social development possible for any society depend on the input of energy; even the world’s food supplies depend on the ability of modern farming to turn fossil fuels into food.
It is now clear that if some of our plans for the future are fulfilled then others must be abandoned.
It is neither optimistic nor pessimistic — but it enables the reader to form his own judgements.
NEW STATESMAN A Pelican Original DISASTERS The anatomy of environmental hazards John Whittow A disaster is categorized as such only when there is loss of human life or property.
A volcanic eruption, a massive earthquake or a landslide in barren terrain is not a disaster.
Yet over the last four or five years rarely a month has gone by without a major disaster being reported from somewhere in the world — the Bangladesh cyclone; the Huascaran avalanche in Peru; the Nicaraguan earthquake; the Turkish earthquake; the Honduras floods spawned by Hurricane Fifi; the Sahel drought of North Africa.
The disastrous year of 1976 appeared to be the final cataclysm, when earthquake shocks, volcanic eruptions, tidal waves, hurricanes, floods, blizzards and drought combined to give the impression that thé earth was in turmoil, the day of reckoning was at hand.
John Whittow not only summarizes the disasters which have caused such widespread death and destruction but also explains, as far as possible, why they occur and whether man is partly to blame.
Trevithick Inflation, accompanied by economic disarray and popular despair, continues to offer a major challenge to the credibility of economic science.
As the flow of explanations bids fair to match the growth in the money supply, Dr Trevithick gives in this Pelican Original — an introductory guide to the problems, the jargon and the panaceas.
The characters in his drama include Milton Friedman, Keynes, Hayek and the ‘New School’ at Cambridge, while the plot encompasses the Phillips Curve, trade union power, helicopter money, rational expectations, floating currencies, incomes policy, import controls and indexation. {n this new edition the author brings us up-to-date with such things as Friedman’s Nobel Lecture in 1977, and Lord Kaldor’s injection of a new convincingness to the cost-push theory, as well as analysing the latest manifestations of current monetarist orthodoxy in both Britain and North America.
INTERNATIONAL PEACEKEEPING United Nations forces in a troubled world Anthony Verrier Irish squaddies are shot in a squalid encounter in the Middle East and the newspapers are pious for a week until the next bit of international ‘news’ displaces them.
Unlovely acronyms, ONUC, UNFICYP and UNIFIL are trotted out for a bemused and bored public, but they conceal a real and urgent, a terrifying and crucial, a randomly violent half-war.
These are the visible bits of an astonishing and largely hidden military crusade.
It is the struggle for peace waged, sometimes uncertainly but unceasingly, by the United Nations Peacekeeping Forces.
The funny armies made up of amazing mixtures of people speaking lots of different languages under, for most of them, an alien command, keep warring factions apart.
This book describes the ways these unsung heroes work, shot at by all but unable, for the most part, to shoot back.
He shows how the strategies work or are improvised and, above all, how vital is their role in international politics.
Cruise missiles deployed in the UK are seen by the British government as preserving our ancient independence in the face of the 'monstrous' Russian threat.
In this book E, P Thompson and his colleagues challenge the grounds of this assumption and show that use of the ownercontrolled missiles by the United States ina ‘limited' war will mean the complete destruction of the 'theatre', of Western Europe and of Great Britain in particular.
Cruise missiles which enable attack deep within the Soviet Union will at least allow the United States to fight on our soil rather than on theirs.
That, combined with the belligerent beliefs of many Western governments, the paranoia of Russia and the bureaucratization of mass destruction, turns what used to be a remote possibility into a frightening probability.
This book examines the politics of what is being done and, in the face of the British government's extraorainary pamphlet PROTECT AND SURVIVE, urges immediate and determined opposition.
