These hard-working cartographers and analysts collectively contributed to the Dayton Peace Accords, Guide to Study of Intelligence leading to a temporary, but significant, suspension of regional violence.
Combining people and talent from eight agencies and offices the following year into the National Imagery and Mapping Agency reflected initiatives underway, but also spoke to the wisdom of asking those involved in defense imagery and mapping, including DMA, to emulate the Dayton The Evolution of Geospatial success on a more permanent basis.
Intelligence and the National Of course, the agency’s enabling legislation Geospatial-Intelligence Agency simply brought people together and initially could do nothing more.
For many months after the creation of NIMA, imagery analysis and geospatial informaby Dr.
Gary E Weir tion services within the agency remained in separate and culturally distinct worlds.
Seeing the potential in integration, a number of senior leaders recomSomething Happened in Dayton mended strongly that the agency integrate the talents assembled under the NIMA umbrella.
Strong cultural O n 1 November 1995, President Clinton called identities on all sides at times made the idea of caron the warring factions in Bosnia to end tographers and other geospatial specialists regularly the conflict that had cost over 300,000 Serb, emulating the Dayton experience a very difficult and Croat, and Muslim lives since 1991.
He invited their almost unlikely prospect. representatives to come to Wright-Patterson Air Force Recognizing possibilities in the combination, Base in Dayton, Ohio, to negotiate an end to the ethnic several people stepped forward to bridge the gap. discord.
In one case, a DMA veteran and senior cartographer At Dayton the United States delegation relied on a technical felt that she might help.
Having worked for a time in team led by the Defense Mapping Agency and private industry on one of the first automobile navithe United States Army Topographic Engineer Center.
These gation system studies, the need to integrate skills and agencies drew together a support team of over fifty personnel to achieve a goal seemed natural.
Working individuals who digitally mapped the disputed Balkan with the NIMA Production Cell at the Washington areas in near real-time to assist the diplomats in their Navy Yard, she gained approval for a plan to blend the deliberations.
The digital renderings included up-toanalytical skills applied to imagery with those of the date terrain visualizations with overlaid cultural and geospatial arts and sciences.
In 1999, she began to economic data relating to potential boundaries. hire cartographers, geographers, and other geospaUsing automated cartography, computer-assisted tial professionals for placement in some of NIMA’s map tailoring, and spatial statistical analysis, the team imagery analysis offices. regularly furnished fresh maps reflecting territorial In the process, all concerned began to appreciate dispositions negotiated less than thirty minutes more fully the cultural divide between the world of earlier.
To that point in time terrain, giving them a vivid and virtual experience cartographers lived by the routine of a production of the space.
In at least one instance, this three-dischedule, discrete well-defined projects each with a mensional experience proved crucial in persuading neat beginning, middle, and end.
In short, entered a new era. they “owned” their areas of specialty, their tasks, their analysis, and the process of reporting.
They thought out loud, collaborated regularly, and directed their GEOINT EVOLUTIONARY BENCHMARKS own work to serve the mission at hand.
She wanted that ownership, the freedom and responThe Vietnam War sibility it offered, and the same flexibility for people in her own field in collaboration with the imagery world.
Long before the United States became engaged The bloody conflict in Chechnya presented the in the Vietnam conflict, the Army Map Service , perfect opportunity.
Louis Aeronautical Chart and Information war, NIMA’s Eurasian Branch turned potential into Center , the National Photo Interpretation practice.
In 2000, those leading the integration initiaCenter , and the Navy Hydrographic Office, tive asked a Bethesda-based cartographer to join the all NGA predecessors, collected data and prepared Eurasia group to merge his talent with their imagery aeronautical and maritime charts, maps, and analyses analysis.
The newcomer to the Eurasia Branch had only for that region. recently joined NIMA via Rand McNally and a senior During a tense summer in 1954, for a moment colleague felt that he had “a sense for cartography.
The Army Map Service provided analyses of the terOnce augmented by a geospatial professional, the rain around the cities of Hanoi and Saigon to provide Eurasia group managed to set cultural barriers aside, American policymakers with critical intelligence on listened, shared, and proceeded to issue intelligence the challenges of intervention.
Division of the country products that had their customers immediately clamfollowed the French defeat in 1954.
As one senior NIMA manager rememparties provided the Army Map Service with aerial bered it, Eurasia’s new cartographer “was a rock star:” photographs permitting the first complete and accuhe provided the magic ingredient that brought the rate maps of Vietnam. effort and the output to another level.
Intellectual In 1959, President Eisenhower requested U-2 misinsight into a crisis situation expressed in a tight, sions over Vietnam and the surrounding region, and complementary symphony of image and idea quickly tasked NPIC with an evaluation of the results.
This analysts also visited the region to estimate the needs pioneering group, one among many, arrayed their generated by the growing conflict between North and early products on a display surface at the Navy Yard South Vietnam.
In begun conducting bomb-damage assessments, idena visit to NIMA during this period, Director of Central tifying possible targets, and producing intelligence Intelligence George Tenet lingered for a considerable products. time over the intelligence on the Wall of Fame, viewing As demands for targeting information grew, this imagery enhanced by geospatial context with the along with American involvement on the side of South distinct feeling that the future lay before him.
Starting Vietnam, the Aeronautical Chart and Information with eight embedded geospatial specialists, within six Center deployed a new database targeting system, months those leading the integration initiative had which enabled American and allied pilots to evade little trouble placing eighteen more in various imagery Communist air defenses more effectively and to place offices in NIMA. their ordnance on target more accurately.
Exploiting The success of the Navy Yard Eurasia Branch photography from the new SR-71 Blackbird, analysts eroded cultural barriers and promoted professional could identify the exact coordinates of newly-found integration.
Coming together as NIMA certainly cretargets and send that information to allied forces for ated the critical mass of talent and insight, but people action. willing to trust, collaborate, and experiment provided With the beginning of American ground combat the catalyst.
Journal of United States Intelligence Studies Fall/Winter 2015 largely upon World War II data.
Further analysis branded the Army’s appreciation of the river deltas fell far short. objects as Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles.
Consequently, over the next three years the Naval Photographs also revealed missile installations in a Oceanographic Office completed comprehensive significant state of readiness with supporting transgeodetic, coastal, and harbor surveys of that complex porters, command and control quarters, cables, and coastline using a series of survey vessels.
In the seven weeks since late August, during December 1966, the Naval Oceanographic when NPIC analysts made the first photo identification Office established a branch in Saigon to provide of the surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba, just 90 miles updated maritime charts and publications for use by off the coast of Florida, the Soviets had managed to local fleet and Marine Corps units in their blockade, ship and assemble an arsenal of offensive weapons interdiction, and naval air support actions. with nuclear capability.
Increasing American military involvement Using irrefutable photographic evidence, and required accurate information about the names of with confidence in the analysis, President Kennedy and natural and cultural features in Vietnam and adjoining his closest advisors developed a strategy that gave the countries, for application to maps and charts and for United States the moral high ground and incomparable operational purposes.
The United States Board on Geographic situational awareness in the ensuing public confronNames, tation with part of the t he Soviet Interior Union.
In a Departnat ionally ment’s United States televised Geologiaddress, the cal Survey, President provided revealed guidelines publicly the for st a nex istence d a rd i zi ng of Soviet names.
The of fensive AMS survey weapons parties capable of collected striking name data de ep i nt o in the field the United for topoStates. graphic He c a l le d maps of for t heir Vietnam immediate a nd ot her removal, count ries, and he and similar declared a staffs at the Naval Oceanographic Office and ACIC “strict quarantine” on all shipments by air or sea to provided names for maritime and aeronautical charts, Cuba.
Intense diplomatic exchanges followed, in both respectively. official and unofficial channels.
On October 24, half of the twenty-five Soviet vessels In late August 1962, NPIC, using data from U-2 en route to Cuba either turned back or altered course flights, identified the installation of Soviet missile sites to avoid the United States Navy’s positions around the island. in Cuba.
On October 15, President John F Kennedy and Meanwhile, President Kennedy and Soviet Premier his civilian and military advisors learned that photos Nikita Khrushchev exchanged diplomatic notes taken the day before revealed the presence of six long, that resolved the conflict.
Journal of United States Intelligence Studies Page 55 withdraw all missiles and related equipment from Basic Doctrine, appeared in July 2004.2 Cuba in exchange for a pledge from the United States The global war on terrorism dramatically not to invade the island.
Only in the 1990s, with the changed the nature of NIMA’s priorities and prodopening of documents related to Soviet policy, did the ucts.
Recognizing that new threats could occur at any world learn that the Soviet military in Cuba actually did time or place, Director Clapper decided both to make have nuclear warheads at their disposal on the island regional analytic overviews more robust, and to embed and that the commanders in the area had the authority NIMA analysts throughout the Defense Department’s to use them.
Not publicized at the time was President military commands and the Intelligence Community.
The new name Aerial surveillance photography had not only represented the maturation of a new discipline and revealed the initial build-up of Soviet missiles in Cuba; the increased unification of NIMA’s parts. it also revealed the missiles’ state of readiness and, The report by the House-Senate Intelligence Comduring the quarantine, the nature of cargo carried by mittee investigating the September 11, 2001, attacks Soviet ships.
Photographic interpreters once again recommended creating a new Director of National clearly established the critical value of their craft.
Intelligence as the principal intelligence adviser to the president and the statutory intelligence advisor September 11, 2001 to the National Security Council.
On February 17, 2005, them into the Pentagon and two others into the twin President George W Bush named John Negroponte, towers of the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan. former UN Ambassador and United States Ambassador to Iraq, The fourth crashed in Pennsylvania when the passento the post.
By April, Congress confirmed the Director gers resisted and fought their hijackers.
In all, some of National Intelligence, and within months a new 3,000 innocent individuals lost their lives.
Two days later, NIMA welcomed retired Air Force Lieutenant General James R Clapper Jr. as its NIMA becomes NGA second director, succeeding geoThe National Imagery and Mapping Agency spatial pioneer Army Lieutenant General James C officially became the National Geospatial-InKing.
Soon after his arrival, the new director began telligence Agency with the November 24, 2003, to promote products that emerged from a variety of signing of the fiscal 2004 Defense Authorization Bill. new initiatives, like NIMA’s work on Chechnya in The passage of the Homeland Security Act a year 2000.
This ambitious synthesis of source and image earlier clarified the agency’s role in supporting its emerged during General King’s tenure and became national customers and helped strengthen NIMA’s known simply as geospatial intelligence, or GEOINT. relationship with other domestic agencies.
After Among his newly created list of offices was the Office September 11, 2001, the agency quickly began to of Geospatial-Intelligence Management.
Its mission utilize tactics, techniques, procedures, and solutions was to provide the director, in his role as the geospatial it had long used overseas, only now applying them intelligence functional manager for the Intelligence to domestic situations with congressional approval.
The first of these, Geospatial Intelligence overseas authorities to provide maps and geospatial intelligence for training and security at the Winter 1.
Journal of United States Intelligence Studies Fall/Winter 2015 Olympics in Salt Lake City and Turin , forty-six nations.
The same represent the battlefield literally and virtually at each period saw more involvement in newly intensified location provided unprecedented insight into each efforts to protect the president of the United States, mission. the vice president, and other high-ranking officials, and to provide better security for United States military and other Operation Iraqi Freedom government facilities.
On March 19, 2003, the United States, United Kingdom, and other coalition forces began conductOperation Enduring Freedom ing military operations designed to depose Saddam Hussein and deprive the state of Iraq of any weapons The swift military response to the 2001 terrorist of mass destruction it might possess.
OEF’s objectives, as articulated by of diplomatic initiatives, humanitarian relief, and President George W Bush, included the destruction reconstruction efforts.
Commercial imagery aided in of terrorist training camps and infrastructure within defining deployment locations for Patriot missile and Afghanistan, the capture of al Qaeda leaders, and the air defense batteries, assisted in mission planning for cessation of in-country terrorist activities.
In addition the seizure of Kirkuk in northern Iraq, and helped to American participation, the coalition included more locate and characterize minefields along the border than sixty-eight nations, with twenty-seven nations between Iraq and Iran.
It demonstrated that coalition having representatives at the headquarters of the United States forces did not ignite the Baghdad oil fires, and proCentral Command in Tampa, Florida. vided context for decisions to strike or pass on select As OEF began, the Taliban controlled more than Iraqi industrial targets. eighty percent of Afghanistan and seemed poised to The military and humanitarian efforts in Afghanoverwhelm their domestic opponents.
By mid-March istan and Iraq occasioned the largest overseas deploy2002, the coalition removed the Taliban from power ment of NGA and NIMA personnel in the history of the in Afghanistan.
To facilitate arrangements for their overseas navigation data, and geospatial intelligence products tours and ensure efficiency, NIMA established the supplied by NIMA, United States Transportation Command Office of Global Support, initially called the Office addressed all force positioning and most logistical of Deployed and Externally Assigned Personnel, in needs in theater by air.
United States airmen and aircraft, some operating from western Missouri and assisted by both NIMA navigational aids and on-site support, flew the longest combat missions in United States history, some taking more than fifteen hours, and broke another duration record for surveillance missions at twenty-six hours.
The agency also supported extensive use of unmanned aerial vehicles, which permitted around-the-clock surveillance of critical sites, facilities, and troop concentrations.
Rather, NIMA suddenly provided a 1991. critical mass of skills and technologies under a single Babington-Smith, Constance.
American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1985. tion of its craft and product.
Creating NGA acknowledged, in name and in practice, the confluence of Brugioni, Dino.
Random House, 1991. every possible sort of imagery with geospatial, human, Buisseret, David, ed.
Allied Aerial ReconGEOINT demonstrated its unique ability to naissance and Photographic Interpretation on the Western illuminate critical situations in ways that permitted Front—World War I Washington, DC: National Defense Intelligence College, 2006. both intelligent policy decisions and timely action.
My Personal InvolveGEOINT confirmed ethnic cleansing atrocities in ment in the Age-Old Quest for the Size and Shape of the Earth.
Olympics to the disaster of Hurricane Katrina in New Haydon, Frederick Stansbury.
Military Ballooning During the Orleans, NGA provided timely GEOINT products that Early Civil War.
MacMillan Publishing Company, Inc., 1967. reviewing the Katrina disaster response and offering Keegan, John.
Random House, 2003. recommendations for improvement, applauded NGA timeliness during the crisis.
President Thomas Jefferson’s explorers Lewis and American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 1997.
Clark, GEOINT has only recently emerged as a new Pedlow, Gregory W and Donald E Welzenbach.
The CIA and synthesis of extraordinary technologies and valuable the U-2 Program, 1954–1974.
A Pictorial History greater good, the powerful combination of technology of the United States Naval Oceanographic Office from 1830 to 1980.
Journal of United States Intelligence Studies Fall/Winter 2015 Robarge, David.
America’s First Satellite Prothe Director of National Intelligence, Dr.
Central Intelligence Agency, examined the development of hyperspectral science 1995. as an intelligence tool and then for NGA Stanton, William.
The Great United States Exploring Expedition explored the evolution of Activity-Based Intelligence of 1838–1842.
The Story of the Great Pioneers in Cartography—from Antiquity to the Space Age, 2d ed.
