The collapse of communism did not, contrary to what many hoped, lead to East–West detente.
The East–West crisis over Ukraine in 2014 has been the worst since the end of the Cold War.
The question this raises as to how far the period of Soviet rule was a Marxist or a Russian phenomenon is by no means academic.
First, change when it happens in Russia can happen very rapidly, as after Stalin’s death and again in the mid-1980s.
The end of the Cold War resembled a gigantic tug of war in which one side unexpectedly let go, leaving the other side not merely unprepared but caught off balance.
The outside world would lose nothing by preparing a constructive response.
There are very few monographs dealing specifically with attitudes to Russia which are, needless to say, very diverse.
A small number of ‘cultural Russophiles’ learn the language and develop an admiration for the country’s literature.
The arms industry may have an interest in maintaining tension with Russia.
Political scientists and foreign policy advisers wield significant influence.
The public at large depends for its information on the image presented by the media.
More recently the prevalence of lawlessness in Russia has become the despair of everyone.
As a result, there was never a significant pro-Soviet lobby in the West—at least after the 1950s.
International Affairs © 2014 The Royal Institute of International Affairs.
Nevertheless, there is room for a seamless transition from ‘Sovietophobia’ to Russophobia.
Communism has vanished but the images of the Kremlin and the Russian Bear remain.
However, there has at practically all times been a disagreement between doves and hawks as to how best to meet the Russian challenge—whether by dialogue or by pure confrontation.
At a private meeting on 22 March 1956, he said that Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin ‘afforded the United States a great opportunity, both covertly and openly, to exploit the situation in the Soviet Union to its advantage’.3 The existence of Russophobia—that is a disdainful attitude to the country’s people or an unwillingness to treat the country on equal terms—may be hard to document.
There have been times, especially in the 1990s and during the presidency of George W Bush, when the United States seemed unwilling to treat Russia or anyone else on terms of equality.
He intended, he said, ‘to force her off her current beat onto the back streets’.4 Churchill, by contrast, was never a Russophobe.
The Fulton speech has been repeatedly shown on western television screens.
But the praise for Stalin has never been included—a warning against selective history.
For when Churchill spoke of ‘negotiation from strength’ he was serious about the negotiation.
It was Eisenhower, in his farewell address on giving up the American presidency in 1961, who warned against the growing power of America’s military–industrial complex.
Churchill was undoubtedly correct in saying that Stalin desired not war but the fruits of war.
There is credible evidence that Brezhnev was a dove; and it comes from a strongly pro-western insider.
On re-examining western attitudes to Russia of the Soviet Union’ four times) and is rightly blamed for presiding over the political and economic stagnation of Soviet society.
Unlike some of his colleagues, he did not believe in the promotion of world revolution.
He was entirely genuine in seeking a ‘reconciliation’ with imperialism and in seeking a new basis for Soviet–American relations.
At the same time he continued to preach ‘ideological struggle’ in order to maintain the façade of party unity.
Chernyayev believes that had he been in better health he would have vetoed the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
He failed, of course, to foresee the American alarm at Soviet expansion in Africa in the 1970s, which he apparently did see as anti-American.
Soviet and Russian human rights violations were bound to be a source of friction with the West.
Both Europe and Russia are parties to the European Convention on Human Rights which was ratified by the Russian Federation in May 1998.
Support for human rights is, in any case, not the same thing as advocating democracy, as President Woodrow Wilson did.
President Kennedy amended this principle to that of ‘making the world safe for diversity’—since, unlike the Soviet leaders, he wished to avoid the impression of wanting to impose his values on others.
But even here, there is a danger of getting the right answers to the wrong questions.
Here the record is discouraging, as recently shown by the fate of the Arab Spring in Egypt and Syria.
Nevertheless, the hope of a ‘soft landing’ is not as unrealistic as it might seem.
Greece in 1974 had been governed, since 1967, by an oppressive and unmeritorious military dictatorship, but the ruling junta eventually became destabilized by its own incompetence.
It sponsored an attack on the Turkish enclave in Cyprus, thereby provoking an invasion from the Turkish mainland which made the partition of the country virtually irreversible.
As a result the junta was forced to recall Greece’s professional politicians.
The second example is that of Chile in the 1980s, where President Pinochet, faced with economic crisis and massive discontent, eventually, in 1988, held—and lost—a referendum on whether he should remain as president.
In neither case, however, did the existing leaders step down from power.
In Greece, President Gizikhis, the junta leader, stayed on as the transitional president, while Pinochet remained as commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
Both were eventually removed, but their departures were a matter of compromise.
What it actually means is that getting half a loaf can be a first step to getting the whole loaf.
David Wedgwood Benn There is everything to be said for democracy—when it works.
But it does not always work, particularly when the electorate is polarized.
The root cause of the problem lies in the absence of trust between the competing parties.
Stable democracy, so we have argued, is most likely to come not from a grassroots uprising but from change at the top.
It has, however, often been claimed that in a communist-type state such change is impossible, that leaders who have been through the party indoctrination system cannot possibly be agents of change.
It has to be emphasized, however, that the achievement of a ‘soft landing’ does not depend solely on the leadership, however enlightened.
It also requires an intelligent and constructive opposition and may additionally require favourable conditions in the outside world.
In both countries the communist leadership, having lost Moscow’s support, had become unsustainable—but the opposition provided it with a viable exit strategy.
The Solidarity movement in Poland provided a regime in crisis with a negotiating partner.
It reached a compromise involving, not regime change, but partially free elections in which the opposition subsequently won all the contested seats; similarly with the ‘velvet revolution’ in Czechoslovakia, where Vaclav Havel served as a negotiating partner with the regime.
This problem was addressed by South Africa’s former president, F W. de Klerk, in a speech marking the twentieth anniversary of the decision to introduce universal suffrage on 2 February 1990.
White South Africans had for some time become increasingly aware that the apartheid system of minority rule was unsustainable.
But to dismantle it carried serious risks—in particular the possibility of a communist takeover.
This difficulty vanished of course with the disappearance of the Soviet Union.
The withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola and the signing of a peace agreement over Namibia also lessened the whites’ sense of danger.
Meanwhile, a new generation of Afrikaners was becoming increasingly middle class, better educated and therefore alienated from the status quo.
In other words, it was Mandela who provided the government with a viable negotiating partner.
Certainly as far as Russia was concerned, the greatest threat to democracy came not from political reforms as such, but from the danger of economic collapse.
This system, although it delivered certain minimum living standards, had caused increasing public dissatisfaction and had led to artificial shortages.
Radical reform was clearly called for and was increasingly advocated in the Soviet press during the perestroika period.
The subsequent course of events is summarized in a book edited by two Nobel Prize winners in economics, Lawrence Klein and Marshall Pomer, with a preface by another such prize winner Joseph Stiglitz.
In 1990, responsibility for economic aid to the USSR was assigned to the International Monetary Fund and other western financial institutions, which in a report in the autumn of that year, offered help on condition of a ‘big bang’ transition to the market through shock therapy.
They envisaged that this would, in the short run, lead to a fall in output and rise of inflation but predicted improvement ‘within two years’.10 This advice was totally embraced by the post-communist Russian leadership, but its consequences were harsh indeed.
Per capita consumption of meat and dairy products, eggs and sugar declined by 25 per cent during the 1990s and as many as half of Russia’s children were reported to be suffering mental or physical disabilities due to malnourishment.
On top of all that, the inflation and mass impoverishment culminating in the financial default of August 1998 are common knowledge.
Klein and Pomer suggest a number of remedial steps which could have been taken.
Their central argument is that the state, even though it should not try to control everything, does nevertheless play a vital economic role.
For example, state subsidies to enterprises with growth potential could have had a beneficial effect.
Russian businessmen who had gone abroad could have been encouraged to provide work for their compatriots at home.
David Wedgwood Benn by the head of the sociology department of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Mikhail Gorshkov, underlines this point.
Only 14 per cent of Russians supported the idea of a ‘minimum state’ while an overwhelming majority thought that the state should play a key role in both economic and social affairs.
By 1991, however, when the USSR finally collapsed, the consensus among almost all western and Russian political commentators was entirely the opposite.
It was strongly urged that nothing must be done to impede the breakup of the Soviet Union; and that economic aid would merely prop up a bankrupt system.
The prevalent idea seems to have been that of ‘creative destruction’—although it may be doubted whether destruction in itself ever is creative.
When it comes to asking what, if anything, the West can do, the first point is that there are no panacea solutions.
There are, however, a number of avoidable mistakes, for example if Britain were to withdraw from the European Court of Human Rights—supplying Moscow with a justification for doing the same.
What is clear, however, is that he is very unfriendly to the West and that the annexation of the Crimea was a flagrant breach of the UN Charter.
Among the more contentious decisions, there are two in particular which deserve to be singled out.
The first concerns NATO’s eastward expansion in the 1990s into the former Soviet Union.
It might have made sense in the face of a Russian threat but at that time there was no Russian threat.
It was overwhelmingly opposed by Russian specialists in the United States including former hawks.
In reality, it was prompted both in the US and in Europe by domestic considerations.
President Clinton for example needed the support of anti-Russian eastern European émigré voters for the purpose of getting re-elected.
A further aim was to ensure the survival of NATO in the postcommunist era.
Britain and other European countries saw it as a way to make sure that the United States would remain in Europe—and to reassure the eastern European countries recently liberated from Soviet control.
One effect of the expansion was to demoralize the strongly pro-western elite in Russia at that time.
The second contentious decision—which leads back to the core of the present crisis—concerns Ukraine.
In the late 1990s it formed the subject of a deal under which Ukraine renounced its nuclear weapons in exchange for a US-brokered deal guaranteeing Ukrainian sovereignty.
This is confirmed by Strobe Talbott, the architect of the Clinton administration’s policy towards post-Soviet Russia.
Ethnic tension has been absent and (like the relations between England and Scotland) ties have been cemented by centuries of intermarriage.
Furthermore, according to the already quoted survey of 2011, nearly half the Russian public believes the West seeks to weaken their country while a quarter believes the West is indifferent to its fate.
And since the beginning of the crisis over Ukraine, Putin’s domestic approval ratings have soared to unprecedented levels.
For historical reasons, however, the fate of Ukraine has been complicated.
This was because Ukraine fell victim to a whole series of invasions—from the east by the Tatars in the thirteenth century, and subsequently by the Polish–Lithuanian empire which at one time stretched to the Black Sea and in 1611 even captured Moscow.
Only in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries did Russia regain its lost territory.
This lack of natural frontiers, in its turn, provided grounds on Russia’s part for the most cynical realpolitik.
They were never in modern times a threat to Russia, although in both world wars they provided a thoroughfare for German invasions.
Western Russophobia predated the Soviet era by quite some time—and this fact is underlined in Orlando Figes’s recent book on the Crimean War.
In this case, western abhorrence of Russia’s human rights record and fear of Russian expansionism were key factors.
All this predictably fuelled western antagonism, which nevertheless had deeper roots.
Palmerston, among many others, saw this as part of a Russian plan to conquer India and concluded that the only possible response was to dismember the Russian empire, for which purpose the British government supplied arms to the Chechen and other Caucasian rebels.
But this fear was only the culmination of a distrust which had been building up in Britain over many years.
Fears of a Russian conquest of India had been voiced as early as the late 1820s.
The ‘Testament of Peter the Great’ which appeared in 1812 in a French translation claimed that Russia aimed not only to conquer Europe but to dominate the world.
A further important factor in the growth of Russophobia was the role of the British press.
Its distribution had greatly expanded owing to the development of railways—and anti-Russian stories boosted sales.
The Crimean War vividly illustrates how perceptions can be skewed by halftruths, fantasy and false information.
A Russian invasion of India was unlikely, to say the least, if only because the invaders would have come to grief in Afghanistan.
The Russian people were the victims of barbarism rather than its perpetrators.
In the end neither Britain nor Russia achieved its ostensible war aims.
Palmerston failed to dismember the Russian empire—and the Chechen rebellion collapsed following the withdrawal of British support.
Tsar Alexander II, who succeeded his father in 1855, was obliged to sue for peace; this involved among other things renouncing his claim to a protectorate over the Ottoman Christians and agreeing to the demilitarization of the Black Sea, thus depriving his country of an important defensive weapon.
However, following the Franco-Prussian war of 1870, Russia was able to annul these latter provisions.
But to return to the present crisis—even if it proves possible to avert it in the short run, this still leaves the background problem unresolved.
The Kremlin’s response was to revive the sense of threat—a flawed response to an understandable sense of grievance.
Having forced Khrushchev to back down, he chose the path of magnanimity.
Another by-product of the speech was the setting up of a hot line between the White House and the Kremlin as a safeguard against mutual misperceptions.
Confrontation with Moscow may be unavoidable, and indeed justified in the short run even though it would involve Europe in a serious loss of trade.
It is imperative to follow the example of President Kennedy and look further.
And here, the clarification of western attitudes can play an important role.
Some people in the West may simply want to weaken Russia, but others do not, just as some manipulate the human rights issue for Cold War purposes, but others, such as Amnesty International, are very genuinely concerned.
The book’s central concern, as its title implies, is the problem of reconciling political morality with political feasibility—and the authors draw heavily on the ideas of George Kennan, Reinhold Niebuhr, the theologian, and Hans Morgenthau, the political scientist.
All three are associated with the realist school which emphasizes the role of power and national self-interest in international relations.
Morgenthau, for example, insisted that to equate political realism with immorality was itself untenable.
By December of that year, when Russia was in turmoil, they voted by a 90 per cent majority to become independent—with the strong encouragement of Boris Yeltsin.
Their immediate wish in 2014 was to get rid of the Yanukovich government with its proven record of corruption.
In the opinion of a Ukrainian sociologist,20 the mass opposition to the Yanukovich regime may—on both sides of the barricades—have been at least in part a protest against social injustice and kleptocratic capitalism.
Most Ukrainians have no wish to live in a mere buffer state as the victims of a power struggle between other states.
One should never give up the search for a solution acceptable both to Ukraine and to its eastern and western neighbours.
David Wedgwood Benn likely to be slow and uneven, as in the case of the Arab–Israel dispute.
But one hopes at least that western attitudes do not become one of the obstacles.
Many of those who claim to champion democracy are in fact more interested in capitalism, which is not the same thing.
Others are in no way opposed to selling arms to dictators, for purely commercial gain.
