At the time, he was a member of the United States Air Force, based in Okinawa, Japan.
If commanded to do so, O'Hanneson would have had to fire nuclear missiles at the Soviet Union.
For 13 terrifying days in October 1962, it looked as if O'Hanneson might get that order.
The United States had just learned that the Soviet Union was placing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The missiles lay about 90 miles off the coast of Florida, posing a direct threat to many United States cities.
President John F Kennedy threatened to bomb and invade Cuba unless the missiles were removed.
But the Soviets' actions in Cuba--and Kennedy's response--brought the two sides to the brink of nuclear war.
Castro In 1959, revolutionaries led by Fidel Castro toppled a corrupt dictatorship in Cuba.
Soon, Castro alarmed the United States by seizing American-owned businesses.
Declaring himself a Communist, he allied Cuba with the Soviet Union, then the world's most powerful Communist country.
In April 1961, the United States Central Intelligence Agency directed a secret invasion of Cuba.
The invasion was carried out by anti-Castro Cuban exiles at a place called the Bay of Pigs.
Both Castro and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev (KROOSH-choff] feared another United States invasion of Cuba.
The United States had placed nuclear missiles in Turkey, near the Soviet border.
Khrushchev felt that positioning Soviet missiles in Cuba was a way to even the balance.
Such missiles could destroy Atlanta, Dallas, or Washington, D.C., in a matter of minutes.
Some of Kennedy's top advisers favored a surprise air attack, followed by a ground invasion.
But United States military leaders could not be sure that such an attack would knock out all the missiles.
They might even launch nuclear missiles and bombers from the Soviet Union.
He ordered the Navy to set up a quarantine around Cuba, to halt the shipment of military equipment.
Americans learned about the crisis for the first time, as the President described his decision to quarantine Cuba.
Supermarket shelves emptied of food, water, and other supplies, as families prepared for nuclear war.
Then, one by one, nearly every Soviet ship either slowed or reversed course.
Kennedy planned to invade Cuba if the Soviet missiles were not removed.
The day started with a United States spy plane straying into the Soviet Union's air space, raising alarm on both sides.
Later, a Soviet officer disobeyed orders and shot down a United States spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot.
Despite the pressure to go to war, Kennedy and Khrushchev both wanted to avoid conflict without looking weak.
The two leaders exchanged letters and sent secret messages through aides.
In exchange, the United States would privately pledge not to invade Cuba.
On October 28, Khrushchev announced that the missiles in Cuba would be dismantled and sent home.
The Cold War lasted another 28 years, but the two sides never again came so close to catastrophe.
Background ""There can be no long-term living with Castro,"" wrote General Maxwell Taylor, a chief adviser to President John F Kennedy, after the Bay of Pigs incident.
From then on, the White House redoubled its efforts to depose the Cuba n leader.
Kennedy approved a secret CIA program of sabotage and political propaganda in Cuba, designed to weaken support for Castro.
For Castro and his ally, Nikita Khrushchev, this amounted to a provocation that couldn't be ignored.
Have students write an imaginative diary entry around the events of October 1962.
WEB SITES * Memories of the Crisis news.bbc.co.uk/1 /hi/world/americas /2317931.stm * State Dept.
Photos future.state.gov/educators /slideshow/cuba.html QUICK QUIZ * Write the letter of the correct answer on the line before each question. --11.
A. became allies C continued the Cold War B. built the Berlin Wall D ended Communism COPYRIGHT 2007 Scholastic, Inc.
No portion of this article can be reproduced without the express written permission from the copyright holder.
