The immediate effects were that missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, and the United States secretly agreed to withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
By June 1963 the first telephone “hotline” was installed for the leaders of the superpowers to directly communicate.
It led to better communication between the leaders of the two countries.
The United States and the USSR also decided to reduce their nuclear programs.
With tactical nuclear weapons on the island, America would have actually lost nearly all of the 180,000 troops in the invasion as well as all the Marines still on Guantanamo Bay.
The United States entered the Vietnamwar because it was worried about communists gaining power in the conflict between the North Vietnam and the South Vietnam.
Ultimately, the United States failed to achieve its objectives and a peace agreement was signed.
Khrushchev, on October 26, sent a letter to Kennedy in which he stated that he would remove missiles from Cuba if the United States would no attack Cuba.
The crisis demonstrated that the United States needed to have the best delivery systems for its nuclear weapons and needed to be able to use these weapons in order to deter Soviet aggression.
Tension increased when a U2 plane was shot down by a Russian missile and the pilot killed.
Basically if there was no “Cold War” Europe would have fallen to the Soviet Union and World War 3 would have started.
Any “Cold War” is better than a “Hot War” look at Iraq and Afghanistan those wars have lasted over 15 years and still going.
Since then, Cuba has not been known to possess a nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons program.
The resolution of the crisis boosted Kennedy’s status because Kennedy had forced the Soviets to yield to United States pressure.
After years of warfare, an estimated 2 million Vietnamese were killed, while 3 million were wounded and another 12 million became refugees.
The war killed an estimated 2 million Vietnamese civilians, 1. million North Vietnamese troops and 200,000 South Vietnamese troops.
The final outcome of the Vietnam War was that North and South Vietnam were united under the Communist North in 1975 despite the best efforts of American servicemen who left the area following the Treaty of Paris in 1973.
The correct answer among all the other choice is D United States naval blockade of Cuba.
Khrushchev accepted Kennedy’s demand to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Why did the Soviets put missiles in Cuba quizlet? -The Soviet Union put the missiles in Cuba to prevent a Nuclear War. -The Soviet Union used checkered shirts to sneak thousands of troops to Cuba. -Missiles were sent to Cuba to increase the strike efficiency and quality.
