In the first two parts of this series, we considered th~ ;ole,ofAmerican Sl(]INT during the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba during the ~ummer and early fall of 1962;\ Although the conventional buildup was easily (jiscovered, thltransfer and installation of intermediate and medium-range ballistic missiles had notbeen discovered until a U~~ reconnaissance flight of 14 October.
The/Kennedy administration responded by declaring a maritime quarantine around Cuba nn/22 October.
The Soviets, although on.alert, never forward deployed their military. \ // \ lu.s.
From this intercept, NSA determined that the communists were monitoring United States (and NATO) readiness levels and force deployments, much like their United States counterparts were watching the communist forces.
The material reveals that the communist cryptologists, especially the Soviets, had a fairly good analytic insight into United States communications.
Their traffic analytic and cryptanalytic efforts provided substantial information to Moscow regarding United States force posture.
Interestingly, it was during the initial buildup that the Cuban COMINT elements and the GRU made their first big discovery.
It is not clear if these were the CIA-run networks or the rather haphazard operations of anti-Castro groups.
The agents were reporting the movements of Soviet military personnel throughout Cuba, and the construction of military barracks and sites for missile launchers.
Though some of the messages incorrectly reported the locations of the missile bases, and others reported the presence of missiles before any of the SS-4s had been shipped, the very fact that such reports might reach Washington could compromise the Anadyr' operation.
Among other things, the GRU had observed a large increase in military aircraft stationed in Puerto Rico.
It also noted an alarming rise in the number of SAC aircraft put on alert.
The GRU mission in Washington, probably operating a listening post from of the embassy, had overheard orders for senior military officers to be on call if needed at the Pentagon.
Ironically, these disquieting indicators of an increased United States military posture went largely ignored in Moscow.
Merchant ship status reports issued by NSA and field sites never singled out the Alexandrovsk for any special interest or significance.
On 24 October, the GRU in Washington apparently intercepted enough radio and phone traffic to determine that some forces, probably SAC, had gone to DEFCON 2, the next level of alert before hostilities are declared.
This meant that all of that command's missiles and bombers were ready to go; the bombers, in fact, were already airborne and stayed aloft by refueling.
However, this information probably did not reach Moscow until 26 October.
On the morning of 26 October, Khrushchev received more ominous news from Washington and Havana.
Indeed, the plan for a massive air strike, known as Operation Scabbards, was in place and ready to go within twelve hours of the president's order.
The GRU reported that it had obtained information that United States military hospitals had received orders to expect a number of casualties to arrive.
So certain were the Soviets that an air strike against Cuba was imminent that Moscow gave Pliyev permission fire on American aircraft if he believed an attack was under way.
These expectations played a major role in the shootdown of the U-2 that afternoon.
In the end, the GRU appears to have performed fairly well in keeping Moscow attuned to American military preparations.
However, the entire Soviet intelligence structure failed when it came to alerting Khrushchev that the U-2 flights of 14, 15, and 17 October probably detected the missile sites that were being constructed.
However, the secrecy of the Anadyr' plan the Soviet ambassador to Washington was kept in the dark and the refusal to develop a plan if the Americans discovered the Soviet ruse, left Moscow at a severe disadvantage after 22 October.
