The Soviet Union, under Premier Nikita Khrushchev had secretly deployed medium range ballistic missiles and intermediate range ballistic missiles to Cuba with Cuban leader Fidel Castro 's consent.
The missiles which posed a direct threat to U.S cities, military installations and the general population were intended to counter a strategic imbalance between U.S.S.R and U.S incase war erupted, given the ongoing cold war.
The Soviet Union had been motivated to put missiles in Cuba due to a set of problems it was facing at home such as Sino-Soviet dispute, a strategic imbalance with the U.S, high demand in defense and space programs and little foreign aid.
However, after withdrawing the missiles from Cuba and an agreement was reached with U.S, the Soviets accepted President Kennedy 's proposal to ban nuclear testing.
Following the ban, tension began reducing, marking the beginning of the end of the cold war.
Had the crisis not erupted, then chances were that U.S could have attacked Cuba.
President Kennedy 's government had been responsible for the failed 'Bay of Pigs ' in which U.S trained and funded a section of Cubans living in U.S to invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro’s government.
Kennedy and Castro had never been in good terms, with Castro 's governing leaning towards communism.
After the crisis and a promise that U.S would not invade Cuba, no other attempt was made by Kennedy 's or subsequent governments to topple Castro 's …show more content… However, by the end of the 1960s, the Soviet Union was at par with the U.S with regard to military capability, arms control and nuclear might, courtesy of the Soviet Union 's apparent inferior position to U.S during the Cuban crisis.
This advanced strategic military advantage was partly due to the Soviet Union 's space program.
On October 22, 1962, after reviewing newly acquired intelligence, President John F Kennedy informed the world that the Soviet Union was building secret missile bases in Cuba, a mere 90 miles off the shores of Florida.
After weighing such options as an armed invasion of Cuba and air strikes against the missiles, Kennedy decided on a less dangerous response.
It was a showdown between the United States and the Soviet Union, each side fearing what the other was capable of doing.
For thirteen long days, everyone in America was extremely tense and nervous about what would happen.
If even just one missile was launched at the United States by the Soviet Union, World War III would have started.
Both the United States and the USSR the most powerful coutnries in the world with very differing governmental beliefs that caused both nations ""to construe the other as inevitably hostile and, indeed, evil.
The USA maintained good relations with the pro-American dictator Batista.
However, the conflict proved manageable, to all participating sides, as no nuclear war actually occurred.
To evade escalation of the conflict, involved nations were obliged to come to an agreement, and overcome their differences.
The world was divided between these ideologies, with United States controlling the West and the USSR spreading socialism with the Warsaw Pact in the East.
Not only were their ideologies different but they were racing against each other in the field of science.
