Further, Khrushchev promised to respect Turkish sovereignty and borders and thus not to invade or threaten Turkey in exchange for similar pledges from the United States regarding Cuba.
This represented one last try by the Soviet Union to obtain some measure of negotiating success from this crisis.
In this letter, he made scant reference to the 27 October broadcast as he required that work must cease on the weapons sites in Cuba.
His actions and demands suggest he was hoping for a static situation in which he could leverage the crisis for a key concession – a pledge of non-hostility from the United States.
The events that occurred beyond Castro’s purview precluded his ability to successfully leverage the situation.
Castro’s elevation of his air defense response capability led to the only direct casualty of the crisis and a potential catastrophe.
Around noon in Cuba Major Rudolf Anderson was shot down in his U2 while conducting a photoreconnaissance mission.
Anderson’s death prompted the military to call for retaliatory measures and represented the most tenuous time of the entire crisis.
MIG fighters were scrambled to intercept and American escort fighters with nuclear tipped missiles rushed to the U2’s aid to escort it back to Alaska.
Robert Kennedy relayed the sustentative parts of the letter being transmitted to Khrushchev and reiterated that Turkey was not a part of this deal.
Robert Kennedy stressed that “we needed an answer immediately from the Soviet Union.
The United States’ final offer was on the table and there was no more room for stalling.
General Pliyev was aware that Castro ordered his air defense units to fire on United States aircraft and that he believed an invasion was set for the next twenty-four hours.
By 11:00m. in Moscow, Malinovsky responded by saying “I propose to confirm” as he informed the Kremlin.
At noon, Khrushchev approved the order.2 That afternoon in Moscow the Presidium considered their military options and moved to relax the potential for mishap.
Since 22 October, Pliyev had the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons to defend his forces.
Also that afternoon, John Scali met again with Feklisov to inquire of him why there were confusing messages from the Soviet Union.
