Thirteen Days details the many meetings of the John F Kennedy cabinet and Joint Chiefs of Staff during the tense period after the Soviet missile build-up on Cuba was discovered.
Race armament Nuclear war Space race All these are characteristic of the Cold War.
The gap kept widening as a hundred or so new United States ballistic missiles became operational each year, whereas the Soviets could barely produce 25 of them, equipped with rather rudimentary guidance systems.
Then, the CIA found out that Il-28 bombers and MiG fighters were arriving.
By then, their conclusion was that the Cubans were building up an anti-aircraft defence system to Soviet standards.
Confirmation came from the CIA that launch sites were under construction.
Their surface-air SAM-2 missiles could destroy aircraft flying at high altitude.
USS Oxford, fitted with listening devices, patrolled the Cuban zone in order to intercept radio communications.
The NSA detected the presence of airtraffic controllers speaking Spanish with strong Slavic accents.
And yet the CIA persisted in thinking that the Soviets were not prepared to run the risk of a clash by deploying nuclear warheads in Cuba.
But converging information kept coming from other sources, such as the French Intelligence services.
A Colonel Houel informed the Americans that major earthworks were under way in the north of the island, which a United States Air Force spy-plane soon confirmed.
Medium range ballistic missiles with 1000 miles with 3 megatons nuclear warheads.
Discovered by Columbus in 1492, the island remained under Spanish rule until 1898, when it became independent with the help of the United States whose influence became predominant. 40% of the sugar production,. 80% of the island's exports, was under United States control.
At the south-east end of the island, 45 square miles of Cuban territory, 2 The Cuba missile Crisis – Thirteen days were given to the United States in 1903 as a token of gratitude for its help in the war against Spain.
During WWII Guantánamo was strategic in the fight against German submarines.
It is the main US logistical base and training camp in the Caribbean, an essential part of its antisubmarine defence system.
During the missile crisis, it took only a few hours for the 2,811 members of the military personnel's families to be evacuated whilst the garrison was substantially strengthened.
Guantánamo has its own desalination plant and all supplies are shipped from nearby Florida.
In 1953, Fidel Castro, a young nationalist leader helped by peasants, took arms against Batista who was finally ousted in January 1959.
From then on, Cuba became a hot issue in the Cold War, since the Castro revolution challenged United States influence in Latin America where it could easily spread.
On 21 May 1962, Nikita Khrushchev decided to install in Cuba 36 SS-4 medium range missiles with 24 launch vehicles, and 24 SS-5 intermediate range “Skean” ballistic missiles with 16 launch vehicles.
Mig-21 fighter-bombers and long-range 42 Il-28 bombers were assembled.0 anti-aircraft SAM-2 missiles were deployed.
The west coast up to Washington DC could be destroyed with only 5 minutes warning.  80 million American killed, military bases destroyed limiting United States retaliatory options.
Given the distance of 2000 km, this would have required an average speed of 7000 m/s, a speed missiles at that time could not reach.
In May 1960, Cuba and the Soviet Union had resumed diplomatic relations.
In July, Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, by then Castro's second-in-command, declared that Cuba had joined the Socialist bloc.
The medium-range missiles deployed in Cuba would have almost doubled the Soviet offensive force, since most of the United States territory was within range.
United States radars, located in Canada in order to detect an intercontinental Soviet strike over the Pole, would have been unable to detect them.
Having, thus, balanced the scales, Khrushchev could hope for the North Atlantic Treaty be weakened, for the Alliance to be loosened, and for concessions over Berlin.
The Khrushchev plan was approved by the Soviet Defence Council on 24 May, and by Castro on 29 May.
United States influence in the world would be shattered if the Soviets show that they can do whatever they want wherever they want.
In fact, an ICBM missile launched from Moscow could hit Washington DC also.
It was also a question of political and military influence on certain parts of the world.
In America, it would be considered as a Munich attitude, a policy of appeasement which would embolden the Soviets.
In 1962, some of Kennedy advisors even thought that if the missiles were not removed, the President could face an impeachment procedure.
JFK’s father, Joe Kennedy had been an appeaser in 1938, and his sons were always suspect of being like him.
Soviets would attack and invade West Berlin  NATO would be attacked  war But if USA didn’t react, apart the diplomatic consequences, there could be a war anyway.
In fact, the Kennedy administration was sure that the Soviets wanted to get hold of West Berlin, that it was a Berlin crisis.
The soviet plan was to start a confrontation with the USA, on their border.
Cuba wasn’t important, it was just a war camp, a strategic place to install missiles in order to have a diplomatic leverage on the USA to force it to withdraw its soldiers from west Berlin.
Put together different people (congressmen, civil servants from each department, members of the National Security Council, soviet specialists) to think of what to do  called EX COMM The Executive Committee consisted of senior members of the National Security Council established by President Truman in 1947.
Vice-President Lyndon B Johnson from Texas, elected to the House of Representatives in 1937 and a Senator since 1949.
Robert F Kennedy the President's younger brother, and his closest aide.
Kenneth O'Donnell , a member of the President's inner circle, he was a most important adviser, often in the background.
Reputed to have been Kennedy's most loyal collaborator, he advocated a blockade and wrote the statement which the President issued on 22 October.
General Maxwell Taylor , had been Chief of Staff of the United States Army in the Eisenhower administration.
A trusted friend of Kennedy's, he was nominated Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and was a hardliner during the Cuban crisis.
In August 1960, after Cuba joined the socialist bloc, the United States imposed a trade embargo on the island; in October Castro retaliated by nationalizing all United States assets.
On March 17, 1960 the Eisenhower administration agreed to a recommendation from the CIA to equip and drill Cuban exiles for action against the new Castro government.
The CIA began to recruit and train anti-Castro forces in Guatemala Sierra Madre mountains on the Pacific coast of Guatemala.
The CIA was initially confident that it was capable of overthrowing Castro, having experience assisting in the overthrow of other foreign governments such as Iranian prime minister Mohammed Mossadegh in 1953 and Guatemalan president Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán in 1954.
Under Kennedy's orders critical details were changed that removed any chance of success of the mission without United States help.
This failed because the airstrikes were not continued as was originally planned limited by decisions at the highest level of United States government.
Castro also had prior knowledge of the invasion, thanks to KGB agents and had moved the airplanes out of harm's way.
Four 2,400-ton chartered transports transported 1,511 Cuban exiles to the Bay of Pigs on the Southern coast of Cuba.
They were accompanied by two CIA-owned infantry landing crafts , called the Blagar and Barbara J, containing supplies, ordnance, and equipment.
The small army hoped to find support from the local population, intending to cross the island to Havana.
The CIA assumed that the invasion would spark a popular uprising against Castro.
However by the time the Invasion began, Castro had already executed some who were suspected of colluding with the American campaign, and imprisoned the others.
It soon became evident after contact with Cuban reinforcements that the exiles were not going to receive effective support at the site of the invasion and were likely to lose.
Reports from both sides describe tank battles involving heavy USSR equipment.
Kennedy decided against giving the faltering invasion United States air support (though four US pilots were killed in Cuba during the invasion) because of his opposition to overt intervention.
Kennedy also cancelled several sorties of bombings on the grounded Cuban Air force, which might have crippled the Cuban Air force and given air superiority to the invaders.
United States Marines were not sent in, even though there were support ships off the coast ready to land at a moment's notice.
As Castro thought that the United States would try again and intervene directly, he drew closer to the Soviet Union which provided ample economic and military backing.
More longer range missiles have been shipped in Cuba  The whole country (except the western coast) is threatened.
Soviets will react because air strikes will probably kill soviet soldiers.
The army never forgave Kennedy for his attitude during the Bay of Pigs.
They didn’t think it was a Berlin crisis but an opportunity to act against Cuba and Castro.
The American press is sniffing something especially since the army baptised the military exercises in Puerto Rico, ORTSAC Kennedy-Gromyko meeting was planned before the crisis began.
Kennedy took the opportunity to th remind that according to a previous declaration , soviet military assistance is only defensive.
The media were beginning to report troop movement and there were rumours of a possible clash.
The President had accepted the idea that airplanes bomb the missile sites and troops land in case the crisis was not over by the end of the month.
Kennedy was still thinking in World War II terms and had hoped to hide everything.
Beijing used the crisis to challenge Moscow's leadership of the international Communist movement.
The crisis did indeed feed the rivalry between the Soviets and China, as they were both engaged in gaining preponderance in Asia and Africa.
A blockade is an act of war and the USA don’t want to appear aggressive.
A quarantine is a sanitary measure but in facts, the result is the same.
These ships are to be inspected and those carrying missiles or weapons are to sail back.
It stops new missiles coming in Cuba but doesn’t remove those already there.
In case of air strikes, there can be no sneak attack Soviets could decide to launch some missiles instead of taking a chance of loosing them.
The United States base in Guantanamo is evacuated and given back to Castro.
But Kennedy rejected it waiting until Monday to decide quarantine or air strike.
JFK told the three national TV networks that he wanted broadcast time in the evening on Monday.
Until then they were asked to withhold ant information concerning Cuba.
Until then, JFK had kept on his schedule and hadn’t cancelled any meeting in order to avoid arousing nd suspicion.
JFK wanted to be sure that all missiles would be destroyed and he decided to stand all US forces around the world on DEFCON 3.
General Le May had decided to bomb all buildings large enough to hide a missile.
While military forces prepare themselves, the Kennedy administration lost Congress support.
Close-up on Kennedy on a TV screen First words Last words OK everybody I think we’re ready Retaliatory response against the Soviet Union.
When seeing a soviet ship they put on radio contact to ask them to reduce their speed and accept an inspection team on board.
If weapons were found the soviet ship has to turn back or accept to be towed to the next port.
If refusal warning shots were fired before the rudder was shot.  that was the long-time normal procedure during a blockade.
Therefore, Kennedy wanted to be informed of everything and decide each move in case a ship didn’t stop.
But an airforce is ready to respond to any probable attack on this plane.
The army is setting a trap to force the administration to order the air strikes and get rid of the missiles and invade Cuba.
We don’t know today if it’s really true (although the 11 The Cuba missile Crisis – Thirteen days army had a harder position) but in 1962 some people in the White House thought that the army wanted war at any cost.
Triple check what the Chief says and does and make sure nothing happens to the spy plane.
But to take good pictures they had to drop brilliant flares which could be mistaken with bombs.
Organisation of the American States created in 1948 by 21 American states in order to promote democracy and promote human rights.
Quarantine, a concept listed in the OAS pact and less drastic than blockade, did not mean total isolation of the enemy nation.
But quarantine could be considered as an act of war if any state disapproved.
Throughout Latin America there were antiAmerican demonstrations followed by rioting.
But, generally, public opinions could not understand how the Cuban regime could strike an alliance with a superpower.
The media fuelled their doubts, insisting on the danger of nuclear war. rd The quarantine became effective on Wednesday 23 1962.
Cuba remains a member, but its government has been excluded from participation in the OAS since 1962.
In fact, there were 3 submarines equipped with nuclear heads and they were instructed to launch their missiles in case of American attack.
Provoke the Soviets by ordering military exercises next to their vessels They gave the order to go on DEFCON 2  they signalled an escalation unwanted by the Kennedy administration.
Fire the major Chief but that would let think that the invasion threat wasn’t real or that a coup d’etat was possible.
Rally round their allies Accuse the USA of wanting a new war although there were no evidence of missiles in Cuba.
But the representative of Chile gives his time to the USA who present evidences with photos.
The blockade is a language, a new vocabulary, JFK communicating with Khrushchev.
Because the army wanted to attack ( an American small-boat is sent to inspect a Lebanese ship to show the Soviets that they would go on with their policy) whereas the Kennedy administration looked for a peaceful issue.
Consider this deal 25 – Second letter from Khrushchev First image Last image Bob Kennedy speaking to O’Donnell Kennedy and his staff.
First words Last words It looks like Fomin was a ploy after all Now gentlemen, if anyone has a great idea, now is the time.
He asked the army to prepare the air strikes on Monday morning, followed by the invasion.
We’re presuming Major Anderson there is phone call for you the pilot is dead.
On the other hand, intelligence was more than necessary to help the Kennedy administration decide on the course of events. reconnaissance flights had been sent over Cuba since the beginning of 1962.
Send a United States U2 over soviet territory  It was escorted back to the frontier by soviet MIGs.
In fact it was one of the few flights which were responsible for air analysis after nuclear tests.
The plane was armed with nuclear missiles because the army was on DEFCON 1.
But the Soviets didn’t realise it and the United States plane was escorted back to its aerial space.
In 1958 General De Gaulle refused that they be deployed on French soil.
Their installation in July-August 1962 on the Cigli base, near Izmir was the result of an agreement reached with Turkey in October 1959, but the 15 Jupiters soon proved obsolete for lack of mobility.
JFK had decided to dismantle them without warning the Turks, who were not consulted either when they were actually removed in April 1963.
Those in Italy were dismantled in 1963, thus meeting the demand of the Rome government who had shown cautious, embarrassed solidarity with the United States in so far as Italy was within range in case of Soviet retaliation.
The 60 intercontinental Thor missiles, deployed on 20 British bases since 1958, were also removed between November 1962 and August 1963.
Propose to withdraw Turkey’s missiles 6 month from now and demand that this latter condition remains secret.
Both countries had to get out of this potential nuclear conflict without loosing face.
This version of Bobby and the Ambassador’s meeting was described in Bobby’s book.
But according to the Ambassador Bobby came to see him twice , telling him that the Kennedy administration was loosing ground against the army and the public opinion who wanted to invade Cuba.
Moreover, Khrushchev was upset because the Soviet general in Cuba had shot down an American U2.
Finally, one of the soviet spy had said that Kennedy was to make a speech on 5 P.M. and said that would be on Moscow’s time.
So Khrushchev felt he had to answer very quickly to Kennedy’s proposal through ambassador Dobrynin.
Since Khrushchev accepted the United States deal, Kennedy’s advisors felt they could do anything in the world.
Only 1 person died The Soviets began dismantling their launchers the very next day.
Kennedy had insisted that the Soviet Il-28 bombers given to Cuba be removed too.
Angered because he had been kept out of the negotiations by his Soviet allies, Castro refused to submit.
It took him 22 days to come around, during which time United States nuclear forces remained on alert.
On 21 November, the Ilyushin bombers were taken back to the Soviet Union and the quarantine was over.
The epilogue came only 30 years later, in 1993, when the last Combat Brigade troops sent to Cuba in 1962 were withdrawn from Cuba.
China reaped the benefits and rivalled the Soviet Union in the eyes of Socialist and Third World countries.
The crisis, confirming the De Gaulle-abhorred Soviet-US condominium, widened the transatlantic gap, since the USA had not consulted with the Europeans.
In West Berlin, there was public concern about a backlash that might have an impact on the status of Berlin.
Thus, Der Tagesspiegel endeavoured to prove that ""Cuba and Berlin"" could not be ""swapped"", unlike missiles deployed on bases in the Caribbean and in Turkey.
Stressing JFK's firm stand, he came to the conclusion that ""22 October 1962 had turned the tables after 13 August 1961"", that illfated day when the Wall was erected in the face of indifferent Allies.
JFK's pusillanimous attitude when the Wall was built had taught Chancellor Adenauer a bitter lesson.
He was worried, and feared that Berlin might bear the brunt of a backlash and lie exposed to a Soviet operation comparable to the 1948 blockade.
The Cuban crisis confirmed his opinion that the security of the Federal Republic should not depend on the United States exclusively.
He came to the conclusion that political and military ties with France should be strengthened.
This was materialized by January 1963, when the Élysée agreements were signed.
From a didactic point of view, the crisis taught United States and Soviet leaders how to cope with situations of extreme tension that could end in thermonuclear war.
Cuba was a vital issue for the USA whereas it was only a side one for Khrushchev who could, thus, afford to show some restraint.
The idea that there ought to be a hotline between the White House and the Kremlin was a direct consequence of the Cuban crisis.
It wasn’t a telephone but a teletypewriter was activated on 30 August 1963.
RFK explains, for instance, that his brother would often withhold opinions in meetings, knowing that others would tend to parrot his ideas rather than offer honest appraisals.
It is also the second movie in which Steven Culp plays Robert F Kennedy, the other being Norma Jean & Marilyn.
However in the movie, the role of Kenneth O'Donnell has been greatly exaggerated as he plays a much larger role in the film, than what he did in reality.
This is because the real Kenneth O’Donnell’s son contributed with a lot of money for the production of Thirteen Days, while requesting that his father’s character would be given a more important role.
In real life history, O’Donnell was never present at the top level White House meetings with Kennedy during the missile crisis.
