Mr President, gentlemen, the first and most important item which I would seek to call to your attention is a new area hitherto never seen by us some 21 miles to the southwest of Havana which we have at the moment labeled a probable MRBM/IRBM launch complex.
The two sites, sir, Nos. and 2, are 2 1/2 miles apart and enlarging this one we look at it and we see for the first time a pattern of Medium/IRBM sites that looks like the things we have been seeing in the Soviet Union.
There's a control bunker with cable scars going up to small buildings in board at each of these pads.
The security fence has been superimposed around the place.And on 29 August, the last time we went over this area the ground had just scarcely started to be scratched.We've never identified as irrevocably the signature of a Soviet intermediate medium range ballistic missile, which is estimatedly a 2,000 mile missile.
So we have, at the moment, labeled it as such and let the guided missile intelligence analysts come up, finally, with the true analysis of what the range of these missiles might be that are eventually accommodated on this set of pads.
Yes sir.Also earlier, Mr President, we reported to you a number of what we call cruise missile sites, that's short range coastal defense type missiles.
Starting out with the Banes site, with another one located at Santa Cruz del Norte, up here in the Havana area.
At the time of that reporting, there were 2 launchers at this position here and here.
Since the coverage of that day, 2 more launching positions have been added upward/up north of those 2 positions.
The launcher here is uncovered, you can actually see the launcher itself.
And down in this small indentment hereappears to be the winged type of air breathing missile which will go on it.
The short, stubby winged fellow which conforms to the cruise type of missile that we have seen before.
Well sir, we had not found anything like the MRBM sites in any of the photography up to this l5 October bit.
We had found and added to it last night 1 more surface-to-air missile site, so that made a total of 23, as of this location.
However, one of them has been pulled up and moved away, at Santa Lucia.
We don't know where they pull these things up and move them to, but we have seen 23 surface-to-air missile sites.
The uh, the Joint Committee made an estimate that between 16 and 32 missiles would be operational within a week or slightly more.
But the points are taken it looks now as if Cuba is not going to be just an instrumental base for fielding these things, but bases are going to pop out like measles all over the world.
Cuba could become just part of the goal, a military problem, and any contest we would have with Soviet Union could get tense any other part of the world, and I think our colleagues in Defense will comment on that very carefully, because that's a very important point.
But, I do think when the full scope of this becomes known that no action would undermine our alliances all over the world, very promptly.I think also we have to think of the effect on the Soviets, if you would do that.
Now suppose that they would consider this a major back down and that this would free their hands for almost any type of adventure they might want to try out in other parts of the world.
If we are unable to face up to the situation in Cuba against this kind of threat then I think they would be greatly encouraged to go adventuring, and would feel they've got it made as far as the ... ... of the United States.
They all know that we have an almost unmanageable problem in this country getting any support for foreign policy that we would need to pursue, if we're going sustain the cause of independence and faith here and in all parts of the world.
We've got a million men in uniform outside of the United States, we've got fine programs, we've got a major major effort we're making in agriculture.
It seems to that inaction, in this situation wouldundermine and undercut the long support we need for the kind of foreign policy that will eventually ensure our survival.Now action involves very high risks indeed.
I think that additional information increases the risk because challenge is much more serious and the, uh, counter action I would suppose would have to be heavier ... ... talking about.
But, we in fact, but, uh, you would have to have in the back of your own mind, whatever decision you take, the, uh, possibility or/not the likelihoodof a Soviet reaction somewhere else running all the way from Berlin right around to Korea and the possibility of a reaction against the United States itself.
I would suppose that with the first missiles you're talking about that a quick strike, a quick success a matter of a couple of hours time, 50 or 60 Soviet missiles ... ... where it is obvious then the matter is over and finished and that was the purpose of our engagement.
That would have much more reduced threats from a military response on the other side. ... ... these other installations and getting involved in various parts of the island, I think would increase the risk of a military response down there.The action also has to be thought of in connection with alliance solidarity, there we're faced with conflicting elements.
Unless we're in a situation where it is clear that the alliance has worked to understand the problem, then unannounced, unconsulted quick action on our part, could well lead to a kind of odd disunitiveness the Soviets could capitalize upon very strongly.
Um, it's one thingfor Britain and France get themselves isolated within the alliance over Suez.
But it's quite another thing for the alliance for the United States to get itself in the same position, because we are the central bone structure of the alliance and this is a different kind of problem that we have to think very hard about.
Now I think that, as far as I am concerned I would have to say to you if we enter upon this path of challenging the Soviets what the Soviets do themselves have to embark tactically dangerous course that no one surely can foresee the outcome.
I think the American people will willingly undertake great danger, if necessary for something.
If they have a deep feeling that you've done everything that is reasonably possible to determine whether or not this trip was necessary.
The first point, whether this trip is necessary,we all of course, remember the Guns of August.
We're certainly convinced of the general situation.We've got the time now that we've gotten ... ... and this, this question I think is something that's pretty important.
In the case in Korea, we had an organized, large-scale aggression from North Korea and we were going in as part of thegeneral United Nations effort.
Even with that start the Korean aspect of it ... ... general support of the American people before it was over.Now, these are considerations I'm just mentioning ... ... put military in favor of a, uh, a confrontation with Khrushchev, and the implication because the ... ... possibility, only a possibility Khrushchev might realize that he's got to back down.
We can't be, we have no reason to expect that, as far as we're concerned.
I'd like to hear my colleague comment on this, whether the, uh, the actual action we would take, that you have to.
No one can guarantee that this can be achieved by diplomatic action, but it seems to be essential that this be challenged and be tested out before military action is employed.
And if our decision is firm, and it must be, I can see no danger in communication with Khrushchev privately, worded in such a way that he realizes that we mean business.
This I consider an essential first step, no matter what military course ... ... we determine on, if he replies unsatisfactorily.
I don't believe the threat of general nuclear war should be ... ... sole reactive, even if the strike should come first.
My chief concern about a strike without a diplomatic effort that it would eventually, that it would immediately lead to war with Cuba and would not be the neat, quick disposal of the bases as was suggested.
Furthermore I'm reasonablycertain the allied reaction would be very hostile.
Especially if the Soviets retaliate locally and take the area beyond Berlin.
Communication with Khrushchev would be useful for the record in establishing the record in our case for action.
In general, I feel that a declaration of war would be valuable since it would open up every avenue of military action, air strikes, invasion, blockade.
Butwe would have to make a case to our allies to justify such a declaration of war.
There are a series of alternative plans, ranging from Roman numeral 1 of about 50 sorties directed against solely against the known MRBMs, known as of last night, to Roman numeral 5, which covers the alternative invasion plans.
That we would attack with conventional weapons against an enemy who is not equipped with operational nuclear weapons.
Ifthere is any possibility that the enemy is equipped with operational nuclear weapons, I'm certain the plans would have to be changed.
Last evening we were discussing the relative merits of these forms of military action, assuming that at some point military action was required.
Last evening, it was my personal belief that there were more targets than we knew of, and that it was probable that there would be more targets than we could know of at the start of any one of these strikes.
The information of this morning I think simply demonstrates the validity of that conclusion of last evening.
It would have to be larger than shown now because of the additional number of targets required and it fits very closely, to alternative 3 in terms of the number of sorties.
I would agree with that particular scenario, that really 2 is hardly possible now.
Well under 2 you don't need to take up the SAM sites before they becomeoperational.Unidentified voice: Uh, they may be operational at any time.Robert McNamara: We have almost certainly added two more targets than are indicated here.
This is why I emphasize a point here, that I don't believe the Soviets would authorize their use against the United States but they might nonetheless be used.
Therefore, I underline his assumptions that all of these cases are premised on the assumptions there are no operational nuclear weapons there.
If there's any possibility of that I would strongly recommend that these plans be modified substantially.
Holding the alliance, which is going to strain the alliance more, this tack by us on these, uh, Cuba.
Which is, most allies regard as a fixation of the United States and not a seriousmilitary threat.
I mean you have to apply conditional tactical ... ... before they would accept or support our action against Cuba because they think that we're slightly demented on this subject.
If we gave say this 24-hour notice, get in touch with Khrushchev, taking no action with our allies.
I say that because if they were equipped to do that they would have been equipped to erect them more quickly.
If they were to move them in 24 hours I think we could keep enough reconnaissance over the island during that period to have some idea of where they've moved.
Put it this way, it might be answered ......infinite delays on their end ... ...an actual text could be in hereand transmitted and that would get to Khrushchev straight away.
So far we know there is no stated relationship that makes these Sovietmissiles or Soviet bases.
There is the attempts that Castro made to ally himselfwith the Warsaw Pact or join the Warsaw Pact or even to engage in a bilateralwith Moscow, apparently he ... ... and failed.
He sent Raul andChe Guevara to Moscow a few months ago apparently for that purpose, otherpurposes.
Hence, if we were to take action with the present status, the Sovietswould have some latitude and might want to respond, if they did at all.
On theother hand, as a result of warning or communication with them, they declarethese their bases.
Because wewould have a problem of committing action against a stated base there.
The important factor there is that if you do this first strikeyou would kill a lot of Russians.
Demand their dismantlement and say that we are going tomaintain constant surveillance, and if they are armed, we would then take themout, and then maybe do it.
I think we should be under no illusions that thiswould probably in the end lead to the same thing.
But we would do it under anentirely different posture and background, and much less danger of getting upinto the big war.The Russians have a curious faculty of wanting a legal basis, despite of all theoutrageous things they've done, they attach a lot of importance to this.
Bomb 'em.Llewellyn Thompson: As Chip says, I agree with you, if they're prepared to say,if you do this, then this is nuclear world war, then you do that anyway.
If we just made the first strike I think hisanswer would be, very probably to take out one of our bases in Turkey, andmake a quick tune, and then sit down and talk.
I think the whole purpose ofthis exercise is to build up to talk with you, in which we try to negotiate outthe bases.
We have, the Cubans asked us for us the missiles to deal withthese emigre bases which are threatening, have attacked and are threateningattack.
Well, that would be patently false on its face as to thenature of the weapons.Robert Kennedy: If we act, it better be Cuban missiles.Unidentified voice: Surely.Unidentified voice: I think our action is aimed at Cuba, just as much as possiblein this situation.Llewellyn Thompson?: You ought to make it, if you do that, perhaps, as easy aspossible for him to back down.
I think almost certainly it leads to his answerwould be also this is so serious, I'm prepared to talk to you about it.
The blockade wouldn't be sufficient, he could go on developing the things he's got there.
He would, uh, you impose a blockade, impose a blockade on Cuba, and he imposes a blockade on Berlin, and then you start to talk.
I briefed him ... ... careful, I think, not to take any position, because I had no position.
Secondly, I think that he felt that limited actions, such as strafing, as anticipated, in 1 or 2 or even 3, of this paper would not be satisfactory.
Turkey or Pakistan or elsewhere.He felt, really, that if a move was made, and I think I pinned him down, he would recommend it, it should be an all out military action.
And he felt that this was done, probably the thing ... ... could be done with the minimum loss of life.
