Kennedy made it clear to Soviet dictator Nikita Khrushchev that basing missiles 90 miles off the coast of Florida was intolerable.
Less retrospective is paid to what might be called the Tanks of October the year before, when United States and Soviet forces also came head to head in the divided German city of Berlin.
Despite favorable polls extending him a 70% approval rating, 1961 was not a good year for President Kennedy, especially in terms of the Cold War.
The criticism became more acute in August of that year when the Soviet-backed communist government of East Germany erected a wall around East Berlin to curb flight to democratic West Berlin.
An estimated 10,000 refugees per week were fleeing East Germany for the democratic west at this time.
As Khrushchev had made threats to close East Berlin, he had also insinuated that he would unite Berlin into one city and grant East Germany exclusive power over access.
Kennedy was accused by many of being indecisive for not making clear how far he was prepared to go to secure West Berlin and maintain access to East Berlin.
In other words, the question was whether Kennedy would resort to nuclear war.
He asserted that he was committed to maintaining the democratic integrity of West Berlin and ensuring western access to the communist sector in East Berlin.
And the fact that the United States was at an acute disadvantage in conventional forces in Europe implied that Kennedy was prepared to use nuclear deterrence.
Moreover, it was really not clear how far Khrushchev was prepared to go.
He made the mistake of viewing Kennedy as weak, a mistake Kennedy’s critics in the west had also made in the wake of the Berlin Wall being erected.
But Khrushchev was smarter than both the press and Kennedy’s western critics.
Though Kennedy had received low marks from the media for his performance at the Vienna Conference in June of that year , Khrushchev garnered from the conference an unmistakable message that West Berlin was to remain free and within the orbit of the democracies. if { googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; } ); } Perhaps the one mistake Kennedy made during the Berlin Crisis was to imply that the Soviets were free to take any measures they wished in communist Europe, as long as they ceased to threaten West Europe and West Berlin.
We must remember that Khrushchev envisioned for Berlin not just a maintenance of Soviet domination of East Berlin, but a Soviet advance into West Berlin.
Most retrospectives treat erection of the wall as the culmination of the Berlin Crisis.
United States officials and their British and French allies still maintained the right to enter and leave East Berlin.
And by October 1961, East German authorities resorted to harassment of western access into East Berlin.
Khrushchev ordered his tanks to retreat and access to East Berlin was restored in full.
And in retrospect, it is clear that the United States and the democratic west were in good hands.
