But it all from the other side oj the Iron Curtain. collapses when a U-2 finds the missiles.
Its paradoxical, unless you look at the evSo he's no longer in a position to pull idence.
They saw our leadership Soviets had moved so that they don't respect much strategic material respect his Soviet power.
The hawks were in the Pentagon and the to the Caribbean that vision for upping the ante.
CIA and on Wall Street; the doves were they raised the slakes enormously the postwar everybody else.
The Soviets had a lot of very, very powthat even though the Soviet Union is far They prefen*etl to deal with conservatives erful weapons, including submarines inferior to the United States in strategic and Republicans, because then they with nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
The power, through the calculated use of knew they were speaking to the hawks. commanders of those submarines were biuff Moscow can still get its way.
That's The missiles would be in Cuba and concerns diplomatically and politically. dangerous.
We they are a drain on his gold supply, but After 1961, United States intelligence on Soviet enjoyed immense superiority.
He concludes that capabilities was pretty good, but on ingap and the window of vulnerability one very impoitant piece of the solution tentions it has never been very good. were issues for the Soviets, not for us. would be reducing defense expendiWe're very bad at analysis of the soft side Khrushchev's Cuban gambit was his of our enemies. attempt to close that window.
Khrushjoin our government, so we haven't a chev was not able to build as many clue about what other cultures are like. as the United States They were liquid-fueled ICBMs that were hard to maintain.
The only way you could use a Were there any real Cold War intelliforce like that is to strike first.
He shifts to nuclear purchases bepreters were able to pinpoint the misThere's a lot of evidence they weren't cause nuclear weapons are cheaper than siles that the Soviets were putting in well prepared for a land war either.
There's no evidence that in their aircraft carrier program. the high point of American intelligence the Khrushchev era the Soviets ever during the Cold War But as far as intencontemplated a land war.
They pushed forward with technological adcarrs, 1 believe, is not to fear our adverwanted to shift resources from the milivances.
Historically, we tend to tary economy to the civilian economy. which then gave them a formidable strike exaggerate the power of our adversaries They realized that in comparison to the force, but only an ICBM strike force.
We underestimate United States, the Soviet Union looked submarines were still behind ours, and in non-state threats, and we exaggerate economically weak.The fact that they had terms of aircraft they were far behind us. state threats.
