Mr Scali's journalistic career included many years with The Associated Press and ABC News, punctuated with government service, as ambassador to the United Nations replacing George Bush and as a White House media consultant.
He covered Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev's visit to the United States and Richard Nixon's trips as vice president to Russia and Poland.
He stood between Khrushchev and Nixon during the famous ""kitchen debate"" in which the two leaders traded barbs on the relative merits of democracy and communism.
In 1962, when Mr Scali was a diplomatic reporter for ABC News, President John F Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba and warned that if any were fired at the United States, the United States would retaliate against Moscow, not Havana.
Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a personal friend of Khrushchev's.
Over lunch, Fomin outlined a proposal under which the Soviets would dismantle the Cuban missile bases if the American government would pledge not to invade Cuba.
The emigre community can now talk about ""before"" and ""after"" the Year of the Indefinite Detention of 32,000 Cuban rafters in Guantanamo and Panama.
The fable was an improbable tale of red-carpet treatment the moment that Cuban exiles set foot on United States soil.
According to the story, the federal government provided arriving Cubans with food, clothing, and opportunities to study or open a business; after the 1966 Cuban Adjustment Act, it also granted them an automatic legal status, giving them a head start in the race toward the American dream.
They had only the privileges that U.S. law gives any political refugee.
The ""pampered minority myth"" dismissed the hard work and sacrifices that Cuban immigrants made.
The myth also conveniently ignored the Cubans' prolonged disenfranchisement, and the general contempt with which the nation's news media originally treated them and their cause.
Until this year of mass detention, many Cubans also wanted to buy the ""privileged minority myth""; it seemed to distinguish them from other beleaguered minorities.
Cubans repressed their grievances against a society that had given them refuge and that was infinitely more livable than their homeland.
Their belief in the myth partly explains their reluctance to get involved in the problems of other minorities.
In fact, Haitians and Nicaraguans -two minorities that are not perceived to be as economically and politically influential as the Cuban Americans -have received more help from Washington in their struggle for freedom and democracy.
The Faustian deal that some prominent Cuban Americans initially struck with the Clinton administration to support the rafters' detention doesn't alter these arguments.
Cuban Americans know that the rafters are their own flesh and blood -in many cases literally.
They view the obstinate, almost universal repudiation of rafters as a rejection of all Cubans.
Small wonder then, that other people's political, sometimes xenophobic, rejection of rafters has united Cubans.
Their unity has been strengthened by the apparent disinterest of the government and public opinion in the rights of the detainees.
The federal lawsuit, which seeks to reaffirm the humanity of those detained and to ensure their rights under United States and international law, seems to have administration officials frothing.
Even Cubans who normally behave like American jingoists are wondering why their countrymen -no different than they -suddenly ceased to be political refugees.
Why so many people rail against the lesser evil of comparing Guantanamo to Treblinka but accede to the greater evil of indefinitely detaining human beings.
Some of the answers lie in the nation's current antiimmigrant mood and in America's tortuous history of ethnic relations.
I hope that in seeking answers Cuban Americans will be inspired by Yale scholar Harold Hongju Koh.
The rafters' fate hangs on this brilliant Korean American's legal expertise.
He became an advocate, first for Haitians and now for Cubans, he says, because he did not want to wait for government to mistreat his Asian family before acting to protect their rights.
Thomas Moore signed for documents stamped ""top secret"" in bold red type, his compact car was being filled with shotguns and explosives.
It was Oct., 1962, and fate had thrust the young naval officer to the forefront of a global crisis that was escalating by the minute.
President John F Kennedy still was hours away from telling the world that the Soviet Union was building nuclear missile sites in Cuba, and the United States wouldn't stand for it.
He was careful not to use the word ""blockade,"" because under international law, that would have been an act of war.
By the time the president spoke, Moore already had been enveloped for hours in the unfolding drama.
While I was getting the top-secret orders, they were loading grenades, shotguns and ammunition into my car.
Here I am carrying explosives in my civilian car down Hampton Boulevard to where our ship was moored.
Those and the top-secret orders revealed that the Pierce had been selected as one of the ships that would enforce the quarantine.
The Pierce left Norfolk on Oct. and reached its area of operations two days later.
The vintage World War II vessel was so old and tired that its chief engineer had pushed a wooden pencil though its hull.
Hearts started beating faster on the afternoon of Oct., when the Pierce's radio operator received a message that the Lebanese merchant freighter Marucla was in the area.
The ship, chartered to the Soviets, was suspected of carrying prohibited cargo to Cuba.
He said the Pierce initially was ordered to let it proceed, but a short time later, things changed.
We reported this, and then came the message that it would be nice if the official boarding ship would be another destroyer, the USS Joseph P Kennedy.
Using internationally recognized flag signals, it ordered the Marucla to stop and prepare to be boarded.
Navy protocol dictated that the boarding party had to include two officers of a certain rank.
To fill this requirement, the Pierce's executive officer, Dwight G Osborne, became senior officer of the boarding party.
If we had boarded a ship with missiles on it, we would have had to take it into custody and bring it to a port in the United States.
Information declassified a few years ago revealed that the White House had a list of the different Soviet ships headed toward Cuba and their suspected cargo, Moore said.
The crisis ended Oct., 1962, 50 years ago today, when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev announced over Radio Moscow that he'd agreed to move the missiles from Cuba.
By then, Kennedy had agreed not to invade the tiny country off the tip of Florida.
The deal came less than two years after the young president approved the ill-fated ""Bay of Pigs"" invasion of southern Cuba.
He said his father worried that Cuban leader Fidel Castro ""was a hothead,"" Moore said.
Early next month, Moore will host a reunion at his home for eight of his Pierce shipmates.
The movie is about the Cuban missile crisis which took the United States and Russia to the brink of war 40 years ago.
With the world focusing now on the US-China spy plane stand-off, Costner's film is attracting a lot of interest.
Costner arrived at Havana's Hotel National looking travel weary after the seven-hour flight, accompanied by girlfriend Christine Baumgarter Co-producers of the film Armyan Bernstein, Beacon Pictures chairman, and Peter Almond, along with several others from the production team made the trip to Cuba for the premiere.
The filmmakers will work with the Cuban Institute of Cinematographic Arts and Industry to screen the film to public audiences.
They also hope to show the film to Cuban government officials who were involved in the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, known to Cubans as the Crisis of October.
Thirteen Days opened in the United States in January and got its first high-profile screening the following month at the White House, where it was viewed by President George Bush and members of the Kennedy family.
New Line Cinema then had the movie about the US-Soviet nuclear showdown sent to the international space station for the enjoyment of its crew, two Russians and an American.
In the movie, Costner stars as Kenny O'Donnell, a White House aide to President John F Kennedy and his brother Robert.
Schiff portrayed a triumphant Kennedy as he announced in late 1962 that the American naval blockade of Cuba had worked and that the Soviet Union had conceded on the issue of arming the island nation.
Students of Journalism 4004 filled in as the White House press corps, tossing real questions to the fake president about the missile crisis that had just passed.
Could Americans have handled the truth about the country's perilous proximity to nuclear war, had they known, a student asked.
Employing an even Boston accent and pausing after every third or fourth word, Schiff kindled the Kennedy presence throughout the mock news conference.
Schiff, who spent months studying books on the period and videotapes of Kennedy speeches, said he had to become so familiar with Kennedy and the issue that he could think as if he were the president.
The documents, which date from the summer of 1962 through early 1963, add details to what is known about the failure of senior Kennedy administration officials and the agency itself to take seriously midsummer signs in Cuba of increased numbers of Soviet forces and equipment and new construction.
Kennedy's advisers who began warning in August 1962 that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was capable of putting missiles in Cuba.
McCone forced Kennedy and top national security advisers that summer to consider options, such as blockades and quarantines, for reacting to what was then only a hunch about Soviet intentions.
But McCone left on a honeymoon in late August, and there was no immediate follow-up to these early discussions.
Two months later, on Oct., McCone's hunch turned into reality when U-2 photos revealed construction of Soviet medium-range ballistic missile sites near San Cristobol, Cuba.
The discovery raised the threat that Soviet nuclear warheads would be in position to reach the U.S. mainland with little warning time.
After secretly studying options, Kennedy on Oct. publicized the discovery, declared a naval quarantine of all Soviet and communist bloc shipping into Cuba and called on Khrushchev to remove the missiles.
In the succeeding days, the Soviets pushed work on the missiles to make them operational.
Khrushchev, who had hoped to have the weapons installed before they were discovered, was certain he would have the upper hand once they were ready to fire.
Today, when President Bush is making trust and experience in crisis management a factor in electing a president, the CIA materials appear especially instructive.
They expand previous behind-the-scenes accounts of how one of the nation's major nuclear-age crises was met by a relatively inexperienced, 45year-old chief executive.
The documents, along with transcripts of tape-recorded White House meetings held on Oct., 1962, and released by the Kennedy Presidential Library, present vivid details of a critical stage of the missile crisis.
They show Kennedy vacillating as the day progressed before choosing a final course.
Among the materials being disclosed are CIA data provided to Kennedy the morning of Oct. that reported the agency considered 24 Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles operational.
The 1,000-milerange missiles, if launched from Cuba, could reach as far as New Orleans, Nashville and Richmond, according to a map provided to Kennedy.
Photos confirmed that the missiles, which were kept separate from their launchers, had been moved to the launch site in night exercises and that cables, fueling trucks and separate guidance equipment had been put in place.
Kennedy's recorded words on Oct. reflect the varied pressures he faced.
At times he talked of his belief that although he wanted to avoid war, the only way he could get the missiles out would be to attack Cuba or undertake a secret trade with Khrushchev that would be politically and diplomatically damaging if disclosed.
For dramatization purposes, it inflates the role of appointments secretary Kenny O'Donnell, played by Kevin Costner, and shortchanges the contributions made by Adlai Stevenson, McGeorge Bundy and Gen.
There is no substitute for presidential leadership, no matter how experienced and brilliant the president's top advisers may be.
It is the president's own judgment, his own knowledge of his adversary and allies, and his ability to guide his advisers and weigh conflicting advice that matter most in the end.
A negotiated solution, when possible and reasonable, always serves the interests of both parties better than a military solution, particularly in an age of proliferating weapons of mass destruction.
Presidential firmness, flexibility and a willingness to maintain a confidential dialogue with the other side -even during the worst times of tension and confrontation -are indispensable.
In world affairs, a United States president's every word to another nation's leader, whether written or spoken, private or public, is weighted with meaning and consequence.
Drafting a letter that could mean the difference between life and death for one's countrymen, or even the planet, inspires clear and careful phrasing that leaves no loopholes but burns no bridges.
When dealing with an aggressive adversary, a measured and limited first step that leaves both the president and the other side with an option other than humiliation or escalation is preferable to an unlimited surprise attack that invites both a belligerent response and the condemnation of history.
A president's military advisers are likely to trust only military solutions; his diplomatic advisers are likely to see merit only in diplomatic solutions; his legal, economic and spiritual advisers are likely to focus primarily on the tools of their respective trades, etc.
A presidential solution, possibly drawing upon the best elements of all the others, includinga combination of fair-minded diplomacy with a threat of superior military force, is most often the right answer.
Thrusting forward the olive branch and the arrows grasped by the eagle represented on the presidential seal requires an ambidextrous president with exquisite timing.
For all the terrible power and deterrent value of nuclear missiles, our highly trained conventional forces, alerted and informed by a high-tech, highly skilled intelligence community, are the most likely and most practical weapons for a president to use in a military crisis.
However slow and divided the United Nations Security Council may be at times, no one is better positioned to serve as an independent and invaluable channel of confidential communications and cool reflection than the secretary-general of that oft-maligned organization.
All these lessons and more come through in the movie as well as the published tape transcripts of that harrowing 13 days.
My role, as portrayed in the film and as transpired in 1962, was comparatively light.
But the heavy sense of weight I felt when asked by the president to draft the penultimate letter to Soviet Chairman Nikita S Khrushchev -with Attorney General Robert Kennedy at my side, with anxious ''hawks'' and ''doves'' scratching for more, with nuclear war around the corner and one brave American U-2 pilot already down -was seared on my memory long before that moment was depicted on the screen.
That was a moment that neither I nor any American would ever want to experience again.
The dramatic action sheds a whole new light on those dread-filled days that October, when the world looked like it would be covered in mushroom clouds and for that, director Matthew Vaughn and his team should be thanked.
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM The crisis was a triumph of United States brinkmanship.
REALITY Historians say the resolution of the standoff was really a triumph of back-door diplomacy.
It was a secret pledge known to only a handful of presidential advisers that did not emerge until years later.
REALITY The United States came out a winner, but so did the Soviet Union.
Their withdrawal, along with Kennedy's assurance that he would not invade Cuba, gave Khrushchev enough to feel he had saved face, and the next day he announced the imminent dismantling of offensive weapons in Cuba.
It was ""the darkest, most dangerous day of the crisis,"" analyst Peter Kornbluh said.
Yet after Kennedy announced on Oct. a United States naval quarantine around the island to prevent more military equipment from arriving, Khrushchev recalled ships carrying nuclear equipment the next day, according to the 2008 book ""One Minute to Midnight"" by Michael Dobbs, which was based on newly examined Soviet documents.
That means that on Oct., when Rusk made his famous ""eyeball-to-eyeball"" statement reacting to supposedly up-to-the-minute intelligence, the vessels were already hundreds of miles away, steaming home.
REALITY Along with being a day late on the turnaround by Soviet ships, the CIA missed several key developments that would have helped Kennedy and his advisers navigate the crisis.
REALITY This myth has been perpetuated in part by the title of Robert F Kennedy's posthumous memoir, ""Thirteen Days,"" as well as the 2000 movie of the same name starring Kevin Costner.
Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan traveled to Cuba that Nov. and spent 20 days in tense talks with the Cuban leader, who was angry that the Soviets had reached a deal without consulting him.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion PETER ORSI ​ Associated Press, 'Cuban missile crisis fallacies endure Five decades later, historians say it was compromise rather than a game of chicken that resolved face-off.', St.
Jose Morin encounters the ghosts of the Cold War as he drives into the heart of what was once a highly guarded Nike missile base.
He stops at the deserted control center where missile crews watched over the base's 18 nuclear-tipped Nike missiles.
In 1993, Morin's trip around the base, on the county line, is just another inspection.
But it also conjures up images of a time when the Cold War was part of South Florida life.
It was one of a dozen missile sites built to guard the Miami-Homestead area from enemy air attack.
The Nike program ended in the continental United States in 1979 when the last sites were deactivated in South Florida, said Cornell, who is the registrar of the United States Army Air Defense Artillery Museum at Fort Bliss near El Paso, Texas.
The Miramar base, built east of Flamingo Road, was designated as HM-03 and operated by the Battery C, 2nd Battalion of the Army's 52nd Artillery Brigade.
An assembly building was used to install nuclear or conventional warheads on the 41-foot-long air defense missiles.
Guard dogs patrolled between the fences in what Morin says was then a ""kill zone,"" where intruders could be shot.
Howard Forman, D-Hollywood, wants to convert the abandoned missile base into a historic site to remind residents of South Florida's Cold War heritage.
Forman said he plans to meet with federal, state and county officials later this year to see if an agreement can be reached to preserve the site.
In the late 1980s, county officials wanted to make it a permanent home for the Broward County Fair.
Since then, a permanent fairgrounds has been proposed further west on 172nd Avenue at a new regional park in western Miramar.
Another plan was to create a large National Guard camp to be used as a training grounds for guard units throughout the state.
Miramar City Manager Eric Soroka said the city wants something done as the base has become overgrown and is used as a dumping ground.
If anything, contemporary complacency about the distinctive destructiveness of nuclear weapons makes reviewing this moment in history more important, not less.
From Oct. to 28, 1962, the crisis dominated international public and media attention as Washington and Moscow sparred right on the edge of thermonuclear war.
Lessons of the events include the exceptional difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, the unpredictability of developments, and the vital importance of tone and temperament as well as decisions at the top during a major crisis.
On Oct., 1962, United States U-2 aircraft reconnaissance photos revealed the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances.
On Oct., after thorough review and analysis, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy Kennedy and his advisers spent a week debating options.
Senior officials in the Kennedy administration, with the exception of independent CIA Director John McCone, had assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba.
They erroneously calculated Khrushchev and associates agreed the move would be just too risky.
Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba were curtailed severely to avoid antagonizing Moscow, and were resumed only because McCone aggressively, adamantly pressed the matter.
Analysis developed photographic evidence of the Soviet deception just before the missiles would have become operational.
At the start of the crisis, there was strong sentiment, especially among the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for a conventional air attack followed by an invasion of Cuba.
JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval quarantine as the United States first step.
Bundy's history of the nuclear age, ""Danger and Survival,"" published a quarter century after the crisis, revealed JFK privately accepted while publicly rejecting a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
Throughout the crisis, Kennedy demonstrated calm, open-minded engagement.
In 1961, an inexperienced JFK approved a flawed Cuba invasion plan strongly endorsed by the CIA and military, then mishandled developments.
Lessons of the crisis include importance of thorough, objective intelligence analysis, and communicating effectively with opponents.
During Oct.-28 1962, the crisis dominated international public and media attention as Washington and Moscow sparred right on the edge of thermonuclear war.
On Oct., after thorough review and analysis, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy.
A secretive advisory group held a meeting Oct., 1962, to discuss the ongoing work of Operation Mongoose, a once-secret plan to cause disruptions in Cuba, including blowing up power stations and planting United States intelligence infiltrators.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy, tapped by his brother to oversee Mongoose, attended.
The documents now available at the National Archives in College Park, Md., provide a glimpse inside the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
After the failed U.S.-backed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961, Kennedy sought improved intelligence gathering and formed his version of the advisory group.
Alerted to the rapid buildup of Soviet missile sites in Cuba, Kennedy and his team considered several possible United States responses -including a direct airstrike against Cuba.
They view aerial photographs of the missile installations and review possible actions, including a response to any attack by Cuban President Fidel Castro on the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.
It is not conduct that one would expect from the United States,"" says George Ball, an undersecretary of state at the time.
On the same day, the United States was massing hundreds of fighter jets in Florida and closely monitoring all military activity on Cuba via satellite tracking stations.
