Following the failed CIA-backed Bay of Pigs invasion, Fidel Castro made an alliance with the communists and the Soviets began to install nuclear missiles in Cuba.
An American U-2 spy plane captured photographs of the missile installations in Cuba on October 14, 1962 triggering the crisis. .push; JFK decided to place Cuba under ""quarantine"" which Khrushchev warned would be seen as an act of war.
Khrushchev and Kennedy came to an agreement by which the Soviets would dismantle its missiles in Cuba and the U.S agreed to dismantle of United States missile bases in Turkey and agreed never to invade Cuba without direct provocation.
During the Cold War the Soviets were determined to assert their influence over smaller nations and to adopt communist governments.
Following the Bay of Pigs Invasion on April 17, 1961 Fidel Castro asked the USSR for weapons to defend Cuba against America.
The CIA informed President Kennedy of the missile installations on October 16, 1962 and JFK realized that he had to respond to the provocation.
The military and strong anti-communists counseled an immediate air strike in order to destroy the missile sites, to be followed by an invasion of Cuba.
President Kennedy was careful to call the proposed action a quarantine rather than a blockade because a blockade was technically an act of war according to international law.
JFK knew that if the USA invaded Cuba, the action could have started WW3.
Tensions grew in both Washington and Moscow and the world looked on in terror as Kennedy and Khrushchev attempted to negotiate their way out of the crisis.
American ships assumed positions around Cuba to enforce the quarantine, whilst Soviet ships continued to move closer and closer to Cuba.
The Soviet ships reached the quarantine line on October 24, 1962 but received orders from Moscow to hold their positions.
The two leaders came to an agreement and On October 28, 1962 Khrushchev announced over Radio Moscow that the Soviet Union would dismantle its missiles in Cuba.
The United States made a public declaration never to invade Cuba without direct provocation.
The John F Kennedy video will give you additional iteresting facts and dates about the political events experienced by the 35th American President from January 20,1961 to November 22, 1963.
