Here Vasin finds himself caught in a power struggle between his superior and the head of the GRU, the KGB's rival security agency.
Working his sources, Vasin picks up hints that a submarine flotilla is nearing Cuba, with each ship secretly carrying nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
Expertly jumping between Vasin's dilemma—his boss wants him to sit on the as-yet-unconfirmed submarine story, hoping it will blow up in the face of the GRU chief—and the equally fraught drama faced by the commander of the flotilla, Vasily Arkhipov, who is in a power struggle of his own.
Arkhipov directs the flotilla, but the subs remain under the operational command of their captains.
Unfortunately, Arkhipov's sub, out of radio contact and being tracked by American destroyers, is controlled by a hotheaded captain eager to deploy his secret weapon.
Basing both his plotlines on actual events and real people, Matthews generates remarkable tension in this perfectly executed two-pronged thriller, with the submarine story proving especially dramatic, evoking both The Hunt for Red October and the high-tension cat-and-mouse game portrayed in the classic WWII submarine film The Enemy Below.
Vasily Arkhipov received the go-ahead by the military to launch a nuke at the United States without Moscow's approval if attacked.
The order makes Arkhipov uneasy because he knows some other captains may have an itchy trigger finger.
Alexander Vasin is so troubled by the leeway given to submarine captains that he's trying to find a way to pass along word to American officials about the danger.
Vasin attempts to persuade a colleague who's a known American agent to tell his American contact about the Russian threat.
Back in the Caribbean, the Russian submarines run low on power and are forced to surface and face a formidable American naval armada.
An afterword reveals that Matthews, a journalist who has written widely on Russian affairs, drew closely on the historical record.
Cold War buffs will particularly enjoy the ride, though any reader who appreciates the finer points of espionage and foreign intrigue will also be well satisfied.
