Categorizing ACTIVITY As you read, use a chart like the one below to list the different proxy wars fought by the United States and the Soviet Union.
The competition between the perpowers also affected “hot” wars, or those that actually involved fighting.
The United States and the Soviet Union were now the world’s two superpowers.
As the ld War conflict between them grew stronger, European nations were divided into two armed camps. ey were forced to depend upon one or the other of these two major powers.
The rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union brought the world the brink, or the very edge, of nuclear war.
These two nations seemed to hold the survival of the orld in their hands.
Instead, the United States and the Soviet Union ught a series of proxy wars.
A proxy war occurs when two powers in conflict use substitutes instead fighting each other directly.
Both the United States d the Soviet Union were armed with powerful nuclear arsenals.
The two nations considered this support as part of the ongoing struggle between their two orldviews.
Each superpower used military and economic aid to win the support of other nations.
The United ates began with NATO in Europe and continued to build liances in other parts of the world.
The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization was formed to op Communist aggression in the East.
The Central Treaty Organization included Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan, Great Britain, and e United States.
The Korean War and Vietnam War were two major conflicts of the Cold War.
The Soviet Union and the United States sent military pport to prevent the other side from expanding its influence.
Also, the Cold War proxy conflict on e small island of Cuba almost turned into a major nuclear war.
In August 1945, the Soviet Union and the United States agreed to divide Korea.
The plan was to hold elections after World War II to reunify, or join together again, Korea.
Instead, two separate governments emerged in Korea—a Communist one in the north and an anti-Communist one in the south.
With Joseph Stalin’s promise of Soviet support, Communist North Korean troops invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950.
Truman saw this as yet another example of Communist aggression and expansion.
Permission is granted to reproduce for classroom use. approval of the United Nations and sent United States troops to repel, or force back, the North Korean invaders.
In October, UN forces—mostly American—marched across the 38th parallel.
The Communist government of China was greatly alarmed by the presence of the UN forces.
As a result, the Chinese sent hundreds of thousands of troops into North Korea.
North Korean and South Korean troops, along with those of supporting countries, fought for three more years.
An armistice, or an agreement to stop fighting, was finally signed in 1953.
The 38th parallel remained, and remains today, the boundary line between North Korea and South Korea.
Many Americans viewed events in Korea as a success for the policy of containing, or limiting, communism in Asia.
The United States was now more determined than ever to contain Soviet power.
As a result, in the mid-1950s the administration of President Dwight D Eisenhower adopted a policy of massive retaliation, or fighting back.
The policy stated that any Soviet advance would be met with the full use of American nuclear bombs.
It was after the Korean War that American military alliances extended around the world.
In 1959 a left-wing revolutionary named Fidel Castro erthrew the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.
United States viewed this Sovietpported regime so close to the mainland as a security threat.
Permission is granted to reproduce for classroom use. tween the two superpowers.
He finally approved a plan that the CIA had proposed. iled Cuban fighters would invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
One hundred fourteen people died, and the rest were ptured by Castro’s troops.
Then, in 1962, Soviet leader Nikita hrushchev began to place nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The missiles were a clear response to the acement of United States nuclear weapons in Turkey.
Khrushchev commented that the United States was worried about Soviet missiles that ere 90 miles across the sea from the United States when United States missiles were basically on the Soviet border.
The United States was not willing to allow nuclear weapons within such a close distance.
In ctober 1962, Kennedy found out that Soviet ships carrying missiles were heading to Cuba.
He agreed to rn back the fleet and remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba. ennedy agreed.
The Cuban missile crisis brought the world frighteningly close to nuclear war.
In fact, 30 years later 1992 a high-ranking Soviet officer revealed just how close it had come to war.
Short-range rockets med with nuclear devices would have been used against United States troops if the United States had invaded uba.
At the time, people realized that e world could have been destroyed in a few days by a nuclear war.
This realization had a great 4 Lesson 3 Cold War Conflicts, continued influence on both sides.
The French refused to accept the new government, and they seized the southern part of the country.
For years, France fought Ho Chi Minh’s Vietminh for control of Vietnam.
After a huge defeat at Dien Bien Phu, France agreed to sign the Geneva Peace Accords in 1954.
Because of the Korean War, China and the Soviet Union wanted to avoid another conflict with the United States.
As a result, they pressured Vietnam to agree to a temporary partition of the country.
South Vietnam had to deal both with North Vietnamese troops and with the Viet Cong.
The Viet Cong were South Vietnamese Communist guerrillas, who were fighting against the government.
By early 1965, the Viet Cong had almost seized control of South Vietnam.
His goal was to keep the Communist regime of North Vietnam from gaining control of South Vietnam.
United States policy makers saw the Vietnam conflict in terms of a theory called the domino theory.
This theory about communism’s spread compared Asian countries to dominoes.
If the Communists succeeded in South Vietnam, all the 5 esson 3 Cold War Conflicts, continued her countries in Asia that were freeing themselves from colonial domination would fall like dominoes communism.
American forces had the advantage of massive superiority in equipment and epower.
Americans, especially college students of draft age, soon sponded with an antiwar movement.
President Johnson was condemned for how he handled the costly and indecisive war.
Former vice president Richard M Nixon ran on the pledge, or omise, to stop the war and bring the American people together.
Finally, in 1973, President Nixon reached an agreement with North Vietnam.
The ris Peace Accords allowed the United States to withdraw its forces.
Within two years after American ithdrawal, Communist armies from the North forcibly reunited Vietnam.
The North Vietnamese Communists gained control of Vietnam, but the domino theory proved rong.
This clear disagreement put an end to e Western idea of a single form of communism directed by Moscow.
By the end of the Vietnam War, a new era American-Soviet relations began to emerge.
