In October 1962, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane recorded photographs of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Ongoing tension between President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Khrushchev concerning both Berlin and the placement of Soviet weapons in Cuba motivated the president to act.
Virginia H Jones is President of Communication Management Associates in Chicago.
ExComm, with the participation and leadership of President Kennedy, created the strategies and tactics of diplomacy that averted potential nuclear catastrophe.
John F Kennedy: Volumes 1–3, The Great Crises, edited by Philip D Zelikow, Timothy Naftali, and Ernest R May, noted scholars and professors of public affairs and history, includes declassified presidential transcripts from July 30 through October 28, 1962.
The transcripts capture decision makers navigating their way through the quicksands of international diplomacy, escalating tension, and the management of public information.
Examples of problem definition, reframing, and consensus building provide rich resources for rhetoricians, public policy analysts, and graduate students.
This three-volume collection provides a captivating and comprehensive sense of the presidency as an institution.
Civil rights, South American regime changes, currency fluctuations, along with lesser ceremonial responsibilities, convey the multifaceted tasks the chief executive faces daily.
Stern, as an historian, chief librarian of the Kennedy Library for over two decades, and a compelling storyteller, captures personality and contextual nuances, adding rich dimensions to the collective wisdom on this topic.
As a unique contribution to the available literature, she provides a diorama of children’s lives as they experience the attempts of government, schools, and the media to manage and communicate the threat of nuclear war.
Then, retired navy captain Peter A Huchthausen’s October Fury breaks new ground by dramatically recounting moment-by-moment decision making and lifestyles of both the Russian and American naval crews aboard submarines and ships participating in maneuvers during the crisis.
The author effectively builds the case that a combination of exceptional political and naval leadership, plus superior American naval power, determined the outcome of events.
Blight and Brenner contribute the enlightened concept of “realistic empathy,” as applied to relations between political entities, particularly those of unequal power.
These five works provide a kaleidoscopic view of a perilous, historical moment.
The sum of these authors’ insights, resourcefulness, and thoroughness provides rich resources for rhetorical scholars, political scientists, and historians focusing on this pivotal period or on the attributes of presidential leadership.
In addition graduate and upper-division students can gain broad perspective on this benchmark event by reading the combined publications.
Tape transcripts provide primary sources of “government in motion” as decisions evolve, leadership negotiates, and public policies form.
This landmark work documents the dynamics of decision making during the crucial 13-day time bomb that changed international power relations.
These three volumes include tape transcripts from July 30 through October 28, 1962.
If he does not insist that the Soviets remove the missiles from Cuba, Kennedy predicts that Premier Khrushchev will aggressively send troops to West Berlin.
The three volumes provide the bases for assessing idea development, argumentation, and the formation of public policy.
Through careful editing of the Kennedy tapes, he literally transcribes the materials declassified in late 1996–early 1997 into essential moments of analysis and decision making during the crisis.
The reader feels involvement through the amplification of personality imbedded in President Kennedy’s remarks and in the words of ExComm members.
This lively recounting of the details illuminates the mood and spirit of the often contentious, often insightful give-and-take.
Averting ‘The Final Failure’ will appeal to a broad range of readers—seasoned scholars committed to understanding the subtleties of Kennedy’s decision making in interaction with the ExComm members, students of politics and history, and concerned citizens curious about the creation and impact of American foreign policy.
The president selected the individuals because of their formal foreign relations and national security responsibilities.
He opposes surprise air attacks, supports the blockade, and counsels not to capture Soviet ships.
Stern demonstrates his talent for narration through engaging descriptions of day, date, time, and place.
For example, he portrays day one of the crucial meetings, October 16, 1962.
His representative schedule included astronaut Walter Shirra and a meeting with the White House Panel on Mental Retardation.
Stern, as in previous writings, raises reservations about the two previously published transcriptions of the Kennedy tapes.
Though the most recent transcripts of the tapes improve accuracy compared with the 1997 version, he is still troubled by errors.
Stern’s narrative approach provides the reader with an engaging, well-documented excursion through our nation’s crucial decision making during the crisis.
However, historian Alice George also traces the origins of governmental steps and public perceptions of activities taken to address the increasing concern of nuclear war during the preceding decade.
For example, she provides in-depth details of governmental attempts, educational decision making, and popular perceptions of civil defense programs.
The programs are fundamentally ineffective, and the public questions the credibility of such projects as public and private civil defense shelters.
In this black-and-white photograph, one child is forced to squat, head close to knees because of confined space, while another peers expectantly, watching a third descend the stairs into the dreary setting to face fear of the unknown.
Chapter 6, “Children of the Cold War,” is a landmark in communicating the climate in which youngsters went about their daily lives.
Picking up on the then-current humor, the author noted the escalating skepticism of the young concerning the decision making of the adults.
This lack of confidence in adult judgment is one omen of what would become the protest movements of the late sixties.
In addition, George also traces elements of popular culture such as comic books and television, noting their strategies and tactics in building a negative stereotype of communism and sustaining fears of the threat of nuclear war.
Communication specialists focusing on the family, popular culture, and propaganda will find George’s work a rich resource for research and teaching.
As a career naval officer, Huchthausen held positions as Soviet naval analyst and naval attaché in Yugoslavia, Moscow, and Romania.
The book recounts his years of service in the United States navy, where he meets individuals who have served on Russian submarines assigned to Operation Kamai, the naval portion of the Soviet plan to place nuclear warheads on Cuba.
His book, October Fury, recreates both the United States and Russian naval viewpoints during these tense days.
We now know from participants on both sides that a naval shoot-out very nearly occurred.
His primary sources provide rich evidence of his conscientious and successful effort to convey the communication climate, group dynamics, and leadership capabilities of those involved in this sea of troubles during the critical days.
For example, Captain Huchthausen interviews Premier Khrushchev’s son-in-law and special press assistant, a Soviet Fleet admiral who served as a submarine officer during the missile crisis, along with a Soviet navy captain who served as a naval attaché in the Soviet Embassy, Washington, D.C., from 1960 to 1965.
In addition to high-level governmental decision makers and naval officers, he records the viewpoints of enlisted personnel with such job designations as sonarman first class, electronics technician, and radarman.
Wives of several personnel also provide insight into the tenor of sea life under high-tension conditions.
Huchthausen confirms and corrects all data collected during these interviews such as “dates, events, and locations” through antisubmarine war records.
The author’s firsthand experience, access to primary sources, compelling storytelling skills, and zest for his subject plunge readers into the contrastive world of United States and Soviet naval life.
Ample supplies and a livable quality of life on United States vessels contrast sharply with the limited resources of the Soviet personnel.
Not only scarce material resources but also a paucity of information influenced the climate in which Soviet naval crews worked.
Huchthausen emphasizes the exceptional capabilities of the Soviet naval leadership under conditions of deception and ongoing limited information.
Scholars concerned with the impact of deception, secrecy, and/or a lack of constant, accurate information for crisis decision making will find this work an excellent base for analysis and discussion.
Those interested in organizational communication, group dynamics, and adaptive practices in the workplace will find Huchthausen’s description of the shipboard management of daily tasks insightful.
Samples of ship organizational life range from a watch quarter and station bill to an abandon-ship bill to a cheer-ship bill.
His professional judgment as a career naval officer resonates as sound to those concentrating on group dynamics and the creation of productive organizational climates.
October Fury provides a unique opportunity for rhetorical critics to further capture the physical and psychological setting for the crisis.
Scholars can gain access to new primary material that provides the living and decision-making experiences of American and Soviet naval personnel who were on the firing line.
Yet crisis management approaches continue to influence the conduct of international relations.
While attention focuses on the interaction intricacies of the Soviet Union and the United States, the Cuban experience was not examined.
Certainly those interested in semantics and other meaning theorists will find these differences worth pursuing.
Not only does Castro chastise the “microfaction,” the 37 individuals, but also rails against the Soviet neglect of Cuba’s views during the missile crisis.
Blight and Brenner note that only speech segments relevant to the crisis have been declassified.
For some time we had been raising the issue of the need to take measures that would guarantee the country’s safety.
A close look through his convoluted remarks reveals a painful and cynical reassessment of Cuban-Soviet relations.
What appear as frequent digressions and at other times repetitious looping to earlier content may represent a specific cultural communication pattern.
Rhetorical critics may want to apply ideological criticism to analyze this cultural product.
Next Castro scorns the Soviet leadership for leaking security information and providing minimal facts about the missiles.
Once again taking over the presentation, Fidel Castro rants about the lack of Soviet consultation.
Much of the later part of the speech indicates concern about CubanAmerican affairs.
The listeners, if there were any left after so many hours, must recognize the on-again, off-again attitude toward Soviet trustworthiness.
The final remarks seem confusing in the aftermath of sustained criticism of the unreliable and retreating ally.
The two chapters following Castro’s “Secret Speech” probe the interpretations and political outcomes of the missile crisis for both Cuba and the Soviet Union and the ongoing, evolving relationship of these two nations.
This includes the Soviet response to Che Guevara’s activities in Bolivia and intentions of using these activities as a base to foster revolutionary actions throughout South America.
Then the authors examine Castro’s reaction to the 1967 Middle East Six-Day War, to Kosygin’s “virtual ultimatum,” and to the 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.
The book’s resources include a thorough consideration of the impact of these events on Cuban-Soviet relations.
Authors Blight and Brenner make four recommendations to promote U.S.Cuban relations.
Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers After the Missile Crisis offers newly released information and interpretations.
Serious scholars of the perilous event should scrutinize the subject through this magnifying glass on the Cuban perspective.
