The then United States President Kennedy ordered his State Department to prepare for Crash Programs.
The next day, on 27th October, becomes one of the most dangerous days in human history.
Not only was there a pressing danger of World War III, but it also foreshadowed that the third world war would be a nuclear war.
On the order of a local Cuban commander, a missile is launched at the place and it is shot down.
During this time, the United States Navy warships deployed on the sea found out that there were Soviet Union submarines near Cuba.
Many people didn't know this for years, that these submarines carried nuclear bombs too.
On the same day, on the 27th of October, the United States Navy warship located the B-59 Soviet Union submarine.
Signalling Depth Charges, a type of explosive were dropped on the submarine.
The Soviet Union officers in B-59, thought that the war had begun once they were under attack.
In a submarine, the situation is dire even on the calmest day, it is very hot due to the high temperatures.
And if we talk about this specific B-59 submarine, when they were under attack, they lost contact with Moscow.
Their radio stops functioning too, effectively cutting them off from the news of the world.
Because they thought that the war had begun, Captain Valentin Savitsky exclaims that they would blast off their opponents.
The most shocking thing about it this, friends, these officers present in the submarine had the authority to launch the nuclear weapons at their discretion.
If they judged that the situation had become out of control, they could use discretion to launch the nuclear bombs and the nuclear missiles.
The nuclear missile in the submarine, was as intense as the nuclear bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
Had the officers in the submarine, launched the nuclear missiles it would have been the beginning of a nuclear war.
According to the new Cuban Constitution, America had the right to impose restrictions on Cuban foreign policies.
In 1934, a treaty was signed, according to which, Cuba had to handover its naval bases to America, and no other country could build naval bases in Cuba.
The situation worsened in 1952, when Fulgencio Batista became the Dictator of Cuba with help from America.
In Cuba, the American government started promoting the interests of private American companies.
The situation was so dire that in 1959, 40% of the sugar lands in Cuba, were owned by American companies.
Nearly all the cattle ranches in the country, were under the control of American companies. 90% of the mines, were owned by American companies. 80% of the utilities were owned by American companies.
And practically, nearly the entire oil industry in Cuba, was in the hands of the American companies too.
Basically speaking, Cuba had become an economic slave in the hands of America.
It was a wonderful time for the rich, but for a common Cuban, healthcare was nearly non-existent.
Typhoid, Tuberculosis, intestinal parasites, such diseases had become quite common among the masses.
In addition to it, prostitution, gambling, and drugs had become a major problem in Cuba.
Corruption was rampant, and Batista himself was linked to the underworld.
The exact details of the Cuban Revolution, can be discussed in detail in some other video, but the situation that followed, was that the United States influence in Cuba was eliminated.
Fidel Castro seized all United States property, and started nationalising it.
So that all trades and businesses with Cuba could be cut off. 2/3rds of the American imports into Cuba were stopped.
On 20th January 1961, A new United States President was elected, John F Kennedy.
And governments all around the world should incorporate this into foreign relations.
If you don't like someone, stop talking to them, stop hanging out with them, but you don't need to treat each other badly.
The United States had cut off all their business and diplomatic ties with Cuba, but the United States did not stop there.
In April 1961, America secretly financed and trained more than 1,500 Cuban exiles.
America's plan was that these 1,500 people would go to Cuba, invade Cuba with the weapons provided by America, so that they could overthrow Fidel Castro's government. this was a secret plan.
But as soon as the rebels landed in Cuba, they were spotted by some local fishermen.
These local fishermen were armed with rifles and they started firing at the rebels.
The firing alerted the Cuban military, and soon the Cuban airforce reached the spot.
The rebels had some air support from the US, but when it became clear that they would lose, the United States backed away from the invasion.
Because John F Kennedy didn't want the world to know that the United States was behind the invasion.
The United States backed down at a critical moment, and Fidel Castro took charge over this operation and the battle was over within 3 days.
This failed Bay of Pigs invasion became an infamous episode of America's foreign policy.
But after this failed invasion, Cuba started looking up to the Soviet Union even more.
The Ukrainian government wants to establish friendly relations with America so that they could protect themselves.
In this case too, the outcome was the exact opposite of what the invader expected.
If any country is pressured like this, most of the time, it would have the opposite impact.
In addition to this, there was another plan called Operation Northwoods.
According to this, some friendly Cubans would be selected they'd wear the uniform of the Cuban Army, and they would be told to attack the US's Guantanamo base in Cuba.
They planned on staging the attack on an empty American ship, and then this attack would then be used as an excuse, to show that Cuba had attacked America, and so America would justify declaring war on Cuba.
He wanted to attack American cities in cities such as Miami, Florida, they'd stage ""terrorist attacks"" the United States would stage it and then blame them on the Cuban government.
The Americans would naturally believe that it was done by Cuba, and then they would use that as an excuse for conducting large-scale military operations on Cuba.
There were so many assassination attempts that he is said to be the person with the highest number of assassination attempts.
Like when there was an attempt to poison his cigar. 2 gangsters from FBIs Top 10 most wanted list were hired to assassinate him.
Chemical, fungus, and poisoned needles were also included in some plans.
Coming back to our story, on 15 October 1962, America's U-2 aircraft, a spy plane, was carrying out its routine surveillance.
The photo showed that the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles were found on this Cuban island.
Some time ago, in August, the USA was suspicious that the Soviet Union and Cuba were joining forces.
When the USA discovered the nuclear missiles, the Kennedy government did not want the world to know that the United States had found out about the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles in Cuba.
About what they could do about the nuclear missiles discovered in Cuba.
US's Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, said that the United States owned more than 5,000 nuclear warheads.
He said that since the United States had many times the number of nuclear bombs than the Soviet Union, there was no need to worry about it, But the other members of Excomm claimed that the political balance of power was changing.
And they had to take some action or else the United States citizens may be disappointed in them.
They were also concerned about how the NATO allies would look at them if they didn't do anything in the situation.
That either Fidel Castro remove the nuclear missiles from Cuba, or America would invade Cuba.
He wanted to use the Army, Marines, Airforce, Navy; all military forces, for a full-on invasion of Cuba.
If you remember, at this time, Berlin was divided into two parts, one of which was under United States influence, and the other under Soviet Union's influence.
I discussed this in detail in the video on the Berlin Wall's ground report.
Carrying out airstrikes at the sites of the nuclear missiles, to destroy the nuclear missiles, without a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
And there were 4 nuclear submarines, of the Soviet Union deployed around Cuba.
Had the USA carried out an airstrike, Cuba and the Soviet Union could have used the rest of the nuclear missiles and a nuclear war would have broken out.
Doing so they would cut off the Soviet Union from sending more weapons to Cuba.
And then they could make a demand on the Soviet Union to take back all its nuclear weapons.
But there was a small problem with this option, Putting up a naval blockade is also seen as an act of war.
Once the United States President Kennedy announced a naval blockade, the Soviet Union and Cuba would have considered it an act of war.
With the declaration of this quarantine, the United States military had started preparing for war.
When there is no war in the country, and there's overall peace, it is Defcon 5.
Defcon 1 means the military needs to be prepared to the maximum to launch an attack at a moment's notice.
The Strategic Air Command in America, and the Air Defence Command, their commanders have the right to change the Defcon levels at their discretion.
The next morning, on 23rd October, they changed it to Defcon 2, without Pres.
Because the world would perceive it to mean that the USA is prepared to attack.
Defcon 2 meant that the USA was preparing its missiles to attack the Soviet Union.
The next day, 24th October, the leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev responded to this by saying that the blockade declared by America, was an act of aggression.
And the Soviet Union ships that were headed towards Cuba, wouldn't be withdrawn by the Soviet Union.
From their perspective, placing nuclear missiles in Cuba, was a strategic defence tactic.
Because America was doing the same in the countries around the Soviet Union.
With the Soviet ships getting closer to American warships, the world held its breath.
When the Soviet ships reached the quarantine line, some ships turn around, and others that had no offensive weapons, were allowed to pass by the United States ships.
But then on 25th October, CIA's director says that the nuclear missiles in Cuba had become operational.
With this, the nuclear weapons in the United States and NATO countries were loaded, and they were ready to strike.
Next morning, on 26th October, US President Kennedy ordered the State Department to prepare for the Crash Program.
This is the part of the story I talk about at the beginning of the video.
As soon as Fidel Castro got news of Kennedy's secret preparations, he wrote a letter to Nikita Khrushchev, saying that America could attack them within 24 to 72 hours.
And if it turned out to be a full-scale invasion, they need to launch a nuclear attack on America to prevent it from happening.
Later, in 2010, when Fidel Castro was interviewed, he regretted his position.
He said that what he said in the highly tense situation, was not worth it, and he shouldn't have said so.
If they saw any American aircraft in the Cuban airspace, The military should immediately open fire at it.
Amidst these events, the United States President Kennedy, and Soviet Premier Khrushchev, were trying to maintain some diplomacy.
But the world wasn't aware of the two secret communication channels between the two.
The Back Channel, through which the politicians around the world can secretly communicate with each other.
Today, it is considered unethical, and the countries don't do it any longer.
John F Kennedy and his brother, the Attorney General of the USA, Robert F Kennedy, were holding secret meetings with Georgi Bolshakov.
Kennedy and Khrushchev could both pretend for their citizens that they were ready to fight each other and defeat the enemy.
The public speeches and warmongering placed in front of the public, stayed out of the Back Channel.
A brilliant audio-learning platform with many audiobooks and biographies for you to listen to.
Normally, it costs ₹399 per year, but because they have sponsored this video, there is a special discount for you.
Alexander Feklisov and ABC news correspondent John Scali, were having lunch together on 26th October, it was then that Feklisov told Scali that the war may break out at any moment.
But if Scali could talk to his 'high-level' friends in the United States government, there could be a diplomatic solution.
The Soviet Union was ready to dismantle the bases in Cuba, under the supervision of the United Nations.
Fidel Castro would promise to not allow any offensive weapons in his country, and in exchange, the United States would have to promise, that they will not invade Cuba ever.
The same evening, the United States State Department received a long, emotional letter.
This letter contained the same offer to the United States that Feklisov talked about during lunch.
But the next day turned out to be one of the most dangerous days in human history.
I mentioned this at the beginning of the video too. 12 minutes into the day, at 12:12 AM, the USA informed its NATO allies countries, that the situation was worsening.
And they should be prepared for any military action they might have to take.
At 6 AM, the CIA reported that 5 of the 6 missile sites in Cuba, were operational.
And that the Cuban military was preparing for war, however, they were ordered not to initiate attacks until the other side attacked first.
Khrushchev said that they agreed with the offer, but they had an additional condition.
The fourth condition was that the nuclear missiles placed by the United States in Turkey, needs to be removed as it was near the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev said that the United States was worried about the missiles in Cuba even though it was 90 miles from the US, While Turkey shared a border with the Soviet Union.
And the United States had placed nuclear missiles on Soviet Union's border.
And 1 hour later, at noon, an American U-2 aircraft entered Cuban airspace.
As the Cuban military was ordered, they shot down the aircraft, and the pilot Rudolf Anderson died in it.
Around the same time, a United States navy warship spotted a B-59 submarine, and starts attacking it.
The USA had continued the naval blockade, and the Russian ships were allowed to move freely, especially if it was carrying weapons.
When this submarine was attacked, Captain Valentin exclaimed, The submarine was carrying nuclear weapons.
The submarine had lost contact with the outside and their radio wasn't working either.
Two of the officers give their approval for the launch of the nuclear missiles, because from their perspective, the war had already begun.
He showed immense courage and said that they wouldn't launch any nuclear missiles.
And tried to convince them that there was no need to jump into launching nuclear weapons so soon, because he believed that there was a chance that the war hadn't broken out and if they started launching nuclear weapons, there would be a nuclear war in the world because of them.
But despite tremendous pressure, around 4 PM, United States President Kennedy says that they would continue the negotiations.
This caused Turkey to put pressure on the US, because Turkey didn't want the missiles to be withdrawn.
Although Italy agrees to remove the United States nuclear missiles from the country.
Robert Kennedy says that they would remove the missiles from Turkey and Italy, but they would do so secretly.
Because the United States government did not want to be pressured by the people.
And asked the Soviet Union to refrain from declaring publicly that they removed the missiles from Turkey and Italy.
Khrushchev would have to publicly withdraw his fourth demand even though it would be fulfilled secretly.
He broadcasted a message on Radio Moscow that the Soviet Union had accepted America's demands.
And secretly, America takes back the nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy. 25 years later, this secret is revealed to the world.
Many people in these countries believed that the other country was an enemy that needed to be wiped out.
And Khrushchev's image, as I told you, he had to sacrifice his image completely.
On the other hand, 2 years later, Nikita Khrushchev was overthrown by his political opponents in the Soviet Union.
Along with the Robert Kennedy and Robert McNamara in the US and in the Soviet Union, along with Nikita Khrushchev, Alexander Feklisov, and perhaps the biggest hero was Vasili Arkhipov, the Commander of the submarines who refrained from using the launch button.
Despite huge pressure from the United States military, Kennedy did not go ahead with the invasion.
Claiming that Russia's actions in Ukraine are right because the same thing happened in Cuba.
The US's actions in Cuba were also justified because the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Had the United States invaded Cuba, they would have made a major mistake.
With the same logic, the actions of Russia in Ukraine are wrong because Ukraine wants to be a part of NATO, However, there are no American missiles in Ukraine.
If you liked this video, you should watch the one on the Berlin Wall, because in it, you can understand the Cold War in detail.
