The revolution began in July 1953, and continued sporadically until the rebels finally ousted Batista on 31 December 1958, replacing his government.
The Cuban Revolution had powerful domestic and international repercussions.
In particular, it transformed Cuba–United States relations, although efforts to improve diplomatic relations, such as the Cuban thaw, gained momentum during the 2010s.
In the immediate aftermath of the revolution, Castro's government began a program of nationalization, centralization of the press and political consolidation that transformed Cuba's economy and civil society.
The revolution also heralded an era of Cuban medical internationalism and Cuban intervention in foreign conflicts in Africa, Latin America, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East.
Several rebellions occurred in the six years following 1959, mainly in the Escambray Mountains, which were defeated by the revolutionary government.
Corruption in Cuba Corruption in Cuba The Republic of Cuba at the turn of the 20th Century was largely characterized by a deeply ingrained tradition of corruption where political participation resulted in opportunities for elites to engage in wealth accumulation.
Cuba's first presidential period under Don Tomás Estrada Palma from 1902 to 1906 was considered to uphold the best standards of administrative integrity in the history of the Republic of Cuba.
However, a United States intervention in 1906 resulted in Charles Edward Magoon, an American diplomat, taking over the government until 1909.
It has been debated whether Magoon's government condoned or in fact engaged in corrupt practices.
Hugh Thomas suggests that while Magoon disapproved of corrupt practices, corruption still persisted under his administration and he undermined the autonomy of the judiciary and their court decisions.
Cuba's subsequent president, José Miguel Gómez, was the first to become involved in pervasive corruption and government corruption scandals.
These scandals involved bribes that were allegedly paid to Cuban officials and legislators under a contract to search the Havana harbour, as well as the payment of fees to government associates and high-level officials.
Despite his intentions, corruption actually intensified under his government from 1913–1921.
Instances of fraud became more common while private actors and contractors frequently colluded with public officials and legislators.
Charles Edward Chapman attributes the increase of corruption to the sugar boom that occurred in Cuba under the Menocal administration.
Both petty and grand corruption spread to nearly all aspects of public life and the Cuban administration became largely characterized by nepotism as Zayas relied on friends and relatives to illegally gain greater access to wealth.
Due to Zaya's previous policies, Gerardo Machado aimed to diminish corruption and improve the public sector's performance under his successive administration from 1925–1933.
While he was successfully able to reduce the amounts of low level and petty corruption, grand corruption still largely persisted.
Machado embarked on development projects that enabled the persistence of grand corruption through inflated costs and the creation of ""large margins"" that enabled public officials to appropriate money illegally.
Under his government, opportunities for corruption became concentrated into fewer hands with ""centralized government purchasing procedures"" and the collection of bribes among a smaller number of bureaucrats and administrators.
Through the development of real estate infrastructures and the growth of Cuba's tourism industry, Machado's administration was able to use insider information to profit from private sector business deals.
Argote-Freyre points out that Cuba's population under the Republic had a high tolerance for corruption.
Corrupt officials went beyond members of congress to also include military officials who granted favours to residents and accepted bribes.
The establishment of an illegal gambling network within the military enabled army personnel such as Lieutenant Colonel Pedraza and Major Mariné to engage in extensive illegal gambling activities.
Mauricio Augusto Font and Alfonso Quiroz, authors of The Cuban Republic and José Martí, say that corruption pervaded in public life under the administrations of Presidents Ramón Grau and Carlos Prío Socarrás.
Prío was reported to have stolen over $90 million in public funds, which was equivalent to one fourth of the annual national budget.
Prior to the Communist revolution, Cuba was ruled under the elected government of Fulgencio Batista from 1940-1944.
Throughout this time period, Batista's support base consisted mainly of corrupt politicians and military officials.
Batista himself was able to heavily profit from the regime before coming into power through inflated government contracts and gambling proceeds.
British diplomats believed that corruption was rooted within Cuba's most powerful institutions, with the highest individuals in government and military being heavily involved in gambling and the drug trade.
In terms of civil society, Eduardo Saenz Rovner writes that corruption within the Police and government enabled the expansion of criminal organizations in Cuba.
Batista refused United States President Franklin Roosevelt's offer to send experts to help reform the Cuban Civil Service.
Later in 1952, Batista led a U-S backed military coup against Prío Socarras and ruled until 1959.
Under his rule, Batista led a corrupt dictatorship that involved close links with organized crime organizations and the reduction of civil freedoms of Cubans.
This period resulted in Batista engaging in more ""sophisticated practices of corruption"" at both the administrative and civil society levels.
Batista and his administration engaged in profiteering from the lottery as well as illegal gambling.
Corruption further flourished in civil society through increasing amounts of police corruption, censorship of the press as well as media, and creating anti-communist campaigns that suppressed opposition with violence, torture and public executions.
The former culture of toleration and acceptance towards corruption also dissolved with the dictatorship of Batista.
For instance, one citizen wrote that ""however corrupt Grau and Prío were, we elected them and therefore allowed them to steal from us.
Corruption under Batista further expanded into the economic sector with alliances that he forged with foreign investors and the prevalence of illegal casinos and criminal organizations in the country's capital of Havana.
Politics of Cuba In the decades following the United States' invasion of Cuba in 1898, and formal independence from the United States on 20 May 1902, Cuba experienced a period of significant instability, enduring a number of revolts, coups and a period of United States military occupation.
Fulgencio Batista, a former soldier who had served as the elected president of Cuba from 1940 to 1944, became president for the second time in 1952, after seizing power in a military coup and canceling the 1952 elections.
Although Batista had been relatively progressive during his first term, in the 1950s he proved far more dictatorial and indifferent to popular concerns.
While Cuba remained plagued by high unemployment and limited water infrastructure, Batista antagonized the population by forming lucrative links to organized crime and allowing American companies to dominate the Cuban economy, especially sugar-cane plantations and other local resources.
Although the United States armed and politically supported the Batista dictatorship, later United States presidents recognized its corruption and the justifiability of removing it.
Batista developed a rather weak security bridge as an attempt to silence political opponents.
In the months following the March 1952 coup, Fidel Castro, then a young lawyer and activist, petitioned for the overthrow of Batista, whom he accused of corruption and tyranny.
However, Castro's constitutional arguments were rejected by the Cuban courts.
After deciding that the Cuban regime could not be replaced through legal means, Castro resolved to launch an armed revolution.
To this end, he and his brother Raúl founded a paramilitary organization known as ""The Movement"", stockpiling weapons and recruiting around 1,200 followers from Havana's disgruntled working class by the end of 1952.
Fidel Castro in the Cuban Revolution Attack on Moncada Barracks Main article: Moncada Barracks Fidel Castro on his arrest after the July 1953 attack on the Moncada Barracks in Santiago de Cuba.
Striking their first blow against the Batista government, Fidel and Raúl Castro gathered 70 fighters and planned a multi-pronged attack on several military installations.
On 26 July 1953, the rebels attacked the Moncada Barracks in Santiago and the barracks in Bayamo, only to be decisively defeated by the far more numerous government soldiers.
It was hoped that the staged attack would spark a nationwide revolt against Batista's government.
After an hour of fighting most of the rebels and their leader fled to the mountains.
The exact number of rebels killed in the battle is debatable; however, in his autobiography, Fidel Castro claimed that nine were killed in the fighting, and an additional 56 were executed after being captured by the Batista government.
Due to the government's large number of men, Hunt revised the number to be around 60 members taking the opportunity to flee to the mountains along with Castro.
Among the dead was Abel Santamaría, Castro's second-in-command, who was imprisoned, tortured, and executed on the same day as the attack.
Imprisonment and immigration Numerous key Movement revolutionaries, including the Castro brothers, were captured shortly afterwards.
In a highly political trial, Fidel spoke for nearly four hours in his defense, ending with the words ""Condemn me, it does not matter.
Castro's defense was based on nationalism, the representation and beneficial programs for the non-elite Cubans, and his patriotism and justice for the Cuban community.
Fidel was sentenced to 15 years in the Presidio Modelo prison, located on Isla de Pinos, while Raúl was sentenced to 13 years.
However, in 1955, under broad political pressure, the Batista government freed all political prisoners in Cuba, including the Moncada attackers.
Fidel's Jesuit childhood teachers succeeded in persuading Batista to include Fidel and Raúl in the release.Soon, the Castro brothers joined with other exiles in Mexico to prepare for the overthrow of Batista, receiving training from Alberto Bayo, a leader of Republican forces in the Spanish Civil War.
In June 1955, Fidel met the Argentine revolutionary Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, who joined his cause.
Raul and Castro's chief advisor Ernesto aided the initiation of Batista's amnesty.
The revolutionaries named themselves the ""26th of July Movement"", in reference to the date of their attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953.
Student demonstrations By late 1955, student riots and demonstrations became more common, and unemployment became problematic as new graduates could not find jobs.
Attack on Domingo Goicuria barracks While the Castro brothers and the other 26 July Movement guerrillas were training in Mexico and preparing for their amphibious deployment to Cuba, another revolutionary group followed the example of the Moncada Barracks assault.
The attack was repelled with ten rebels and three soldiers killed in the fighting, and one rebel summarily executed by the garrison commander.
Granma The yacht Granma departed from Tuxpan, Veracruz, Mexico, on 25 November 1956, carrying the Castro brothers and 80 others including Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos, even though the yacht was only designed to accommodate 12 people with a maximum of 25.
On 2 December, it landed in Playa Las Coloradas, in the municipality of Niquero, arriving two days later than planned because the boat was heavily loaded, unlike during the practice sailing runs.
This dashed any hopes for a coordinated attack with the llano wing of the Movement.
After arriving and exiting the ship, the band of rebels began to make their way into the Sierra Maestra mountains, a range in southeastern Cuba.
Three days after the trek began, Batista's army attacked and killed most of the Granma participants – while the exact number is disputed, no more than twenty of the original eighty-two men survived the initial encounters with the Cuban army and escaped into the Sierra Maestra mountains.The group of survivors included Fidel and Raúl Castro, Che Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos.
The dispersed survivors, alone or in small groups, wandered through the mountains, looking for each other.
Eventually, the men would link up again – with the help of peasant sympathizers – and would form the core leadership of the guerrilla army.
A number of female revolutionaries, including Celia Sanchez and Haydée Santamaría , also assisted Fidel Castro's operations in the mountains.
Havana Presidential Palace attack Havana Presidential Palace attack, 13 March 1957 On 13 March 1957, a separate group of revolutionaries – the anticommunist Student Revolutionary Directorate , composed mostly of students – stormed the Presidential Palace in Havana, attempting to assassinate Batista and overthrow the government.
The RD's leader, student José Antonio Echeverría, died in a shootout with Batista's forces at the Havana radio station he had seized to spread the news of Batista's anticipated death.
The plan, as explained by Faure Chaumón Mediavilla, was to attack the Presidential Palace by a commando of fifty men and simultaneously support the operation by one hundred men occupying the radio station Radio Reloj at the Radiocentro CMQ Building to announce the death of Batista.
The attack on the palace would result in the elimination of Fulgencio Batista, the purpose of taking of Radio Reloj, was to announce the death of Batista and to call for a general strike, to incite the people of Havana to join the armed struggle.
However, this secondary support operation was not carried out as the men who were to participate never arrived at the scene of the events because of last-minute hesitation.
Although the attackers reached the third floor of the Palace, they did not locate or execute Batista.
Humboldt 7 massacre Havana police at the entrance door of apartment 201, 20 April 1957.
Colonel Esteban Ventura Novo assassinated four participants who had survived the Assault on the Presidential Palace and in the seizure of the Radio Reloj station at the Radiocentro CMQ Building.
Marcos Rodríguez Alfonso began arguing with Fructuoso, Carbó and Machadito; Joe Westbrook had not yet arrived.
Marquitos, who gave the airs to be a revolutionary, was strongly against the revolution and was thus resented by the others.
Colonel Esteban Ventura and revealed the location of where the young revolutionaries were, Humboldt 7.
After 5:00 PM on 20 April, a large contingent of police officers arrived and assaulted apartment 201, where the four men were staying.
The police rounded up and executed the rebels, who were unarmed.The incident was covered up until a post-revolution investigation in 1959.
Marquitos was arrested and, after a double trial, was sentenced by the Supreme Court to the penalty of death by firing squad in March 1964.
Frank País Frank Pais was a revolutionary organizer who had built an extensive urban network, who had been tried and acquitted for his role in organizing an unsuccessful uprising in Santiago de Cuba in support of Castro's landing.
On 30 June 1957, Frank's younger brother, Josué Pais, was killed by the Santiago police.
During the latter part of July 1957, a wave of systematic police searches forced Frank País into hiding in Santiago de Cuba.
On 30 July he was in a safe house with Raúl Pujol, despite warnings from other members of the Movement that it was not secure.
The Santiago police under Colonel José Salas Cañizares surrounded the building.
However, an informant betrayed them as they tried to walk to a waiting getaway car.
The police officers drove the two men to the Callejón del Muro and shot them in the back of the head.
In defiance of Batista's regime, he was buried in the Santa Ifigenia Cemetery in the olive green uniform and red and black armband of 26 July Movement.
In response to the death of País, the workers of Santiago declared a spontaneous general strike.
This strike was the largest popular demonstration in the city up to that point.
The mobilization of 30 July 1957 is considered one of the most decisive dates in both the Cuban Revolution and the fall of Batista's dictatorship.
This day has been instituted in Cuba as the Day of the Martyrs of the Revolution.
The Frank País Second Front, the guerrilla unit led by Raúl Castro in the Sierra Maestra was named for the fallen revolutionary.
Naval mutiny at Cienfuegos On 6 September 1957 elements of the Cuban navy in the Cienfuegos Naval Base staged a rising against the Batista regime.
Led by junior officers in sympathy with the 26th of July Movement, this was originally intended to coincide with the seizure of warships in Havana harbour.
Reportedly individual officials within the United States Embassy were aware of the plot and had promised United States recognition if it were successful.By 5:30am the base was in the hands of the mutineers.
About two hundred 26th of July Movement members and other rebel supporters entered the base from the town and were given weapons.
By the afternoon Government motorised infantry had arrived from Santa Clara, supported by B-26 bombers.
After street fighting throughout the afternoon and night the last of the rebels, holding out in the police headquarters, were overwhelmed.
Insurgency and United States involvement The United States supplied Cuba with planes, ships, tanks and other tech such as napalm, which was used against the rebels.
This would eventually come to an end due to a later arms embargo in 1958.
According to Tad Szulc the United States began funding the 26th of July Movement around October or November 1957 and ending around middle 1958.
The purpose being to instill sympathies to the United States amongst the rebels in case the movement succeeded.
Comandante William Alexander Morgan of the Second National Front of the Escambray While Batista increased troop deployments to the Sierra Maestra region to crush the 26 July guerrillas, the Second National Front of the Escambray kept battalions of the Constitutional Army tied up in the Escambray Mountains region.
The Second National Front was led by former Revolutionary Directorate member Eloy Gutiérrez Menoyo and the ""Yanqui Comandante"" William Alexander Morgan.
Gutiérrez Menoyo formed and headed the guerrilla band after news had broken out about Castro's landing in the Sierra Maestra, and José Antonio Echeverría had stormed the Havana Radio station.
Though Morgan was dishonorably discharged from the United States Army, his recreating features from Army basic training made a critical difference in the Second National Front troops battle readiness.Thereafter, the United States imposed an economic embargo on the Cuban government and recalled its ambassador, weakening the government's mandate further.
Batista's support among Cubans began to fade, with former supporters either joining the revolutionaries or distancing themselves from Batista.
Once Batista started making drastic decisions concerning Cuba's economy, he began to nationalize U.S oil refineries and other U.S properties.
Nonetheless, the Mafia and United States businessmen maintained their support for the regime.Batista's government often resorted to brutal methods to keep Cuba's cities under control.
However, in the Sierra Maestra mountains, Castro, aided by Frank País, Ramos Latour, Huber Matos, and many others, staged successful attacks on small garrisons of Batista's troops.
Castro was joined by CIA connected Frank Sturgis who offered to train Castro's troops in guerrilla warfare.
Castro accepted the offer, but he also had an immediate need for guns and ammunition, so Sturgis became a gunrunner.
Sturgis purchased boatloads of weapons and ammunition from CIA weapons expert Samuel Cummings' International Armament Corporation in Alexandria, Virginia.
Sturgis opened a training camp in the Sierra Maestra mountains, where he taught Che Guevara and other 26 July Movement rebel soldiers guerrilla warfare.
In addition, poorly armed irregulars known as escopeteros harassed Batista's forces in the foothills and plains of Oriente Province.
The escopeteros also provided direct military support to Castro's main forces by protecting supply lines and by sharing intelligence.
Ultimately, the mountains came under Castro's control.In addition to armed resistance, the rebels sought to use propaganda to their advantage.
Even so, nearly every time the Cuban military fought against the revolutionaries, the army was forced to retreat.
An arms embargo – imposed on the Cuban government by the United States on 14 March 1958 – contributed significantly to the weakness of Batista's forces.
Operation Verano Batista finally responded to Castro's efforts with an attack on the mountains called Operation Verano, known to the rebels as la Ofensiva.
The army sent some 12,000 soldiers, half of them untrained recruits, into the mountains, along with his own brother Raul.
In a series of small skirmishes, Castro's determined guerrillas defeated the Cuban army.
With his forces pinned down by superior numbers, Castro asked for, and received, a temporary cease-fire on 1 August.
Over the next seven days, while fruitless negotiations took place, Castro's forces gradually escaped from the trap.
By 8 August, Castro's entire army had escaped back into the mountains, and Operation Verano had effectively ended in failure for the Batista government.
Battle of Las Mercedes The Battle of Las Mercedes was the last battle which occurred during the course of Operation Verano, the summer offensive of 1958 launched by the Batista Government during the Cuban Revolution.The battle was a trap, designed by Cuban General Eulogio Cantillo to lure Fidel Castro's guerrillas into a place where they could be surrounded and destroyed.
The battle ended with a cease-fire which Castro proposed and which Cantillo accepted.
The battle, though technically a victory for the Cuban army, left the army dispirited and demoralized.
Castro viewed the result as a victory and soon launched his own offensive.
Castro sent a column of men under René Ramos Latour to ambush the retreating soldiers.
They attacked the advance guard and killed some 30 soldiers but then came under attack from previously undetected Cuban forces.
Latour called for help and Castro came to the battle scene with his own column of men.
Castro's column also came under fire from another group of Cuban soldiers that had secretly advanced up the road from the Estrada Palma Sugar Mill.
As the battle heated up, General Cantillo called up more forces from nearby towns and some 1,500 troops started heading towards the fighting.
However, this force was halted by a column under Che Guevara's command.
While some critics accuse Che for not coming to the aid of Latour, Major Bockman argues that Che's move here was the correct thing to do.
By the end of July, Castro's troops were fully engaged and in danger of being wiped out by the vastly superior numbers of the Cuban army.
He had lost 70 men, including René Latour, and both he and the remains of Latour's column were surrounded.
The next day, Castro requested a cease-fire with General Cantillo, even offering to negotiate an end to the war.
This offer was accepted by General Cantillo for reasons that remain unclear.
Batista sent a personal representative to negotiate with Castro on 2 August.
The negotiations yielded no result but during the next six nights, Castro's troops managed to slip away unnoticed.
On 8 August when the Cuban army resumed its attack, they found no one to fight.
Castro's remaining forces had escaped back into the mountains, and Operation Verano had effectively ended in failure for the Batista government.
Battle of Yaguajay Central part of the battle's monument and plaza with the statue of Camilo Cienfuegos In 1958, Fidel Castro ordered his revolutionary army to go on the offensive against the army of Fulgencio Batista.
While Castro led one force against Guisa, Masó and other towns, another major offensive was directed at the capture of the city of Santa Clara, the capital of what was then Las Villas Province.
Three columns were sent against Santa Clara under the command of Che Guevara, Jaime Vega, and Camilo Cienfuegos.
Cienfuegos's column directly attacked a local army garrison at Yaguajay.
Convinced that reinforcements would be sent from Santa Clara, Lee put up a determined defense of his post.
The guerrillas repeatedly attempted to overpower Lee and his men, but failed each time.
By 26 December Camilo Cienfuegos had become quite frustrated; it seemed that Lee could not be overpowered, nor could he be convinced to surrender.
In desperation, Cienfuegos tried using a homemade tank against Lee's position.
The ""tank"" was actually a large tractor encased in iron plates with attached makeshift flamethrowers on top.
Finally, on 30 December Lee ran out of ammunition and was forced to surrender his force to the guerrillas.The surrender of the garrison was a major blow to the defenders of the provincial capital of Santa Clara.
The next day, the combined forces of Cienfuegos, Guevara, and local revolutionaries under William Alexander Morgan captured the city in a fight of vast confusion.
Panicked by news of the defeat at Santa Clara and other losses, Batista fled Cuba the next day.
Battle of Guisa On the morning of 20 November 1958, a convoy of the Batista soldiers began its usual journey from Guisa.
Shortly after leaving that town, located in the northern foothills of the Sierra Maestra, the rebels attacked the caravan.
Guisa was 12 kilometers from the Command Post of the Zone of Operations, located on the outskirts of the city of Bayamo.
Nine days earlier, Fidel Castro had left the La Plata Command, beginning an unstoppable march east with his escort and a small group of combatants.On 19 November the rebels arrived in Santa Barbara.
Fidel gathered his officers to organize the siege of Guisa, and ordered the placement of a mine on the Monjarás bridge, over the Cupeinicú river.
In the early morning, they took the path that runs between the Heliografo hill and the Mateo Roblejo hill, where they occupied strategic positions.
At around 10:30 am, the military Command Post located in the Zone of Operations in Bayamo sent a reinforcement made up of Co., plus a platoon from Co.
Fidel ordered the mining of another bridge over a tributary of the Cupeinicú River.
Hours later the army sent a platoon from Co. and another platoon from Co., supported by a T-17 tank.
Rebel offensive This section needs additional citations for verification.
If the price of maintaining them will cost it, he is better off giving them up; that is to say, withdrawing from the face of the guerrilla danger.— Che Guevara, 1958 Map showing key locations in the Sierra Maestra during the 1958 stage of the Cuban Revolution On 21 August 1958, after the defeat of Batista's Ofensiva, Castro's forces began their own offensive.
In the Oriente province , Fidel Castro, Raúl Castro and Juan Almeida Bosque directed attacks on four fronts.
Descending from the mountains with new weapons captured during the Ofensiva and smuggled in by plane, Castro's forces won a series of initial victories.
Castro's major victory at Guisa, and the successful capture of several towns including Maffo, Contramaestre, and Central Oriente, brought the Cauto plains under his control.
Meanwhile, three rebel columns, under the command of Che Guevara, Camilo Cienfuegos and Jaime Vega, proceeded westward toward Santa Clara, the capital of Villa Clara Province.
Batista's forces ambushed and destroyed Jaime Vega's column, but the surviving two columns reached the central provinces, where they joined forces with several other resistance groups not under the command of Castro.
When Che Guevara's column passed through the province of Las Villas, and specifically through the Escambray Mountains – where the anticommunist Revolutionary Directorate forces had been fighting Batista's army for many months – friction developed between the two groups of rebels.
There was also a minor party candidate on the ballot, Alberto Salas Amaro for the Union Cubana party.
Although Andrés Rivero Agüero won the presidential election with 70% of the vote, he was unable to take office due to the Cuban Revolution.Rivero Agüero was due to be sworn-in on 24 February 1959.
Smith on 15 November 1958, he called Castro a ""sick man"" and stated it would be impossible to reach a settlement with him.
Rivero Agüero also said that he planned to restore constitutional government and would convene a Constitutional Assembly after taking office.This was the last competitive election in Cuba, the 1940 Constitution of Cuba, the Congress and the Senate of the Cuban Republic, were quickly dismantled shortly thereafter.
The rebels had publicly called for an election boycott, issuing its Total War Manifesto on 12 March 1958, threatening to kill anyone that voted.
Battle of Santa Clara and Batista's flight Habana entrance Fidel Castro and Huber Matos.
On 31 December 1958, the Battle of Santa Clara took place in a scene of great confusion.
The city of Santa Clara fell to the combined forces of Che Guevara, Cienfuegos, and Revolutionary Directorate rebels led by Comandantes Rolando Cubela, Juan Abrahantes, and William Alexander Morgan.
He fled Cuba by air for the Dominican Republic just hours later on 1 January 1959.
Comandante William Alexander Morgan, leading RD rebel forces, continued fighting as Batista departed and had captured the city of Cienfuegos by 2 January.Cuban General Eulogio Cantillo entered Havana's Presidential Palace, proclaimed the Supreme Court judge Carlos Piedra as the new president, and began appointing new members to Batista's old government.Castro learned of Batista's flight in the morning and immediately started negotiations to take over Santiago de Cuba.
On 2 January, the military commander in the city, Colonel Rubido, ordered his soldiers not to fight, and Castro's forces took over the city.
The forces of Guevara and Cienfuegos entered Havana at about the same time.
They had met no opposition on their journey from Santa Clara to Cuba's capital.
Castro himself arrived in Havana on 8 January after a long victory march.
His initial choice of president, Manuel Urrutia Lleó, took office on 3 January.
Aftermath Relations with the United States Victorious rebels in the Havana Hilton, January 1959.
The Cuban Revolution was a crucial turning point in U.S.-Cuban relations.
Although the United States government was initially willing to recognize Castro's new government, it soon came to fear that Communist insurgencies would spread through the nations of Latin America, as they had in Southeast Asia.
Meanwhile, Castro's government resented the Americans for providing aid to Batista's government during the revolution.
After the revolutionary government nationalized all United States property in Cuba in August 1960, the American Eisenhower administration froze all Cuban assets on American soil, severed diplomatic ties and tightened its embargo of Cuba.
In 1961, the United States government launched the Bay of Pigs Invasion, in which Brigade 2506 landed on a mission to oust Castro; the attempt to overthrow Castro failed, with the invasion being repulsed by the Cuban military.
The United States embargo against Cuba is still in force as of 2020, although it underwent a partial loosening during the Obama Administration, only to be strengthened in 2017 under Trump.
The United States began efforts to normalize relations with Cuba in the mid-2010s, and formally reopened its embassy in Havana after over half a century in August 2015.
The Trump administration reversed much of the Cuban Thaw by severely restricting travel by United States citizens to Cuba and tightening the United States government's embargo against the country.
I believe that there is no country in the world, including the African regions, including any and all the countries under colonial domination, where economic colonization, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, in part owing to my country's policies during the Batista regime.
I believe that we created, built and manufactured the Castro movement out of whole cloth and without realizing it.
I believe that the accumulation of these mistakes has jeopardized all of Latin America.
The great aim of the Alliance for Progress is to reverse this unfortunate policy.
This is one of the most, if not the most, important problems in America foreign policy.
I approved the proclamation which Fidel Castro made in the Sierra Maestra, when he justifiably called for justice and especially yearned to rid Cuba of corruption.
Manuel Urrutia Lleó Manuel Urrutia Lleó, in the presidential palace, president of Cuba, 1959.
Che Guevara with Manuel Urrutia in 1959, who was president at the beginning of the revolution, after being appointed by the rebels.
He campaigned against the Gerardo Machado government and the second presidency of Fulgencio Batista during the 1950s, before serving as president in the first revolutionary government of 1959.
Urrutia resigned his position after seven months, owing to a series of disputes with revolutionary leader Fidel Castro, and emigrated to the United States shortly afterward.
The Cuban Revolution gained victory on 1 January 1959, and Urrutia returned from exile in Venezuela to take up residence in the presidential palace.
His new revolutionary government consisted largely of Cuban political veterans and pro-business liberals including José Miró, who was appointed as prime minister.Once in power, Urrutia swiftly began a program of closing all brothels, gambling outlets and the national lottery, arguing that these had long been a corrupting influence on the state.
The measures drew immediate resistance from the large associated workforce.
The disapproving Castro, then commander of Cuba's new armed forces, intervened to request a stay of execution until alternative employment could be found.Disagreements also arose in the new government concerning pay cuts, which were imposed on all public officials on Castro's demand.
The disputed cuts included a reduction of the $100,000 a year presidential salary Urrutia had inherited from Batista.
By February, following the surprise resignation of Miró, Castro had assumed the role of prime minister; this strengthened his power and rendered Urrutia increasingly a figurehead president.
As Urrutia's participation in the legislative process declined, other unresolved disputes between the two leaders continued to fester.
His belief in the restoration of elections was rejected by Castro, who felt that they would usher in a return to the old discredited system of corrupt parties and fraudulent balloting that had marked the Batista era.Urrutia was then accused by the Avance newspaper of buying a luxury villa, which was portrayed as a frivolous betrayal of the revolution and led to an outcry from the general public.
He denied the allegation issuing a writ against the newspaper in response.
The story further increased tensions between the various factions in the government, though Urrutia asserted publicly that he had ""absolutely no disagreements"" with Fidel Castro.
Urrutia attempted to distance the Cuban government from the growing influence of the Communists within the administration, making a series of critical public comments against the latter group.
In line with his call for revolution in Latin America and beyond against imperial powers, laid out in his Declarations of Havana, Castro immediately sought to ""export"" his revolution to other countries in the Caribbean and beyond, sending weapons to Algerian rebels as early as 1960.
In the following decades, Cuba became heavily involved in supporting Communist insurgencies and independence movements in many developing countries, sending military aid to insurgents in Ghana, Nicaragua, Yemen and Angola, among others.
Castro's intervention in the Angolan Civil War in the 1970s and 1980s was particularly significant, involving as many as 60,000 Cuban soldiers.
Relations with the Soviet Union Following the American embargo, the Soviet Union became Cuba's main ally.
The Soviet Union did not initially want anything to do with Cuba or Latin America until the United States had taken an interest in dismantling Castro’s communist government.
There were three big reasons why the Soviet Union changed their attitudes and finally took interest in the island country.
First was the success of the Cuban Revolution, to which Moscow responded with great interest as they understood that if a communist revolution was successful for Cuba, it could be successful elsewhere in Latin America.
So from then on the Soviets began looking into foreign affairs in Latin America.
Second, after learning about the United States' aggressive plan to deploy another Guatemala scenario in Cuba, the Soviet opinion quickly changed feet.
Third, Soviet leaders saw the Cuban Revolution as first and foremost an anti–North American revolution which of course whet their appetite as this was during the height of the cold war and the Soviet, United States battle for global dominance was at its apex.
The Soviets’ attitude of optimism changed to one of concern for the safety of Cuba after it was excluded from the inter-American system at the conference held at Punta del Este in January 1962 by the Organization of American States.
This coupled with the threat of a United States invasion of the island was really the turning point for Soviet Concern, the idea was that should Cuba be defeated by the United States it would mean defeat for the Soviet Union and for Marxism-Leninism.
If Cuba were to fall, ""other Latin American countries would reject us, claiming that for all our might the Soviet Union had not been able to do anything for Cuba except to make empty protests to the United Nations"" wrote Khrushchev.
The Soviet attitude towards Cuba changed to concern for the safety of the island nation because of increased United States tensions and threats of invasion making the Soviet-Cuban relationship superficial insofar as it only cared about denying the United States power in the region and maintaining Soviet supremacy.
In a letter that Khrushchev writes to Castro in January of the following year , after the end of conflict, he talks about wanting to discuss the issues in the two countries' relations.
He writes attacking voices from other countries, including socialist ones, blaming the USSR of being opportunistic and self-serving.
He explained the decision to withdraw missiles from Cuba, stressing the possibility of advancing Communism through peaceful means.
Khrushchev underlined the importance of guaranteeing against an American attack on Cuba and urged Havana to focus on economic, cultural, and technological development to become a shining beacon of socialism in Latin America.
In closing he invites Fidel Castro to visit Moscow and discuss the preparations for such a trip.The following two decades in the 70’s and 80’s were somewhat of an enigma in the sense that the 70’s and 80’s were filled with the most prosperity in Cuba’s history yet the revolutionary government hit full stride in achieving its most organized form and it adopted and enacted several brutal features of socialist regimes from the Eastern Bloc.
In 1972 Cuba joined COMECON, officially joining their trade with the Soviet Union’s socialist trade bloc.
That along with increased Soviet subsidies, better trade terms, and better, more practical domestic policy led to several years of prosperous growth.
This period also sees Cuba strengthening its foreign policy with other communistic anti-US imperial countries like Nicaragua.
This period is marked as the Sovietization of the 70’s and 80’s.Cuba maintained close links to the Soviets until the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991.
The end of Soviet economic aid and the loss of its trade partners in the Eastern Bloc led to an economic crisis and period of shortages known as the Special Period in Cuba.Current day relations with Russia, formerly the Soviet Union, ended in 2002 after the Russian Federation closed an intelligence base in Cuba over budgetary concerns.
However, in the last decade, relations have increased in recent years after Russia faced international backlash from the West over the situation in Ukraine in 2014.
In retaliation for NATO expansion towards the east, Russia has sought to create these same agreements in Latin America.
Russia has specifically sought greater ties with Cuba, Nicaragua, Venezuela, Brazil, and Mexico.
Currently, these countries maintain close economic ties with the United States.
In 2012, Putin decided that Russia focus its military power in Cuba like it had in the past.
Putin is quoted saying “Our goal is to expand Russia’s presence on the global arms and military equipment market.
Characteristics Ideology Propaganda poster in Havana, 2012 At the time of the revolution various sectors of society supported the revolutionary movement from communists to business leaders and the Catholic Church.The beliefs of Fidel Castro during the revolution have been the subject of much historical debate.
Some orthodox historians argue Castro was a communist from the beginning with a long-term plan; however, others have argued he had no strong ideological loyalties.
Leslie Dewart has stated that there is no evidence to suggest Castro was ever a communist agent.
Levine and Papasotiriou believe Castro believed in little outside of a distaste for American imperialism.
Women in the Cuban Revolution Raúl Castro, Vilma Espín, Jorge Risquet and José Nivaldo Causse in 1958 The importance of women's contributions to the Cuban Revolution is reflected in the very accomplishments that allowed the revolution to be successful, from the participation in the Moncada Barracks, to the Mariana Grajales all-women's platoon that served as Fidel Castro's personal security detail.
With the Granma and November 30, we had Celia, Vilma, and many other compañeras.
The ones who ended the war with officers' ranks stayed in the armed forces.
Before the Mariana Grajales Platoon was established, the revolutionary women of the Sierra Maestra were not organized for combat and primarily helped with cooking, mending clothes, and tending to the sick, frequently acting as couriers, as well as teaching guerrillas to read and write.
Celia Sanchez and Vilma Espin were leading strategists and highly skilled combatants who held essential roles throughout the revolution.
Tete Puebla, founding member and second in command of the Mariana Grajales Platoon, said of Celia Sanchez, ""When you speak of Celia, you've got to speak of Fidel, and vice versa.
Related Archival Collections There were many foreign presences in Cuba during this time.
Esther Brinch was a Danish translator for the Danish government in 1960's Cuba.
I am writing these lines to inquire about a man of ours who was almost certainly taken prisoner by your forces.
By chance said vanguard had taken another road and came to the road behind us.
As I expected, I sent a man to catch up with her to tell her to stop before reaching the Furnace.
The messenger left with the belief that it was going ahead and therefore would be completely unnoticed of the danger; He was also traveling on horseback, with the consequent noise of his footsteps.
Once the error was discovered, everything possible was done to warn him of the situation, but he had already reached the danger zone.
I am sure that he was taken prisoner; I confess that even the fear that he would have been later killed.
And I know that when it is a post that fires it is never limited to a single shot in these cases.
I have been explicit in the narration of the incident so that you can have sufficient evidence.
I hope I can count on your chivalry, to prevent that young man from being assassinated uselessly, if he was not killed last night.
We all feel special affection for that partner and we are concerned about his fate.
I propose that you return him to our lines, as I have done with hundreds of military personnel, including numerous officers.
Many painful events have occurred in this war because of some unscrupulous or honorable military personnel, and believe me that the Army needs men and gestures to compensate for those blemishes.
It is because I have a high opinion of you that I decide to talk to you about this case, in the assurance that you will do what is within your power.
If some formal inconvenience arises, it can be done in the form of an exchange, for one or more of the soldiers we took prisoner during the action of Guisa.
The patrol was turned back, and that same day the first enemy reinforcements arrived.
Hours before that, a truck full of soldiers had been blown up by another mine.
On the 25th, an infantry battalion, led by two T-17 tanks, advanced along the Bayamo-Guisa road, guarding a convoy of fourteen trucks.
Inside the Guisa garrison, the complete battalion that came in reinforcement, along with two T-17 tanks, was now within the rebel lines.
At 6:00m., the enemy had to abandon all its trucks, using them as a barricade tightly encircling the two tanks.
At 10:00m., while a battery of mortars attacked them, rebel recruits, armed with picks and shovels, opened a ditch in the road next to the tank that had been destroyed on the 20th, so that between the tank and the ditch, the other two T-17 tanks within the lines were prevented from escaping.
The action wasn’t over—a rebel column intercepted the enemy in retreat along the Central Highway and caused it new casualties, obtaining more ammunition and arms.
At 2:30m. on the 29th, the rebels took up positions, and the tank managed to place itself facing the Guisa army quarters.
The tank’s cannon had already fired fifty shots when two bazooka shots from the enemy killed its engine, but the tank’s cannon continued firing until its ammunition was exhausted and the men inside lowered the cannon tube.
The column that advanced along the road from Corojo was repulsed after two hours of combat.
The advance of the battalions that came along the road from Bayamo to Guisa was halted, and they encamped two kilometers from Guisa; those that advanced along the road from Corralillo were also turned back.
We took eight compañeros who died heroically in action, and seven wounded.
A Chronological Encyclopedia of Conflicts and Their Management, 1945–1995.
CS1 maint: uses authors parameter ^ New Republic, 14 Dec.63, Jean Daniel ""Unofficial Envoy: An Historic Report from Two Capitals,"" page 16 United States President John F Kennedy said: ""I approved the proclamation which Fidel Castro made in the Sierra Maestra, when he justifiably called for justice and especially yearned to rid Cuba of corruption.
Retrieved 5 May 2010. ...the world knows about the Moncada attack in Oriente province that made Fidel Castro famous, but few have heard of the attack on the Goicuria Barracks in Matanzas on April 29, 1956.
That event caught the young Bretos on a Sunday outing to mass at the cathedral with his Aunt Nena.
The yacht, designed for only 12 passengers and supposedly with a maximum capacity of 25, also had to carry fuel for a week as well as food and weapons for the soldiers.
A Hidden History of the Cuban Revolution How the Working Class Shaped the Guerillas' Victory.
Office of the Historian, Foreign Service Institute, United States Department of State.
The pursuit for freedom. p830-832 ^ ""Cuba Once More"" by Walter Lippmann.
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.643.
Teté Puebla & the Mariana Grajales Women's Platoon in Cuba's Revolutionary War, 1956–58.
Pathfinder, 2003 ^ Shayne, Julie D The Revolution Question: Feminisms in El Salvador, Chile, and Cuba.
Havana Crowds Hail Success Of Revolt, 1959/01/05 "" is available at the Internet Archive.
