Khrushchev / Castro letters October 1962Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space October 26, 1962 Dear Comrade Khrushchev: Given the analysis of the situation and the reports which have reached us, consider an attack to be almost imminent--within the next 24 to 72 hours.
Our message to President Kennedy of October 27, allows for a solution of the problem in your favor, defending Cuba from an invasion, from an outbreak of such a war.
Kennedy's answer, which you obviously know, offers United States guarantees that they will not only not invade Cuba with their own forces, but that they will not allow their allies to do so.
The President of the United States has thus responded favorably to my messages of October 26 and 27.
It must be said that we understand your profound indignation at the aggressive actions of the U.S.A and at its violation of the fundamental norms of international law.
For the time being, however, it is not law that rules but rather the lack of sense of the militarists in the Pentagon.
Now that a solution is being found-one that is in your favor and that guarantees against an invasion-the unbridled militarists in the Pentagon want to frustrate the agreement and provoke you into taking actions that could be used against you. we ask you not to give them a pretext for this.
We on our part will do everything to stabilize the situation in Cuba, to defend Cuba. from invasion and to assure you the possibilities for the peaceful construction of the socialist society.
Khrushchev Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space October 28, 1962 Mr Nikita Khrushchev Prime Minister of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.
The position of our Government regarding your statement can be found in the text of the declaration announced today, with which you are surely familiar.
I must clarify a point relating to the anti-aircraft measures which we adopted.
Previously, there were isolated violations with no particular military purpose, and they did not result in real danger.
We decided that we could not remain idle because of the danger of a surprise attack.
With our warning radars turned off, the potential attackers could fly with impunity over the sites and totally destroy them.
We did not believe that we should allow this, given the cost and effort which we have expended, and because an attack would have gravely weakened our morals and military capability.
Because of this, Cuban forces mobilized fifty anti-aircraft batteries, our entire reserves, on October 24 in order to support the positions of the Soviet forces.
If we wanted to prevent the risk of a surprise attack, the crews had to have orders to shoot.
The Soviet Forces Command can give you further details on what happened with the plane that was shot down.
In the past, violations of our airspace were de facto and were conducted furtively.
Yesterday the American Government tried to make official the privilege of violating our air space at any time, day and night.
This we could not accept because it would mean renouncing our sovereign prerogative.
Nevertheless, we agree to avoid an incident at this moment that could gravely harm the negotiations.
We will instruct the Cuban batteries to hold their fire while the negotiations last, without reversing the decision we announced yesterday to defend our air space.
We must consider the dangers of possible incidents in the present conditions of high tension.
I also wish to inform you that we are opposed, by principle, to inspections on our territory.
I appreciate the enormous efforts which you have made to maintain the peace, and we totally agree with the necessity to fight for this aim.
If we achieve it in a just, solid, and permanent way it will be an enormous service to humanity.
We have received your letter of October 28, along with the reports of the conversations that you and President Dorticos had with our ambassador.
We understand your situation and are taking into account your difficulties in this first stage following the elimination of the maximum tension that resulted from the threat of an attack by American imperialists which you expected at any moment.
We have taken, and will continue to take, every measure to strengthen our defenses and to accumulate the forces necessary to carry out a counter-strike.
At this time, with the weapons we have given Cuba, it is able to defend itself more than ever.
Even after the dismantling of the missile sites you will have weaponry sufficiently powerful to push back the enemy on land, sea, and air near your territory.
It is clear to everyone that this is a very serious warning which we are addressing to the enemy.
You stated in the meetings that one cannot trust the United States Of course you are right.
Your statements on the conditions for negotiations with the United States are equally correct.
Having shot down a U.S. aircraft over Cuban territory was in the end a useful act because it ended without complications.
But we-believe that you have total control over the internal enemy without our help.
The most important thing which we have achieved is to stop, for the time being, an attack by external enemies.
He was preparing to attack Cuba, but we stopped him and have forced him to pledge to the world that he will not do so at this time.
This process of struggle will last for as long as there exists on this earth two sociopolitical systems, until one of the systems, and we know that it will be our communist system, triumphs world-wide.
Comrade Fidel Castro, we have decided to send you this answer as quickly as possible.
We will conduct a more detailed analysis of what took place in a letter which we will soon send you.
In that letter we will make a more in depth analysis of the situation and will give you our opinion on the results of the settlement of the crisis.
At this time, the negotiations on a settlement are beginning and we ask you to communicate your position to us.
We, for our part, will keep you informed on the progress of the negotiations and make the necessary consultations.
Comrade Fidel Castro, we wish you all possible success, and I am sure that you will achieve it.
But with you, we intend to take all the steps to thwart them and to contribute to the strengthening and development of the Cuban Revolution.
