Following the death of Stalin, new leaders attempted to ""de-Stalinize"" the Soviet Union causing unrest in the Eastern Bloc and members of the Warsaw Pact.
In spite of this there was a calming of international tensions, the evidence of which can be seen in the signing of the Austrian State Treaty reuniting Austria, and the Geneva Accords ending fighting in Indochina.
However, this period of good happenings was only partial with an expensive arms race continuing during the period and a less alarming, but very expensive space race occurring between the two superpowers as well.
The addition of African countries to the stage of cold war, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo joining the Soviets, caused even more unrest in the West.
Fear of Soviet influence and nationalism 3 The end of the Korean War 4 Origins of the Space Race 4.
The race continues 5 Soviet strategy 6 Mutual assured destruction 7 Eastern Bloc events 7.
Sino-Soviet split 12 Culture and media 13 Computers in the Cold War 13.
Computers in the United States 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References 17 Further reading 18 External links Eisenhower and Khrushchev When Harry S Truman was succeeded in office by Dwight D Eisenhower as the 34th United States President in 1953, the Democrats lost their two-decades-long control of the United States presidency.
Under Eisenhower, however, the United States' Cold War policy remained essentially unchanged.
Whilst a thorough rethinking of foreign policy was launched , the majority of emerging ideas were quickly regarded as unworkable.
While the transition from the Truman to the Eisenhower presidencies was a mild transition in character , the change in the Soviet Union was immense.
With the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953, Georgy Malenkov was named leader of the Soviet Union.
Malenkov joined a failed coup against Khrushchev in 1957, after which he was sent to Kazakhstan.
During a subsequent period of collective leadership, Khrushchev gradually consolidated his hold on power.
Although the contents of the speech were secret, it was leaked to outsiders, thus shocking both Soviet allies and Western observers.
Khrushchev followed by easing restrictions, freeing some dissidents and initiating economic policies that emphasized commercial goods rather than just coal and steel production.
Eisenhower inherited from the Truman administration a military budget of roughly US$42 billion, as well as a paper drafted by Acheson, Harriman, and Lovett calling for an additional $7–9 billion in military spending.
With Treasury Secretary George Humphrey leading the way, and reinforced by pressure from Senator Robert A Taft and the cost-cutting mood of the Republican Congress, the target for the new fiscal year was reduced to $36 billion.
While the Korean armistice was on the verge of producing significant savings in troop deployment and money, the State and Defense Departments were still in an atmosphere of rising expectations for budgetary increases.
Joseph N Welch being questioned by Senator Joseph McCarthy , June 9, 1954 Although unwilling to cut deeply into defense, the President also wanted a balanced budget and smaller defense allocations.
With this in mind, Eisenhower continued funding for America's innovative cultural diplomacy initiatives throughout Europe which included goodwill performances by the ""soldier-musician ambassadors"" of the Seventh Army Symphony Orchestra.
In the meantime, however, attention was being diverted elsewhere in Asia.
The continuing pressure from the ""China lobby"" or ""Asia firsters"", who had insisted on active efforts to restore Chiang Kai-shek to power was still a strong domestic influence on foreign policy.
In April 1953 Senator Robert A Taft and other powerful Congressional Republicans suddenly called for the immediate replacement of the top chiefs of the Pentagon, particularly the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Omar Bradley.
To the so-called ""China lobby"" and Taft, Bradley was seen as having leanings toward a Europe-first orientation, meaning that he would be a possible barrier to new departures in military policy that they favored.
Another factor was the vitriolic accusations of McCarthyism, where large portions of the United States government allegedly contained covert communist agents or sympathizers.
But after the mid-term elections in 1954–and censure by the Senate–the influence of Joseph McCarthy ebbed after his unpopular accusations against the Army.
They are not psychologically prepared for the concept that you can have a war when you don't have actual fighting.— Admiral Hyman G Rickover addressing United States Senate Committee on Defense Preparedness on January 6, 1958 1958 deployment of United States atomic weapons in Korea, while reducing the size of conventional forces Eisenhower's farewell address, January 17, 1961.
The administration attempted to reconcile the conflicting pressures from the ""Asia firsters"" and pressures to cut federal spending while continuing to fight the Cold War effectively.
On May 8, 1953, the President and his top advisors tackled this problem in ""Operation Solarium"", named after the White House sunroom where the president conducted secret discussions.
Although it was not traditional to ask military men to consider factors outside their professional discipline, the President instructed the group to strike a proper balance between his goals to cut government spending and an ideal military posture.
Eisenhower and the group instead opted for a combination of the first two, one that confirmed the validity of containment, but with reliance on the American air-nuclear deterrent.
This was geared toward avoiding costly and unpopular ground wars, such as Korea.
The administration also reserved the prospects of using them, in effect, as a weapon of first resort, hoping to gain the initiative while reducing costs.
In 1955 the eight-engined B-52 Stratofortress bomber, the first true jet bomber designed to carry nuclear weapons, was developed.
In 1961, the United States deployed 15 Jupiter IRBMs at İzmir, Turkey, aimed at the western USSR's cities, including Moscow.
Fear of Soviet influence and nationalism Allen Dulles, along with most United States foreign policy-makers of the era, considered many Third World nationalists and ""revolutionaries"" as being essentially under the influence, if not control, of the Warsaw Pact.
Soviet Communist leadership has won a victory in China which surpassed what Japan was seeking and we risked war to avert.
Behind the scenes, Dulles could explain his policies in terms of geopolitics.
But publicly, he used the moral and religious reasons that he believed Americans preferred to hear, even though he was often criticized by observers at home and overseas for his strong language.
Two of the leading figures of the interwar and early Cold War period who viewed international relations from a ""realist"" perspective, diplomat George Kennan and theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, were troubled by Dulles' moral-ism and the method by which he analyzed Soviet behavior.
Kennan agreed the argument that the Soviets even had a world design after Stalin's death, being far more concerned with maintaining control of their own bloc.
But the underlying assumptions of a monolithic world communism, directed from the Kremlin, of the Truman-Acheson containment after the drafting of NSC-68 were essentially compatible with those of the Eisenhower-Dulles foreign policy.
To that end Soviet efforts are now directed toward the domination of the Eurasian land mass.
Korean War Prior to his election in 1953, Dwight D Eisenhower was already displeased with the manner that Harry S Truman had handled the war in Korea.
Acting on a campaign pledge made during his United States presidential election campaign, Eisenhower visited Korea on December 2, 1952 to assess to the situation.
Eisenhower's investigation consisted of meeting with South Korean troops, commanders, and government officials, after his meetings Eisenhower concluded, ""we could not stand forever on a static front and continue to accept casualties without any visible results.
Eisenhower urged the South Korean President Syngman Rhee to compromise in order to speed up peace talks.
This, coupled with the United States' threat of using nuclear weapons if the war did not end soon, led to the signing of an armistice on July 27, 1953.
Prisoners of war were allowed to choose where they would stay, either the area that would become North Korea or the area to become South Korea, and a border was placed between the two territories in addition to an allotted demilitarized zone.
The ""police action"" implemented by the Korean United Nations agreement prevented communism spreading from North Korea to South Korea.
United States involvement in the Korean War demonstrated its readiness to the world to rally to the aid of nations under invasion. particularly communistic invasion, and resulted in President Eisenhower's empowered image as an effective leader against tyranny; this ultimately led to a strengthened position of the United States in Europe and guided the development of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
The primary effect of these developments for the United States were the military buildup called for in response to Cold War concerns as seen in NSC 68.
Origins of the Space Race The Space Race between the United States and the Soviet Union was an integral component of the Cold War.
Contrary to the Nuclear arms race, it was a peaceful competition in which the two powers could demonstrate their technological and theoretical advancements over the other.
The Soviet Union was the first nation to enter the space realm with their launch of Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957.
The satellite was merely an 83.6-kilogram aluminum alloy sphere, which was a major downsize from the original 1,000-kilogram design, that carried a radio and four antennas into space.
This size was shocking to western scientists as America was designing a much smaller 8-kilogram satellite.
This size discrepancy was apparent due to the gap in weapon technology as the United States was able to develop much smaller nuclear warheads than their Soviet counterparts.
The Soviet's satellite success caused a stir in America as people question why the United States had fallen behind the Soviet Union and if they could launch nuclear missiles at large American citiese.
This committee was appointed to lead the United States in policy for scientific and defense strategies.
Another United States response to the Soviets' successful satellite mission was a Navy led attempt to launch the first American satellite into space using its Vanguard TV3 missile.
This effort resulted in complete failure however, with the missile exploding on the launch pad.
These developments resulted in a media frenzy, a frustrated and perplexed American public, and a struggle between the United States Army and Navy for control of the efforts to launch an American satellite into space.
To resolve this, President Dwight D Eisenhower appointed his President's Science Advisor, James Rhyne Killian, to consult with the PSAC to develop a solution.
Creation of NASA In reaction to the launch of the Sputnik 1 by the Soviet Union, the President's Science Advisory Committee advised President Dwight D Eisenhower to convert National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics into a new organization that would be more progressive in the United States' efforts for space exploration and research.
This agency would effectively shift the control of space research and travel from the military into the hands of NASA, which was to be a civilian-government administration.
NASA was to be in charge of all non-military space activity, while another organization was to be responsible for space travel and technology intended for military use.On April 2, 1958 Eisenhower presented legislation to Congress to implement the creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency.
Legislation was passed by Congress, and then signed by President Eisenhower on July 29, 1958.
Kennedy's space administration Space architect Wernher von Braun with President John F Kennedy, 1963 Since the conception of NASA, there had been considerations about the possibility of flying a man to the Moon.
Although under the Dwight D Eisenhower presidential administration NASA was given very little authority to further explore space travel, it was proposed that after the manned Earth-orbiting missions, Project Mercury, that the government-civilian administration should make efforts to successfully complete a manned lunar spaceflight mission.
NASA administrator T Keith Glennan explained that President Dwight D Eisenhower, restricted any further space exploration beyond Project Mercury.
This nation should commit itself to the achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth"" -John F KennedyAfter President John F Kennedy made this proposal to Congress on May 25, 1961, he remained true to this commitment to send a manned lunar spaceflight in the ensuing 30 months prior to his assassination.
Directly after his proposal, there was an 89% increase in government funding for NASA, followed by a 101% increase in funding the subsequent year.
The Soviet Union in the Space Race In August 1957 the Soviet Union tested the world's first successful Intercontinental ballistic missile , the R7 Semyorka.
Within only two months of the launch of the Semyorka, Sputnik 1 became the first man made object in Earth's orbit.
This was followed by the launch of Sputnik II which carried Laika the first living space traveller though she did not survive the trip.
This led to the creation of the Vostok programme in 1960 and the first living creatures to survive the trip to space, Belka and Strelka the Soviet space dogs.
The Vostok Program was responsible for placing the first human in space, yet another task that the Soviet Union would complete before the United States.
The R7 ICBM Prior to the start of the space race, the Soviet Union and the United States were struggling to build and obtain a missile that could not only carry nuclear cargo, but could also travel effectively from one country to another.
These missiles, also known as ICBMs or Intercontinental Ballistic Missile, were key for either country to gain a major strategical advantage in the early years of the Cold War.
However, where the United States failed in their initial ICBM flight tests, the Soviets proved to be years ahead in ICBM technology with their R7 program.
However, during the initial testing, the R7 ICBM proved too small for the required cargo and major changes were approved and implemented in May 1954.
This rocket proved effective in testing in May 1957 and was then slightly adjusted to support space flight.
Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2 Soviet rocket engineer Sergei Korolev and Sputnik 1 on a 1969 Soviet stamp In October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union successfully launched the first Earth satellite into space.
Sputnik 1's official mission was to send back data from space, however the effects of this launch were monumental for both the USSR and the United States.
For both countries, the launch of Sputnik 1 sparked the start of the Timeline of the Space Race.
It created a curiosity for space flight and a relatively peaceful competition to the Moon.
However the initial effects of Sputnik 1 for the United States was not a matter of exploration, but a matter of national security.
What the USSR proved to the world, and mainly the United States, was that they were capable of launching a missile into space and potentially an ICBM carrying nuclear cargo at the United States.
The fear of the unknown capability of Sputnik sparked fear in the Americans and many government officials went on record giving their thoughts on the matter.
For the Russians' the launch of Sputnik 1 proved to be a major advantage in the Cold War, because it secured their current leading position in the war, created a retaliation force in the event of a United States nuclear strike, and allowed for a competitive advantage in ICBM technology.
Sputnik 2 launched almost a month later on November 3, 1957 with a mission goal of carrying the first dog, Laika, into Earth orbit.
This mission, though unsuccessful in the sense that Laika did not survive the mission, further established the USSR's position in the Cold War.
Not only were the Soviets capable of launching a missile into space, but they could continue to complete successful space launches before the United States could complete one launch.
The Lunar missions were the Russian equivalent to the United States Project Mercury and Project Gemini space programs, whose primary mission was to prepare to put the first human on the Moon.
The first of the Lunar missions was Luna 1, which launched on January 2, 1959.
Its successful mission established the first rocket engine restart within Earth orbit and the first man-made object to establish heliocentric orbit.
Finally, Luna 3 launched on October 7, 1959 and took the first pictures of the dark side of the Moon.
After these three missions in 1953, the Soviets continued their exploration of the Moon and its environment in 21 other Luna missions.
Soviet space travel from 1960–1962 The Luna program was a giant step forward for the Soviets in achieving the goal of putting the first man on the Moon.
Over this two-year period, the Soviets were taking major steps forward in getting to the Moon with one mission set back, Sputnik 4.
This mission was launched officially as a test of life support systems for future cosmonauts on May 15, 1960.
However, on May 19, ""an attempt to deorbit a space cabin failed"" and sent the cabin into high Earth orbit, only for it to crash into the Earth in September of the same year.
The Soviets continued their space program, however by launching Sputnik 5 on August 19, 1960, which carried the first animals and plants to space and return them safely to Earth.
Successfully carried the first human into space, Yuri Gagarin, and completed the first manned orbital flight.
Successfully carried the first crewed mission lasting one day carrying Gherman Titov.
Vostok 3 carried Andriyan Nikolayev and Vostok 4 carried Pavel Popovich.
Successfully completed the first dual crewed space flight, the first ship-to-ship radio contact and first simultaneous flight of crewed spacecraft.The race continues The Soviet Union continued to extend its lead in the space race with their mission on April 12, 1961 which made Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin the first human being to leave Earth's atmosphere and enter space.
The United States gained some ground a month later, on May 15, 1961, when they sent Alan Shepard on a fifteen-minute flight outside of Earth's atmosphere during the Freedom 7 project.
On February 20, 1962, America made further progress as John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth in his Mercury mission Friendship 7.
Nuclear strategy In 1960 and 1961, Khrushchev tried to impose the concept of nuclear deterrence on the military.
Nuclear deterrence holds that the reason for having nuclear weapons is to discourage their use by a potential enemy, with each side deterred from war because of the threat of its escalation into a nuclear conflict, Khrushchev believed, ""peaceful coexistence"" with capitalism would become permanent and allow the inherent superiority of socialism to emerge in economic and cultural competition with the West.
In 1962 the Soviet submarine fleet had only 8 submarines with short range missiles, which could be launched only from submarines that surfaced and lost their hidden submerged status.
Khrushchev's attempt to introduce a nuclear 'doctrine of deterrence' into Soviet military thought failed.
Discussion of nuclear war in the first authoritative Soviet monograph on strategy since the 1920s, Marshal Vasilii Sokolovskii's ""Military Strategy"" and in the 1968 edition of Marxism-Leninism on War and the Army, focused upon the use of nuclear weapons for fighting rather than for deterring a war.
New methods of delivery such as Submarine-launched ballistic missiles and Intercontinental ballistic missiles with MIRV warheads meant that both superpowers could easily devastate the other, even after attack by an enemy.
This fact often made leaders on both sides extremely reluctant to take risks, fearing that some small flare-up could ignite a war that would wipe out all of human civilization.
Nonetheless, leaders of both nations pressed on with military and espionage plans to prevail over the other side.
One of the most important forms of nonviolent competition was the space race.
The Soviets jumped out to an early lead in 1957 with the launching of Sputnik, the first artificial satellite, followed by the first manned flight.
The success of the Soviet space program was a great shock to the United States, which had believed itself to be ahead technologically.
The ability to launch objects into orbit was especially ominous because it showed Soviet missiles could target anywhere on the planet.
Soon the Americans had a space program of their own but remained behind the Soviets until the mid–1960s.
American President John F Kennedy launched an unprecedented effort, promising that by the end of the 1960s Americans would land a man on the Moon, which they did, thus beating the Soviets to one of the more important objectives in the space race.
Another alternative to outright battle was the shadow war that was taking place in the world of espionage.
There was a series of shocking spy scandals in the west, most notably that involving the Cambridge Five.
The Soviets had several high-profile defections to the west, such as the Petrov Affair.
Funding for the KGB, CIA, MI6 and smaller organizations such as the Stasi increased greatly as their agents and influence spread around the world.
In 1957 the CIA started the programme of reconnaissance flights over the USSR using Lockheed U-2 spyplanes.
When such a plane was brought down over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960 at first the United States government denied the plane's purpose and mission, but was forced to admit its role as a surveillance aircraft when the Soviet government revealed that it had captured the pilot, Gary Powers, alive and was in possession of its largely intact remains.
Coming just over two weeks before a scheduled East-West Summit in Paris, the incident caused a collapse in the talks and a marked deterioration in relations.
Eastern Bloc events As the Cold War became an accepted element of the international system, the battlegrounds of the earlier period began to stabilize.
A de facto buffer zone between the two camps was set up in Central Europe.
In the south, Yugoslavia became heavily allied to the other European communist states.
This was an attempt to transform East Germany into a satellite state of the Soviet Union.
Already disaffected East Germans, who could see the relative economic successes of West Germany within Berlin, became enraged, provoking large street demonstrations and strikes.
Nearly a million Germans partook in the protests and riots that took place at this time.
Warsaw Pact Generals Adolf Heusinger and Hans Speidel sworn into the newly founded West German Bundeswehr on 12 November 1955 In 1955, the Warsaw Pact was formed partly in response to NATO's inclusion of West Germany and partly because the Soviets needed an excuse to retain Red Army units in potentially problematic Hungary.
For 35 years, the Pact perpetuated the Stalinist concept of Soviet national security based on imperial expansion and control over satellite regimes in Eastern Europe.
Through its institutional structures, the Pact also compensated in part for the absence of Joseph Stalin's personal leadership, which had manifested itself since his death in 1953.
While Europe remained a central concern for both sides throughout the Cold War, by the end of the 1950s the situation was frozen.
Alliance obligations and the concentration of forces in the region meant that any incident could potentially lead to an all-out war, and both sides thus worked to maintain the status quo.
Both the Warsaw Pact and NATO maintained large militaries and modern weapons to possibly defeat the other military alliance.
This led to a desire within the Polish public for more of radical reforms of this kind, though the majority of Polish officials did not share this desire and were hesitant to reform.
Wladysaw Gomulka headed up the protests as the new leader of the Polish Communist party.
In Poland demonstrations by workers demanding better conditions began on June 28, 1956, at Poznań's Cegielski Factories and were met with violent repression after Soviet Officer Konstantin Rokossovsky ordered the military to suppress the uprising.
A crowd of approximately 100,000 gathered in the city center near the UB secret police building. tanks and 10,000 soldiers of the Polish Army under General Stanislav Poplavsky were ordered to suppress the demonstration and during the pacification fired at the protesting civilians.
The death toll was placed between 57 and 78 people, including 13-year-old Romek Strzałkowski.
There were also hundreds of people who sustained a variety of injuries.
Hungarian Revolution of 1956 After Stalinist dictator Mátyás Rákosi was replaced by Imre Nagy following Stalin's death and Polish reformist Władysław Gomułka was able to enact some reformist requests, large numbers of protesting Hungarians compiled a list of Demands of Hungarian Revolutionaries of 1956, including free secret-ballot elections, independent tribunals, and inquiries into Stalin and Rákosi Hungarian activities.
Protester attacks at the Parliament forced the collapse of the government.The new government that came to power during the revolution formally disbanded the Hungarian secret police, declared its intention to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact and pledged to re-establish free elections.
Approximately 200,000 Hungarians fled Hungary, some 26,000 Hungarians were put on trial by the new Soviet-installed János Kádár government and, of those, 13,000 were imprisoned.
Imre Nagy was executed, along with Pál Maléter and Miklós Gimes, after secret trials in June 1958.
U-2 incident The United States sent pilot Francis Gary Powers in a U-2 spy plane on a mission over Russian airspace to accumulate intelligence on the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960.
The Eisenhower administration authorized multiple such flights into Russian airspace, however, this one increased the tension on American-Soviet relations.
On this day, Powers' plane was shot down and recovered by the Soviet Union.
President Eisenhower and the United States tried to claim the plane was only used for weather purposes.
The incident occurred just weeks before the two countries were supposed to attend a summit along with France and Great Britain.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev would not release any information about the plane or its pilot in the days leading up to the summit so that the United States would continue its ""weather plane"" lie, though eventually Eisenhower would be forced to admit that the CIA had been conducting such surveillance missions for years.
This was because, at the summit, Khrushchev admitted that Soviets had captured the pilot alive and recovered undamaged sections of the spy plane.
Eisenhower did agree to bring the intelligence gathering excursions to an end but would not apologize for the incident.
Upon Eisenhower's refusal to apologize, the summit came to an end as Khrushchev would no longer contribute to the discussion.
One of Eisenhower's primary goals as president was to improve the American-Soviet relationship, however, this exchange proved to damage such relations.
The summit was also an opportunity for the two leaders to finalize a limited nuclear test ban treaty, but this was no longer a possibility after the United States handling of the incident.
Berlin Crisis of 1961 This section needs additional citations for verification.
Berlin Crisis of 1961 Soviet tanks face United States tanks at Checkpoint Charlie, October 27, 1961 The crucial sticking point was still Germany after the Allies merged their occupation zones to form the Federal Republic of Germany in 1949.
In response Soviets declared their section, the German Democratic Republic, an independent nation.
Neither side acknowledged the division, however, and on the surface both maintained a commitment to a united Germany under their respective governments.
Germany was an important issue because it was regarded as the power center of the continent, and both sides believed that it could be crucial to the world balance of power.
While both might have preferred a united neutral Germany, the risks of it falling into the enemy's camp for either side were too high, and thus the temporary post-war occupation zones became permanent borders.
In November 1958, Soviet first secretary Khrushchev issued an ultimatum giving the Western powers six months to agree to withdraw from Berlin and make it a free, demilitarized city.
At the end of that period, Khrushchev declared, the Soviet Union would turn over to East Germany complete control of all lines of communication with West Berlin; the western powers then would have access to West Berlin only by permission of the East German government.
The United States, Great Britain, and France replied to this ultimatum by firmly asserting their determination to remain in West Berlin and to maintain their legal right of free access to that city.
In 1959 the Soviet Union withdrew its deadline and instead met with the Western powers in a Big Four foreign ministers' conference.
Although the three-month-long sessions failed to reach any important agreements, they did open the door to further negotiations and led to Soviet leader Khrushchev's visit to the United States in September 1959.
However, in June 1961 Soviet first secretary Khrushchev created a new crisis over the status of West Berlin when he again threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany, which he said, would end existing four-power agreements guaranteeing American, British, and French access rights to West Berlin.
The three powers replied that no unilateral treaty could abrogate their responsibilities and rights in West Berlin, including the right of unobstructed access to the city.
As the confrontation over Berlin escalated, on 25 July President Kennedy requested an increase in the Army's total authorized strength from 875,000 to approximately 1 million men, along with increase of 29,000 and 63,000 men in the active duty strength of the Navy and the Air Force.
Additionally, he ordered that draft calls be doubled, and asked the Congress for authority to order to active duty certain ready reserve units and individual reservists.
He also requested new funds to identify and mark space in existing structures that could be used for fall-out shelters in case of attack, to stock those shelters with food, water, first-aid kits and other minimum essentials for survival, and to improve air-raid warning and fallout detection systems.
During the early months of 1961, the government actively sought a means of halting the emigration of its population to the West.
By the early summer of 1961, East German President Walter Ulbricht apparently had persuaded the Soviets that an immediate solution was necessary and that the only way to stop the exodus was to use force.
This presented a delicate problem for the Soviet Union because the four-power status of Berlin specified free travel between zones and specifically forbade the presence of German troops in Berlin.
During the spring and early summer, the East German regime procured and stockpiled building materials for the erection of the Berlin Wall.
Although this extensive activity was widely known, few outside the small circle of Soviet and East German planners believed that East Germany would be sealed off.
It was the first time the colloquial term Mauer had been used in this context.
On Saturday August 12, 1961, the leaders of East Germany attended a garden party at a government guesthouse in Döllnsee, in a wooded area to the north of East Berlin, and Walter Ulbricht signed the order to close the border and erect a Wall.
At midnight the army, police, and units of the East German army began to close the border and by morning on Sunday August 13, 1961 the border to West Berlin had been shut.
Approximately 32,000 combat and engineer troops were used in building the Wall.
Once their efforts were completed, the Border Police assumed the functions of manning and improving the barrier.
East German tanks and artillery were present to discourage interference by the West and presumably to assist in the event of large-scale riots.
On 30 August 1961, President John F Kennedy had ordered 148,000 Guardsmen and Reservists to active duty in response to East German moves to cut off allied access to Berlin.
ANG units mobilized in October included 18 tactical fighter squadrons, 4 tactical reconnaissance squadrons, 6 air transport squadrons, and a tactical control group.
On 1 November; the Air Force mobilized three more ANG fighter interceptor squadrons.
Because of their short range, 60 Air Guard F-104 interceptors were airlifted to Europe in late November.
The United States Air Forces in Europe lacked spare parts needed for the ANG's aging F-84s and F-86s.
Some units had been trained to deliver tactical nuclear weapons, not conventional bombs and bullets.
They had to be retrained for conventional missions once they arrived on the continent.
The majority of mobilized Air Guardsmen remained in the U.S.The four powers governing Berlin had agreed at the 1945 Potsdam Conference that Allied personnel would not be stopped by East German police in any sector of Berlin.
But on 22 October 1961, just two months after the construction of the Wall, the United States Chief of Mission in West Berlin, E Allan Lightner, was stopped in his car while going to a theatre in East Berlin.
Army General Lucius D Clay , United States President John F Kennedy's Special Advisor in West Berlin, decided to demonstrate American resolve.
The attempts of a United States diplomat to enter the East Berlin were backed by United States troops.
The stand-off was resolved only after direct talks between Ulbricht and Kennedy.
The Berlin Crisis saw United States Army troops facing East German Army troops in a stand-off, until the East German government backed down.
Third World arena of conflict The Korean War marked a shift in the focal point of the Cold War, from postwar Europe to East Asia.
After this point, in the wake of the disintegration of Europe's colonial empires, proxy battles in the Third World became an important arena of superpower competition in the establishment of alliances and jockeying for influence in these emerging nations.
Many Third World nations, however, did not want to align themselves with either of the superpowers.
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, Organization of American States, ANZUS, Central Treaty Organization, and Non-Aligned Movement The Eisenhower administration attempted to formalize its alliance system through a series of pacts.
He intensified efforts to ""integrate"" the entire non-communist Third World into a system of mutual defense pacts, travelling almost 500,000 miles in order to cement new alliances.
Dulles initiated the Manila Conference in 1954, which resulted in the SEATO pact that united eight nations in a neutral defense pact.
Decolonization The combined effects of two great European wars had weakened the political and economic domination of Latin America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East by European powers.
Meanwhile, the Eisenhower administration adjusted United States policy to the effects of decolonization.
The Marshall Plan had already rebuilt a functioning Western economic system, thwarting the electoral appeal of the radical left.
When economic aid had ended the dollar shortage and stimulated private investment for postwar reconstruction, in turn sparing the United States from a crisis of over-production and maintaining demand for United States exports, the Eisenhower administration began to focus on other regions.
In an exercise of the new ""rollback"" policies, acting on the doctrines of Dulles, Eisenhower thwarted Soviet intervention, using the CIA to overthrow unfriendly governments.
The United States viewed the decolonization movement in Africa as an opportunity to gain access to raw materials that had previously been monopolized by the imperialist powers in Europe.
Also, United States policy makers recognized that the poverty and instability that had persisted in Africa because of the colonial empires would provide a breeding ground for communist ideologies, so the United States would respond by providing economic assistance to the newly developing nations in Africa.
Though the United States championed itself as a beacon of freedom and democracy, it often supported repressive regimes within Africa, such as the apartheid system led by a minority white population in South Africa.
British decolonization in Africa Communist governments also had, sometimes conflicting, policy objectives within Africa.
The Soviet Union sought to respond to United States intervention within Africa by establishing alliances with newly born nations against Western imperialism.
The Soviet Union saw the elimination of colonial capitalism from Africa, and the rest of the Third World, as necessary for the advancement of those nation and by extension the triumph of socialism over capitalism.
Third World nationalist viewed the command style economy of the Soviet Union as promising since it allowed that country to advance from an agrarian to an industrial economy.
However, Soviet doctrine was not only challenged by the United States but by other communist powers.
China also moved to support nationalist movements in Africa in order to challenge imperialism.
Though the Soviet Union provided more substantial assistance, Maoist ideology became more alluring than Soviet ideology due to its emphasis on the rural population as opposed to Soviet doctrine which focused more on the urban proletariat.
Often the Soviet Union and China found themselves supporting opposing liberation movements in Africa.
Such as with Zimbabwe, with the Soviet Union supporting the Zimbabwe African Peoples Union while China supported the ZANU's breakaway movements.Cuba would also play a major role in the nationalist movements within Africa.
Fidel Castro and his associates saw Cuba as an example to be followed by the African nations on how to escape the clutches of imperialism.
After all, Cuba had thrown off an oppressive dictatorship and with stood a United States backed invasion of the island.
Cuba's focuses on Africa stemmed from the belief that the decolonization provided an arena for the struggle between socialism and capitalism.
Another reason for Cuba's support of African socialist movements was for the shared link between Cuba and Africa.
As such, many Cubans were motivated to help liberate Africans from colonialism and imperialism and to help spread the Cuban revolution to them.
Congo Crisis The Democratic Republic of the Congo , previously known as Belgian Congo, achieved independence from Belgium in 1960, after which Western leaders were determined to keep the country, and its enormous quantities of mineral wealth, within the West's sphere of influence.
However, in May 1960, the elected government. led by Patrice Lumumba, envisioned an economic model that would benefit the citizens of the Congo as opposed to supporting western economic interests.
As such western powers sought to replace Lumumba with a more prowestern leader.On July 5, five days after independence, Congolese soldiers mutinied after being told by their Belgian officers that there would be no wage increases, promotions, or African officers in the post-colonial army.
After which Lumumba dismissed the Belgians, and elevated Joseph Mobutu to army chief of staff.
Convinced that Belgium was attempting to recolonize the Congo, Lumumba appealed for intervention at the United Nations.
However the United Nations and United States refused to provide support, and thus Lumumba turned to the Soviet Union for aid.
The United States government saw this as a threat and thus formulated plans to assassinate Lumumba.With CIA and Belgian army support Mobutu staged a coup against Lumumba.
Lumumba was captured and transferred to Katanga where he was executed by the secessionist forces there.
Despite Tshombe's rule, the Congo would continue to be in crisis throughout the rest of the 20th and early 21st centuries.
Though Communist nations would support rebel groups in the Congo, those groups would not succeed in taking power.
Suez Crisis The Middle East in the Cold War was an area of extreme importance and also great instability.
The region lay directly south of the Soviet Union, who traditionally had great influence in Turkey and Iran.
The area also had vast reserves of oil, not crucial for either superpower in the 1950s but essential for the rapidly rebuilding American allies in Europe and Japan.
In accordance with this, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria made arms deals to Egypt, worth up to $225– 50 million in exchange for surplus cotton, giving Warsaw Pact members a strong presence in the region.
Egypt, a former British protectorate, was one of the region's most important prizes with a large population and political power throughout the region.General Gamal Abdel Nasser's dealings with the Soviet Union and its allies antagonized the administrations of the West, including the Eisenhower administration in the United States In July 1956, the Eisenhower administration balked at funding the massive Aswan High Dam project.
In response, that same year, Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal and ejected British troops from Egypt.Eisenhower persuaded the United Kingdom and France to retreat from a badly planned invasion with Israel that was launched to regain control of the canal from Egypt for fear of alienating other Arab states, and driving them into the arms of the Soviet Union.
Nasser was later lauded around the globe, but especially in the Arab world.
Italy, France, Spain, West Germany, Norway, Canada, and Britain developed a Common Market to be less dependent on the United States.
The 20th-century successor to the UK as the ""workshop of the world"", the United States found its competitive edge dulled in the international markets while at the same time it faced intensified foreign competition at home.
Throughout much of Latin America, reactionary oligarchies ruled through their alliances with the military elite and the United States.
But by the mid-20th century, much of the region passed through a higher state of economic development, which bolstered the power and ranks of the lower classes.
This left calls for social change and political inclusion more pronounced, thus posing a challenge to the strong United States influence over the region's economies.
Guatemala When democratically elected Guatemalan President Jacobo Árbenz attempted a modest redistribution of land, he was overthrown in the 1954 CIA Guatemalan coup d'état Throughout the Cold War years, the United States acted as a barrier to socialist revolutions and targeted populist and nationalist governments that were aided by the communists.
The CIA Operation PBSuccess eventually led to the 1954 coup that removed Arbnez from power.
The operation drew on an initial plan first considered in 1951 to oust Arbenz named Operation PBFortune.
Cuban Revolution The Castro Regime overthrew the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, who came to power in 1933 through a military revolution, and then again through another military coup.
After the revolt Batista ran the government through a number of puppet rulers.
However, after a series of failed puppet presidents Batista himself became president from 1940–1944.
Batista's first term as president went peacefully and saw large amounts of economic growth due to public works programs he implemented.
After his term as president Batista moved to Florida where he lived until he decided to come back to Cuba run for president in 1952.
But, just three months before election day, a military coup put Batista back in power.
He justified this coup by claiming the sitting president was planning his own coup in order to remain in power.
The Batista dictatorship lasted seven years until 1959 when it was overthrown by Fidel Castro.
Fidel Castro was the first political leader to establish a communist state into the western hemisphere and held control of Cuba for over five decades.
In 1952 he ran for a seat in Cuba's House of Representatives, but the election failed to happened due to the rise of the dictator.
In 1953 Castro launched a coup in an attempt to overthrow Batista, but failed and was jailed soon after.
While in jail he renamed his revolutionary group ""26th of July Movement"" and helped coordinate the group from prison.
In 1955 was released from Cuban prison under an amnesty deal, after which fled to Mexico in order to rally support for his second attempt at overthrowing Batista and dictatorship.
In December 1956, Castro, along with about 80 of his comrades, landed on Cuba.
Though most of his forces were killed or captured for their attempt to overthrow the government during this time, Castro and what was left of his forces escaped into the mountains and began their guerrilla warfare campaign.
Over the next two years Castro continued his guerrilla warfare while slowly growing his militant forces.
In 1959 Castro's forces had key victories at important Cuban strong holds that, combined with Barista's loss of popularity and military power, led to Barista fleeing Cuba and Castro taking power.
Fidel Castro during a visit to Washington, D.C., shortly after the Cuban Revolution in 1959 Castro was sworn in as Prime Minister of Cuba on February 16, 1959 at this point in time he had control of the Cuban government's 30 thousand man army.
One of Castro's first acts as leader of Cuba was to nationalize American assets on the island without compensation.
Before the fall of the proUnited States Batista regime, United States interests had owned four-fifths of the stakes in the island's utilities, nearly half of its sugar, and nearly all of its mining industries.
The United States could manipulate the Cuban economy at a whim by tinkering with the island's financial services or by tampering with government quotas and tariffs on sugar–the country's staple export commodity.
In response to these acts, the United States government refused to recognize Castro as the leader of Cuba, the United States government made the first of several attempts of overthrow Castro by launching the infamous Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Castro then signed a trade agreement in February 1960 with communist states, which would emerge as a market for the island's agricultural commodities that could replace the country's traditional patron–the United States.
The East garnered a huge victory when they formed an alliance with Cuba after Fidel Castro's successful revolution in 1959.
This was a major victory for the Soviet Union, which had garnered an ally in close proximity to the American coast.
Ending Castro's rule After Fidel Castro's takeover of Cuba, the United States was unsure about the nation's new leader's political ideologies.
Potential economic cooperation between the Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in 1959, leaders of the Soviet Union and Cuba, respectively, resulted in the immediate perturbation of the United States.
The largest concern at this time was a Soviet satellite just 90 miles from the United States' mainland.
The administration then began planning to intervene with this situation.
The Central Intelligence Agency initially proposed sabotaging the sugar refineries in Cuba, but President Eisenhower felt the threat was Castro and that he was the issue the United States needed to resolve.
The CIA then began planning for an overthrow or possible assassination of Castro in December 1959.
In February 1960, President Eisenhower requested the CIA develop a formal program to remove Castro from power.
The request resulted in a plan for a task force led by Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell.
The initial stage of this task force was to develop and train a group of Cuban exiles to form a paramilitary group.
This group would then deploy into Cuba to organize, train, and lead resistance forces to overthrow the government.
With no other plausible alternative, Eisenhower approved the Bissell task force which is also known as Brigade 2506.
The force was later transitioned from its original guerrilla infiltration model to a more paramilitary invasion concept due to the difficulty in coordinating with anti-Castro opposition.
In Eisenhower's remaining months in office, he pushed the CIA to accelerate its plans for Brigade 2506.
Eisenhower did not want the transition of presidency to halt any development.
The plans began to finalize in the time between Kennedy's election in November and his inauguration in January.
Bissell hoped to train men in Guatemala to be Brigade 2506 and the 5412 Committee endorsed this along with the use of an airstrip in Nicaragua, and supply missions from the United States.
President Kennedy was faced with the decision of whether of not to follow through with this plan when he ordered a meeting with many department heads in the United States government.
Kennedy ultimately decided to fully fund and accelerate the program making the operation and its results his own responsibility.
Afterwards, Castro publicly declared himself a Marxist-Leninst and set up Cuba as the first Communist state in the Americas and continued to nationalize virtually all major industries in the country.
The Soviet government seized on the abortive invasion as a rationale for the placing of Soviet troops on Cuba.
It was also decided to position on Cuba medium-range nuclear missiles which could strike many points in the United States at once.
In response, President John F Kennedy quarantined the island, and after several intense days the Soviets decided to retreat in return for promises from the United States not to invade Cuba and to pull missiles out of Turkey.
After this brush with nuclear war, the two leaders banned nuclear tests in the air and underwater after 1962.
The retreat undermined Khrushchev, who was ousted soon afterwards and replaced by Leonid Brezhnev.
The Cuban Revolution led to Kennedy's initiation of the ""Alliance for Progress"" program.
The program was to provide billions of dollars of loans and aid over the course of the 1960s for economic development in order to stave off socialist revolution.
The Alliance also contained counterinsurgency measures, such as the establishment of the Jungle Warfare School in the Panama Canal Zone and the training of police forces.
Through the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company , the British had a monopoly on the transporting, pumping, and refining of oil in most of Iran.
The company paid production royalties to the government of the Shah— placed on the throne by the British in 1941.
But the royalties and salaries to Iranian employees were smaller, considering that the company's earnings were ten times greater than its expenses.
Iran suffered from poverty, and nationalists insisted that controlling the company could alleviate this.
Many Iranians demanded that a higher share of the company's earnings be paid.
In response, the AIOC replied that it had a binding agreement with the Shah until 1993, and collaborated with some Iranian political forces to draft a report opposing nationalization.
In February 1951, the Iranian prime minister, suspected of being involved with the report, was assassinated.
Later that year the new prime minister nationalized his nation's British-owned oil wells.As the Iranians moved toward seizing the reserves, the Truman administration attempted to mediate.
Later, the Eisenhower administration, convinced that Iran was developing communist ties, used the CIA, joining forces with Iran's military leaders to overthrow Iran's government.
However, by 1953 the party had begun to criticize him as a United States puppet state.
The premier perceived that as Iran's economy suffered and fears of communist takeover gripped the United States government, the United States would abandon Britain and rescue him from his predicament.To replace Mossadegh, the United States favored the young Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.
In return, Pahlavi promised to allow United States companies to share in the development of his nation's reserves.
According to CIA documents made public in 2000, the United States provided guns, trucks, armored cars, and radio communications in the CIA-assisted 1953 coup, which elevated Pahlavi from his position as that of a constitutional monarch to that of an absolute ruler.
With Mossadeq out of the way, oil profits were then divided between the Shah's regime and a new international consortium.
The British were awarded 40% of the country's oil revenues, five United States firms won another 40%, and the rest went to Royal Dutch Shell and Compagnie Française des Pétroles.
The profits were divided evenly between the consortium and Iran.Since the turn of the 20th century the United States had been trying to get into the Iranian oil fields only to encounter British competition.
The breakthrough for the United States was made possible by the Cold War-era ties to the Shah and under the guidance of the State Department official Herbert Hoover, Jr., who had gained a great deal of experience in the complexities of the international oil problem as a private businessman.
Indochina Captured French soldiers from Điện Biên Phủ, escorted by Vietnamese troops, walk to a prisoner-of-war camp The Battle of Dien Bien Phu was the climactic battle of the First Indochina War between French Union forces of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps, and Vietnamese Viet Minh communist revolutionary forces.
The battle occurred between March and May 1954, and culminated in a massive French defeat that effectively ended the war.
As a result of blunders in the French decision making process, the French undertook to create an air-supplied base at Dien Bien Phu, deep in the hills of Vietnam.
Its purpose was to cut off Viet Minh supply lines into the neighboring French protectorate of Laos, at the same time drawing the Viet Minh into a battle that would cripple them.
Instead, the Viet Minh, under General Vo Nguyen Giap, surrounded and besieged the French, who were unaware of the Viet Minh's possession of heavy artillery and their ability to move such weapons to the mountain crests overlooking the French encampment.
The Viet Minh occupied the highlands around Dien Bien Phu, and were able to fire down accurately onto French positions.
Tenacious fighting on the ground ensued, reminiscent of the trench warfare of World War I The French repeatedly repulsed Viet Minh assaults on their positions.
Supplies and reinforcements were delivered by air, although as the French positions were overrun and the anti-aircraft fire took its toll, fewer and fewer of those supplies reached them.
After a two-month siege, the garrison was overrun and most French surrendered.
Despite the loss of most of their best soldiers, the Viet Minh marshaled their remaining forces and pursued those French who did flee into the wilderness, routing them and ending the battle.
Shortly after the battle, the war ended with the 1954 Geneva accords, under which France agreed to withdraw from its former Indochinese colonies.
The United States intervention with the greatest ramifications was in Indochina.
The NLF drew its ranks from the southern peasantry and was backed by North Vietnam, which in turn was backed by the Soviet Union and China.
The RVN was later absorbed by its communist counterpart to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
South Asia The Indian subcontinent was never a primary focus of superpower attention during the Cold War.
Europe, East Asia, Latin American, and the Middle East were consistently viewed as being more important to the superpowers' interests.
The countries of South Asia, despite containing a fifth of the world's population, were not powerful economies like Japan or Western Europe.
Unlike the Middle East with its oil, South Asia was lacking in vital natural resources.
The United States' most important interest in the region, however, was the establishment of airfields that could be used as bases for U-2 flights over Soviet territory, or in case of wartime be home to nuclear bombers that could hit Central Asia.
Originally, both the Americans and Soviets felt the region would remain in the British sphere of influence, but this was not the case.
The Americans hoped that the Pakistani armed forces could be used to block any Soviet thrust into the crucial Middle East.
It was also felt that as a large and high-profile nation, India would be a notable prize if it fell into either camp.
India, a fledgling democracy, was never particularly in any grave danger of falling to insurgents or external pressure from a great power.
A key event in the South Asian arena of Cold War competition was the signing of the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between Pakistan and the United States in 1954.
This pact would limit the later options of all the major powers in the region.
For Pakistan, the United States alliance became a central tenet of its foreign policy, and despite numerous disappointments with it, it was always seen as far too valuable a connection to abandon.
After the Sino-Soviet Split, Pakistan also pursued close relations with China.
Soviet policy towards South Asia had closely paralleled that of the United States.
At first the Soviets, like the Americans, had been largely uninterested in the region and maintained a neutral position in the Indo-Pakistani disputes.
With the signing of the accords between Pakistan and the United States in 1954, along with the countries enlisting in CENTO and SEATO, the situation changed.
In 1955, Bulganin and Khrushchev toured India and promised large quantities of financial aid and assistance in building industrial infrastructure.
In Srinagar, the capital of Kashmir, the Soviet leaders announced that the Soviet Union would abandon its neutralist position and back India in the ongoing Kashmir dispute.
Jawaharlal Nehru was skeptical, however, and for many of the same reasons that he had wished to avoid entanglements with the United States he also wished to keep India from being too closely attached to the Soviet Union.
Although the USSR sent India some aid, and although Nehru became the first non-communist leader to address the people of the Soviet Union, the two nations remained relatively distant.
After Khrushchev's ousting, the Soviets reverted to a neutralist position and moderated the aftermath of the 1965 war.
A large current accounts deficit had developed and a severe drought hit the agricultural sector hard.
As with the downturn of a decade earlier, India again looked to outside assistance.
However, relations were at a low ebb with the United States, which was largely preoccupied with Vietnam.
On top of that, several smaller issues had turned American indifference into antipathy.
Western international organizations such as the World Bank were also unwilling to commit money to India's development projects without Indian trade concessions.
Along with other Warsaw Pact nations, the Soviets began to provide extensive support for India's efforts to create an industrial base.
In 1969, the two powers negotiated a treaty of friendship that would make non-alignment little more than a pretext.
Two years later, when faced with a growing crisis in East Pakistan , India signed the agreement.
Sino-Soviet split Before the Sino-Soviet split, tensions between China and India complicated the Soviet Union's efforts to maintain close relations with both of Asia's leading emerging nations.
In March 1959, China suppressed a revolt in Tibet, leading to open conflict between China and India.
On March 31, the Dalai Lama, Tibet's spiritual and temporal ruler, fled to India, where he was granted asylum over China's protest.
India later backed a move in the United Nations general assembly to enter into a full debate on charges of Chinese suppression of human rights in Tibet over the objections of the Soviet Union, Poland, Yugoslavia, Albania, Romania, Bulgaria, East Germany, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, North Korea, and Mongolia.
However, despite the Warsaw Pact's, Mongolia's, and North Korea's objections to the Indian-backed debate in the UN, Mao grew increasingly frustrated with the Soviet Union's rather muted and reluctant backing of Chinese actions in Tibet.
Director of Central Intelligence at the time Allen W Dulles believed that the India and Pakistan could best combat communist China politically and economically, but noted that the ruthless suppression of the Tibetan Revolt was likely to cause each country to focus resources onto protecting their Himalayan borders militarily.
This would likely escalate the contest, and not in favor of India.China's active presence in Tibet preceded a much more dangerous confrontation between India and China.
Successive Chinese governments had rejected the Sino-Indian border dictated by the British Empire in the early 20th century, called the McMahon Line.
As China built outposts along what China thought to be its borders, India built more outposts in the disputed area to drive out the Chinese, in what would be known as the Forward Policy.
Charges and countercharges of border violation and aggression were exchanged along the frontier.
On September 9, a few days before his departure for the U.S., Janos Kadar of Hungary attempted to mediate the disputes between China and India, hoping to appeal to his friendly relations in both parties.
Khruschev and Alexander Dubček of Czechoslovakia also appealed to China and India.
However, China's reaction to the Soviet, Hungarian, and Czechoslovakian appeal for ""peaceful coexistence"" with the West and India was not seen as encouraging; and the fallout of the tensions along the Himalayas caused worldwide speculation over the Warsaw Pact-Chinese alliance, which was based on common ideological, political, and military interests.
By the time the Sino-Indian border dispute developed into full-fledged fighting in the 1962 Sino-Indian War, the alliance between the world's two leading communist powers was irreparably shattered.
Although the Warsaw Pact nations backed China's October 1962 peace offer, urging Nehru to accept it, Albania's and Romania's offer to deliver MiG fighter planes to India sent Sino-Albanian and Sino-Romanian relations into crisis.
This also turned China against other Eastern European communist states.
By the end of 1963, the Eastern Bloc and China were engaging in open polemics against each other, initiating a period of open hostility between the former allies that lasted for the remainder of the Cold War era.
Culture during the Cold War In the ensuing years from World War II in the United States, media and culture portrayed a general sense of anxiety and fear of the spread of the Soviet Union's communism in American entertainment, political, social, and scientific sectors.
As tensions between the two nations increased over the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, public hysteria over communism subverting American daily life was coined the ""Red Scare"", but more specifically the Second red scare with respect to the 1950s.
Media coverage of the Cold War served as a catalyst for acknowledging ideological differences between the two nations.
Written and illustrative forms of communication were the predominate source of information before the 1960s in the United States; political expressions in American newspaper cartoons, fliers, and movie posters with ""easily de-codable "" and ""emotive images"" largely served as a casting mold for solidifying American ideals against its Soviet counterpart.
Indeed, both United States and USSR medias succeeded in producing rhetoric and imagery that bolstered the motives of their respective states while establishing a sense of jingoism in their people; which is effectively known as propaganda.
The polarization of the Cold War era and the dread resulting from a Nuclear arms race between the United States and USSR, in addition to a politicized system of media distribution, led to the escalated height of sentiments which included statements like ""Better Dead Than Red"" in American media and culture.
As early as 1947 in the United States entertainment sector, the House Un-American Activities Committee began holding hearings regarding the political orientation of American entertainment professionals, starting with the famous Hollywood Ten trial that resulted in the conviction of 10 Hollywood directors and writers being charged with Contempt of Congress, and eventually leading to the broader Hollywood blacklist; with the peak of the committee's actions occurring between 1953 and 1956.
Targets of HUAC's entertainment industry blacklist included directors, actors, screenwriters, musicians, and other prominent entertainment professionals, which were ultimately blacklisted from their careers for having been alleged communist members or having communistic sympathies.
Soviet communistic ideals being propagated into American life was used as justification for the tactics employed by the highly publicized HUAC and McCarthy trials.
During this period in America, television stations and motion picture corporations were considerably influential on the minds of the public as associations between federal and private corporations became more intimately associated; a deliberate measure to promote positive consensus for military and intelligence efforts against the Soviet Union in a time of war.
After the downfall of senator Joseph McCarthy and the McCarthy trials, which was due to his demagogic style and unsubstantiated accusations, the House Un-American Activities Committee shortly after began its descent into ruin by the mid-late 1950s and early 1960s, and later was officially dismantled in 1975.
Prior to these events, there had never been such a socially and politically significant issue publicized to the American populace within culture and media regarding domestic threats to United States democracy during the 20th century.
During this great period, Cold War themes first entered mainstream culture as a public preoccupation.
The 1959 film On the Beach, for example, depicted a gradually dying, post-apocalyptic world that remained after a nuclear Third World War.
James Bond first appeared in 1954; the films were loosely connected to the Cold War, but fans loved the beautiful women, exotic locations, tricky gadgets, and death-defying stunts, and probably paid less attention to the politics.
Bond movies followed the political climate in depicting Soviets and ""Red"" Chinese.
Frederick Forsyth's formula spy novels sold in the hundreds of thousands.
His 1984 novel The Fourth Protocol, whose title refers to a series of conventions that, if broken, will lead to nuclear war and that are now all broken except for the fourth and last thread, was made into a major 1987 film starring Michael Caine.
Computers in the Cold War Computer technology began to be influential in the mid–1940s during World War II and continued to increase in use during the 1950s and 1960s.
The first computers were designed and built in Great Britain and the United States to store digital programs.
The first electronic digital computers were used for large-scale military calculations.
These computers would go on to help scientists in the fields of ballistic missiles, nuclear missiles, and anti-missile defense systems.
Computers in the Soviet Union The Soviet Union faced a dilemma in that Western science was what Soviet scientific progress had been measured against.
The dilemma for the Soviets was that while they wanted to surpass and overtake Western science, they had to borrow it in order to further their scientific progress.
The results were that many Soviets were denouncing Western science but would turn around and describe a national need for the same theory they just denounced.
The Soviet Union first began getting reports about electronically stored digital programs designed and built in Britain and the United States in the 1940s which got great attention from Soviet mathematicians and physicists working on defense projects that needed large amounts of computation.
Soviet scientists got information about these computers from publications and survey articles.
But they may have also got some of this information through their intelligence channels.
Ballistic missile programs were major clients of Soviet digital computing and were used for calculating missile trajectories which the first problem solved but the large high speed computer M-2, was the calculation of thermodynamic and hydrodynamic parameters for missile design.
One of the first problems solved by a computer was the calculation of the dependency of the target destruction probability on the detonation efficiency of fragmentation warheads.The Soviet Union got in the game of computers early and further developed them to make them into useful pieces of equipment for military purposes.
This was fueled in part by wanting to compete with Western sciences but also this was during the Cold War which meant the United States was also investing into computers which gave the Soviet Union extra motive to keep investing into them.
Computers in the United States The United States and Britain were some of the first countries to start developing computers and the United States did not stop developing.
The United States saw that using computers for military purposes would be beneficial and this came during the beginning of the Cold War.
The Soviet Union also began to integrate computers into military programs and so the competition between the Soviet Union and the United States with computers began.
The United States quickly started to adapt computers to defense and military purposes.
The air force was one of the first military branches to adapt and use computers for their uses.
The air force established a Reeves analogue computer at the Wright Air Development Center at Daytona for developing weapons systems.
It had already been used in the Korean War to track enemy shells back to their source which was then destroyed.
The Navy then deployed its Naval Ordnance Research Calculator as a means of accurately firing a naval gun at a target, taking into account the multiple variables of ship speed, wind velocity, direction and roll and pitch of the vessel.
As the United States knew how computers would impact military programs, they began collecting what information they could on how the Soviet Union was coming on with their own computer program.
The information the United States got was that the Soviet Union was not really able to keep up with the United States because they had insufficient and poor standards of equipment needed for making computers.
This would show that unlike the nuclear programs of each country which was pretty even race, the United States had a pretty sizable lead in the computer competition with the Soviet Union.
The United States had a good lead in computer development against the Soviet Union.
Not only was the military branches using computers avidly but the civilian population also got to be able to use computers.% of computers in the United States was used for military purposes while 30% were used for civilian uses.
Computers became a very big role in the military after World War II while also being available to civilians and the United States led this change into the technical world through the 1950s and 1960s.
Retrieved 2022-05-08. ^ a b c ""Eisenhower Presidential Library"". www.eisenhower.archives.gov.
Bibcode:2009AcAau..65.1530L. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.09.03.075. ^ a b ""Soviet Union.Evolution of Military Doctrine"". loc.gov.
Retrieved 2018-04-09. ^ a b ""LexisNexis® Academic & Library Solutions"". www.lexisnexis.com.
References This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations.
Berlin, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali.
America, Britain, and East-West Trade, 1948–63"" The Historian, Vol., 2003 Hoopes, Townsend, The Devil and John Foster Dulles.
Russian and American Dystopian Satires of the Cold War"" Critical Survey, Vol., 2005 Melanson, Richard A and David Mayers, eds., Reevaluating Eisenhower.
