Conflict and Peace in the 20th Century, Topic 5 Crisis of the Cold War 1955-1970.
This is a describe type question and to answer it well you need to either describe This invasion was a complete four separate points or develop two disaster and the invaders did not get points. further than the beach.
Quick tip – if you develop two points and From Castro’s view point this identify a third one you should get invasion was evidence that the USA maximum marks. was working actively to overthrow his Government.
Crisis in missile crisis was the most frightening of their the Cold War 1955-70. lives.
Exam Board) • In April 1962, America had placed nuclear Quick tip – you must refer to missiles in Turkey. both events and reach a • Shortly after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro declared Cuba as a socialist republic, supported judgement for the entering into close ties with the Soviet Union. full 10 marks.
Explain your range ballistic missiles in Turkey, these directly threatened cities in the western parts of the Soviet Union. answer.
He regarded the missiles as a personal Quick tip – this is a affront. type knowledge • Therefore the deployment of missiles in Cuba; the first time question where you missiles had been moved outside the USSR, can be seen as Khrushchev’s direct response to the United States missiles in need to explain an Turkey. issue, so you need • Having medium range ballistic missiles on Cuban land to develop at least meant that the Soviet Union had the capacity to threaten two separate points.
Created by Paul Hallett • Khrushchev planned the deployment in May 1962, by late July over sixty Soviet ships were on their way to Cuba.
Qb Explain President Kennedy’s options once the missiles had been discovered on Cuba.
Created by Paul Hallett • After the photographic evidence showing Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba had been confirmed, President Kennedy organised a secret meeting of senior advisors at the White House.
In these he claimed the nature of the missiles in Cuba and the Soviet Union had peaceful intentions.
Created by Paul Hallett • The compromise reached satisfied no one, it was a particular embarrassment for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union who had not made public the withdrawal of the missiles in Turkey.
General LeMay told the president that it was “the greatest defeat in our history” and that the United States should invade immediately.
The purpose was to enable both leaders to communicate directly to ensure future crisis’ did not evolve.
Explain your answer referring only to , and Top tip – to gain top marks her you must provide a developed explanation for all three countries.
This means describing an evidence point and explaining its significance in relation to other points.
Top tip – to gain full marks here you must provide a developed explanation for both leaders and countries.
You must not just describe and explain, but also reach a clear judgement.
