Share Tweet E-mail Image from Flickr via dok1 By Noam ChomskyBy arrangement with TomDispatch.
Kennedy’s own judgment was that the probability of war might have been as high as 50 percent.
One is Oct., when United States destroyers enforcing a quarantine around Cuba were dropping depth charges on Soviet submarines.
From the ExComm records, Stern concludes that, on Oct., President Kennedy was “leaning towards military action to eliminate the missiles” in Cuba, to be followed by invasion, according to Pentagon plans.
The American attacks are often dismissed in United States commentary as silly pranks, C.I.A. shenanigans gone wrong.
As explained recently by the respected left-liberal commentator Matthew Yglesias, “one of the main functions of the international institutional order is precisely to legitimate the use of deadly military force by western powers”—meaning the U.S.—so that it is “amazingly naïve,” indeed quite “silly,” to suggest that it should obey international law or other conditions that we impose on the powerless.
United States policy towards Cuba is harshly condemned throughout Latin America and indeed most of the world, but “a decent respect for the opinions of mankind” is understood to be meaningless rhetoric intoned mindlessly on July 4.
On Nov.th, the Pentagon announced that all known Soviet missile bases had been dismantled.
In 1962, the war was avoided by Khrushchev’s willingness to accept Kennedy’s hegemonic demands.
Noam Chomsky is Institute Professor Emeritus in the MIT Department of Linguistics and Philosophy.
Share Tweet E-mail At Guernica, we’ve spent the last 15 years producing uncompromising journalism.
And we’re constantly working to produce a magazine that deserves you—a magazine that is a platform for ideas fostering justice, equality, and civic action.
If you value Guernica’s role in this era of obfuscation, please donate.
With contributors from every continent and at every stage of their careers, we are a home for singular voices, incisive ideas, and critical questions.
